
THE POLITICAL THEORY OF 
NEOLIBERALISM


C U R R E N C I E S
New Thinking for Financial Times
Melinda Cooper and Martijn Konings, Editors

The Political Theory 
of Neoliberalism
THOMAS BIEBRICHER
Stanford University Press 
Stanford, California


stanford university press
Stanford, California

© 2018 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University. 
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of Stanford University Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Biebricher, Thomas, 1974– author.
Title: The political theory of neoliberalism / Thomas Biebricher.
Description: Stanford, California : Stanford University Press, 2018. | 
Series: Currencies | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2018016758 (print) | LCCN 2018019839 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9781503607835 | ISBN 9781503603646 (cloth : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781503607828 (pbk. : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Neoliberalism. | Political science—Philosophy. | 
Neoliberalism—European Union countries. | European Union countries—
Politics and government. | European Union countries—Economic policy.
Classification: LCC JC574 (ebook) | LCC JC574 .B54 2018 (print) | 
DDC 320.51/3—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018016758
Typeset by Kevin Barrett Kane in 10/15 Janson
Cover design by George Kirkpatrick

Contents
Acknowledgments 
vii
Introduction
1 

1  What Is Neoliberalism?
11
PART I: THE POLITICAL THEORY OF NEOLIBERALISM
29
2  The State
33
3  Democracy
79
4  Science
109
5  Politics
139
PART II: DISCIPLINING EUROPE
157
6  European Crises: Causes and Consequences
161
7  Ideas, Uncertainty, and the Ordoliberalization of Europe
193

Notes
225
References
237
Index
255


This page intentionally left blank 

vii
This book was written in 2016 and 2017, but its ideas and arguments have 
developed over several years, and earlier versions of some arguments have been 
presented at conferences, workshops, and seminars. I would like to thank the 
many people who have been willing to discuss neoliberalism with me and thus 
helped me develop my own views and positions. 
In particular, I thank those who read parts of the draft manuscript: 
William Callison, Marius Kött, and Susanne Rühle. They provided im­
portant feedback and raised the kinds of skeptical questions one hopes for 
from readers. I very much appreciate the reviewers for Stanford University 
Press, who offered thorough and thoughtful engagement with my work; 
their comments and suggestions undoubtedly helped improve the book in 
many respects. I am particularly grateful for the feedback from Andrew Dilts 
and Yves Winter. Although Wolfgang Streeck and I agreed to disagree on 
the role of ideas in politics, his advice not to overestimate the importance 
of theories—and theorists—was well taken. 
I am deeply thankful to have had the good fortune that the initial book 
proposal ended up in the hands of Emily-Jane Cohen at Stanford University 
Press, who was interested in the project from day one and steered it through 
its various stages with wisdom and understanding—and a strong and helpful 
opinion on a word limit. Working with her was as pleasant as it was productive. 
Acknowledgments

viii	
Acknowledgments
Other people have supported this project in more indirect yet essential 
ways. Wendy Brown’s encouragement rekindled and maintained my enthu­
siasm for the project when I had doubts about it. Rainer Forst’s unwavering 
support and advice throughout the years were invaluable and gave me the 
opportunity to complete the project. 
Finally, I thank my friends and family and, especially, my partner, Raphaela, 
for their love and support. This book is dedicated to our daughter, Lucía.


1
At some point during Bryan Singer’s genre-redefining 1995 thriller, The Usual 
Suspects, the elusive villain Keyser Söze shares some of his wisdom with the 
audience: “The greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the world 
that he doesn’t exist.” Something similar might be said about neoliberalism 
even if attributing infernal implications to it might seem a little far-fetched. 
The term is as ambiguous as it is contested. While some consider it to be 
synonymous with the unleashed forces of turbo-capitalism (Bourdieu 1998; 
Chomsky 1999), others think of it as a moderate version of classical liberal­
ism’s blunt imperative of laissez-faire. And while some note a decade-long 
march of victory of neoliberal policy regimes worldwide (see Harvey 2005), 
others disparage it as a figment of its critics’ fevered imagination that does 
not even exist—let alone rule the world—and the term ought to be sent 
into semantic retirement. The latter perspective contends that neoliberal­
ism is not only vacuous but has also become so politically charged that it 
serves as little more than a polemical tool for theoretical and political smear 
campaigns waged with denunciatory intentions. And to be sure, this is cor­
rect insofar as there are hardly any self-proclaimed neoliberals to be found. 
Since it was (re)introduced to academic and political discourse in the early 
1990s, only its critics have used the term (see Boas and Gans-Morse 2009). 
At present there is a growing reluctance even on their side to make use of it 
The Political Theory of Neoliberalism

I NTR O D U CTI O N 

2	
Introduction
because it disqualifies any speaker as a potential ideologue with anticapitalist 
biases. If you call someone neoliberal, it suggests that you are unwilling to 
engage in reasoned argument and would rather resort to polemical name-
calling. So even if neoliberalism ruled the world, it would be a neoliberal­
ism without any neoliberals, and even its academic critics dare not speak its 
name—a truly devilish trick. 
I first show that neoliberalism is far more than a chimera made up by its 
critics. Neoliberal thought developed as a response to the crisis of liberalism 
in the 1930s, and there is a common denominator to this body of thought, 
albeit a thin one. It is not a common set of doctrines but what I call the 
neoliberal problematic, which concerns the preconditions of functioning 
markets. This problematic characterizes the work of a number of thinkers 
who can be referred to as neoliberals in the proper sense of the term, such 
as the German ordoliberals Walter Eucken, Wilhelm Röpke, and Alexander 
Rüstow, but also Friedrich August Hayek, Milton Friedman, and James 
Buchanan.1 They provide me with the reservoir of ideas that I scrutinize in 
part 1, the central part of the book.
Here, I reconstruct, analyze, and problematize crucial elements of the 
political theory of neoliberalism. Neoliberal thought contains a genu­
inely political dimension that is integral to the neoliberal problematic 
and far from just an annex to a creed of self-regulating markets. Part 
1 is structured around four major categories in neoliberal thought: the 
state, democracy, science, and politics. Neoliberal positions with regard 
to these issues vary considerably to the point of being outright contradic­
tory, and part of the rationale behind this study is to capture the resulting 
heterogeneities and tensions between the various perspectives, which are 
grouped in varieties of neoliberal thought. 
Part 2 shifts the attention to the world of “actually existing neoliberalism” 
(Brenner and Theodore 2002) with a focus on contemporary Europe, for two 
reasons. First, I am interested in an analysis of the condition of contemporary 
neoliberalism: how neoliberalism has been transformed over the course of the 
recent string of crises and whether and how it is thus different from precri­
sis neoliberalism. Second, I focus on Europe because the European Union 
(EU) and the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) together are easily the 
most advanced laboratory in regard to the development of neoliberal political 

	
Introduction
3
forms. Here we find neoliberal ideas encapsulated not just in nation-state 
structures and international (trade) regimes but as a supranational federation 
(with a common currency), which is a configuration that many neoliberals have 
reflected on extensively as a potential institutional panacea for a neoliberal 
project, all respective difficulties notwithstanding. 
Consequently, chapters 6 and 7 are devoted to a discussion of the workings 
of the EU/EMU, to what extent they conform to neoliberal tenets and neo­
liberal thinkers’ views on the EU/EMU, as well as European integration more 
generally. Finally, based on preliminary arguments concerning the impact of 
ideas on political practices in general and particularly under conditions of crisis 
and genuine uncertainty, I argue that the Eurozone in its current institutional 
setup increasingly adheres to the precepts of ordoliberalism as one variety of 
neoliberalism. In this sense, we witness the ordoliberalization of Europe: Not 
only is competitiveness heralded as the aim of all reform efforts; the Eurozone 
now has a competitive order that forces all of its members into a particular 
form of competition with each other deemed desirable, which results in a 
generalized politics of austerity. Furthermore, the structural characteristics of 
this “economic constitution” implement much of the ordoliberal convictions 
with regard to the role of the state, democracy, and science in governing a 
market—albeit a market of jurisdictions. This form of governance is deeply 
skeptical of pluralist democracy, instead relying on a technocratic mode of 
policy making that borders on the authoritarian. If it is true that the sign of our 
times is the rise of authoritarianism, we should not mistake this to signal the 
end of neoliberalism. To the contrary, certain varieties of neoliberal thought 
have always contained an authoritarian dimension, which is now increasingly 
on display in its actually existing form in Europe and elsewhere. Neoliberal­
ism, properly understood as capitalist markets embedded in authoritarian 
political forms, has far from run its course—it may have only just begun. 
Let us begin with a closer look at the potential reasons for and against 
the continued use of the term “neoliberalism.” I see two critical lines of ar­
gumentation. The first disapproves of the way the concept has been reduced 
to a “political swearword” (Hartwich 2009) and demands a less value-laden 
analytical vocabulary to describe politico-economic ideas, policies, or institu­
tions. The second highlights the closely connected problem neoliberalism 
shares with plenty of other terms that ascend to the status of intellectual 

4	
Introduction
buzzwords for a while: Because of their very popularity and subsequent 
dissemination into various disciplinary contexts and usage, they dissolve 
into amorphous catch-all terms or empty signifiers (see Brenner, Peck, and 
Theodore 2010, 183–184). “Discourse” and “globalization” have had to 
endure a similar fate. 
 The charge that neoliberalism is merely the semantic weapon of choice 
wielded by anticapitalist forces and it should be abandoned to make room for 
concepts and analytical categories not considered politically suspect betrays 
a problematic assumption. It implies the possibility of a language that is un­
distorted by political leanings and would offer an unbiased linguistic access 
to social reality. After all, only if there is an actual alternative to the allegedly 
polemical vocabulary of neoliberalism does the charge of its critics stick. 
However, this assumption is less than plausible. While twentieth-century 
positivism/critical rationalism as it is conceived of in the works of Karl 
Popper (who once was a member of the Mont Pelerin Society, a transnational 
network of neoliberals) may have dreamt of a fully transparent language 
that comes without any additional connotative baggage beyond its explicit 
meaning, few currently share this dream. 
The likely rejoinder is to argue that philosophical reasons may not per­
mit us to conceive of an unbiased language but that it makes an important 
difference whether we use more or less biased terms. So rather than speak 
of neoliberalism, we could simply refer to a market economy or just plain 
capitalism. Aside from the fact that even some first-generation neoliberals 
argued against the use of the term “capitalism” “because it suggests a system 
which mainly benefits the capitalists” (Hayek 2003, 1:62), a more general 
problem arises: cleansing social theoretical language of any biases comes only 
at the price of abstraction, which may leave us bereft of a vocabulary with any 
diagnostic potential. What is the intellectual value added when we describe 
societies as simply capitalist? That description was true a hundred years ago 
and even earlier. It is as accurate for a description of Sweden as it is for the 
United States—and almost all other existing economies. In other words, it 
is so true that it becomes trivial. However, social inquiry that does not aim 
at timeless nomological knowledge is well advised to take spatiotemporal 
context seriously and consequently requires terminological tools below the 
level of abstraction of “capitalism” and “market economies” to capture what 

	
Introduction
5
is distinct about these contexts. Such diagnostic potential appears to be of 
considerable analytical and critical value for any endeavor aimed at captur­
ing “what our present is” (Foucault 1989, 407), how it differs from the past, 
and how it might be different. Despite its inconveniences, neoliberalism can 
be considered a promising candidate in the search for a critical-diagnostic 
terminology applicable to the contemporary world—more promising, in my 
view, than alternatives such as late capitalism, post-Fordism, or advanced 
liberalism (see Barry, Osborne, and Rose 1996), which come with their own 
set of even graver definitional problems. 
What are the definitional difficulties of neoliberalism; and are they 
unique to this particular term or a more widespread inconvenience associ­
ated with labels that refer to traditions and strands in political thought? 
Those opposed to neoliberalism because of its frequent polemical use in 
debates often link this polemical potential to the lack of definitive content 
of the term. Supposedly, it is the emptiness of neoliberalism that turns it 
into a perfect discursive weapon, rich in antagonistic connotations and very 
poor in solid content. There is no need to downplay these difficulties, which 
actually begin with the root term of neoliberalism: “liberalism.” Liberalism 
is a current of thought that, positively speaking, exhibits an enviable richness 
and has been described as intellectual home by a surprisingly heterogeneous 
group of thinkers. Less positively speaking, one could describe liberalism 
as a tradition of thought that is next to impossible to pin down to a defini­
tional kernel (see Crouch 2011, 3). Consider that there are arguments made 
for an inclusion of the absolutist and semiauthoritarian thinker Thomas 
Hobbes in the liberal tradition. This is a clear indicator of how broad the 
liberal tent is, and we would expect that this translates, among other things, 
into difficulties with one of its genealogical heirs, neoliberalism. Beyond 
this common difficulty of labeling political genres, neoliberalism is laden 
with another complication rooted in the somewhat unique spatiotemporal 
dynamic experienced by its root term “liberalism.” What I have in mind is 
the slow transformation of the term “liberalism” beginning at the end of 
the nineteenth century, especially in the Anglo-Saxon world. It is here in 
particular that liberal thinkers combined elements taken from this tradi­
tion with agendas of a more social-democratic or progressivist kind. The 
“new” liberalism of a John Dewey or a T. H. Green led to a profound shift 

6	
Introduction
in meaning of the term, particularly in the United States and Great Britain, 
which continues to cause trouble for a shared political language between the 
Continental European and the Anglo-Saxon world.2 After all, this shift has 
left us with a constellation in which the left-leaning Continental European 
Social Democrat would be referred to as a liberal on the other side of the 
Atlantic, while a liberal in the Continental sense is probably considered a 
conservative in the American sense. This transatlantic divergence of mean­
ings with regard to liberalism has left its mark on the usage of neoliberalism 
as well. Despite all the reservations noted, “neoliberalism” is an established 
term in European political discourse. But given the changed meaning of 
liberalism in the North American context, it comes as no surprise that 
neoliberalism can hardly be said to be a part of the repertoire of political 
discourse there. Audiences might wonder how neoliberalism can denote the 
very opposite of what they commonly view as liberalism. North American 
political discourse refers to the positions associated with neoliberalism in 
the European context as “libertarianism”—but the fate of the latter in Eu­
ropean political discourse is the mirror image of neoliberalism in America: 
it is not a category of any significance in political discourse, its academic 
significance notwithstanding. 
Should these terminological complications prompt us to abandon the 
concept of neoliberalism after all? My response is not to deny the difficulties 
of literally coming to terms with neoliberalism but rather to question the 
uniqueness of these problems and whether they should really be considered 
problems in the sense of avoidable mistakes resulting from faulty reasoning 
or something slightly different. The crucial point, in my view, is to clarify 
what we can hope to achieve with terms that designate anything from a 
political ideology, to an intellectual discourse, or a tradition of thought. Con­
sider any number of examples from conservatism, liberalism, and socialism 
to critical theory, poststructuralism, or the “new materialism.” In each case, 
it is impossible to draw lines with geometrical accuracy that would enable 
us to distinguish unequivocally between, for example, conservatism and its 
closest intellectual siblings and cousins from liberalism to authoritarianism. 
I have mentioned that liberalism is arguably the best case to illustrate the 
difficulty of defining intellectual traditions that evolve in complex patterns 
over time and geocultural contexts. Although any but the casual observer 

	
Introduction
7
is aware of the fuzziness at the heart of all of these concepts, there are few 
calls to stop referring to liberalism or conservatism because of their termi­
nological/conceptual deficiencies. After all, if the standard we aspire to in 
our use of these categories is to map the intellectual-political landscape with 
geometrical accuracy, then we would have to rid the cartographic toolbox 
of neoliberalism and practically any other term used to describe what are 
ineradicably heterogeneous strands and currents in thought and more or 
less congruent political positions. The fact that a call to retire all of these 
imprecise terms has not really gained any traction suggests that the tacit 
expectations with regard to these terms are not that they provide us with 
exact markers of the intellectual-political territory but that they offer us a 
broad sense of orientation in need of constant revision and questioning. 
The closer we scrutinize what a tradition presumably stands for, the clearer 
its ambiguities come into view. Conversely, the more we find out about a 
particular thinker, the harder it becomes to group that thinker into any 
one tradition in an unambiguous fashion. We should not view this as some 
kind of pathology but rather as business as usual for political theorists. 
Finally, this business that preoccupies so many studies in both the history 
of political thought and contemporary theory should not be seen as a dry 
exercise in intellectual stock keeping. On the contrary, this is an eminently 
political activity, and the political nature of constructing these traditions is, 
aside from the reasons already identified, the main source of the unabated 
controversy surrounding any one particular definition of, for example, con­
servatism that suggests thinker X is part of that tradition while thinker Y is 
not. Contesting a certain interpretation of conservatism and the respective 
representatives may not be the most important activity political theorists 
engage in. However, it is anything but a trivial matter how we define tra­
ditions and chart political and intellectual territory because these are the 
terms in which political contestations are being conducted. So while some 
may complain about the fuzziness of political labels and their contested 
nature, political theorists should be aware of their limits and dangers but 
still embrace them as an important medium of political contestation—and 
this includes a fortiori neoliberalism. 
Having provided a preliminary defense of the use of the terminology 
of neoliberalism, I conclude with an outline and brief justification of the 

8	
Introduction
two major, and potentially controversial, assumptions and corresponding 
methodological decisions underlying this study.
First, I assume that an analytical distinction can be made between neo­
liberalism as an intellectual project and neoliberalism as a number of con­
crete political projects in various empirical settings. While I am ultimately 
interested in both the theory and practice of neoliberalism, the starting 
point and focus of this study is the theoretical level. This approach might 
be considered an “ideas-centered understanding of neoliberalism” (Cahill 
2014, 32), which is met with criticism, especially by those who subscribe 
to a more materialist view and suspect neoliberalism’s ideational dimen­
sion to be of predominantly ideological significance (see Harvey 2005, 19; 
Mirowski 2013, 68). They point to the alleged chasm between neoliberal 
theory and practice and reprimand nonmaterialist accounts for their alleged 
disregard for the embeddedness of ideas in interest- and institution-based 
power structures that keep the former in place (see Cahill 2014). While I 
am not in principle opposed to studying “actually existing neoliberalism,” 
the subject of part 2, I do see some problems with focusing exclusively on 
this dimension, because strictly materialist accounts come with their own set 
of difficulties. First, materialists routinely define some policy regime of, for 
example, privatization and marketization as neoliberal, but how would one 
arrive at such a definition without consultation of neoliberal texts and the 
ideas contained in them? For decades there was no neoliberalism, except in 
the form of an intellectual discourse, so taking the respective political prac­
tices as a starting point is not a self-evident choice. Furthermore, the alleged 
discrepancy between neoliberal theory and practice is overstated in many 
materialist accounts, arguably due to a lack of interest in neoliberal theory, 
which is often summed up as the doctrine of “self-regulating markets.” If this 
were an accurate interpretation, the divide between the two dimensions of 
neoliberalism would indeed be wide, but attributing an economistic view of 
market absolutism to neoliberal theory betrays a poor understanding of it.3 
Instead, neoliberal theory is deeply interested in the link between politics, 
society, and economics. Once we take it seriously as a body of thought in 
political economy, it becomes clear that there are notable correspondences 
between these designs and neoliberalism in practice. To be sure, it would 
be wrong to suggest that there is a 1:1 correspondence between neoliberal 

	
Introduction
9
theory and practice, or that actors regularly and consciously aim to imple­
ment neoliberal ideas, or that the latter somehow realize themselves—I 
have no Hegelian inclinations. However, to infer from this that neoliberal 
theory is simply inconsequential is to have an impoverished understanding 
of political life deprived of its ideational dimension.4 Finally, the price we 
would have to pay for not considering neoliberal theory in its own right 
but just an ideological veil of neoliberal practices is a political one. Imagine 
the response of a proponent of neoliberalism to the criticisms leveled at 
actually existing neoliberalism regarding, for example, its inequality levels 
or other problems. The answer would clearly not be that neoliberalism is 
to blame, but rather its poor and incomplete implementation keeps us from 
reaping the alleged rewards of thorough neoliberalization: The solution to 
society’s problems remains more, not less, neoliberalism. The only way to 
preclude this exculpating argumentative strategy is to engage neoliberalism 
on the level of theories and ideas to show that the problem does not lie with 
selective implementation, unfaithful to the spirit of the respective ideas but 
the very ideas themselves. 
The second methodological assumption concerns my mode of engage­
ment with neoliberal thought. The purpose of this study is not only to re­
construct and analyze the political theory of neoliberalism but also to offer a 
critique of it. While others make the case for (a particular kind of) ideology 
critique of neoliberal theory (see Mirowski 2013), my critique has a slightly 
different thrust and is based on two equally important components. First, 
I distill the positive contents of neoliberal theory’s political dimension and 
probe for internal inconsistencies and tensions within and between varieties 
of neoliberalism, as well as instances where if falls short of its own stated 
aspirations in what might be called an immanent critique. But as the time-
honored discussions surrounding this mode of critique show, its strength lies 
in the fact that it engages its object on its own terrain and thus can never be 
off target, but its weakness flows from the same source. Accepting that ter­
rain, the terms of engagement, excludes these from an immanent critique in 
its strictest form. Therefore, the second component is a focus on that which 
is not being said in neoliberal theory: that is, the assumptions and conditions 
presupposed and built into it, the resulting limitations and blindspots, and 
the implications and potential consequences of certain ideas were they to 

10	
Introduction
be put into practice. The result I hope to achieve is a rich and nuanced cri­
tique of neoliberal thought that is willing to give neoliberal theory its due: 
a critique that has no need to distance itself from each and every element of 
it to ensure the identity of some demonic “Other” that is neoliberalism and, 
conversely, the purity of the non-neoliberal that must not be contaminated 
by correspondences or partial agreements with it, let alone the outrageous 
idea of possibly learning something from its proponents. Thus, the critique 
I intend to develop is designed to be neither a refutation nor an unmasking 
in the sense of ideology critique but rather a problematization of neoliberal­
ism’s political theory in its various aspects.


11
“Neoliberalism” is an inconvenient, albeit important, term for critical inquiries 
into the socioeconomic and political conditions of the capitalist present. 
Nevertheless, the problem remains that the potential usefulness of the 
term is greatly diminished because its meaning is unclear, or, possibly, as 
its critics believe, it has no meaning. Thus, it is no surprise that research­
ers who study neoliberal theory and/or practice feel compelled to offer 
a straightforward and unambiguous definition to preempt the charge of 
harboring an empty signifier floating around at the heart of their research 
agenda. However, this has led to a great number of studies that seek to 
define neoliberalism either through a set of specifically neoliberal policies 
like deregulation or privatization (see Chomsky 1999, 19; Larner 2000; 
Steger and Roy 2010, 14; Mirowski 2013, 333) or through some kind of 
conceptual kernel that supposedly represents its very essence (see Crouch 
2011, vii; Mudge 2008, 706–707). However, these efforts are plagued by 
difficulties: There is an ineradicable air of arbitrariness to the various 
policy lists, and the breadth and internal heterogeneities of “variegated” 
(Jessop 2016, 123) and “polymorphic” (Peck 2010, 8) neoliberalism seem 
to defy any attempt at developing “a generic and trans-historical defini­
tion of neoliberalism” (Hay 2007, 53)—and this applies not only to actu­
ally existing neoliberalism but to its discourse as well. Still, it is hardly a 
What Is Neoliberalism? 
C HAPTE R 1

12	
What Is Neoliberalism?
solution to postulate that there “are thus a number of distinct, but related 
neoliberalisms” (Roy, Denzau, and Willett 2007, 5), since this only exac­
erbates the problem by having to define each and describe the nature of 
the bond that relates them. 
This, then, is the predicament in which any work on neoliberalism finds 
itself. The main task of this chapter is therefore to develop an understanding 
of neoliberalism that avoids the overly parsimonious fallacy of attempting to 
“transcendentally ‘fix’ neoliberalism” with reference to some essence or core 
(Peck 2010, 15)—an understanding that is sufficiently accurate to capture 
the internal heterogeneity without dissolving neoliberalism entirely into 
multiple neoliberalisms without any underlying unity. I choose the follow­
ing conceptual strategy in this undertaking. 
Given the marked absence of any self-proclaimed neoliberals today and 
the suspicion harbored by some commentators that neoliberalism may have 
never existed other than as “a figment of the fevered left” (Mirowski 2009, 
426), I argue that a useful starting point to investigate the meaning of neo­
liberalism is to look at what those who actually referred to themselves as 
neoliberals associated with the term. In other words, the first step in gaining 
an understanding of the neoliberal project(s) is the reconstruction of the 
historical context of its emergence, which may be summed up as the crisis 
of liberalism. Neoliberalism must be understood, first and foremost, as a re­
sponse to this crisis based on a diagnosis of the factors that led to its decline. 
Out of this I distill what I call the neoliberal problematic, which, in my view, 
strikes the right conceptual balance between the unity and the heterogeneity 
of neoliberal thought. Neoliberalism, I argue, was never emphatically “one,” 
and the historical approach employed here has not been chosen in the hope 
of finding the single origin of neoliberalism, where its essence could be 
isolated from all contingent ingredients in pristine purity, because there is 
no such place. Despite the undeniable tensions within neoliberal discourse 
that characterized it even in its origins, what did unite those who called 
themselves neoliberals was a shared problematic that animated their efforts. 
The market lay at the center of this problematic, but the problematic was 
inherently political, as I show in contrast to the conventional economistic 
accounts of neoliberalism. 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
13
The Birth of Neoliberalism: The Colloque Walter 
Lippmann and the Crisis of Liberalism
It stands to reason that few if any of the participants of the Colloque Walter 
Lippmann anticipated that their meeting would retrospectively come to be 
considered as marking the birth date of an entire intellectual tradition when 
they gathered at the Institut International de Cooperation Intellectuelle 
in Paris during the last days of August 1938. The five-day colloquium had 
been organized to discuss the American journalist Walter Lippmann’s book 
The Good Society, published in 1937. Lippmann attended along with twenty-
five mostly European thinkers from various countries (see Reinhoudt and 
Audier 2018; Walpen 2004, 55–61). In the records of this meeting we first 
find the term “neoliberalism” connoting a common agenda and a shared 
project.1 Of course, referring to the birth of neoliberalism and the records 
of the meeting makes it seem as if a single origin and a founding text by 
Walter Lippmann were, after all, available as core ingredients of a straight­
forward definition of neoliberalism, but the simplicity of the narrative and 
the metaphor is deceiving. 
Neither is there a single origin of neoliberalism nor is there an “ur-text” 
authored by Lippmann or any other neoliberal.2 In fact, while Louis Rou­
gier, who was the official convener of the meeting, supposedly added 
the term “neoliberalism” to the records after the meeting, it is not clear 
whether there was a consensus to adopt this particular label during the 
actual discussions (see Burgin 2012, 73; Walpen 2004, 60). More compli­
cations to the alleged birth of neoliberalism could be added, the gravest 
of which was the impending World War II, which stopped the neoliberal 
project with its plans for a research center, regular meetings, and inten­
sified network building in its tracks. It took almost a decade after the 
Colloque for a similar meeting to take place—the second birth of neo­
liberalism, if you will—in April 1947, when sixty participants gathered 
in Switzerland to form the Mont Pelerin Society (MPS), which, to this 
day, is considered to represent a “neoliberal international” (see Mirowski 
and Plehwe 2009), although the word “neoliberalism” never even made 
it into the society’s official Statement of Aims that had been agreed on by 
the founding members. 

14	
What Is Neoliberalism?
Yet the Colloque still does mark a useful starting point for an examina­
tion of the neoliberal project because its agenda and that of the founding 
conference of the MPS, in combination with the writings of some of the 
participants, can help us reconstruct the context of the emergence of neo­
liberalism as an intellectual-political project and the rationale underlying it. 
Lippmann’s Good Society was a highly inconsistent treatise; however, its 
diagnosis and overall assessment of the times struck a chord with some of 
the leading future neoliberals. Lippmann depicted and dissected a classical 
liberalism in rapid decline and called for an effort to stabilize and consolidate 
the course of an intellectual tradition that was otherwise bound to tumble 
straight into oblivion. This was the catalyst for people like Hayek in London 
or Röpke in Geneva, who shared some of these worries, to call for a meeting 
to discuss not only Lippmann’s book but the dire condition of liberalism 
more generally. Accordingly, the context of neoliberalism’s intellectual in­
ception can succinctly be stated as the crisis of liberalism. 
So let us take a look at some of the main factors that could be consid­
ered symptoms of the possibly fatal crisis of liberalism. By the late 1930s 
proponents of liberalism—and not only them (see Polanyi 2001, 3)—had 
become convinced that the decline of the liberal age had been set in motion 
with the onset of World War I in 1914. The war was of course a catastrophic 
and deeply traumatizing event for (Western) civilization in any number of 
respects, but it dealt a particularly heavy blow to a broadly liberal worldview 
for two reasons. First, the mostly optimistic outlook on history shared by 
many currents of liberalism, including the more popularized versions, was 
shattered by the atrocities of a war fought with the utmost disregard for 
human life; the Western Front was described as “a machine for massacre” 
(Hobsbawm 1994, 25). The relapse into four years of barbarism made the 
talk of progress (through commerce) ring hollow if not outright cynical. 
The world seemed to have entered a period in which the notion of progress 
became elusive and was increasingly replaced by “a sense of catastrophe and 
disorientation” (ibid., 94). 
Second, the war complicated the liberal position because up until this 
time, ideas about (socialist) state planning had been just that, ideas that could 
be dismissed as unrealistic and irremediably utopian. However, World War 
I proved that economies could be run to a considerable degree on the basis 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
15
of centralized planning without collapsing—which became even more obvi­
ous during World War II. At least in certain currents of liberalism the prime 
argument against socialism before the war had been that it was not only 
undesirable but also simply unattainable. This position became much more 
difficult to maintain with planning taking place in the war economy. To some 
extent the famous Socialist Calculation Debate during the 1920s and 1930s, 
in which some representatives of the Austrian school such as Ludwig von 
Mises and Hayek participated, has to be understood as an attempt to prove 
that despite these seemingly promising experiences, experiments in planning 
without markets and market prices were still ultimately doomed to fail. 
During the 1920s, efforts were undertaken to restore the liberal civili­
zation of the nineteenth century (see Polanyi 2001), but at the end of the 
1920s they proved futile, as liberalism suffered another severe setback in the 
form of the Great Depression. While liberals had tried to prove theoretically 
that socialism was bound to collapse in the Socialist Calculation Debate, 
capitalism actually did collapse in practice on an almost worldwide scale. 
Given the enormity of the economic and social devastation caused by the 
crisis, it is no surprise that a broadly liberal position in favor of capitalist 
markets as indispensable guarantors of growth and wealth lost much, if not 
all, of its appeal, especially among the masses hit by unemployment and 
thrown into poverty. Thus, the crisis and its socioeconomic fallout created 
major problems for liberalism, as the pressure on elected governments to 
get involved in active crisis management and alleviate at least the most 
severe social problems increased to a point where the respective demands 
became almost impossible to ignore. Two developments in particular signify 
this turn of the tide that is of crucial importance for the inception of the 
neoliberal project. 
The first is the New Deal, which President Franklin Roosevelt had charac­
terized as “liberal” and which attracted considerable ire from Lippmann. The 
reforms associated with this label not only manifested a significant buildup 
of the American welfare state at the federal level through the introduction 
of a social insurance system; it also represented a profound change in the 
overall philosophy of the state. The state explicitly adopted a new set of re­
sponsibilities toward its population that no longer pertained only to defend­
ing it against external enemies, enforcing the law, and providing a minimum 

16	
What Is Neoliberalism?
of public infrastructure. It now included attending to socioeconomic welfare 
more broadly, especially with regard to the adverse effects of a capitalist economy 
(see Hobsbawm 1994, 96, 138–140). The stoic attitude of letting economic crises 
run their course combined with the denial of any more than rudimentary 
responsibility for social ills had fallen into disrepute over the years of crisis, 
and governments all over the North Atlantic world began to reconsider their 
role in regard to the economy and society. John Maynard Keynes’s theories 
came to represent this changed attitude, which brings us to the next facet of 
the liberal crisis, the rise of Keynesianism.
As early as 1924 Keynes had famously proclaimed “the end of laissez-
faire” in a lecture of the same title he delivered at Oxford. It may have been 
premature at the time, but the 1930s proved Keynes right, although “hege­
monic Keynesianism” would not come to full fruition until the post–World 
War II era. Keynes essentially argued for an active involvement of the state 
in economic policy in its various aspects. The position shared by welfare 
economics and economic liberalism was that capitalist markets would more 
or less automatically recover from external shocks or crises and slide back 
into market-clearing equilibria, guaranteeing profits, growth, and employ­
ment. However, Keynes contended that it was possible for markets to get 
stuck in suboptimal equilibria where continued stagnation, unemployment, 
and deflation loomed large unless the state stepped in to jump-start the 
economy. This could be achieved through an expansionary monetary pol­
icy, such as lowering interest rates and thus reducing the price of money, 
but even more important, through public investment to boost aggregate 
demand and thus encourage the private sector to expand production and 
investment. As the Great Depression dragged on, Keynes’s view that dys­
functional markets without built-in correctives could get locked into crisis 
conditions offered the basis for a plausible interpretation of the empirical 
evidence. Moreover, his work, culminating in the General Theory of Employ­
ment, Interest and Money, published in 1936, provided governments with a 
sorely needed set of policy instruments that allowed for a more hands-on 
approach to dealing with an ailing economy. The rise of this activist phi­
losophy of government, which even justified running deficits under certain 
conditions to pump money into an economy in crisis, was an important 
factor in the formation of neoliberalism, although the relation between the 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
17
various neoliberals and Keynes(ianism) is more complex than one might 
expect.3 Overall, though, Keynes, and much more so Keynesianism as it was 
further developed by economists like Joan Robinson and Nicolas Kaldor, 
represented a veritable bête noire for liberalism in the 1930s and beyond 
(see Hayek 1978a). The rise of the former was inextricably tied to and gave 
a clear indication of the latter’s decline. 
The final development contributing to the liberal crisis was surely the 
most alarming for the participants of the 1938 Colloque: the ascendency of 
deeply antiliberal political forces from Bolshevik Communism on the left of 
the political spectrum to European Fascism and German National Socialism 
on the right, as well as plain “old-fashioned authoritarians or conservatives” 
somewhere in between (Hobsbawm 1994, 113). 
Needless to say, the very existence of the Soviet Union, with its centrally 
planned economy, provided a challenge for those liberals who had been 
arguing that socialism could not work. While it was hardly a secret that the 
Soviet Union had evolved into a deeply repressive regime that persecuted 
individuals and groups, its apologists pointed out that it had weathered the 
storm of the Great Depression better than many other societies, which 
had, in turn, raised the interest in “planning” even in capitalist countries 
(Hobsbawm 1994, 96). In any case, as repressive or even outright totalitar­
ian as the Soviet Union may have been, in 1938, there was no reason to 
assume that it and its collectivist economy would collapse anytime soon. If 
the experience of wartime socialism was a thorn in the side of liberalism, 
proving that planning could work on a limited scale, the Soviet Union was 
a massive spear and evidence that entire societies could be organized ac­
cording to a centralized plan—albeit at the cost of basic rights and the loss 
of hundreds of thousands of lives. 
Similarly, Europe in 1938 was the site of triumphant antiliberal forces 
almost wherever the eye could turn—but here they predominantly hailed 
from the right of the political spectrum. National Socialism had seized power 
in 1933 in Germany, forcing the Colloque attendees Röpke and Rüstow into 
exile, and Italian Fascism continued to reign. In Spain, Franco’s Falange had 
defeated the republican forces in the civil war, and in other countries, such as 
Hungary and Finland, semifascist authoritarian movements and parties were 
not in power but gaining political ground. And like Soviet Communism, 

18	
What Is Neoliberalism?
the Fascist and National Socialist regimes were far from crumbling; so for 
an observer of the liberal persuasion the overall scenery must have seemed 
rather apocalyptic. After all, while Communism and Fascism would not agree 
on much else, they were united in their fierce enmity of anything bourgeois 
or liberal (see Furet 1999): “For a generation liberalism in Europe seemed 
doomed” (Hobsbawm 1987, 333). 
These are the most striking symptoms of the crisis of liberalism, and the 
neoliberal project must be understood as a reaction and response to what 
the neoliberals-to-be perceived as a crisis of truly existential proportions, 
one addressed in various sessions at the Colloque devoted to the factors re­
sponsible for the decline of neoliberalism (see Reinhoudt and Audier 2018). 
This interpretation of the neoliberal project as a reaction to the antiliberal 
syndrome just described provides us with the first clue for the clarification 
of the neoliberal project’s content through an understanding of what it was 
opposed to, or, to use an expression coined by Michel Foucault, its “field 
of adversity” (2008, 106). 
The Field of Adversity
There can be little doubt that the key intellectual and political adversary 
of neoliberalism was what the early neoliberals would call “collectivism,” 
although they may also have used more specific vocabulary. In this choice 
of words an important positioning already becomes clear, foreshadowing a 
terminological strategy later to be found in many theories of totalitarian­
ism. In this perspective, the political distinction of significance is not right 
versus left, or Communism versus Fascism, but rather totalitarianism versus 
liberalism, or collectivism versus individualism. In other words, while there 
may be some differences between Fascist and Communist regimes, accord­
ing to the neoliberal view their crucial common denominator is that they are 
collectivist. The possibly best example of this position is, of course, Hayek’s 
The Road to Serfdom (2001), originally dedicated to the “Socialists of all Par­
ties.” Animated by the concern that the Allies might win the war but lose 
the battle of ideas and thus resort to planning beyond the wartime economy, 
Hayek aimed mainly to show that the well-meaning advocates of modest 
planning were inadvertently playing into the hands of those with whom they 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
19
were at war. What must be defended against collectivisms of all persuasions 
is “an individualist civilization” (Hayek 2001, 14) that is equally endangered 
by Fascism and Communism (ibid., 27). We can also include similar views 
of other Colloque attendees such as Lippmann and Rüstow. Furthermore, 
Eucken’s fundamental distinction between a centrally administered economy 
(Zwangsverwaltungswirtschaft) and an exchange economy (Verkehrswirtschaft) 
introduced in his Foundations of Economics published two years after the Col­
loque, which he was barred from attending by the Nazis, indirectly confirms 
that the purposes of centralization in the first system are of no real significance 
(see Eucken 1951a, 119–132). Thus, the first thing to note with regard to 
neoliberalism’s field of adversity is that neoliberals of the 1930s and 1940s 
were staunch anticollectivists and defined themselves predominantly against 
both National Socialism/Fascism and Communism.4 
In some of the more recent scholarship on the origins of neoliberalism, 
it has been argued that this is noteworthy because it shows how the main 
targets of neoliberal criticism shift over the years and decades. Although 
contemporary neoliberalism may be strongly associated with the critique 
of the state in general and the welfare state in particular, this allegedly dif­
fers from the situation in its early days: “At this stage, neo-liberal authors 
focused their energies on opposing the socialist and fascist strands of this 
discourse [on planning],” writes Ben Jackson; “the chief enemy of the neo-
liberals was not the nascent welfare state or even Keynesian economics” 
(2010, 140). This is an important point and a reminder of the difficulties 
involved in defining something that has a history and whose contours and 
the relative priority of its oppositions shift over the course of time. And, of 
course, Jackson has a point; after all, one session at the Colloque was even 
devoted to the question of whether and how liberalism might be able to fulfill 
its social obligations (see Reinhoudt and Audier 2018, 149–156). Today’s 
readers might be surprised to learn that Hayek’s somewhat infamous Road 
to Serfdom contains strong polemics against “planning” but also concedes 
that “to limit working hours or to require certain sanitary arrangements, 
is fully compatible with the preservation of competition. . . . Nor is the 
preservation of competition incompatible with an extensive system of so­
cial services” (2001, 39). However, these passages are difficult to reconcile 
with the overall claim of his book that even the most modest attempts at 

20	
What Is Neoliberalism?
planning are likely to lead a society down the road to serfdom. This tension 
at the heart of Hayek’s account was Keynes’s single but rather devastating 
point of criticism in a letter to Hayek: “You admit here and there that it is a 
question of knowing where to draw the line. You agree that the line has to 
be drawn somewhere [between free enterprise and planning], and that the 
logical extreme is not possible. But you give us no guidance whatever as to 
where to draw it” ([1944] 1980, 387).
To put the matter differently, while their relative importance as neolib­
eral adversaries certainly shifts over time, it is not possible to conceptually 
separate the critique of the welfare state from the critique of totalitarianism 
even in early neoliberal discourse.5 Foucault may have overstated the case 
by referring to an “illiberal” “economic-political invariant” underlying the 
analyses of early neoliberalism (2008, 111), suggesting that all roads of plan­
ning ultimately lead into the abyss of totalitarianism. However, Lippmann’s 
equivocation of the “gradual collectivism” that he detects in the New Deal 
with Fascism and Communism (1937, 106), as well as Röpke’s criticism of 
the Beveridge Plan’s extension of the welfare state in Great Britain, paints 
an ominous picture of the buildup of the welfare state that is reminiscent of 
Hayekian imagery: “The welfare state not only lacks automatic brakes and 
not only gathers impetus as it moves along, it also moves along a one-way 
street in which it is, to all intents and purposes, impossible or, at any rate, 
exceedingly difficult to turn back. . . . This implies growing centralization 
of decision and responsibility and growing collectivization of the individual’s 
welfare and design of life” (1960, 162–163).6
To sum up this first point regarding the field of adversity, neoliberal­
ism’s prime antagonists are certainly Communism and National Social­
ism/Fascism, which the neoliberals view as nothing more than different 
manifestations of the same basic collectivism-cum-totalitarianism. But 
the point of the neoliberal conceptualization of this sector of the field of 
adversity is to draw connections between those most extreme instantia­
tions of a politics of illiberalism and other phenomena that might be seen 
as respective prestages, such as the welfare state and, more indirectly, 
Keynesianism—and by extension those who would promote it, especially 
trade unions. The welfare state and the omnipresent but poorly defined 
planning associated with it supposedly represent collectivism in nuce—but 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
21
there is a certain range of positions among neoliberals with regard to the 
inevitability and irreversibility of the drift toward collectivism. Further­
more, the relative dangers of the welfare state also depend on its particular 
configuration (see, e.g., Hayek 2001, 125).
It is against these adversaries that neoliberalism positions itself, seeking 
to revitalize a broadly liberal agenda or at least certain elements thereof in 
the face of the 1930s illiberal zeitgeist. To be sure, the fact that neoliberalism 
is concerned with a revitalization of liberal ideas, which must have seemed 
like an almost quixotic undertaking at the time, is hardly surprising; it is 
common sense among most commentators who choose a broadly histori­
cal approach to outlining the neoliberal project (see, e.g., Turner 2007, 42; 
Peck 2008, 14; Burgin 2012, 65). The more interesting component of what 
might be called the neoliberal formula can be derived from another, closer 
look at the field of adversity. 
Narratives of Liberal Decline
The early neoliberals, both at the Colloque and at the founding meeting of 
the MPS, were adamant that the decline of neoliberalism was not only the 
result of the rise of its external adversaries but also attributable to problems 
within liberalism that would have to be addressed if it were to regain the 
status of a contender in the battle of ideas. An entire session of the Colloque 
was devoted to the internal factors responsible for the liberal demise, and 
the MPS also discussed the preconditions for a liberal revival in 1947 (see 
Reinhoudt and Audier 2018, 119–128). Thus, it is hardly an exaggeration 
to say that neoliberalism was the outcome of a collective liberal soul search­
ing seen as a prerequisite for the revitalization of ideas that a hundred years 
earlier had almost reigned supreme. While neoliberalism is an attempt to 
revitalize a broadly liberal agenda, it is not simply a revival of these ideas. To 
face the challenges of (gradual) collectivism, it would not suffice to simply 
recycle classical liberal ideas and call for a return to the fundamental truths 
of Adam Smith or Adam Ferguson.7 Liberalism would have to undergo a 
proper modernization if it were to successfully engage Keynesian and col­
lectivist ideas, as Hayek made clear in his opening statement at the MPS 
founding conference: “As I see our task, it is not sufficient that our members 

22	
What Is Neoliberalism?
should have what used to be called ‘sound’ views. The old liberal who ad­
heres to a traditional creed merely out of tradition, however admirable his 
views, is not of much use for our purpose. What we need are people who 
have faced the arguments from the other side, who have struggled with 
them and fought themselves through to a position from which they can 
both critically meet the objection against it and justify their views” (1992, 
240). Liberalism needed to be modernized in order to compete, or rather, 
survive in the twentieth century, according to the large majority of Colloque 
participants, so the neoliberal project could not be a solely restorative one. 
What puts the “neo” into neoliberalism is obviously this modernizing 
effort. But this presupposed, crucially, a critical revision of the old liberal 
agenda and an analysis of its shortcomings and aberrations. In other words, 
the full field of adversity, against which neoliberalism defines itself, also 
includes wrongheaded strands of liberalism that developed over the latter 
half of the nineteenth century. These were internal factors of liberalism’s 
decline, according to the neoliberal crisis narrative. Let us take a closer look 
at this narrative through four overlapping versions from Röpke, Rüstow, 
Friedman, and Hayek, all written some years after the Colloque but largely 
congruent with what we know about the discussions in its context. 
Wilhelm Röpke’s version of the crisis narrative begins with a rhetori­
cal question: “Could it possibly be, that far from being just a victim of the 
societal crisis it [liberalism] could have contributed to it through its own 
errors? And if this should turn out to be the case and the crisis of modern 
society is also the crisis of liberalism, is there no room for hope that a 
cleansing and inner rejuvenation of liberalism will also be a crucial con­
tribution to overcoming the crisis of society in general?” (1950a, 14–15). 
His examination of liberal decline operates on the basis of a distinction 
between an “imperishable” core of liberalism that is maintained and built 
on in a process of “rejuvenation from within” and “ephemeral” aberrations 
(ibid., 9). Three main “internal” problems are identified in his account: first, 
“the relation between liberalism and the functions of reason, second, its 
relation to community and third, the relation to economic life” (ibid., 25). 
The respective aberrations that have harmed liberalism are “rationalism, 
individualism and economic liberalism” (ibid.). Consequently, Röpke warns 
of the hubris of intellectualism and the dangers of individualism when they 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
23
lead to atomization of the individual in society. In regard to socioeconomic 
life, he bemoans liberalism’s one-sided focus on narrowly economic issues 
(ibid., 29), discussed later at greater length. 
Alexander Rüstow is the most outspoken critic of liberalism among the 
neoliberals. He attributes the decline of liberalism, “the dominant philoso­
phy of life in the Western World during the nineteenth century” (1942, 
268), to reasons very similar to Röpke’s last point. “In practice, liberalism 
meant for the nineteenth century predominantly economic liberty, i.e., the 
freedom of the market system” (ibid.). Still, Rüstow offers a much more 
elaborate account of the roots of the problem: a misconception of markets 
based on certain religious beliefs. For Adam Smith, as well as his physiocratic 
precursors, the economy was supposedly based on a “beneficial automatism 
of the economic laws” that had to be respected, and consequently all efforts 
at intervening in and steering this economy, for example, in the form of 
mercantilism, came to be seen as misguided in the name of “‘Laissez-faire! 
Laissez-passer!’ which at the same time was a summons to honor God and 
an adjuration not to allow short-sighted human anxieties to interfere with 
the eternal wisdom of the natural law” (ibid., 269, 270). As a result of this 
misguided understanding of the economic sphere and the failure to compre­
hend its linkage with other societal spheres, “an unmistakable degeneration 
of the market economy set in” toward the end of the nineteenth century 
(ibid., 272). A revitalized liberalism would have to abandon this misconcep­
tion and shed the religious beliefs that fuel it. What clearly emerges from 
this as another intellectual adversary of neoliberalism is the (non)politics 
of laissez-faire. This is a major point that has often been ignored until the 
more recent controversies over neoliberalism and the financial crisis, in 
which neoliberalism supposedly represented the belief in self-regulating 
markets (see Stiglitz 2008). However, when we look at the intellectual ori­
gins of the neoliberal project, it is impossible not to see how strongly the 
early neoliberals distanced themselves from the twin ideas of the politics of 
laissez-faire and self-regulating markets.8 
Not just the ordoliberals but even the young Milton Friedman (1955) sub­
scribed to the crisis narrative of a misguided nineteenth-century “liberalism, 
old style”; in his “Neo-liberalism and Its Prospects” he explicitly identifies 
with the neoliberal agenda: “We have a new faith to offer; it behooves us to 

24	
What Is Neoliberalism?
make it clear to one and all what that faith is” (1951, 2). And just like Röpke 
and Rüstow he constructs the prehistory of neoliberalism as one of liberal 
decline: “The collectivist belief in the ability of direct action by the state to 
remedy all evils is itself however an understandable reaction to a basic error 
in the 19th century individualist philosophy. This philosophy assigned almost 
no role to the state other than the maintenance of order and the enforcement 
of contracts. It was a negative philosophy. The state could do only harm. 
Laissez-faire must be the rule” (ibid.). Here, laissez-faire is even accused of 
indirectly contributing to the rise of collectivism, so there can be no doubt 
that the “new faith” of neoliberalism will have to do without it. 
It may be surprising to those who think of Hayek as the patron saint 
of quasi-libertarian “Austrian economics,” but as Austrian as he may be, 
Hayek was just as adamant as Rüstow and Friedman that a modernization of 
liberalism would require a critical assessment of its own mistakes and aber­
rations, including the notion of laissez-faire: “Probably nothing has done 
so much harm to the liberal cause as the wooden insistence of some liberals 
on certain rough rules of thumb, above all the principle of laissez-faire,” he 
writes in The Road to Serfdom (2001, 18; see also Hayek 1992, 238). And in 
an entry on “liberalism” written for an encyclopedia, Hayek sets the stage 
for his account by distinguishing “two distinct sources” that will lead to the 
establishment of two different traditions within the liberal tradition (1978b, 
119). In contrast to the framing of Röpke, who distinguished between a truly 
liberal core and various excesses and aberrations that subsequently come 
to taint that core, Hayek’s liberalism is divided into two rival strands from 
the beginning. The first is a more conventionalist tradition personified by 
the thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment from Smith to Hume. The sec­
ond is a “continental or constructivist liberalism” (ibid., 125), which finds 
its most typical expression in the rationalism of Descartes or the staunch 
anticlericalism and antitraditionalism of Voltaire and, in Hayek’s view, is 
particularly prone to losing its liberal sense of direction. The history of 
the liberal decline following its mid-nineteenth-century heyday is narrated 
very similarly to the other accounts, but in Hayek’s version it is not just the 
laissez-faire radicalism of a Herbert Spencer that is considered an aberra­
tion detrimental to liberalism in general. As noted previously, the work of 
the later Mill and particularly the thought of T. H. Green intellectually 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
25
prefigure a convergence of liberalism with strands of socialism or progres­
sivism that results in what Hayek calls “moderate socialism” (ibid., 130). 
Thus, in Hayek’s interpretation the decline of liberalism is the result of a 
bifurcation of the tradition into a faction of laissez-faire proponents, on the 
one hand, and supporters of the quasi-social-democratic “new liberalism,” 
on the other, be it Green’s version in the United Kingdom or Dewey’s liberal 
progressivism in the United States. 
So what have we learned about the neoliberal project through an ex­
amination of how it defines itself against its various others? The list of 
“external” opponents is headed by the various collectivisms but also includes 
Keynesianism, a sprawling welfare state, and its supporters. To contend with 
the various manifestations of this antiliberal syndrome, liberalism would 
have to be revitalized, something that could not be achieved through a res­
toration of the liberalism of the nineteenth century. Inevitably, revitalizing 
liberalism meant modernizing it, and that would result in a newly fashioned 
neoliberalism. Still, the precondition for a successful revitalization would be 
a critical assessment and revision of the liberal agenda, various versions of 
which we have just encountered. In other words, the field of adversity is not 
limited to an external dimension but also contains an internal one in which 
the twin aberrations against which neoliberalism defines itself—laissez-faire 
liberalism and new liberalism—are also to be found. 
The Neoliberal Problematic
While this first sketch of the neoliberal project is already of some use, the ef­
fort to capture what defines this project can be taken further by addressing the 
neoliberal problematic. If the chief adversary of neoliberalism is collectivism, 
and that collectivism, in turn, is opposed to the capitalist market economy, 
then it is no surprise that the defense of capitalist markets broadly under­
stood is the centerpiece of neoliberal thought. This is rather uncontroversial 
and seemingly leads us into the familiar territory of neoliberalism as market 
fundamentalism and turbo-capitalism. Yet this is not the case. After all, the 
idea of self-regulating markets requires the notion of a politics of laissez-faire 
in the noneconomic sphere if it is to be consistent. But if we take seriously 
the way the founders of the neoliberal project distanced themselves from or 

26	
What Is Neoliberalism?
outright rejected the idea of laissez-faire, then it becomes virtually impossible 
to characterize neoliberalism as the doctrine of self-regulating markets. The 
neoliberals are no market fundamentalists; on the contrary, in a certain sense 
the market turns into a problem for them, because in the light of liberalism’s 
decline and crisis, simply watching the iron laws of economics unfolding 
automatically and autonomously is no longer a tenable position for them. 
Consequently, the neoliberal problematic concerns the political and social condi­
tions of possibility for functioning markets, the latter being characterized by the 
integrity of the price system, which must operate unperturbed. 
The common denominator of neoliberalism cannot be expressed positively 
in the form of a number of doctrines or theses. What all neoliberals share is 
the problem of how to identify the factors indispensable to the maintenance 
of functioning markets, since the option of simply leaving them to themselves 
is no longer on the table. Obviously, this still leaves room for a range of dif­
ferent responses or ways of framing solutions to the neoliberal problematic 
as well as changes over time. What exactly it is that ensures the function­
ing of markets is a matter of continued dispute between different neoliberal 
thinkers and varieties of neoliberal thought. Thus, this is a conceptualization 
of neoliberalism that is still broad enough to capture the heterogeneities of 
neoliberal thought, the varieties of positions, and the transformations that 
take place over time. Still, there is a thin common denominator in the form 
of a shared problematic, and in my view this strikes the right balance between 
the Scylla of overly parsimonious definitions of neoliberalism as the doctrine 
of x, y, or z and the Charybdis of dissolving it into a constantly shape-shifting 
multiplicity of loosely related neoliberalisms.
I have argued that the market becomes a problem for neoliberals, and 
this is true in the sense that it is no longer seen as a mechanism operating 
independently of its surroundings. But this implies, strictly speaking, that the 
actual problem, and thus the center of attention, shifts to those surround­
ings that become the real focus of neoliberal thought, which suggests that 
we should develop a more “decentered” account of neoliberalism, where 
markets may reside at the center but the neuralgic area of analysis for a 
critical understanding of neoliberalism is the infrastructural periphery of 
markets. Thus, what we have in neoliberalism is not a body of economistic 
thought that views markets as existing in some kind of vacuum. Rather, 

	
What Is Neoliberalism?
27
neoliberalism must be understood as a discourse in political economy that 
explicitly addresses the noneconomic preconditions of functioning markets 
and the interactive effects between markets and their surroundings. Neo­
liberalism is often portrayed as fixated on markets and the economy, and it 
would be absurd to claim this to be entirely wrong, so I also acknowledge 
the centrality of markets for neoliberal thought. However, once we consider 
the writings of these neoliberals, who did not necessarily see themselves as 
conventional economists (see Mirowski 2009, 427), it turns out that they give 
at least equal weight, if not more, to the analysis of noneconomic issues and 
how they relate to the economy and the operation of markets. It is to these 
questions about the infrastructure of markets that neoliberals devote ever-
renewed efforts of analysis and critique. While their views of markets per 
se, their internal workings as well their various merits, remain fairly stable 
over time, it is the noneconomic side of their work that turns out to be the 
most dynamic because it is here that the actual neoliberal problematic is 
addressed over and over again from different angles and perspectives. James 
Buchanan sums it up well in his description of his intellectual trajectory: “I 
found myself becoming a political philosopher, in inquiry if not by profes­
sion” (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 22). 
Indeed, addressing these questions obviously and inevitably leads into 
genuinely political territory, which is the reason I have argued that the neo­
liberal problematic is an inherently political problematic: For example, how 
does the social environment of markets have to be shaped, what kind of 
state action is required, and what are the effects of democracy on the poli­
tics needed for functioning markets? It would not be accurate to state that 
scholarship on neoliberalism has ignored its political dimension entirely, 
but aside from a few exceptions this research mostly concerns the politics 
of actually existing neoliberalism. We may know a lot about the economic 
dimension of neoliberal theory and what may be problematic about “market 
justice,” but surprisingly little is known about its political dimension. How­
ever, the intellectual desideratum of a reconstruction and analysis of this 
still underresearched area is not the only reason and rationale behind the 
endeavor to examine what I call the political theory of neoliberalism. It may 
be this political dimension—and not the economics of neoliberalism—that 
will turn out to provide the opportunity for a critique that does not exhaust 

28	
What Is Neoliberalism?
itself in attacks on the “fixation on markets” and the “greed and egoism” 
neoliberalism supposedly fosters. Changing our focus may reveal that the 
political preconditions and implications of neoliberalism as they are laid out 
in neoliberal thought are too high a price to pay—even if the economics of 
neoliberalism turned out to be sound and acceptable. A final reason that 
those critical of neoliberalism should be interested in its political dimension 
is that the neoliberals and many of neoliberalism’s critics inhabit eerily similar 
ground in regard to certain political issues. Neoliberals are critical of various 
aspects of the state, democracy, and science; but the same can be said about 
many of its (left-wing) critics. So it would seem important to examine closely 
the various positions and critiques thereof, not only to find out where and 
how these critiques and their suggested alternatives differ but also to explore 
whether or not there is something to be learned from neoliberal critiques 
and whether it might not be possible to borrow certain of their elements and 
redeploy them for critical purposes of one’s own.


29
Part 1 is devoted to the reconstruction, analysis, and critique of key elements of 
the political theory of neoliberalism, in other words, the political dimen­
sion in neoliberal thought. This political dimension is not just an appendix 
to a body of thought otherwise devoted strictly to economic matters but a 
vital aspect of a collective intellectual endeavor to address the neoliberal 
problematic of identifying and securing the manifold conditions of possibil­
ity of functioning markets. The following survey of the political thought of 
neoliberalism focuses on four elements that are most closely related to this 
guiding problematic: the state, democracy, science, and politics. 
The relevance of the first two is immediately evident: Can the state con­
tribute to the conditions that enable functioning markets, and if so, how and 
what can it contribute? Conversely, why and how may the state undermine 
these very conditions, and how can this be avoided? Four varieties of neoliberal 
thought aim at either enabling or constraining the state by either focusing 
on state output (policies) or a recentering/decentering of state structure. The 
latter results either in diffusing state power in multilevel governance arrange­
ments or forging a semiauthoritarian state, which proves how strong the ten­
sions between varieties of neoliberal thought turn out to be in some cases. 
The issue of democracy is most closely linked to that of the state, because 
the guiding question concerns mainly how democracy might complicate 
The Political Theory of Neoliberalism
PART I

30	
Political Theory of Neoliberalism
the tasks and limits assigned to the state by neoliberal thought. For the 
neoliberals, democracy in its contemporary form turns out to be one of the 
gravest impediments in addressing the neoliberal problematic, but their 
writings still exhibit a variety of specific critiques of democracy with different 
diagnoses (from “rent-seeking” and self-serving politicians to the ignorant 
masses) and, consequently, different remedies. These range from a “strong 
state” that fends off demands from a democratic public and pluralist parties, 
to a set of constitutional rules on debt and deficits, or a legislative chamber 
resembling a supreme court that is insulated from the dealings of ordinary 
parliamentarism. Finally, neoliberal writings even consider introducing more 
direct democratic measures to keep political elites in check. 
The third element, science, may seem less self-evident but is not only of 
immediate concern to the neoliberal problematic but also directly related to 
the neoliberal views on state and democracy. The guiding questions here are 
quite similar to the others: How and what can social science contribute to the 
conditions of possibility of functioning markets? How may a misunderstand­
ing of the proper mode of scientific reasoning and its limits as well as the 
proper role of science in regard to the state and (a democratic) society lead 
to the very opposite? Neoliberal thought on science can thus be divided into 
two broad and almost diametrically opposed varieties. One extols the powers 
of (economic) science if conducted properly according to the right methods 
and posits scientifically generated truth against (collectivist) prejudice and 
ideology. The other is mainly concerned about the dangers of “scientism” 
and warns of how a science of economics mimicking natural science would 
do harm to any neoliberal project, either through faulty methodology or 
an overly confident belief in the powers of human reason. The two variet­
ies also differ about the role that science should play in regard to politics: 
While the first (best exemplified by the work of Eucken) promotes the model 
of scientific policy advice, gesturing toward a technocratic form of policy 
making, the second (best exemplified by the work of Buchanan) finds the 
idea of scientists offering their services to politicians who are considered to 
be mostly interested in their reelection to be thoroughly misguided. 
Politics is the final and crucial element of a political theory of neoliberal­
ism. The questions in this context are how neoliberals view politics and, in 
particular, how they conceive of a politics of neoliberal reform. In chapters 2, 

	
Political Theory of Neoliberalism
31
3, and 4 we encounter a combination of critical analysis and reform propos­
als regarding state, democracy, and the role of science. Chapter 5 examines 
how these reform proposals are to be implemented, a far-from-trivial issue 
that presents neoliberal thought with a rather serious challenge. 
This challenge is neoliberal thought’s striking inability to theorize a 
politics of neoliberal reform, at least not without violating the very as­
sumptions that underlie its own analyses and critiques of the shortcomings 
of democratic politics. Ordoliberals like Röpke tend to place their hopes in 
the emergence of some guardian-like elite, which is—against all odds—will­
ing and able to realize the public good as it is defined in ordoliberal terms. 
Hayek (and some others) has to resort to entertaining the possibility of 
a (transitory) dictatorship to implement neoliberal reforms. Buchanan is 
incapable of explaining how self-interested politicians would ever pass his 
favored reform proposals, which would hurt their own self-interest, and 
explicitly suspends the assumptions of homo economicus to keep neoliberal 
hopes (often bordering on the eschatological) for reform alive. Overall, this 
is arguably the weakest link in neoliberal political theory.


This page intentionally left blank 

33
In a recent contribution to the debate a rhetorical question has been raised: Is the 
state “the bête noire of neo-liberalism or its greatest conquest?” (Schmidt 
and Woll 2013, 112). It is a rhetorical question because, as Schmidt and 
Woll are well aware, for the neoliberals the state is undoubtedly both. The 
strategic centrality of the state to neoliberal theory and practice derives 
from its very ambivalence, since it is, simultaneously, the crucial instru­
ment in creating the conditions for functioning markets (see, for example, 
Friedman and Friedman 1990, 28), but also, arguably, the greatest threat 
to them. Consequently, neoliberal thought invests a lot of time and space 
in determining the proper role for the state to play. Despite the significant 
overlaps that must not be disregarded, within the body of these elaborations 
and considerations we can detect differing and even contradicting emphases 
and logics and, accordingly, distinguish varieties of neoliberal thought with 
regard to the state. My aim is to distill the main strategies of conceptual­
izing the state and its proper role in regard to the economy and society and 
to group the variants of the respective arguments and positions to develop 
a comprehensive overview and a critical assessment of the varieties of neo­
liberal theorizing of the state.
The starting point of the discussion is marked by a fundamental yet 
thin agreement among the neoliberals: The state has positive functions to 
The State
C HAPTE R 2 

34	
The State
perform, and they are neither confined to guaranteeing private contracts 
or, more generally, enforcing the law, nor is it helpful to think about the 
role of government in quantitative terms of “more” or “less” (see Röpke 
1950b, 228; Hayek 2001, 84, 195; Friedman 1951). The question is how to 
give a qualitative account of the state and its activities not only in the sense 
of a description of the status quo of existing states but, more important, in 
the prescriptive sense of outlining the contours of the ideal neoliberal state. 
The second commonality across all varieties of neoliberal state discourse 
is a metaphor or image regularly employed to satisfy this requirement in 
the most intuitively plausible way. Although it will become clear that it is 
insufficient to capture the intricacies of the neoliberal view of the state, 
it still forms a good baseline that we can refer back to on occasion. This 
master metaphor of neoliberal state discourse casts the state as an umpire 
or referee (see, e.g., Friedman 2002, 25; Buchanan 1975, 68, 95; Eucken 
1949, 29). In other words, the main responsibility of the state is to enforce 
the rules of the game in an impartial and authoritative manner. Implied in 
this description of the state’s tasks are the two sides of the same coin of state 
power mentioned previously: the need to enable the state and at the same 
time to restrict it in its actions. Without someone to enforce the rules in a 
competitive game, it is seemingly inevitably going to descend into chaos, 
which is supposedly not in the interest of anyone involved. Yet to keep the 
game from collapsing, it is equally important that the referee is somehow 
restricted to just this activity and refrains from suddenly grabbing the ball, 
scoring a point, and thus directly interfering in the process of the game. 
Thus, this imagery involves, on the one hand, drawing a line between the 
indirect structuring of the game through an enforceable framework of rules 
that still allows the players to choose their own strategies within the bound­
aries of these constraints and, on the other, directly intervening in the game 
to steer it in a particular direction. 
Analysts of actually existing neoliberalism would be quick to point out 
that this may be an appealingly categorical distinction between the state’s 
agenda and non-agenda, but it has, for better or worse, little bearing on 
neoliberal states in their actuality. However, it is already within neoliberal 
thought itself that the descriptions of stately tasks often point far beyond 
the stoic rulings of an umpire.

	
The State
35
Keeping this in mind, we turn to the varieties of neoliberal state discourse 
based on two analytical distinctions that serve to structure our survey. The 
first is the distinction between state output and state structure, or to be more 
precise, argumentative strategies that focus on either one or the other. The 
second concerns strategies of restricting the state and its capacities and an 
emphasis on the positive functions the state must perform as well as the 
various prerequisites that allow it to deliver on these tasks. The combination 
of these two analytical distinctions results in a four-field matrix that yields 
the respective number of varieties of neoliberal state discourse. 
A Positive Agenda for the State: 
Policy Principles and Goals
We begin with those strategies of neoliberal state theory that focus on the 
output of the state and emphasize certain goals that the state should pursue 
through a particular set of policies. In most cases this endeavor is framed as 
an identification of certain policy principles, but the principles are not always 
as principled as the reference to them as such would suggest. The works of 
Milton Friedman provide the first example of such an approach and serve 
as a good illustration of principles in name only, or at least mostly in name 
only. While Friedman very rarely came close again to the almost enthusias­
tic endorsement of the state’s positive functions, in contrast to a politics of 
laissez-faire on display in some writings of the 1950s (see Friedman 1951, 
1955), he maintained a commitment to the need for government to perform 
certain functions, not the least “to do something that the market cannot do 
for itself, namely, to determine, arbitrate and enforce the rules of the game” 
(2002, 27; Friedman and Friedman 1984, 17). However, Friedman realizes 
that the metaphor of the umpire leaves the state’s agenda severely underde­
termined, and he consequently embarks on an attempt to justify positive state 
action based on four principles. The state, or rather, “government,” which 
is the preferred term used by Friedman and Hayek (see Hayek 2003, 1:48), 
is first and foremost in charge of providing internal and external security 
for its citizens, protecting them “from coercion” (Friedman and Friedman 
1990, 29). Government thus provides a precondition for a certain kind of 
individual freedom understood as the absence of coercion. These first two 

36	
The State
principles appear unproblematic to Friedman. The fourth principle contains 
a justification for paternalist state action in regard to those who are incapable 
of “responsible” behavior. As controversial as this may seem, it is the third 
principle that preoccupies Friedman the most, not the least because it is most 
closely related to the economic sphere and the workings of markets: State 
policy in these matters is required, the principle states, whenever there are 
“neighborhood effects,” or what is now commonly referred to as “externali­
ties,” accruing to individual or collective (economic) activities. The issue 
is well known and in Friedman’s treatment covers everything from the use 
of non-priced natural resources like clean air and water to negative effects 
certain business practices or forms of organization (e.g., monopolies) may 
have on competitors and the general public. Here the state is called on to 
rectify things, but Friedman is keenly aware of the dangers this principle 
entails. The problem, not unknown in political theory, has some analogies 
to John Stuart Mill’s famous harm principle. One major question implied by 
Mill’s reasoning is where to draw the line between self- and other-regarding 
spheres. With respect to Friedman’s neighborhood effects, the question 
becomes whether there is ever anything, especially in behavior in markets, 
that does not have positive or, more often, negative externalities. An ex­
pansive notion of neighborhood effects thus easily turns into a justification 
for a broad agenda for state policy that may also be mobilized to argue for 
the introduction of social policies, and a more encompassing welfare state 
more generally, as compensation for negative externalities experienced by 
individuals in the economic sphere. 
The first point to note is that we have already left far behind the par­
simonious metaphor of the umpire with a state now possibly involved in 
compensating for many externalities, mediating between conflicting claims, 
and inevitably affecting private actors through its own positive or negative 
externalities. The second point to note is the fate of Friedman’s principles 
over the course of the discussion—especially with regard to externalities. 
Unwilling to retreat from the principle in general, Friedman offers a seem­
ingly pragmatic solution and suggests that in every case, benefits and costs 
of governmental intervention need to be assessed, and only when the for­
mer outweigh the latter is the state to move forward with its actions (see 
Friedman and Friedman 1990, 32). This seemingly turns the matter from 

	
The State
37
one guided by principles into a utilitarian calculus, which is confirmed when 
Friedman concedes that “our principles offer no hard and fast line how far 
it is appropriate to use government” (2002, 32). Neither do they provide 
clear criteria by which to judge specific policies and whether they are part of 
a legitimate governmental activity (Friedman and Friedman 1990, 33). The 
principles and duties of government, in which Friedman placed his hopes to 
identify the proper scope of action for the state, thus turn out to be rather 
elastic. While some may appreciate this as a welcome dose of pragmatism 
in dealing with the state, this can hardly be a consolation for a neoliberal 
interested in a clearly defined and demarcated state agenda. 
The next example concerning a positive agenda for state policy based 
on principles and goals can be referred to as the politics of the competitive 
order, which casts the state as the creator and guardian of this compe­ti­
tive order and the resulting competitive markets. Especially in the early 
postwar years but also beyond, this notion is found across almost the entire 
spectrum of neoliberal thought. In his presentation at the Mont Pelerin 
founding meeting Hayek noted “that competition can be made more effec­
tive and more beneficent by certain activities of government than it would 
be without them,” adding that “the purpose of a competitive order is to 
make competition work,” not to restrict its effectiveness (1980, 110–111). 
The young Friedman equally affirmed the “goal of the competitive order” 
(1951, 3) as a description of the economic agenda of the state (see also 
Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 84). However, the concept of the competitive 
order originated in the ordoliberal tradition and, more specifically, in the 
works of Walter Eucken. For him, functioning markets were characterized, 
first and foremost, by the existence of effective competition, so economic 
policy ought to orient itself toward creating truly competitive conditions. 
Eucken’s solution is the aforementioned competitive order, which the state 
is to establish and enforce. The competitive order is based on six constitutive 
principles: a functioning price system, sound money, open markets, private 
property, freedom of contract, and unlimited personal liability (discussed in 
detail later). The state is to set up a legal-political framework in accordance 
with these principles and enforce it, which brings us again to the notion of 
the impartial umpire. Ordoliberalism along the Euckenian lines, in particular, 
has since the end of World War I accentuated the need for a systematic and 

38	
The State
strictly rule-based economic policy that defines itself explicitly against the 
supposedly experimental character of the economic policies of the day (see 
Eucken 1960, 55–58). Eucken calls for an approach to policy based on the 
notion of interdependent political, social, legal, and economic orders, which 
requires an extremely high level of cohesion in policy making that takes ac­
count of the complexities involved in this interdependence of orders. Eucken 
concludes that in such a precarious constellation the negative effects of ad 
hoc interventionist policies would be exacerbated and thus confirms the need 
for the state to focus on its role as the guardian of the economic constitution. 
Thus, Eucken’s approach may seem more principled than Friedman’s—after 
all, his posthumously published magnum opus on economic policy is called 
Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik (Principles of economic policy). However, the 
principles constituting the competitive order are not the only ones relevant, 
and this will lead to a significant broadening of the state’s agenda. 
Upon establishing the competitive order, the state cannot rest on the 
laurels of its creation because it needs constant maintenance (and possibly 
even adjustment from time to time) to prevent markets from deteriorating. 
The four regulating principles are to inform the state’s continuous actions 
in this regard. The ordoliberal conceptualization of the market order is 
that it is not self-sustaining but subject to constant dynamics of corrosion. 
This changes the imagery of the state from a detached judge to an activist 
policeman of the market on high alert, constantly monitoring the intensity 
of competition and considering remedial actions in case it is found wanting.1 
The constant threat to the competitive order comes from the vital interest of 
each and every market actor to avoid and evade the pressures of competition, 
in part through collusion in the form of cartels, oligopolies, or monopolies.2 
Accordingly, the first regulative principle Eucken lists concerns a proactive 
antimonopoly policy. 
Aside from the detrimental effect of economic power on the competitive 
order, Eucken identifies other sources of problems that the other three prin­
ciples are to address. The first is not surprising: it deals with the problem of 
externalities, which Eucken apparently does not consider to be as dangerous 
as Friedman does. Much more surprising are the other two principles: the 
third stipulates the need for fiscal redistribution to avoid an undue emphasis 
on the production of luxury goods, and the fourth considers the problems 

	
The State
39
arising from an “anomalous behavior of supply” in labor during economic 
crises (see Eucken 1960, 303). This is the possibility that the falling price of 
labor power due to a recession does not lead to the unwillingness to sell this 
good at such a low price (which would make the price rebound over time) 
but rather to an expansion of supply—because employees still have to make a 
living and must work even more at lower wages. Eucken offers some factors 
that may mitigate the problem, but there may come a point when the state 
should introduce a minimum wage. Two points are notable about these prin­
ciples. First, they look less like principles than specific policies or measures 
that respond to very specific (detrimental) conditions. Second, it seems that 
minimum wages, fiscal redistribution, and the fight against anything that 
reduces the level of competition in markets make up a state agenda that is 
not confined to enforcing the rules of the game but may lead in certain cases 
to direct intervention into the workings of markets—the minimum wage 
being the most obvious example. This may be considered an outlier within 
Eucken’s overall framework, but the policy agenda beyond the politics of 
the competitive order narrowly understood also significantly broadens the 
scope of appropriate and required state action in the realm of social policy. 
It is not entirely clear how exactly Eucken’s respective elaborations are to be 
interpreted, partly because the editor assembled these passages after Eucken’s 
death. Still, the question is not whether Eucken endorsed certain elements of 
social policy, from social insurance schemes to workplace and labor-market 
regulations (see Eucken 1960, 312–324). Rather, the status of these elements 
is unclear. One way of reading Eucken’s formulations of social policy as 
complementing the competitive order and being necessary even in the case 
of an otherwise perfectly ordered socioeconomic sphere suggests that this 
is a countervailing additional element needed to balance the politics of the 
competitive order (see ibid., 313, 318). But there is another way of interpret­
ing Eucken based on his remark on social policy having to be considered part 
and parcel of the “politics of the economic order” (Wirtschaftsordnungspolitik), 
which suggests that social policy may ameliorate some of the social hardships 
of the market economy and may work against capital’s severe exploitation 
of labor, but the overall effect that makes it an integral aspect of economic 
policy is its contribution to economic competition. As Eucken points out, a certain 
level of personal material independence is the precondition for labor power 

40	
The State
being sufficiently decommodified so it does not have to be sold at just any 
price and there is a real competition for human resources (ibid., 319); and 
“when labor unions contribute to a balancing of the situation of a monopoly 
of demand [for labor] and push through wages, that are on par with wages 
under effective competition . . . then they contribute to the implementation 
of the competitive order” (ibid., 323). Such praise for labor unions is rare 
among neoliberals, but Eucken views it warranted not so much for social 
concerns—Eucken is a fierce critic of what he would consider abuse of labor 
union power to prevent wage suppression—as in the light of their contribu­
tion to increased competition. Whether Eucken’s assumptions about market 
correction, minimum wage, and fiscal redistribution are in fact correct and 
whether they lead to an increase in the overall level of competition may be 
doubtful, but what is more important for our purposes is that we can for­
mulate a concluding assessment of Eucken’s perspective on the principles 
and scope of state action. 
The impression we get from the Euckenian agenda of the ordoliberal 
state may be described as principled but only if by principle we mean the 
maintenance of the competitive order. More appropriately, it might be called 
a teleological or goal-oriented approach, the maintenance of the competi­
tive order being that telos or goal against which all others are relegated to 
secondary importance, as are concerns over the proper mode and domain of 
the policies pursued.3 Whatever it takes to defend the competitive order is 
thus the proper description of the state’s agenda according to Eucken. The 
second example of this approach comes from Eucken’s fellow ordoliberals 
Röpke and Rüstow. Both are adamant in their support for the defense and 
strengthening of the competitive order through, especially but not exclusively, 
an aggressive stance on monopolies and other forms of economic power (see 
Röpke 1950b, 228, 234; Rüstow 1942, 281). However, they add another more 
specific goal to the state’s actions, “liberal interventionism” (Rüstow 1942, 
281), which consists of an “intervention for adjustment” in contrast to an 
“intervention for preservation” (Röpke 1950b, 187). What Röpke and Rüstow 
have in mind is a policy that facilitates structural adjustment processes rather 
than defends the status quo. This is a remarkable demand for a number of 
reasons, the first of which is the nonchalant appropriation of the label “in­
terventionism,” which is usually anathema for neoliberal thought, and the 

	
The State
41
explicit embrace of the respective forms of state action. When Röpke and 
Rüstow spell out the various forms of such interventionism, they consider 
a panoply of measures, ranging from those indistinguishable from ordinary 
social policy and relief for those adversely affected by structural changes, 
to those aiming for the quickest possible reinsertion of requalified human 
capital into the labor market through training schemes. The ideas of Röpke 
and Rüstow are, to some degree, reminiscent of a labor-market paradigm 
now called “flexicurity.” They share the flexicurity regime’s peculiar am­
bivalence between considerations of social security broadly speaking and 
a truly accelerationist paradigm of capitalism. After all, these interventions 
may ameliorate the hardship of prolonged unemployment at the individual 
level, but they assume the ability and willingness of individuals to retrain 
throughout their entire career in order to replace devalued human capital 
through a more profitable stock. Furthermore, on the aggregate level these 
interventions are bound to result in an ever-faster structural change because 
as many impediments as possible are removed from labor. However, what 
is in question here is not the substantive normative desirability of “liberal 
interventionism” but the implications for the state agenda. First, the positive 
commitment to interventionism of any kind questions the state’s alleged role 
as umpire because it is overtly intervening in the process of the socioeconomic 
game. Furthermore, if the state is to encourage and support socioeconomic 
change, how can the state detect the overall direction of such change? Such 
assessments are obviously fraught with serious difficulties, and a fellow neo­
liberal like Hayek would argue that the only entity capable of knowing about 
this direction—to speak metaphorically—is the market, which is one of the 
main reasons for state restraint in economic policy (see Hayek 2002). Con­
versely, if the state were endowed with such prescience that it can and “must 
anticipate the final outcome of large structural changes” (Rüstow 1942, 281), 
one might wonder why it should not be much more involved in economic 
matters more generally. 
We have to conclude that the attempt to pin down state output to a spe­
cific positive agenda, based either on principles or specific goals, ultimately 
grants the state a much broader scope of activities in regard to both policy 
actions than expected from the commitment to keep the state to narrowly, or 
at least rigidly defined, goals and principles. Friedman’s neighborhood effects, 

42	
The State
Eucken’s regulating principles and social policy, and the liberal intervention­
ism of Röpke and Rüstow all provide significant loopholes for the expansion 
of state activity that may prove impossible to curtail in the long run and thus 
are fatal to the original endeavor of each of the four thinkers. 
The final example of a positive agenda for the state may seem rather 
curious at first but demonstrates that there is a considerable range of 
answers and proposed solutions to the neoliberal problematic of precon­
ditions for functioning markets. For Röpke and Rüstow liberal interven­
tion to hasten the dynamic of capitalist reproduction is not the only and 
possibly not even the most important issue on the state’s agenda. In ad­
dition, they propose a politics of demassification or, to put it positively, a 
so-called organic policy (Vitalpolitik). Only when markets are embedded 
in a healthy demassified society are their corrosive effects contained and 
their own continued existence ensured. We look briefly at the ordoliberal 
account of the emergence and problems of mass society before discussing 
the details of an organic policy. 
Massification is a long-term consequence of its dialectical counterpart, 
individualization or atomization, which creates the conditions for the for­
mation of masses in the first place. This process is concomitant with indus­
trialization, which erodes long-established more rural lifestyles and leads to 
massive urbanization. Uprooted individuals find themselves in cities without 
networks or social capital, as it would be called today, and thus form the raw 
material for massification: “Individuals are randomly thrown together as if 
they were grains of sand piled up into arbitrary heaps by the wind; they are 
the masses of the urban centers. . . . The resulting simple aggregation of these 
individuals left entirely to their own devices is what we call massification. 
It is the leveling of the social pyramid, an atomization that is accompanied 
by agglutination” (Röpke 1949, 243, 246). In the diagnosis of the ordoliber­
als these atomized city dwellers suffer from “under-integration,” and while 
mostly anonymous processes of capitalist industrialization are responsible for 
this problem, the old “paleoliberals,” as Rüstow would mockingly refer to the 
nineteenth-century advocates of “laissez-faire” (1963, 12), are also to blame 
for ignoring it in the name of unfettered individualism. Their view of capital­
ist development was blind to the corrosive effect it would have on individuals 
and the highly problematic side effects of under-integration. Lacking a sense 

	
The State
43
of belonging and thrown back on themselves, individuals are vulnerable to of­
fers of reintegration put forward by collectivist movements as they address the 
individual as part of a national community in the case of Fascism and National 
Socialism, or the laboring masses in the case of Communism. Because of the 
sociological blindness of early liberalism, collectivist movements could gain 
ever more momentum by mobilizing the masses with what Röpke views as an 
offer of “pseudo-integration” (1950b, 11), which is not to be mistaken for a 
sense of real community. But the vulnerability of those uprooted pertains not 
only to the spiritual dimension of what Rüstow sometimes describes with the 
Heideggerian term “thrownness” (Geworfensein) (2017a, 170), but it also has 
a socioeconomic aspect, proletarization. The masses have no alternative but 
to sell their labor power on the labor market because they do not have any 
(family) networks to support them or alternative sources of income in their 
new urban dwellings. They are thus dependent on either employment, what­
ever its form may be, or support by the state. Needless to say, the ordoliberals 
prefer people to work rather than rely on transfer payments, but it is worth 
noting that they problematize the effect of extreme commodification of labor 
power as workers are forced to work under poor conditions and engage in 
productive activities that they find dull and meaningless: “The day is taken 
up by work which mother and father do in different locations, under external 
instruction and command and with minimal personal initiative. It is divided up 
in such a way that its overall significance is by no means always clear” (ibid.). 
We must not jump to the conclusion that this is a kind of crypto-Marxist cri­
tique of capitalist conditions of production, but there is a critique of alienation 
(which does not have to be Marxist) contained in the ordoliberal critique of 
proletarization and massification more generally. However, as serious as the 
grievances about dependency on work and the ensuing alienation may be, the 
more serious problem is associated with the alternative to work in the form of a 
welfare state that subjects individuals through coercive insurance schemes and 
keeps them in a state of economic immaturity, if not dependence (see Röpke 
1987, 71). It is the missing (economic) independence in both scenarios that 
the ordoliberals see at the heart of the phenomenon of proletarization. The 
unsurprising skepticism, if not severe criticism, of the welfare state already 
indicates that while massification/proletarization has an undeniable economic 
aspect, this grave “sickness of the social structure” (Röpke 1959b, 34) cannot 

44	
The State
be cured through conventional social policy of insurance and transfer schemes, 
and neither is it a matter of simply raising wages. This would treat it as a solely 
material problem, failing to appreciate the aspects that point beyond strictly 
economic conditions: the “spiritual” aspects of massification. What then is 
the solution? For Röpke, the answer is deceptively simple: “Massification is 
increased by whatever fosters concentration; demassification is increased by 
everything that benefits decentralization” (ibid.). Röpke is a strong proponent 
of political decentralization—at least in the abstract—but what he demands 
here is a more encompassing social decentralization that concerns housing 
policy, economic policy, cultural policy, and aspects of social policy. The massive 
processes of urbanization would have to be reversed by creating conditions in 
which it is possible and attractive for people to return to small-scale munici­
palities and supposedly live happier lives. Here men and women can “regain 
the lost balance between individuality and collectivity in the small living circle 
filled with human warmth (family, municipality, church communities, neigh­
borhood, small and medium companies, scientific, literary and artistic circles 
etc.)” (ibid., 35). Röpke does not refer to happiness but rather “inner stability” 
and “responsibility,” which could be restored through demassification, but in 
Rüstow’s version this is exactly what is ultimately at stake. 
For him a politics of demassification is part of an even more fundamen­
tal “organic policy” that should serve to increase the overall well-being of 
people, both material and spiritual: “which possible measures should be 
demanded, in order to complement mainstream social policy in such a way 
as to lead to a genuinely satisfying organic situation [Vitalsituation]—an 
organic situation in which the individual can feel content and happy. This 
is what I call organic policy [Vitalpolitik]” (Rüstow 2017a, 168). To be sure, 
decentralization is part and parcel of such an organic policy, and Rüstow il­
lustrates the demand with a rather idealized view of rural life, where “people 
have their little house, their garden, their piece of farmland, and in their 
free time they and their families can occupy themselves usefully with work 
that they enjoy” (ibid.). But the organic situation Rüstow is concerned about 
clearly has a number of different dimensions. Organic policy should be sup­
portive of families and a particular kind of parenting, must pertain to schools, 
and also concerns gender relations, as Rüstow urges in an unapologetically 
reactionary way that young women should be prepared to perform mainly 

	
The State
45
their established roles as housewives and mothers (see ibid., 172–173). Or­
ganic policy is thus directed at man (and woman), and given the enormity 
of the task, it is no surprise that Rüstow envisaged a science of humankind 
that would have to inquire into the conditio humana and thus inform the 
multilayered effort of increasing people’s well-being in a holistic fashion 
(discussed in chapter 4). 
How should this agenda of decentralization/demassification, which ex­
pands in Rüstow’s version into an organic policy, be assessed? Not surpris­
ingly, the two ordoliberals have been harshly criticized for what appears to 
be a rather retrograde streak to this part of the state’s agenda (see Hahn 
1993). All too easily their vision of an optimally integrated society with an 
appreciable overall organic situation appears as a highly idealized picture of 
early capitalism, where artisans and small landowners lived a fulfilled and 
self-reliant life independent of both giant corporations and their means of 
production and a bureaucratic (welfare) state. But while there is undoubt­
edly a measure of nostalgia underlying both, especially Röpke’s account, 
whose cultural pessimism is more pronounced than Rüstow’s, we should 
note that many currents in environmental thought and many among those 
who search for viable pathways into postgrowth societies would also empha­
size the importance of a decentralized way of life for both consumers and 
producers. Propagating the decentralized life may be nostalgic, especially 
given that in 2008 for the first time in history more than 50 percent of the 
world’s population lived in cities. However, if current trends continue and 
this figure reaches 70 percent by 2050, life in ever-growing megacities, 
which is already difficult to sustain for the majority of its inhabitants, may 
become just as devitalizing as Rüstow suggests.
However, what is important to note is the striking difference between the 
economic sphere and the social environment of markets in both accounts. 
While liberal interventionism accelerates the dynamics of capitalism ever 
further and thus requires flexibility and mobility, organic policy aims to achieve 
the complete opposite with regard to the nonmarket sphere. Its aim is decel­
eration, stability, and integration if not an outright attempt to turn back time. 
The charitable interpretation of this constellation is to view it as a deliberative 
balancing of countervailing tendencies, which is precisely the precondition for 
markets to reproduce themselves in a sustainable manner. The uncharitable 

46	
The State
counterpart is to view it as a contradictory constellation where the two ordo­
liberals fail to consider the diffusion of either of the two logics into the other, 
simply assuming that they will remain in balance.
Most important, if the aim of neoliberal theorizing of the state in this 
variety is the identification of tasks and principles that yield strict demarca­
tion lines for state action, the agenda of an organic policy is the complete 
opposite because it is as expansive and poorly defined as one could possibly 
imagine. 
 We can now turn to strategies of limiting and restricting state action 
on the basis of certain principles or procedural/formal requirements with 
regard to its output.
Limiting State Action: Compatible Interventions, the 
Rule of Law, and Balanced-Budget Amendments 
In the discussion of liberal interventionism there seemed to be no criterion 
limiting the nature of the intervention as long as it was intended for the 
purposes of adjustment. However, this is true only in Rüstow’s version of 
the argument; Röpke offers such a criterion with an emphasis on limiting 
state action, as discussed in the following examples. 
Röpke introduces the distinction between “‘compatible’ and ‘incompat­
ible’ interventions” (1950b, 160) and offers two criteria that, supposedly, 
enable a clear assessment of any policy in question as to its status in this 
regard. First, in order to be considered compatible, an intervention must 
leave the internal workings of markets, especially the price mechanism, as 
undisturbed as possible.4 In other words, the intervention should always 
resort to the most “indirect” means possible (Röpke 1963, 256). Second, 
an incompatible intervention “creates a situation which immediately calls 
for further and even greater intervention. . . . The result is an unending 
dynamic chain of cause and effect and everything begins to deteriorate” 
(ibid., 161). This suggests a straightforward litmus test for policies, limiting 
compatible ones to those that are unequivocally permissible. Yet when scru­
tinized more closely, Röpke’s distinction is not so clear-cut as it may appear 
at first. Considering the second criterion, there may be the possibility of an 
interventionist spiral triggered by a particular one, but it seems there are 

	
The State
47
many instances in which the decision to make further interventions remains 
a political one based on expediency and interest—at least, it is questionable 
whether the facts simply speak for themselves. Röpke’s formulation of the first 
criterion does not yield a categorical distinction because the stated aim is to 
have the least possible influence on the operation of the price mechanism. So 
this is an argument based on “lesser evils,” but is there a “red line” beyond 
which interventions become strictly impermissible? To be sure, Röpke offers 
illustrative examples to clarify matters. For example, the devaluation of a 
currency is preferred over exchange controls, and a rent ceiling is described 
as an incompatible intervention because it arguably necessitates further in­
terventions (see ibid., 160–161). But this seems to indicate that unless the 
state is explicitly setting prices or simply prohibits certain economic actions/
exchanges, the intervention must be deemed compatible. This is obviously a 
rather heterodox interpretation of the topos of the (in)compatible intervention, 
attributed to both Röpke and Eucken (see, e.g., Foucault 2008, 138–139), that 
is often presented as the panacea for Ordnungspolitik, offering an analytical 
device to demarcate permissible from impermissible state action. Still, there 
are considerable complications here. Not only is there no reference to this 
distinction in Eucken’s work, which leaves room for many types of policies 
to safeguard the competitive order (see Kolev 2013, 62), but one of the few 
unequivocally incompatible policies in Röpke’s sense is the minimum wage, 
which Eucken considers necessary under certain conditions. At least some of 
Eucken’s politics concerning the regulatory principles are thus not covered, 
but the scope of compatible economic policy is in fact remarkably broad, 
which lends further credence to my rather heterodox interpretation. 
Consider two examples of what is considered to be within the confines 
of compatible economic policy. First, Röpke notes that “it is certainly in ac­
cordance with the market economy, if the state with the means of compulsion 
at its disposal (especially taxation) carries out a readjustment of income levels 
in order to effect a more equitable distribution.” Second, it is even market 
compatible “if the state itself manages individual enterprises or even whole 
branches of production and now appears on the market in the capacity of pro­
ducer or merchant” (Röpke 1950b, 189–190). It is not even necessary to dwell 
on the question of whether fiscal redistribution and a mixed economy actually 
satisfy the criterion of leaving markets or their price mechanism undisturbed, 

48	
The State
which seems at least debatable. It is worth noting, first, the complications 
involved in applying Röpke’s criteria, which leaves room for doubt whether 
they really provide the necessary analytical device to distinguish unequivocally 
between compatible and incompatible interventions in any given policy case 
(see Kolev 2013, 153). Second, even if this turns out to be the case, the range 
of permissible state action is surprisingly broad, covering a great variety of 
interventions short of explicitly setting prices. 
The second example of a limitation of permissible state output underlies 
the entire political thought of Hayek. Hayek held a doctorate in law, so it 
may not come as a surprise that his attempt to limit state action is based on a 
particular interpretation of the rule of law. This topos is a complex one, and it 
is not possible to discuss all of its aspects here. I focus first on the argument 
that concerns the nature of law and later on the more state-structural ele­
ments that concern institutional constellations and the separation of powers. 
Chapter 3 addresses the ambivalent relation of the rule of law to democracy. 
It is only a mild overstatement to say that, for Hayek, the decline of 
liberalism amounts to the decline of the rule of law, and vice versa, because 
“liberalism is . . . the same as the demand for the rule of law in the classical 
sense of the term” (1967a, 165). The reference to the classical sense of the 
term implies that there has been a degeneration or decline in the tradition 
and understanding of the rule of law, and much of his constructive endeavors 
in designing a neoliberal order can be understood as an attempt to restore 
the rule of law properly understood.
According to Hayek, the rule of law is not the same as constitutionalism 
(2009, 180). Aside from its separation-of-power aspect, the rule of law is first 
and foremost a “meta-legal doctrine” concerning “what the law ought to be” 
(ibid., 181). Law, in other words, is qualified by certain formal requirements 
that turn it into what in the German law tradition was called a law “in the 
material sense of the term”—not in contrast to its formal but to its procedural 
properties. What does this mean? Hayek is trying to argue, first and foremost, 
against legal positivists who contend that anything emanating from the locus 
of sovereignty—whether legislatures or kings—is ipso facto a law as long as it 
is in accordance with certain procedural requirements, which are much more 
demanding in the case of parliaments than absolute rulers. To the extent that 
this interpretation prevails, the rule of law lacks any meaningful rule according 

	
The State
49
to Hayek, because there is no restriction on what the sovereign decides to 
write into law. Against this understanding Hayek mobilizes countervailing 
legal traditions that require certain formal characteristics for laws to be con­
sidered in accordance with the rule of law. For example, the law needs to be 
generally known, its content needs to be clear and understandable, it must 
not be retroactively applied, it must be abstract (referring to an unknown 
and unspecified number of individuals in the future), and it must be applied 
equally to everyone (see ibid., 182–184). 
Before we take a closer look at these characteristics and the problems they 
may pose, it is important to note some differentiations that Hayek introduces. 
“Law,” for Hayek, is a term too unspecific, because too many different legal 
norms are called laws, while only legal norms including the characteristics just 
named are laws in the proper sense, which he now terms nomos and describes 
as “laws of just conduct.” This kind of law is contrasted with thesis, the law 
of organizations, which lacks the formal characteristics of nomos. In Hayek’s 
narrative, nomos and thesis have become conflated because parliamentary leg­
islatures historically came to be put in charge of formulating both the rules of 
just conduct and the organizational rules for the proper conduct of the state, 
which is an important source of the decline of the rule of law. In addition, 
and for reasons related to the democratic nature of parliamentary legislatures, 
nomos and thesis are not just conflated. Thesis expands at the expense of nomos, 
or, what Hayek seems to consider as rough equivalents, public law increas­
ingly crowds out private law: “The progressive permeation of private law by 
public law in the course of the last eighty or hundred years, which means a 
progressive replacement of rules of conduct by rules of organization, is one of 
the main ways in which the destruction of the liberal order has been effected” 
(1967a, 168–169; see also Hayek 2003, 1:114). While it is tempting to probe 
this narrative further, we must turn to another differentiation that provides us 
with a clearer sense of the limits Hayek means to impose on state action. The 
differentiation in question is the one between the coercive functions of the 
state and its service functions, the latter comprising, for example, the social 
policies previously mentioned. 
The limits of the rule of law apply only to the coercive powers of the 
state, “in which its actions are strictly limited to the enforcement of rules 
of just conduct and in the exercise of which all discretion is excluded.” The 

50	
The State
service state, however, “has no coercive power or monopoly” but “enjoys 
wide discretion” in the use of the resources at its disposal (Hayek 1967a, 
165–166). This raises a number of questions that we can begin to address 
based on the initial observation that Hayek’s attempt to restore law appar­
ently does not aim at restricting state actions in their entirety through the 
rule of law. In other words, there would still be room for thesis, since the 
service state must be interpreted as an organization pursuing particular 
goals, namely, the efficient provision of a certain service. If this is correct, 
then the assessment found in some of the secondary literature, according 
to which Hayek aims at the establishment of a “nomocracy” instead of a 
“teleocracy”—terms he has borrowed from Michael Oakeshott—though 
intuitively plausible, is not completely accurate (Hayek 2003, 2:15; see also 
Plant 2016). Of course, Hayek’s main point is that the former order is by far 
the preferable one, not only for normative but also for functional reasons. 
However, since Hayek’s work mentions service aspects of the state on more 
than one occasion, there also seems to be room granted to teleological, 
goal-oriented, state action. What ultimately remains surprisingly unclear 
or at least somewhat undertheorized, given that it is such a crucial point 
in Hayek’s design, is the relation between the nomocratic and teleocratic 
aspects of state action and, relatedly, what this implies for the relation be­
tween legislature and government. 
The service state is granted discretion in its action, but does this mean 
that the rule of law does not apply at all to the provision of governmental 
services? In this case the state would have carte blanche, which would be an 
unexpected result after all the efforts Hayek invests in a robust circumscrip­
tion of the state’s powers. In fact, Hayek does makes it clear that the service 
state may not discriminate against clients, but whether this is an effective 
safeguard hinges on the matter of equal treatment. Depending on the out­
come of this discussion, services could still be offered in a selective manner 
and citizens may have only limited legal claims to them—the state would/
could act like a quasi-private person (see Hayek 1967, 175). After all, the 
restrictions Hayek introduces aside from no coercion and no governmental 
monopoly apply only to financing the service state through taxation. The 
latter is a compulsive power of the state, and therefore the limits of the rule 
of law apply, but what exactly does this mean? 

	
The State
51
To answer this question, we have to take a closer look at the characteris­
tics of nomos. The most controversial ones are certainly the requirements of 
equality and generality. Their overall thrust is clearly to prevent some kind 
of legalized discrimination through laws that apply only to certain groups 
or individuals, but it is more difficult to spell out exactly what kind of treat­
ment through state law would be prohibited. Hayek himself notes that “a 
law may be perfectly general in referring only to formal characteristics of 
the persons involved and yet make different provisions for different classes 
of people. Some such classification, even within the group of fully respon­
sible citizens, is clearly inevitable” (2009, 183). This is a rather far-reaching 
concession because it suggests that differential treatment of some sort or to 
a certain degree is admissible and even unavoidable. Clearly, if, for example, 
a “law” introduced a tax for the population of just one particular location, 
it would fail Hayek’s test of lawfulness, but there seems to be considerable 
gray zone this side of clearly discriminatory measures. Hayek argues that 
the degree to which the effect of a law on specific groups or individuals can 
be predicted, and in that sense lacks abstractness, may be a helpful indica­
tor in this regard, and he also considers the idea that the legitimacy of a 
differential treatment may be confirmed by the affected group consenting 
to the measure. But ultimately he is forced into the noteworthy admission 
“that, in spite of many ingenious attempts to solve this problem, no entirely 
satisfactory criterion has been found that would always tell us what kind of 
classification is compatible with equality before the law” (ibid., 184). Hayek’s 
candor is to be applauded, and given the enduring controversies in moral 
and legal philosophy over these matters, his assessment must be regarded 
as accurate. But this leaves a gaping argumentative hole at a neuralgic point 
in Hayek’s design of the rule of law as an effective limitation on the pow­
ers of the state—and it leaves one wondering what his justification is for 
his position on the state’s power to tax, which was our initial question. He 
writes that “the means should be raised according to a rule which applies 
uniformly to all. (This, in my opinion, precludes an overall progression of 
the burden of taxation of the individuals)” (Hayek 1967a, 175). Hayek is 
obviously entitled to this opinion, which suggests a flat-rate tax, but it seems 
that he lacks arguments to counter any opinions to the contrary. 
In fact, James Buchanan has noted this argumentative insufficiency and 

52	
The State
provides the last example of limiting state action through principles or for­
mal/procedural rules that focuses precisely on the issue of financing state 
action through taxation. Before we review Buchanan’s specific solution to 
the problem, let me briefly contextualize it within his overall approach of 
constitutional economics. The “distinction between choices among rules 
and choices within rules” (Buchanan 1997b, 118) is fundamental to this 
perspective, as Buchanan almost exclusively focuses on the former level of 
choices that he describes as constitutional choices regarding the fundamental 
rules of the political and economic game, encapsulated predominantly in 
individual (property) rights to be enforced by the umpire state. This is the 
result of a hypothetical constitutional contract based on individual con­
sent, which places Buchanan in the contractualist tradition from Thomas 
Hobbes to John Rawls, both of whom he draws on in his approach. But while 
Buchanan takes the specter of Hobbesian anarchy seriously, his contractual 
legitimation of the state departs from Hobbes’s view in at least two major 
assumptions: first, Buchanan’s broadly democratic commitments, at least 
to the extent that they do not conflict with his normative bases of a strict 
normative individualism; and second, the firm belief in the possibility of 
limiting state action: “We reject the Hobbesian presumption that the sov­
ereign cannot be constrained by constitutional constraint” (Brennan and 
Buchanan 1980, 10). How to fashion such a constraint that proves to be 
effective is arguably the main focus of Buchanan’s thought (1975, 13), and 
his answer is based on analytical distinctions that we are familiar with from 
Hayek’s account. Buchanan distinguishes between the constitutional contract 
that must be guarded by what he calls the “protective” state, which operates 
according to the model of the umpire,5 and the “productive” state, which 
results from a postconstitutional contract. The latter does not concern the 
enforcement of rules but the state’s provision of public goods, which can in 
principle include everything that markets cannot produce efficiently. But 
even beyond that there is room for a particular political community to 
decide what the state should provide and to what degree, including certain 
social policies (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 83, 284). This distinction 
bears some obvious resemblance to Hayek’s nomocratic state constrained 
by the rule of law and the service state that produces certain goods for its 
citizens, possibly in competition with private providers. As we have seen, 

	
The State
53
this side of state action is only vaguely circumscribed in Hayek’s account, 
and Buchanan also seems skeptical about the possibility of developing sub­
stantive constraints on the scope of productive state action. So like Hayek, 
Buchanan focuses on the financial base of the productive/service state, which 
in itself is located in the protective state dimension because it is dependent 
on the threat of coercion, the power to tax. As we have seen, Hayek also 
addresses the issue of taxation, but he does so in passing, and his call for 
a nonproportional tax is based on the shaky foundation of the generality/
equality requirement of the rule of law. Unconvinced by what he thinks is 
a “dangerously arbitrary” demand by Hayek (Brennan and Buchanan 1980, 
157), which is also ultimately ineffective as a constraint on the power to tax 
in general, Buchanan seeks to identify an alternative set of procedural rules 
that would act as an indirect limitation to the productive state through a 
constraint on the possibility to finance it. 
The most promising set of rules to achieve this, in Buchanan’s view, 
is a constitutional balanced-budget amendment, or what in the Euro­
pean context is commonly referred to as a “debt brake” (see Buchanan 
1997a). Needless to say, this is a highly topical, and some would say rather 
pressing, issue since most members of the EU have passed such debt 
brakes as an element in more or often less autonomously chosen auster­
ity politics in countries hit particularly hard by financial, economic, and 
sovereign debt crises. Similarly in the United States, while there is no 
federal constitutional balanced-budget amendment—at least not an ef­
fective one—austerity politics is being pushed down to the level of states 
and municipalities, the latter of which have effective debt brakes since 
they are legally prohibited from running deficits (see Peck 2014). The 
balanced-budget amendment is discussed later, but here I present some 
preliminary critical elaborations on the functioning of the amendment as 
well as its implications in Buchanan’s version of the argument. I also point 
out a fundamental ambiguity pertaining to both a balanced-budget rule 
and a rule-based politics of neoliberal fashion more generally as we have 
encountered it in Eucken, Röpke, and Hayek. 
How would the amendment work? Buchanan places particular emphasis 
on the fact that he proposes a rule for a balanced budget that “is procedural 
rather than substantive” (1997b, 126), which he considers of systematic and 

54	
The State
strategic relevance. A substantive rule prescribing which cuts to make and 
which taxes to reform would be an excessive intrusion into the decision-
making autonomy of democratically elected representatives, and, strate­
gically speaking, the transparency of the rule’s winners and losers would 
make it excessively difficult to build a coalition in support of it6—although 
we will see that this is a problem that continues to haunt the procedural 
rule as well. Instead, Buchanan argues for a rule that essentially stipulates 
the nondebt financing of all state outlays. How much the state spends and 
what it spends the money on is not defined by the rule, and Buchanan thus 
hopes to dodge the charge that the amendment would inappropriately en­
shrine a particular substantive economic policy at the constitutional level. 
In his words, “the amendment requires only that congressional majorities, 
within the other constraints through which they are authorized to act, pay 
for what they spend, with ‘pay for’ being defined in a willingness to levy 
taxes on those citizens who make up the current membership of the polity” 
(ibid.). Conversely, if there is no willingness to levy taxes, expenditures need 
to be adjusted accordingly. I confront this notion with some preliminary 
observations on the use of rules in politics before returning to the issue of 
balanced-budget amendments and developing a more robust critique in 
chapters 3 and 5. 
Buchanan offers a justification for rules that bind the political sovereign 
with reference to a familiar figure in economics, Robinson Crusoe. Crusoe 
needs to make full use of daylight to get necessary work done on the island, 
but he has the bad habit of sleeping in, so he constructs an alarm clock to 
wake him up early in the morning (see Buchanan 1975, 93). For Buchanan, 
this is a rational response because Crusoe acknowledges his limited self-
discipline, and through an external enforcement mechanism rather than a 
plea to his inner strength, he manages to realize what ultimately is in his 
own interest as he himself perceives it in the evening and on the following 
afternoon—but not in the morning, when it actually matters. Accordingly, 
as a strategy for achieving one’s goals, laying down a rule for oneself and 
making sure it is enforced is a strategy superior to what the literature refers 
to as “case-to-case-maximization.” The typical argument for this stance 
draws on a traffic example. Waiting on a red light in the middle of the night 
with no other cars in sight reduces current utility, but in the long run the 

	
The State
55
rule is superior. While a driver may not be harmed running a light each and 
every time, just one mistake in her discretionary assessment might cost her 
life (see Friedman 2002, 51–53). This sounds reasonable enough, but the 
plausibility may just hinge on the suggestive example Buchanan constructs. 
Consider Crusoe again; he is a subject prone to giving in to temptation (and 
also keep in mind that this weak and wayward subject represents demo­
cratically elected decision makers in Buchanan’s account) and thus in need 
of strict rules for getting up early to prevent a pattern of sleeping in from 
commencing. However, what if he falls ill and is in desperate need of sleep 
but still rises in the morning, distrustful of his own (unconscious) motives 
and solely focused on obeying the self-set rules, only to find his health de­
teriorate from lack of rest? In this example, sticking to the rules obviously 
is not rational, especially in the long run. So what would be called for is 
obviously “smart” rule following, a measure of flexibility in the application 
of rules or, what in the Aristotelian tradition is referred to as phronesis. It is 
not the rules themselves that are beneficial; rather, it is these rules in com­
bination with those who establish them and implement them appropriately 
that make them so. And this pertains to a sickly Crusoe as well as a crisis-
ridden country swallowing the bitter medicine of austerity. So the analytical 
plausibility and the normative appeal of both a balanced-budget amendment 
and rule-based politics in general cannot be conclusively assessed before the 
respective assumptions about rule-following and rule-implementing actors 
are scrutinized more closely, which we return to in chapter 5. 
Structural State Constraints: Horizontal 
and Vertical Separation of Powers
State output is one possible place to apply constraining devices; the structure 
and form of the state is the other. The classic (liberal) approach to limiting 
the state’s abilities through a specific structural setup is, of course, the separa­
tion of powers between the various branches of government. On a given scale 
of the state, there ought to be checks and balances between the legislative, 
judicial, and executive branches, constituting the institutional dimension of 
the rule of law. Given that separation of powers is a standard element in the 
broadly liberal repertoire of devices aimed at curtailing state power through 

56	
The State
internal differentiation and careful distribution of various competencies, it 
is somewhat surprising that the principle is rarely discussed explicitly in the 
majority of accounts considered here. This may simply mean that the principle 
and its effects are taken for granted and its desirability as a structuring device 
is tacitly assumed. But the argumentative thrust in some neoliberal accounts 
suggests that their stance in regard to this principle is more equivocal than 
one would assume for a branch off the tree of liberalism. 
Buchanan’s and Hayek’s accounts provide a more extensive treatment 
of the issue. Given its centrality for Hayek’s political thought, it is not sur­
prising that he offers the most elaborate ideas about what implementing 
the rule of law would require on the institutional level. The Constitution of 
Liberty contains three chapters on these ideas, in which Hayek traces the 
roots of the rule of law in various geographical and political contexts, from 
constitutionalism in the United States to the German Rechtsstaat, as well as 
the tendencies that led to its respective decline. As already noted, in Hayek’s 
view, above all, the conflation of legislative and executive activities—mak­
ing and implementing/enforcing the law—is to blame for this decline, and 
accordingly, the strictest possible separation of these state powers and their 
clear assignment to different branches of government is required. Hayek’s 
reconstruction of the institutional dimension of the rule of law yields an 
arrangement that is mostly familiar from other representatives of the liberal 
tradition. Legislatures create proper laws in the Hayekian sense, and a sepa­
rate body of actors, the executive, implements the laws and is strictly bound 
by them (at least whenever coercion is involved). Hayek acknowledges that 
a certain measure of discretion is involved in implementing laws, and the 
lawfulness of such discretionary action thus must be established through an 
independent court system and judicial review. Obviously, the crucial point 
in this way of separating the power of the state is to prevent their confla­
tion and misappropriation, which is precisely what has happened according 
to Hayek, as well as Buchanan, who models the proper functioning of the 
separation of powers on the basis of his distinction between the protective 
and the productive state. 
The productive state is associated with the legislative branch, whose 
task is to produce public goods and law in general. The protective umpire 
state, however, is encapsulated in the executive and judicial branches. The 

	
The State
57
mode of operation of these is decidedly different because the enforcement/
application of rules involves what Buchanan describes as a truth judgment 
analogous to scientific inquiry, whereas legislation is first and foremost a 
matter of interests and (collective) choices (1975, 69, 95). If this fundamental 
difference is disregarded, the proper balance of governmental powers is in 
jeopardy. So what exactly is wrong with the contemporary manifestations 
of the separation of powers for Buchanan and Hayek? 
Buchanan primarily highlights the dangers of the executive and judicial 
encroachment on the genuinely legislative function of lawmaking. The dis­
passionate referee more and more often modifies the rules and thus oversteps 
the internal boundaries set up to demarcate various powers, threatening 
to undermine the (self-)limitation of the state and its branches. “Few who 
observe the far-flung operation of the executive arm of the United States 
government along with the ubiquity of the federal judiciary could interpret 
the activities of either of these institutions as falling within meaningful 
restrictions of the enforcer. Ideally, these institutions may be umpires in 
the social game; actually, these institutions modify and change the basic 
structure of rights without consent of citizens. They assume the authority 
to rewrite the basic constitutional contract, to change ‘the law’ at their own 
will” (Buchanan 1975, 163).7 Note that this imperialism of the two branches 
is not just a matter of appropriating more and more competencies in regard 
to a legislature that is the only branch legitimated to make and change law. 
The problem is also the mode in which law is “rewritten,” for example, by a 
court. Either the court tries to emulate the operational mode of legislatures, 
making choices and considering interests, and thus functionally ceases to 
be a proper court of law; or it decides like a court generally should, accord­
ing to Buchanan, on the basis of a quasi-scientific truth judgment and thus 
profoundly misunderstands or disregards the nature of legislative politics, 
which is not about truth but interests and choices. 
In Hayek’s view, the imperial thrust between the various powers is reversed. 
It is the legislative chamber that seizes more and more powers that properly 
belong to “government,” that is, the executive branch of the state that com­
prises law enforcement and the service function of the state (Hayek 2003, 
1:130–131). Hayek’s explanation of this dynamic is not easily analyzed, but 
one enabling factor is undoubtedly the decline of the generality requirement 

58	
The State
of a law, which made it possible for legislatures “to command whatever they 
pleased simply by calling their commands ‘laws’” (ibid.). Although this may 
enable legislative entropy, what would be the motive for parliamentary ac­
tors to seize more and more governmental powers? Hayek seems to hint at 
a dynamic that is self-amplifying once it is triggered. A governing assembly 
will come to think of itself as running the country “as one runs a factory 
or any other organization” (ibid., 143),8 which means that its authority and 
responsibility are unlimited and its scope of action therefore ever expanding. 
This argument in itself seems rather weak, but it gains plausibility in light of 
Hayek’s view of democracy; and since his remedy to the conflation of execu­
tive and legislative powers, and, by the same token, measures and laws proper, 
also has far-reaching implications for democratic processes and institutions, 
we revisit this issue in chapter 3. 
Buchanan’s solution to the problem of the horizontal separation of pow­
ers, a specific proposal beyond restoring a constitutional order that is now 
“in disarray,” is not apparent—and the “constitutional revolution” needed 
to restore order once more points us in the direction of the actors that are 
to be the revolutionary subject of this transformation of rules (1975, 166). 
Still, while Buchanan seems to offer little guidance about how the horizontal 
confusion of powers he is diagnosing is to be addressed, his designs for a 
proper vertical separation of powers turn out to be much more elaborate.
At first glance, it would seem that neoliberals were exemplars of what the 
late Ulrich Beck referred to as “methodological nationalism,” the implicit 
frame of reference in all political considerations being the nation-state. To 
a certain extent this is accurate and somewhat understandable, since at least 
the post–World War II era was arguably the heyday of this political form and 
the nation-state therefore was the scalar center of attention for neoliberals as 
for other political thinkers of the time.9 However, one of the main strategies 
for constraining the state in neoliberal thought is the vertical decentering 
of the nation-state, both upward through the formation of a supranational 
federation and downward through devolution, thus turning the nation-state 
itself into a federal political unit. Attempting both simultaneously might even 
increase the overall feasibility of such transformations: “It could probably 
be tackled more easily if international federation were undertaken at the 
same time as a reorganization of the centralized states on a federal basis, 

	
The State
59
just as, vice versa, the second process would be helped by the first” (Röpke 
1959a, 46; see also Hayek 2001, 240). So while both logics of decentering 
the state are discussed in the context of each other in many versions of the 
neoliberal argument for federalism, I try to analytically distinguish between 
the two to clarify and to put the focus on the link between the national and 
supranational levels.
Let us first briefly look at the context of the earliest versions of the argu­
ment that can be found in the work of Röpke, Hayek, and, less prominently, 
Rüstow. World War II, either as a potentiality in its actuality or in its impact, 
leaves a clear imprint on these works, depending on the time of writing, in 
that one of the motives for endorsing a supranational structure is the hope 
to pacify interstate relations through it. 
This is most pronounced in Rüstow’s essay “Politik und Moral” (Poli­
tics and morality), which also offers the only truly cosmopolitan argument 
along strongly Kantian lines: In order to overcome the potential of armed 
hostilities that are a characteristic feature of an international state of nature 
and thus forces even moral collective actors into wars of self-defense, there 
is only one ultimate solution, to establish a “world government” consisting 
of a supranational “legislative, judiciary and executive” (1949, 587–588). 
Whether this demand can be plausibly based on Kant’s writings is of no 
concern here, but just as Kant had argued that it is not just reason that 
drives humanity to unite in ever-more encompassing political communities 
but also nature, or, more generally, empirical forces, Rüstow is adamant 
that there are certain empirical phenomena and respective forces pushing 
toward some kind of world government that he views as imminent: “The 
certitude of this prediction is based on the atomic bomb” (ibid., 589). As 
far as Rüstow is concerned, the question is only whether world government 
will exist under American or Soviet hegemony if the Soviets were to acquire 
nuclear arms as well. This points us in the direction of another aspect of the 
historical context of the early arguments for a supranational federation, par­
ticularly prominent in the work of Rüstow but also in Röpke, who is highly 
ambivalent about European integration but endorses the establishment of 
a European federation that should serve in an alliance with the United 
States as a “defence against the imperialism of world communism” (Röpke 
1959a, 51). Matters of war and peace thus figure in the neoliberal thought 

60	
The State
on federalism, but what turns out to be at least as important as limiting 
the state’s ability to wage wars is to constrain it in its powers regarding the 
domestic economy and society. 
If we follow Röpke, both tasks were achieved in the most efficient and 
peaceful manner through the gold standard in former times. His earliest 
works from the 1920s dealing with these issues still investigate the possibili­
ties of reinstating a system of international free trade based on guaranteed 
convertibility of gold, which had been a key factor in developing a highly 
integrated world market leading up to World War I. However, as Röpke 
comes to realize over the course of the early 1930s, the gold standard and the 
other preconditions of what Polanyi called the “Hundred Years’ Peace” are 
irretrievably lost through processes that Röpke will analyze in International 
Economic Disintegration (1942).10 It almost seems, therefore, that Röpke con­
siders a federation as only the second-best solution to the problem of limiting 
state power, but the shift toward federalist designs can also be interpreted as 
an element in the modernization process of liberalism that is constitutive of 
neoliberalism. The world of the 1930s renders futile any attempt to restore 
the world economy that rested on old liberal principles, techniques, and in­
stitutions, so new approaches have to be developed as functional equivalents 
of the gold standard, if the attempt at “reconstructing the world economy” 
is to stand any chance at all (Röpke 1950b, 242). 
But while Röpke is a passionate supporter of federalism in general, 
the analytical refinement of his thought leaves a lot to be desired, which 
is at least partly attributable to one of the major sources of his passion for 
federalism: his experience of Switzerland. Röpke was able to relocate from 
his initial exile in Istanbul to Geneva in 1936, and although he could have 
returned to Germany after the war, he chose to stay in Switzerland, which 
is already an indication of the attachment he formed to his new home. It is 
only a mild overstatement to say that his view of federalism—even on the 
supranational level—is an extrapolation of the existing federalist arrange­
ments in Switzerland. To be sure, this has the benefit of basing claims and 
assessments on the example of a functioning form of federalism, but at times 
it limits Röpke’s supranational imagination and is based on an idealization 
of Swiss federalism that is oblivious to any possibly existing problems. 
Nevertheless, it is difficult to argue with the core assumption underlying 

	
The State
61
Röpke’s postwar thought on federalism. The nation-state is doubly defi­
cient because it is too big and amorphous to generate the experience of real 
political community for its members, and it is too small to address some 
of the most pressing problems of today that are solvable only on a trans- 
or supranational level. We already know that Röpke would like to see the 
first problem addressed through a consequent politics of decentralization 
and subsidiarity, so let us focus on the second. Especially in the European 
context, any political form beyond and above the nation-state can only be 
of a federalist nature: “the essence of Europe [is] unity in diversity, freedom 
in solidarity” (Röpke 1960, 244). There may be few who would disagree 
with this (normative) characterization, but it begs the question how exactly 
this is to be achieved in a trans- and supranational setting. Needless to say, 
the reference to a “balance between the dividing and the uniting forces” in 
such a federation remains purely formulaic as well (Röpke 1959a, 44). Still, 
this is not to suggest that Röpke’s considerations on a European federation 
are vague throughout, albeit edifyingly so. Wherever he is more candid, 
though, the thrust of the argument is rather skeptical about the possibility 
of such a federation. His readers are cautioned that federalism is not just 
an administrative technique but that it is rooted in an entire philosophy 
(Röpke 1953a, 10). Still, could these attitudinal and “spiritual” precondi­
tions be disseminated throughout Europe? 
Röpke is only certain that this will not happen through a kind of integra­
tion that EU scholars would refer to as “neofunctionalist” and that was argu­
ably characteristic of early postwar integration patterns. To put it simply, the 
idea was that integration/harmonization of certain economic sectors would 
trigger so-called spillover effects, necessitating the integration of more and 
more other sectors for purely “functional” reasons, ultimately leading to 
political integration as well. Röpke, however, is adamant that economic in­
tegration presupposes the “spiritual-political integration of Europe” (1953a, 
13). This still leaves the reader with the question of how to achieve this, 
not the least because Röpke is deeply concerned over any transfer of power 
from the national to the supranational level—which, to some degree, would 
appear to be part and parcel of truly political integration (see Röpke 1960, 
243). The solution to the conundrum comes in the form of a reference to 
the Swiss example; yet this hardly appears to be a solution for the short and 

62	
The State
medium terms, because the point about federalist Switzerland is that it has 
grown “slowly and organically” over centuries (Röpke 1953a, 12). But this 
means that Röpke ultimately remains deeply torn over the desirability and 
necessity of a federation. There is a keen awareness of the functional benefits 
of a supranational federation to rein in the powers of national sovereignty but 
also to enhance transnational political problem-solving capacities. However, 
he has little to offer about the specific characteristics of such a federation, 
and, even more calamitously, Röpke cannot propose a path that could be 
deliberately chosen and followed toward “spiritual-political integration” 
because his conception of a federation is so deeply wedded to the Swiss 
case and its allegedly organic development. This is not to say that there 
are not very good reasons to harbor reservations about the possibility of a 
normatively desirable form of European integration, but if he is right and 
“humanity has now finally reached the point where unless future develop­
ment succeeds in extending beyond the conception of the nation . . . the 
resulting punishment will be the downfall of civilization” (Röpke 1959a, 43), 
then waiting patiently for the organic growth of Europeanist attitudes and 
political commitments is hardly a persuasive political response.
This would seem to lead to rather pessimistic conclusions about the 
future existence of some kind of federation that somehow needs to integrate 
economically and politically simultaneously, while fostering the respective 
political mentalities necessary to support these processes. But while it is 
unclear how this is supposed to take place, Röpke at least is certain about 
the utter impossibility of European supranationalism turning into a socialist 
superstate. This brings us to Hayek’s considerations on federalism, which 
are initially designed to confirm this impossibility but also point beyond 
this specific goal. 
In The Road to Serfdom Hayek addresses one possible socialist response to 
the liberal attempt to prove the functional unfeasibility of socialism on the 
nation-state level, the argument that socialism is internationalist and thus 
may be dysfunctional when implemented in a single country but feasible on 
the level of a supranational federation. Hayek’s rebuttal follows the overall 
logic of his argument, according to which the variety of individual needs 
and wants makes central planning without the systematic use of coercion 
impossible, especially on a trans- or supranational level. Hayek states, “But 

	
The State
63
one has only to visualize the problems raised by economic planning of even 
an area such as Western Europe to see that the moral bases for such an un­
derstanding are completely lacking. . . . To undertake the direction of the 
economic life of people with widely divergent ideals and values is to assume 
responsibilities which commit one to the use of force” (2001, 228–229). 
However, this is not yet the most illuminating insight Hayek develops. In 
an article on federalism, originally published in 1939, he introduces a logic 
of limiting nation-state powers that remains pertinent today. Hayek’s argu­
ment begins with what is almost a reversal of Röpke’s position regarding 
the primacy of economic and political integration. Economic integration 
may or may not presuppose political integration, but the latter, according to 
Hayek, is certainly inconceivable without the former. Protectionist policies 
internal to a political unit must lead to conflicts between territorially fixed 
groups, and Hayek assumes that this will lead to disintegrative pressures, 
which the central government cannot absorb in the long run. This leads him 
to the conclusion that a stable federation requires a common market without 
impediments to economic interactions and movement across borders. 
What would this imply for the powers of nation-states making up this 
federation, which Hayek even imagines to have a common currency? It 
would dramatically diminish the economic policy options of states because 
they now find themselves in a situation in which they vie with one another 
both for natural resources and various types of more or less mobile financial, 
industrial, and human capital. More concretely, this means that “not only 
would the greater mobility between the states make it necessary to avoid 
all sorts of taxation which would drive capital or labor elsewhere, but there 
would also be considerable difficulties with many kinds of indirect taxation.” 
The fundamental reason is that states “will lose their monopolistic position” 
(Hayek 1980, 261). 
In this perspective, the power of the state that turns it into a potentially 
uncontrollable Leviathan is the result of its “market position.” States can 
dictate the conditions of politics and the costs (taxes, fees) to their citizens, 
who are effectively at their mercy. It almost goes without saying that the 
remedy for this special kind of market failure for the neoliberal Hayek lies in 
creating competition for the individual state, thereby reducing its monopo­
listic powers. A market of jurisdictions needs to be established. The logic 

64	
The State
of markets and competition thus is inscribed into both the supranational 
and subnational decentering of the nation-state since, principally, a market 
of jurisdictions can be established at the nation-state, provincial, and even 
municipal levels in what today is commonly referred to as “competitive fed­
eralism.” The crucial factor to establishing a truly competitive environment 
is, of course, the mobility of capital in the broad sense, which suggests that 
the smaller the units, the more effective the competition between them, so 
the main goal in such a strategy of constraining the state would be a devolu­
tion of powers to substate units. 
Hayek notes the possibility of devolution in passing (2001, 240), but an 
“interstate federation,” as he calls it (1980, 255), is an even more promis­
ing arrangement for a particular reason. Competition requires maximum 
mobility, which means that substate units need to be embedded in an encom­
passing structure, the nation-state, which guarantees this mobility at least 
to a certain degree. However, the history of substate federalism is mostly 
characterized by the gravitational pull at the national scale, leading to a re­
centralization of powers and reestablishment of a monopoly. It is the fact that 
this dynamic is not, and possibly cannot be, replicated in the same way that 
makes the relation between national and supranational scales uniquely suit­
able for Hayek’s purposes. Nation-state governments, he argues, by and large 
are considered to be legitimized to engage in a wide variety of policies that 
shift and reshift burdens and benefits between groups and territories based 
on some kind of national identity that forms a bond between the members 
of the population. Such a broad mandate to shape the livelihoods of those 
subject to it, however, will never be given to a supranational government: 
“The central government in a federation composed of many different people 
will have to be restricted in scope if it is to avoid meeting an increasing 
resistance on the part of the various groups it includes.” As a consequence, 
“a lot of interferences in economic life will become impractical” (ibid., 265, 
266). It is tempting to explore the almost eerie similarities between such 
a federation that Hayek developed in 1939 and the Eurozone of today, as 
the former almost amounts to a blueprint for the latter (see Streeck 2017), 
discussed further in chapter 6. I now scrutinize the views and arguments of 
the neoliberal who has devoted the most systematic efforts to the analysis 
of federalism broadly speaking. 

	
The State
65
The constitutional balanced-budget amendment is certainly the best-
known concrete policy demand associated with the name James Buchanan. 
Since the mid-1970s (and to a certain extent even before then) his interest 
was piqued by federalist designs as an alternative institutional/structural de­
vice to achieve the goals of the amendment—only far more effectively. In a 
paper written while on a research stay in St. Gallen, Switzerland, Buchanan 
lauds the country for its “effective federalism” (2001, 241), just as Röpke did 
fifty years earlier, although this is not the only reason for Buchanan’s praise. 
As already mentioned, the primary value of federalism for Buchanan is the 
restrictions it places on the size of the public sector and the budget, a view 
supposedly confirmed by the Swiss experience. Buchanan is aware that an 
empirical case does not prove anything, and he is enough of a theorist to 
probe the characteristics of federalist arrangements on a strictly analytical 
level. As mentioned previously, the initial attractiveness of federalism sparking 
Buchanan’s interest lies in its potential use as “an indirect means of imposing 
constraints on the potential fiscal exploitation of Leviathan. It may be that an 
explicit constitutional decision to decentralize and hence to disperse politi­
cal authority may effectively substitute for overt fiscal limits” (Brennan and 
Buchanan 1980, 174). In his later work, he even contemplates federalism as 
“an ideal political order” (Buchanan 1995b; see also Feld 2014). 
Compared to Hayek’s, Buchanan’s work on federalism is much more 
detailed and voluminous, but to Hayek’s credit, many of the insights that 
Buchanan’s investigations yield are already implied in Hayek’s article from 
1939. However, in contrast to Hayek, Buchanan is unwilling to rely solely 
on transnational solidarity remaining too weak to legitimate a full-fledged 
policy portfolio on the supranational scale, which would compensate for 
the reduced powers of the nation-state in a federation and thus nullify the 
intended effect. Instead, he places his hopes in some additional safeguards, 
particularly the guaranteed right for nation-states and substate units to se­
cede and a particular distribution of the power to tax between the various 
levels of Leviathan. The former provision is a logical extension of the basic 
mechanics of competition, which require actual exit options to be effective, 
so we focus on the latter. In Buchanan’s view the centralizing dynamic of 
federalist settings is not contingent on but driven by the strategies of rational 
(collective) actors that benefit from it (see Buchanan and Lee 1994, 222). 

66	
The State
So how is it possible to prevent this dynamic from offsetting the desired 
effects of limiting the overall tax load and maintaining tax competition, for 
example, through a centralized tax that may even be redistributed to the 
subunits to compensate them for their lack of revenue due to competition? 
Needless to say, Buchanan considers sharing revenue either directly among 
the competing units or indirectly through a central structure in the way just 
described as undesirable because it decreases the incentive to compete and 
thus should be constitutionally prohibited.11 However, reverse revenue shar­
ing is introduced as the mechanism to ensure that competitive federalism 
even beyond the nation-state could emerge as a sustainable model resistant 
to the multiple dynamics that would undermine it. The name of the model 
is apt because reverse revenue sharing would maintain the revenue-sharing 
structures that exist in most empirical cases of federalist arrangements (on 
the level of nation-states) but would reverse the flow of revenue. While 
today substate units in many cases rely on funds raised and distributed at 
the national level, Buchanan wants to make national revenue dependent on 
the substate units and, accordingly, the supranational level on the national. 
In other words, even if there were a sense of transnational solidarity robust 
enough to legitimate policies involving (redistributive) expenditures on a 
large scale (which Hayek deems unlikely), only the funds authorized by 
nation-state governments could be spent on the supranational level. Fur­
thermore, as long as the supranational level lacks the independent power 
to tax, the possibility of being subjected to what Buchanan calls exploita­
tion through taxation by this level of government is simply nonexistent. 
Conversely, the units on the lowest level of government are free to tax their 
citizens as much as they can—even in a discriminatory way—because the 
disciplining force of mobility will rein in the small Leviathans whenever 
they overplay their hand, fiscally speaking. Again, it is tempting to inquire 
how the characteristics of this model compare to those of the EU and its 
fiscal arrangements, which is considered later. 
First, let me introduce a few thoughts that serve to problematize the 
model(s) of fiscal federalism, nationally and supranationally, that we find in 
Hayek and Buchanan, although my main critique is that the strategy of de­
priving the state of certain powers through its decentering and competition 
between the constituent units is difficult to reconcile with the demands for 

	
The State
67
a transformation of state structures that seem to point in almost completely 
the opposite direction considered here.
There is a vast literature on the effects and feasibility of competitive 
federalist arrangements on the national or supranational scale, most of 
which is empirical. While supporters question the possibility of maintain­
ing the allegedly beneficial (fiscal) decentering of the state over time and 
resist recentralizing pressures, critics of competitive federalism often raise 
the issue of a pernicious race to the bottom with detrimental results for 
most, if not all, jurisdictions involved. However, it is safe to say that the 
evidence regarding both issues is inconclusive so far (see Feld 2014), not 
the least because so much depends on the specific setup of the arrangement 
in question. So let me stay at the theoretical level and follow the path of 
immanent critique based on just one consideration: Jurisdictional com­
petition presupposes a market, and the functioning of this and any other 
market—according to the neoliberal problematic—is based on certain 
conditions of possibility. One essential condition for effective competition 
is the possibility of bankruptcy, or market exit. It was Michel Foucault who 
highlighted the difference between a liberal understanding of markets as 
sites of harmonious exchanges and an ordoliberal /neoliberal understand­
ing that emphasized competition as the crucial aspect of markets, which 
implied an understanding of markets as sites of conflict that necessarily 
had to produce winners and losers to function properly (see Foucault 2008, 
118–119). So the question is whether and to what extent this condition 
also applies to jurisdictional competition. 
Let us imagine a territory divided into subunits sufficiently small to 
ensure reasonably low exit costs, which are another major precondition 
of competition. Now policy packages as well as the respective price tags 
begin to diverge to attract capital, with different jurisdictions pursuing dif­
ferent strategies. Under ideal conditions—which are about the opposite of 
what most people consider normatively ideal in this case—capital, includ­
ing human capital, will flow effortlessly to the jurisdictions that offer the 
policy-price combination that corresponds most closely to the respective 
preferences (which can vary; not everyone likes to live in a low-tax environ­
ment). A number of different scenarios can be imagined for the next step 
in such a dynamic model. 

68	
The State
The one that spells the least trouble for it, in my view, is one that 
Buchanan at least takes into consideration but would be strongly at odds 
with Hayek’s assumptions: There is some volatility in the market initially, 
but after some time a dominant model emerges for all jurisdictions because 
it turns out that individual preferences are not that individualist and most 
people prefer some middle-of-the-road policy product at a reasonable price. 
Hayek must consider this an unlikely outcome given his insistence on the 
variety of values and preferences in a population that serve as the main 
normative argument against centralized planning. Still, let us assume that 
individuals (and even capital) do not have preferences that are strong and 
divergent enough to trump residual “locational rents” (the utility of remain­
ing at home), and the market reaches a beneficial equilibrium. This would 
mean that competition is practically suspended and exists only virtually until 
a particular government tests the patience of its citizen-customers by offer­
ing an inferior policy product or preferences change and/or intensify. In my 
view, this scenario yields a sustainable arrangement, but it is one based on 
somewhat unlikely assumptions about the conformity of individual prefer­
ences and rests on actual competition being the exception and its virtual 
version the norm. Nevertheless, under certain conditions this appears to 
be a functioning arrangement to effectively limit state capabilities through 
the decentering of statehood. 
The more probable scenario for the dynamics of the model, in my view, 
would lead to a different outcome that raises some doubts with regard to its 
a priori feasibility. Let us assume that preferences do diverge in a significant 
way and some jurisdictions do lose a significant amount of capital/people 
to other jurisdictions. Even if the less attractive units are not depleted of 
all capital instantaneously, a significant loss makes it even more difficult 
to provide “good policy at decent prices.” This means that the relocation 
dynamics become self-amplifying, and then it is just a matter of time until 
jurisdictions have to declare insolvency, probably prompting all remaining 
inhabitants to leave if they can—the locational rents for staying are a minor 
factor at this point. So what happens to a jurisdiction depleted of capital and 
deserted by its inhabitants? The most plausible scenario is for it to be inte­
grated into another jurisdiction. Over time this is bound to result in fewer 
and bigger jurisdictions, which means that competition will be reduced by 

	
The State
69
the same degree because of rising exit costs and the potential detrimental 
systemic effects of sizable governments going bankrupt and because fewer 
competitors find it easier to cooperate at the expense of their citizens: “For 
reasons equivalent to those familiar in oligopoly theory, the potentiality for 
collusion among separate units varies inversely with the number of units” 
(Brennan and Buchanan 1980, 180). In short, competition undermines itself 
in such a setting. How does this change once the competing units are embed­
ded in a provincial, national, or supranational setting? Either there is not 
much change because horizontal or vertical bailouts are prohibited and/or 
difficult to orchestrate if, for example, due to reverse revenue sharing, the 
higher governmental level is completely dependent on funds from the lower 
tier. Or there is horizontal revenue sharing and/or vertical redistribution of 
funds, which in all likelihood will keep even struggling political “enterprises” 
in the market if not guarantee the existence of the various units. This is not 
to say that the federal or even supranational unit could not try to “incen­
tivize” lower-level jurisdictions to behave more competitively and be more 
efficient in their policy production, but unless there are legal grounds and 
the actual possibility for a jurisdiction to declare insolvency, the pressure of 
jurisdictional competition is relaxed to a considerable degree. Much more 
will have to be said on these matters once we focus on the EU and the ques­
tion of whether competing units could and should declare insolvency or bail 
each other out, but we now move on to the last quadrant in the matrix of 
neoliberal varieties of theorizing the state, addressing structural changes to 
the state so it can perform its positive functions. 
Recentering the State: Authoritarian Liberalism
The cliché understanding of neoliberalism suggests that it is the doctrine of 
self-regulating markets and the minimal state. However, a closer look at the 
texts proves that this is at least an impoverished understanding of neoliberal 
thought because what we find there, at least in one of its varieties, is actu­
ally the call for a strong state. Needless to say, this statement needs some 
explanation, but let us begin with those accounts that indeed demand the 
restoration or fortification of state power—the strong state—and inquire 
how they arrive at this assessment. 

70	
The State
The ordoliberals most explicitly postulate the need for a strong state, 
which is arguably most surprising in the case of the early Rüstow, whose 
magnum opus Freedom and Domination contains a fundamental critique of 
domination that one would assume to apply as well to the state as a structure 
of domination. Nevertheless, in his view it is one of the gravest errors of 
classical liberalism to have promoted the ideal of a weak state that would 
still maintain its independence: “No one noticed . . . the obvious sociologi­
cal truth that the strength and independence of a state are interdependent 
variables, and that only a strong state is powerful enough to preserve its 
own independence” (Rüstow 1942, 276). This is already a succinct summary 
of the ordoliberal position with regard to how the structure of the state 
and its relation to the state and economy have to be transformed so it can 
operate properly and thus provide a crucial precondition for functioning 
markets. What the ordoliberals and many of their fellow neoliberals object 
to, first and foremost, is a seeming conflation of state, economy, and society, 
resulting in what Eucken refers to as the “economic state” (Wirtschaftsstaat) 
deeply immersed in economic processes on behalf of various producer 
groups and acting, at least to some extent, at their behest (2017a, 56). The 
most fundamental concern underlying the ordoliberal assessment is that 
the state’s various entanglements will ultimately lead to its dissolution and 
destruction: “Responsible government must examine carefully all the pos­
sible means of resisting this pluralistic disintegration of the state” (Röpke 
1960, 143). 
Before we scrutinize more thoroughly what exactly characterizes a 
strong state, we first note the empirical background against which the de­
mand of an independent and strong state emerges in ordoliberal thought. 
This is, of course, the Weimar Republic on the eve of its descent into 
chaos and, subsequently, Nazi totalitarianism. While this is not enough to 
exculpate the ordoliberals straightaway, it does explain the shrill tonality 
of some of their contributions and the radicalness of some of their views. 
Or, to put it somewhat differently, lamenting the dysfunctionality of a 
democratic system and a corporatism/pluralism that left the state overex­
tended and drifting is not easily dismissed as unfounded alarmism in the 
Germany of 1932, when Eucken and Rüstow first voice the demand for a 
strong, independent state. 

	
The State
71
However, it must be probed, whether or not there are also more system­
atic reasons that led the ordoliberals to this conclusion; otherwise, we run 
the risk of buying into the narrative expounded by contemporary defenders 
of ordoliberalism who argue that it may have exhibited some problematic 
tendencies in the prewar era (e.g., advocacy of a strong state), but the ex­
perience of totalitarianism and war converted it to the values of liberal 
democracy, to which later writings supposedly attest. It is certainly true that 
the vocabulary of later ordoliberal texts is somewhat toned down and the 
explicit call for a strong state disappears.12 Nevertheless, Röpke’s warning 
of a disintegration of the state is from the late 1950s, and the basic logic of 
the underlying argument for the strong state remains largely unchanged 
even in the context of the liberal democracy of the early Federal Republic 
of Germany. The other strategy of developing an apologia for the undeni­
able existence of calls for a strong state in early ordoliberalism takes on 
the following form: The ordoliberals did indeed call for a strong state, but 
despite the problematic connotations this demand may have nowadays, what 
they meant by it was simply a state that would not weaken itself through 
overextension. The state gains strength through both its refusal to accept 
responsibility for all of society’s ills and a prudent policy of self-limitation 
along the lines of the principles and goals discussed previously. However, 
by involving itself in any number of socioeconomic matters, the “economic 
state” cannot plausibly refuse societal demands for state action. Inevitably it 
will fail at some of the problems it has been called on to solve, thus leading 
to a continuous corrosion of state authority because nothing is more un­
dermining to the state than not being able so solve problems it has claimed 
responsibility for. This argument is certainly part of the neoliberal repertoire 
(see, e.g., Hayek 2003, 1:143; Röpke 1950b, 192), but does this exhaust the 
meaning of the strong state in ordoliberalism?13 
Let us take a closer look. We have already seen that a strong state needs 
to sever the ties that bind it to societal interest groups and their demands; 
it needs to find the “strength to free itself from the influence of the masses 
and in some way distance itself from the economy” (Eucken 2017a, 68–69).14 
Assuming that the attempt at disentanglement was successful, how is the 
state to operate once it is liberated from the pressures of society? Eucken 
demands that the state should not act according to the will of others but 

72	
The State
according to its “own will” (ibid., 60), which suggests an organicist con­
ception of the state as some kind of macrosubject endowed with a will of 
its own. This prompts the question of how the will of the state is formed 
independently of societal influences, and Eucken is adamant that the most 
important aspect of the formation of this will is the state’s unity (ibid.). Along 
similar lines, Röpke even refers to a “monistic state” (1960, 142), which is 
consistent with the antipluralist thrust of the argument for a strong state. 
The strong state is thus characterized by an independent and monistic/
uniform will formation, and furthermore, it ought to exhibit a government 
endowed with the will to govern. What is needed is a “really strong state, a 
government with the courage to govern” (Röpke 1950b, 192), and leader­
ship, if not a “‘leader’ [Führer], who will not shirk political responsibility” 
(Rüstow [1929] 1959, 101).
Let us note at once that Rüstow and Röpke more or less plausibly assume 
that such a state is compatible with a democratic system; nevertheless, what 
emerges quite clearly from the various statements of the ordoliberals is a 
conception of the state that can be called authoritarian without any signifi­
cant stretch. It is authoritarian not so much because of its emphasis on state 
authority, which could be simply a conservative position, but because its 
postulate of a unitary will of the state and the concomitant hostility toward 
anything that could threaten it, especially the demands from particularistic 
actors and, it would seem, a separation of powers deliberately designed to 
diffuse this process of will formation. 
As mentioned previously, the charge of authoritarianism is routinely 
deflected and relativized by contemporary defenders of ordoliberalism, 
but in my view there is indeed a systematic reason for this stance, which 
points beyond the traumatic experience of an imploding democratic system 
and a faltering state in the Weimar Republic. Remember that it is incum­
bent on the state to establish and watch over the competitive order, which 
includes a robust policy of tackling economic power in its various forms. 
What kind of state is required to succeed at these tasks? First, the politics 
of the competitive order are a highly sensitive field because, as Eucken 
(1960) emphasizes, the political, economic, and legal orders are interde­
pendent, and whatever the state does has an impact on these interlocking 
systems, which exist in a fragile balance. Ideally, this impact, including 

	
The State
73
various unintended consequences, is contemplated beforehand in order 
not to cause unwanted disturbances. But how could a state, at the whim of 
ever-changing societal influences, ever produce decisions and actions that 
satisfy the need for such a prescient and coherent policy? This is exactly the 
question that Eucken poses to his readers in The Principles of Economic Policy, 
which was first published in 1952 and does not differ in its overall diagnosis 
from Eucken’s writings in 1932: “Everywhere there is the undermining of 
state authority through particularistic forces that represent particularistic 
interests. . . . A state with a unified and consequent will formation . . . is 
indispensable today. All economic policy is seemingly placed in jeopardy, 
because the state fails as an ordering power” (ibid., 329–330). So the first 
reason why a state should have an almost monolithic internal structure is 
the complexity of economic policy, even when the state is supposedly not 
intervening directly in economic processes. This complexity, combined 
with the incoherence of state policy resulting from unchecked influence 
of societal actors on the process of will formation, is bound to lead to 
chaos—as the Weimar Republic seemingly proved. The second reason is 
the state’s responsibility to aggressively check economic power and actors 
who would attempt to convert this economic power into political power 
through the official democratic channels or backroom lobbying.15 But this 
requires a state that is autonomous (independent in its decision making) 
and has the capability to implement its decisions even if this means that, 
for example, a consortium of firms that commands excessive market power 
has to be broken up. It is a state, to be more specific, capable of smashing 
even giant companies like Google or Microsoft as well as banking institu­
tions “too big to fail,” such as Goldman Sachs and Deutsche Bank—and it 
goes without saying that the same applies to unions to the extent that they 
hold market power. 
It would seem that the promotion of an at least semiauthoritarian state 
defined by the characteristics just listed is a risky strategy for neoliberalism, 
whose prime intellectual and political opponent is after all collectivism-
cum-totalitarianism. But an analysis of Röpke’s and Hayek’s work shows 
how they seek to demarcate authoritarianism and dictatorship from the 
totalitarianism they criticize.16
Let us begin with Hayek: “The difference between the two ideals stands 

74	
The State
out most clearly if we name their opposites: for democracy it is authoritarian 
government; for liberalism it is totalitarianism. Neither of the two systems 
necessarily excludes the opposite of the other: a democracy may well wield to­
talitarian powers, and it is conceivable that an authoritarian government may 
act on liberal principles” (2009, 90). Based on these two pairs of opposites, 
Hayek reshuffles the relations between political forms and ideologies. The 
result is an intimation of a slippery slope that does not lead from authoritari­
anism to totalitarianism but rather from democracy to totalitarianism. This 
becomes even clearer in his writings from the 1970s, where he states “that 
the predominant model of liberal democratic institutions . . . necessarily leads 
to a gradual transformation of the spontaneous order of a free society into a 
totalitarian system conducted in the service of some coalition of organized 
interests” (Hayek 2003, 1:2). Note that Hayek refers to the “predominant 
model” of democracy and not democracy per se; we later explore how he 
would like to see the democratic process reformed, but the crucial point is 
that he makes it quite clear that if he were presented with the choice between 
an unlimited democracy and a liberal dictator, he would not hesitate, because 
“it is at least conceivable, though unlikely, that an autocratic government will 
exercise self-restraint; but an omnipotent democratic government simply 
cannot do so” (ibid., 99). Therefore, “personally, I prefer a liberal dictator to 
a democratic government lacking in liberalism” (El Mercurio 1981, D9). The 
latter statement is not taken from Hayek’s writings but from an interview he 
gave the Chilean newspaper El Mercurio during a visit to the country in 1981 
when it was under the rule of Augusto Pinochet’s military dictatorship. The 
dictatorship followed the democratically elected government of Salvador 
Allende, who was ousted in 1973 and whom Hayek characterized in the same 
interview as driven by totalitarian aspirations. While his defenders tend to 
downplay the two visits to Chile, including meetings with Pinochet and his 
defense of the dictatorship in the interview as a misguided assessment in the 
heat of the political moment,17 allegedly proving once more that theorists 
often show poor judgment when it comes to real-life politics, the previous 
quotations prove, to the contrary, that Hayek’s position on Chile’s supposedly 
liberal authoritarian regime is in fact consistent with what he writes about 
such regimes and the totalitarian tendencies of democracy in The Constitution 
of Liberty and elsewhere.18 

	
The State
75
Among the neoliberals, it is not just Hayek who attempts to distinguish 
categorically between totalitarianism and dictatorship or authoritarian rule. 
Röpke sets up the various opposites in a similar fashion, although his word­
ing is slightly different: “If the ancient, like the modern tyrannies, are clearly 
different from dictatorship, it is not less false to confound them with the 
idea of a government that is hierarchic, aristocratic or authoritarian or to set 
them up as the opposites of democracy” (1942, 247).19 After all, “every well-
knit state comprises some more or less powerful elements of a hierarchic 
and authoritarian nature, and it would serve no useful purpose to consider 
as characteristic of the modern ‘ochlocratic’ tyranny a peculiar form of 
authoritarian government like dictatorship” (ibid., 246). The difference is, 
according to Röpke, that the “modern usurpers” have invariably “risen from 
the masses” and their democracy, and thus he arrives at the same conclusion 
as Hayek: “The antithesis of tyranny is not democracy . . . but the liberal 
principle” (ibid., 248). 
However, Röpke gives the argument an additional twist that reminds 
us of a particular aspect of the liberal crisis syndrome—the war economy—
which, in some aspects, resembles a regime of central planning. Röpke 
contends that “the introduction of an authoritarian regime, such as has now 
happened under the overwhelming pressure of war in the countries most 
involved” (1942, 248) should not mislead commentators to believe they are 
on the path to socialism—which is a major concern underlying Hayek’s Road 
to Serfdom. “To do so in peace time would in fact carry their political and 
economic life irresistibly down the slippery slope of collectivist authoritarian 
totalitarianism” (ibid.) Röpke maintains that there is no reason to believe 
that the same automatism would hold for wartime authoritarianism, which 
apparently can be reversed once the war is over. But with this last move 
Röpke of course blurs the neat demarcation lines that he tried to draw ear­
lier, which is most obvious in his reference to a decidedly undifferentiated 
“collectivist authoritarian totalitarianism” but also implied in his version 
of a slippery-slope argument that suggests there is indeed a link between 
authoritarianism and totalitarianism, but only during peacetime. 
However, even if Röpke did not end up undermining his own discursive 
strategy, what is problematic about the efforts to distinguish between to­
talitarianism and authoritarianism is not necessarily the distinction as such, 

76	
The State
which may be a useful means of differentiating, for example, between various 
regimes, as in the work of Juan Linz (2000). Rather, it is the implicit normal­
ization of authoritarianism taking place as if it had absolutely nothing to do 
with totalitarianism. Normalizing authoritarianism means that Röpke and 
Hayek, to choose the most prominent examples, do not just argue that not 
every authoritarian regime amounts to a fascist or communist totalitarian­
ism, which is at least a defendable claim despite the difficulties of developing 
mutually exclusive ideal types of totalitarianism and authoritarianism. They 
cavalierly discount the totalitarian potential of authoritarian rule and instead 
highlight the respective dangers supposedly inherent in contemporary democ­
racy, suggesting that anyone holding liberal views, broadly speaking, would 
be better off or at least safer under authoritarian rule. What we thus have to 
conclude is that at least one variety of neoliberal thought is infused with what 
some may consider an odd kind of liberalism, one that shows authoritarian 
tendencies and thus may be called “authoritarian liberalism.” 
Interestingly, this is the title of an essay by the German constitutional 
scholar Hermann Heller, first published in 1933, and his use of the term 
referred to the thought of another constitutional scholar from Germany, 
Carl Schmitt (see Heller [1933] 2015). In 1932 Schmitt gave a talk in which 
he gave the following explanation for the ongoing crisis of the Weimar 
regime: “The present German state is total due to weakness and lack of re­
sistance, due to its incapacity to resist the onslaught of parties and orga­
nized interests. It must give in to everyone, please everyone and act at the 
pleasure of even the most contradictory interests” (Schmitt 1998, 218). 
Schmitt recommends a vehement effort on behalf of the state to sever ties 
that bind it to the economic sphere and thus depoliticize the economy and 
simultaneously deeconomize the state; but “a state that is to bring about 
this new order ought to be, as was said extraordinarily strong” (ibid., 227). 
It may be a stretch to characterize Schmitt’s work in general as authoritarian 
liberalism, but Heller’s term indeed sums up the essence of this particular 
talk, which conceptualizes authoritarian political forms and market econo­
mies as mutually enabling. It does so on an argument that bears a striking 
resemblance to Röpke’s, Eucken’s, and Hayek’s ideas with regard to the 
strong state and authoritarianism, who, in this particular respect turn out 
to have at least very similar intuitions, as does Rüstow: Schmitt’s talk on 

	
The State
77
November 23, 1932, was aptly titled “Strong State and Sound Economy.” 
Rüstow’s first call for a strong state can be found in a talk he gave exactly 
fifty-five days before, titled “Free Economy—Strong State.”
Needless to say, authoritarianism poses a serious challenge to notions of 
pluralist democracy, and I problematize the former accordingly in the fol­
lowing chapter. I now simply draw some critical attention to the fundamental 
tension that exists between the two strategies of neoliberal state theorizing. 
While the one can be summed up as an attempt to limit the (nation-)state 
and curtail its powers through a decentering of its structure along broadly 
federalist lines, it would not be much of a stretch to say that the other is 
all about recentering the state with a premium on unity to the point of an 
almost monolithic state structure, that is, the strong state. While the one 
can be understood as a critique of nation-state sovereignty, the other seems 
to be driven by the need to restore state sovereignty or at least state author­
ity. How is this tension to be interpreted? The first response might be that 
both strategies can exist side by side and may even complement each other. 
The state must be empowered to perform its positive functions and at the 
same time limited through decentralization to ensure it is confined to these 
functions. Yet this is just a restatement of the fundamental challenge that 
presents itself to the neoliberal theorizing of the state. 
Furthermore, it does not take long to realize that the two strategies 
cannot comfortably exist alongside each other. One of the major reasons 
for a strong state is the need for an impartial enforcing agent that cannot 
be manipulated by the actors it seeks to regulate. But even if we assume that 
the state has severed the ties to, for example, economic interest groups, it 
can still be disciplined by them in a federal context through the threat of 
exiting the jurisdiction in question. In a setting structured by the competi­
tion over various capitals under conditions of extreme mobility, this is a 
powerful threat, and it is difficult to see how an individual jurisdiction could 
maintain control over the framework of its competitive order. It would 
seem that the possibility of regime shopping leads to anything but strong 
states that can regulate their markets according to ordoliberal notions or pro­
duce the public goods its citizens agreed on in a postconstitutional contract à 
la Buchanan. The semi-monopolist whose economic power is to be curtailed 
by the state as guardian of the competitive order could simply move to 

78	
The State
another jurisdiction and still sell its products in the original one, so any 
enterprise unhappy with the tax and regulatory regime could set up in a 
particular jurisdiction. The only way to keep the effects of federation from 
turning the idea of a strong state in economic matters into a sham would be 
to have the guardianship of some kind of market order migrate upward to 
the supranational level. This would prevent the various jurisdictions from 
engaging in a competition that will have overall detrimental effects for the 
citizens of the various jurisdictions, but this demand is hardly to be found 
in the neoliberal writings. While Hayek does at least mention the possibil­
ity of some supranational framework for the common market, the main 
emphasis is on the supranational scale enforcing freedom of movement 
and economic interactions, thus only intensifying competitive pressures on 
the various jurisdictions. Röpke is vehemently opposed to any transfer of 
sovereignty to the supranational level whatsoever. It must be concluded that 
the demands for a strong state characterized by both capacity and autonomy, 
to put it in the terminology of Theda Skocpol (1985), on the one hand, and 
the decentering of the state through federalist arrangements, on the other, 
represent an antinomy in neoliberal state theorizing that is ultimately un­
resolvable. This is a matter we return to extensively in the context of EU 
politics in chapter 7, where we will see that there is indeed a unique way of 
combining the two varieties.


79
The various neoliberal positions on limiting but also enabling the state through 
certain constraints on its outputs, internal restructurings, and relation to its 
environment obviously have implications for the respective perspectives on 
democracy that are the subject of this chapter. Democracy is an element of 
neoliberal political theory that deserves a discussion on its own terms. It is 
of fundamental importance for contemporary political theory, and at least 
some of the critical remarks directed at democracy in its current institutional 
shape are not easily dismissed as exclusively neoliberal ideology but resonate 
with concerns shared across a broad political spectrum. Finally, while the 
discussion of the state focused on rules, principles, and structural issues, 
an investigation of neoliberal views on democracy also shifts the emphasis 
from these rather static elements to the dynamics of (democratic) political 
life and the various actors that populate and dominate it. 
I begin with the common denominator of neoliberal accounts of democ­
racy—that it is a problem for functioning markets—and then highlight what 
I consider the two core contentions that structure the spectrum of various 
critical diagnoses. The first focuses on the pluralist aspect of contemporary 
democracy; the other, on the alleged excess of power accruing to democracy 
in its contemporary form. Both contentions are far from incompatible, but 
certain neoliberal positions lean more toward one side than the other, while 
Democracy
C HAPTE R 3

80	
Democracy
others rest on both contentions in almost equal measure, which they consider 
as two sides of the same coin. Based on this survey of various diagnoses, I 
briefly look at the main damage that democracy supposedly does, according 
to the different interpretations, and discuss the various remedies proposed 
to alleviate the alleged pathologies of democracy. Here the varieties of neo­
liberal thought on democracy are most pronounced, with recommendations 
ranging from extending the sphere of markets at the expense of democratic 
decision making to introducing more direct democratic elements and thus 
complementing existing institutional arrangements.
Democracy and Its Problems: 
Majoritarianism and Limitlessness
Simply put, the common denominator of all neoliberal views on democracy 
is the conviction that it poses a more or less serious problem. It is a prob­
lem insofar as its mechanisms complicate the already challenging task of 
conceptualizing the proper role of the state in its relation to markets and 
society; but it also, more fundamentally, has the potential to plunge societies 
into chaos and/or transform them into machineries of massive exploitation 
and repression that ultimately come to resemble the collectivisms that the 
neoliberals so vehemently oppose. This is not to suggest that all of the 
perspectives discussed here demand the abolition of democracy, although 
some of the options seem to come close to it. But even those accounts that 
are, overall, most favorably inclined to democratic decision making offer 
trenchant critiques of democracy’s (potential) pathologies that must be ad­
dressed to avoid dramatic consequences. 
The first issue in need of clarification is what exactly “democracy” signi­
fies in neoliberal discourse. The object of the neoliberal critique throughout 
is democracy in its representative variant, which obviously does not make the 
neoliberals unqualified supporters of the nonrepresentative version; in most 
cases this is assumed to make matters even worse. The point is that neoliberal 
critique indeed aims at democracy in its actually existing or predominant 
form as the various thinkers conceive of it. While other aspects of neolib­
eral thought are abstract and decontextualized—from Buchanan’s models 
and formulas to Eucken’s ideal types of economic orders—the discourse on 

	
Democracy
81
democracy is almost always contextualized; it is not an engagement with 
theories of democracy but a diagnostic aimed at concrete democracies, their 
actual functioning and respective shortcomings. 
In my reading, the neoliberal discourse on the problems of democracy is 
structured around two poles between which a spectrum of positions exists.1 
The first of these poles is best summed up with reference to the positions 
of Hayek, Friedman, and Buchanan and is constituted by two interrelated 
points. Hayek sums up both most succinctly by mobilizing another pair of 
opposites—or at least nonidentical phenomena—to make his case against 
contemporary democracy. On the one hand, he states, is the principle of 
constitutionalism; on the other is what he views as the contemporary un­
derstanding of democracy as “a form of government where the will of the 
majority on any particular matter is unlimited” (Hayek 2003, 1:1). There are 
two separate points to this, the unlimited power of democratic government 
and the rule of majorities, but before we take a closer look, we first examine 
Hayek’s argumentative strategy. 
While the neoliberal critique of democratic practices and institutions is 
almost always concrete, a crucial resource the critique makes use of is some 
kind of alternative account, which may be an abstract ideal that is neverthe­
less considered to have been implemented at least to a certain degree in the 
historical past, as demonstrated by Hayek. His framing of the problem is a 
narrative of decline operating analogously to the ones regarding liberalism 
and the rule of law that we have already encountered. In other words, Hayek 
is careful not to be painted into an unequivocally antidemocratic corner 
and casts himself as a supporter of “the basic ideal of democracy” (2003, 
2:2), which, however, has become gravely distorted in its contemporary 
manifestations. The most pernicious distortion has given rise to the belief 
in democratic government as unlimited, which is not surprising in light of 
what we already know of Hayek’s conceptualization of the rule of law and 
its decline. 
But now we get a clearer of view of the historical developments and faulty 
assumptions he blames for this deterioration of democratic practices up to 
the current point. Both can be summed up in the notion of parliamentary 
sovereignty. For Hayek, this principle represents the various facets of de­
mocracy’s decline. With the shift to democracy it was no longer considered 

82	
Democracy
important to have checks and balances or other limitations on government, 
contends Hayek, thus reproducing a familiar topos in the critical liberal 
discourse on democracy found also in Mill and others: the naïve belief that 
as long as “the people” rule, there is no need for other safeguards against 
the abuse of power. But even if the people were to make wrong or at least 
ill-advised decisions, the democratic doctrine would have been at a loss in 
attempting to rein in the popular will expressed in parliamentary decisions 
because it is tied to a misconception of sovereignty, according to Hayek. 
We must not dwell too long on this particular topic I have discussed more 
extensively elsewhere (see Biebricher 2014), but let us at least note that 
one of the multiple layers in Hayek’s critique of democracy is a critique of 
a certain understanding of sovereignty. The notion that “there must always 
exist an ultimate ‘sovereign’ source of power from which law derives” is no 
more than a “sophism” that informs the democratic self-aggrandizement 
(Hayek 2003, 1:28), which contends that parliamentary sovereignty by defi­
nition cannot be held in check because then parliament would not be truly 
sovereign. But this is to misconstrue the matter in Hayek’s view because in 
a constitutionalist setting sovereignty is not located in any one place; as a 
matter of fact, it disappears. “If it be asked where under such an arrangement 
‘sovereignty’ rests, the answer is nowhere—unless it temporarily resides in 
the hands of the constitution-making or constitution-amending body. Since 
constitutional government is limited government there can be no room in 
it for a sovereign body if sovereignty is defined as unlimited power” (ibid., 
2:123). For Hayek, “sovereignty,” as it is commonly used, is a metaphysical 
concept, which may be an accurate assessment, but it is still doubtful whether 
it can be simply conjured away as he suggests.2 
To summarize, the combination of trust in the inability of democracy 
to do any harm to the people with a mistaken view on sovereignty and 
increased governing through legislatures leads to the conviction that “the 
representative assembly is not only the highest but also an unlimited author­
ity” that cannot and must not be curtailed in its reach (Hayek 2003, 2:3). 
Furthermore, and this is already familiar terrain for us, it has immunized 
itself against any attempts at limiting it to certain forms of action—that is, 
the rule of law—by moving from the (properly democratic) view that “only 
what is approved by the majority should be binding for all, to the belief that 

	
Democracy
83
all that the majority approves shall have that force” (ibid., 6). With these 
shifts, the wheels are set in motion toward the slow but steady transforma­
tion of contemporary democracies into totalitarian societies, which prompts 
Hayek to submit “that if democracy is taken to mean government by the 
unrestricted will of the majority I am not a democrat” (ibid., 39). And as 
is befitting for someone who had a keen sense of the power inherent in 
language and particular terms, Hayek proposes that true democracy should 
be renamed “demarchy,” which is the “ideal of an equal law for all” (ibid., 
40), thus avoiding the confusions in our politico-economic language he sees 
looming in this and many other cases.
Buchanan and Friedman share these Hayekian grievances to a large 
degree, albeit with slightly differing nuances and emphases. Buchanan’s 
concern over a democratic state/government cutting the ties through which 
it could be controlled and held accountable only intensifies over the course 
of his oeuvre. Starting from a public-choice perspective that rigidly applied 
methodological individualism to the government and state apparatuses, 
Buchanan conceptualized all of these as strictly interpersonal relations, thus 
almost dissolving government and state into the former: “‘Government’ as 
such, cannot exist, and ‘governmental outcomes’ may exhibit relatively little 
internal consistency or stability” (Brennan and Buchanan 1980, 29). This 
makes for all kinds of dysfunctionalities, such as massive incoherence of 
government policy, but from the analyses of public-choice theorists emerged 
an archipelago-like image of the state that made it rather implausible to 
harbor fears about its transformation into a totalitarian state subjecting 
society to its will. 
This changes with Buchanan’s switch to the concept of Leviathan in the 
early 1980s. Up to that point, Buchanan had concurred with the public-
choice mainstream that the motive of securing reelection on behalf of poli­
ticians in a democracy constrained these political actors to a significant 
degree. This does not mean that the outcomes were necessarily “efficient”; 
yet the state could hardly be considered despotic, but neither was it to be 
seen as a benevolent guardian of the common good. It is only the latter 
assumption that is retained in the framework of Leviathan. The Leviathan 
state is analyzed as if it were a monolithic kind of government. Of course, 
this creates problems for a methodological individualist such as Buchanan, 

84	
Democracy
who even admits a “methodological ‘leap to Leviathan’” (Brennan and 
Buchanan 1980, 30), which he still maintains to be a defendable one. None 
of the elected and unelected state personnel has any intention of further­
ing Leviathan’s interest (or the public’s), but the resultant of all individual 
actions always points in the same direction: the urge to maximize revenue. 
Leviathan has thus inherently expansive tendencies, and Buchanan concludes 
that this dynamic is no longer effectively curtailed by electoral controls; an 
increasingly unaccountable democracy with unlimited power thus turns into 
Leviathan (see Buchanan 1975, 161). 
But Buchanan also shares Hayek’s reservations regarding the majority 
principle, as does Friedman. To a certain extent, the arguments are all varia­
tions on the theme of a looming “tyranny of the majority,” well known from 
any number of liberal and conservative critiques of democracy. Hayek insists 
on the will of the majority to be expressed in abstract rules only, but he also 
emphasizes that “the argument for democracy presupposes that any minority 
opinion may become a majority one” and opposes strongly the idea that just 
because a particular opinion has the backing of 51 percent of the people, it 
must be considered better or superior to others. If anything, Hayek states, 
they are likely to be inferior to those that “the most intelligent members 
of the group will make after listening to all opinions” (2009, 96), not least 
because majority decisions will often contain compromises made to gain 
that majority. However, he believes that if there is anything to be said in 
favor of democracy, then it is the fact that built into it is an institutionalized 
competition of opinions in which minorities may eventually even convince 
the majority. Hayek assumes that only through such small dissenting elites 
are societies as a whole exposed to new ideas and over time advance. Ac­
cording to Hayek, this is, of course, hampered by a notion of democracy that 
fetishizes the majority principle. Moreover, all three thinkers problematize 
the basic experience of being outvoted and relegated to a minority that has 
to comply with the majority’s decision on a certain matter.
 Hayek’s concerns are fueled by the value subjectivism he inherits from 
the marginalist Austrian Carl Menger, leading him to the conclusion that 
democratic decision making had best confine itself to matters on which 
there is substantive agreement in the electorate. Buchanan’s reservations 
are based on the Wicksellian point that the unanimity rule would ensure 

	
Democracy
85
a Pareto optimum in political decision making because no policy could 
be adopted that would not improve some or all positions, or at least not 
do any damage.3 Normatively speaking, this would be the ideal rule for 
politics, and it is only for reasons of feasibility that Buchanan accepts the 
majority principle, reluctantly acknowledging “the normative strength 
that majority rule has in public attitudes” (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 
118). Friedman makes his case against majority decision making that subjects 
the minority to “conformity” by explicitly juxtaposing it to markets where 
one is never outvoted. “That is why it is desirable to use the ballot box, so far 
as possible, only for those decisions where conformity is essential” (Friedman 
and Friedman 1990, 66). Implicit in this statement is a suggestion about how 
the deficiencies of democratic decision making may be overcome: through 
the use of markets, discussed in more detail later. 
I conclude the exposition of this pole of the neoliberal critique of democ­
racy by noting some broad similarities between the points raised here and 
critiques of democracy voiced from the other end of the political spectrum 
that concern especially the legitimacy of the majority principle. Claus Offe, 
to choose but one prominent example, has shown that the majority principle 
involves a number of inherent problems and is premised on a number of 
preconditions in order to be normatively acceptable (see Guggenberger and 
Offe 1984). One of the inherent difficulties is the problem of quantitative 
decision-making procedures being unable to account for the quality of the 
votes—the intensity of the preference expressed in them. Should a majority 
of 52 percent with hardly a real interest in a particular matter really be able 
to force their decision on a minority of 48 percent who passionately disagree? 
One of the fundamental preconditions is similar to the point made by Hayek 
previously: A minority that has no chance of ever becoming the majority 
(e.g., “structural minorities”) can legitimately contest the use of the major­
ity principle in regard to their rights. Similarly, all decisions that would be 
irreversible or only reversible at prohibitively high costs should in principle 
not be made according to the majority principle, because even if the current 
minority opinion becomes the majority, the original decision cannot actually 
be reversed. My point is simply that the critique of the majority principle in 
itself is not an exclusive concern for neoliberals, and there is even a degree 
of overlap, albeit a very small one, between the reasons given, for example, 

86	
Democracy
by Buchanan or Offe to support this critique. However, while there may 
be agreement that something is problematic about the majority principle 
or its preconditions, the conclusions drawn and remedies prompted by this 
diagnosis differ fundamentally.
Let us turn to the other core contention of the neoliberal critique of 
democracy, which we glimpsed in the previous discussion of the strong state, 
and now it becomes clear that what actually stands in the way of such a state is 
democracy, or at least a certain kind of democracy. The fundamental prob­
lem raised by this variety of criticism is the pluralism of contemporary de­
mocracy, the undue influence of actors pursuing particularistic interests 
in the political process and the distortions that result from this influence. 
The most vivid descriptions of the problem are found—as so often—in the 
ordoliberal accounts. Rüstow refers to the “pathological form of government 
. . . of pluralism” and the “decay of democracy” as the “state which begins 
to feed the beasts of organized business interests will finally be devoured by 
them” (1942, 277). Similarly, Röpke sees the “state become plaything and 
prey of the vested interests” and predicts that the “struggle among group 
interests . . . leads to the disintegration of the state” (1950b, 130–131). And 
not just interest groups but also parliamentary parties are to blame since 
they were transformed into “parliamentary agencies of economic pressure 
groups and were financed by them” (Rüstow 1942, 276), thus acting as relays 
for the demands of the former. 
Eucken echoes the overall diagnosis, which for him is particularly wor­
risome because of the collusion of economic and political power bound to 
undermine the competitive order as economic power is translated into po­
litical influence, possibly leading even to political dependence on economic 
power: “Economic policy by the state and the representation of business 
interests here blend into a tightly coordinated unity” (2017a, 57). Eucken is 
an interesting case because contemporary defenders of ordoliberalism place 
a high premium on saving him from the charge of harboring antidemocratic 
sentiments. I have already described two strategies of exculpation with regard 
to the strong state. With regard to democracy, the most recent arguments 
defending Eucken are found in Viktor Vanberg (2014) and Daniel Nientiedt 
and Ekkehard Köhler (2016). Vanberg mostly reiterates the usual argu­
ments softening the demand for a strong state, but even the former director 

	
Democracy
87
of the Walter Eucken Institute expresses some skepticism with regard to 
Eucken’s democratic bona fides. Nientiedt and Köhler resort to a different 
argument, according to which Eucken objected mostly to a particular kind 
of democracy, an identitarian one along the lines of Schmitt and Rousseau, 
exemplified in the economic state that merges state, society, and economy 
(2016, 1749). This is hardly a convincing interpretation because what 
Eucken objects to is the expression and furtherance of particularistic socio­
economic interests by private and state actors, which is typically described 
as pluralism. Note also that Carl Schmitt, in the talk mentioned previously 
and in The Concept of the Political (1932), describes and laments exactly the 
same processes that Eucken sums up under the term “economic state,” which 
therefore could hardly characterize an identitarian democracy as Schmitt 
viewed and espoused it. 
Another important factor suggesting that Eucken, in certain respects, 
is closer to Rousseau’s and Hegel’s views of state and democracy is that he 
clearly views the state as a potential guarantor of the common good, the 
general will that must prevail over particularistic wills, to use the vocabu­
lary of Rousseau. Is this not exactly why the state has to free itself from the 
influence of various socioeconomic actors and the political parties that they 
steer like parliamentary puppets to further their necessarily particularistic 
interests? It is this thoroughly Hegelian task of the state defending the gen­
eral interest against the antinomies of social life that elevates what it does, 
and thus also public power used in the process, to a different normative 
status, which is the answer to the question why state power is normatively 
different from private/economic power raised earlier.4 Clearly, the general 
interest is hardly as substantive in Eucken as it can be made out in certain 
readings of Rousseau or Hegel; it solely pertains to the maintenance of the 
competitive order, which is in everyone’s best interest—just not as Rousseau’s 
citoyen but as a consumer. Did Eucken’s views change after the war, as one 
of the apologia narratives states with regard to the strong state? It is hard 
to tell, because as Nientiedt and Köhler note, democracy is simply never 
mentioned in the postwar writings, which I find rather telling.5 This is not 
to suggest that Eucken was simply an antidemocrat but that he was deeply 
skeptical of a pluralist understanding of democracy. Such an understanding 
does not demand that private actors or political parties pass a litmus test 

88	
Democracy
of acting only in the general interest—whatever it may be—but principally 
affords even the narrow-minded pursuit of particularistic interests prima 
facie legitimacy and thus conveys a decidedly liberal, but apparently not a 
very ordoliberal, understanding of democracy.6 
In the ordoliberal, especially Eucken’s, version of the argument against 
pluralism an additional and final factor comes into play that we should note, 
not least because of its significance for the various remedies suggested to cure 
the ills of democracy. Modern democracy is not only pluralist; it is also mass 
democracy. Groups pursue particular interests contrary to the general inter­
est per se, but the masses are also a part of these endeavors in some way (see 
Eucken 2017a, 59). The problem is that the masses are not well equipped 
to comprehend the intricacies of either governmental order in general or 
economic policy in particular. Moreover, according to Eucken, who is the 
most adamant elitist among the ordoliberals, there is a “destructive power” 
to the masses, which tends toward “destroying especially those orders that 
actually function” (1960, 16, 14). For Röpke and Rüstow “massification” is 
also a key concept, but while they associate a number of social pathologies 
with the masses, they are much less inclined to suggest that the masses are 
epistemologically unfit to form a coherent and even reasonable political 
will (see, however, Rüstow 2009, 34). Although Röpke attributes such an 
“intellectual regression” only to “mass as an acute state” (1960, 53), mass as 
a “chronic state,” which he analyzes with reference to José Ortega y Gasset’s 
Revolt of the Masses, still poses dangers. Uprooted and estranged “mass man” 
is easy prey for demagoguery, propaganda, and advertisement and thus may 
still be turned into the pawn of some mischievous politico-economic cause, 
especially if the condition of massification becomes permanent (ibid., 56). 
Democracy, in sum, is likely to produce dysfunctional and even irrational 
political output/outcomes, and at its worst it turns into a catalyst for col­
lectivist transformations. 
While part of the problem of the pluralism the ordoliberals criticize 
is the irrationality of the masses, who may even be swayed to act against 
their own presumed best interests (i.e., a well-ordered economic sphere), 
the more contemporary version of the argument is concerned instead with 
the very rationality of actors ultimately leading to the decline of pluralist 
democracy. What I am referring to is the theorem of rent seeking, the basic 

	
Democracy
89
logic of which is no different from the ordoliberal argument, albeit without 
the invocation of the state as the guardian of the common good to which, 
for example, Buchanan is vehemently opposed, and on the basis of a much 
more rigorous formalization through a model of human behavior. I briefly 
introduce this now notorious behavioral model of homo economicus before I 
return to it in a more extensive discussion later. The theoretical groundwork 
of Buchanan (and to a lesser degree, Friedman and Hayek) rests heavily on 
homo economicus as a rational utility maximizer and the application of this 
model to bureaucratic and democratic politics. 
This application leads to a constellation in which private individuals and 
organized interests have a strong incentive to demand some kind of special 
treatment or an exemption from the rules (because individual utility is maxi­
mized if everyone else has to follow rules we do not have to follow ourselves) 
and accordingly approach the political system with such demands for “rents.” 
On the supply side of the market for rents in a democracy are politicians eager 
to be reelected and thus incentivized to offer rents in return for presumed 
electoral allegiance from the respective groups/organizations that benefit 
from preferential treatment. What is problematic about this market on which, 
it seems, supply and demand for rents match in a happy equilibrium? 
Buchanan raises two critical points against the “rent-seeking society” 
(Buchanan, Tollison, and Tullock 1980) that are of equal importance for 
his account of democracy. First, rent seeking is a classic case of individual 
versus collective rationality/efficiency: Along the basic lines of a prisoner’s 
dilemma a (collective) actor in a democracy has to assume that other actors 
will lobby for their particular interests, which is likely to affect the first 
actor adversely, if only indirectly; that is, it is worse off, relatively speaking, 
if others gain some preferential treatment. If each actor acts rationally on 
an individual basis, then the outcome will be exactly what the ordoliberals 
have already decried, a political system besieged by special interests that 
clamor for improvements of their situation. Obviously, this description is 
easily articulable with the discourse on “ungovernability” that became a 
crucial topos in the neoconservative discourses of the 1970s and early 1980s 
in both North America and parts of Europe (see Crozier, Huntington, and 
Watanuki 1975; Offe 1984). An unruly and renitent post-1968 population 
that lacks the discipline and ego strength of former generations in the heroic 

90	
Democracy
age of capitalism demands more and more favors from the state and is less 
and less prepared to comply with societal rules.7 
But apart from these neoconservative interpretations, the problem ac­
cording to Buchanan is rather that individually rational behavior ends up 
creating a situation in which almost everyone is worse off than before, 
because even if they all get what they lobbied for, they will be put at a 
disadvantage in regard to every other group or category that receives some 
kind of rent. So if the rational-choice calculus is applied rigorously, it turns 
out that everyone is being hurt by pursuing his or her individual interest. 
Importantly, the main thrust of the argument is not directed at the selfish­
ness of interest groups in the name of some common good. Rather, the logic 
of the situation, in which everyone has to assume that others are lobbying 
on behalf of their own group or organization, makes it imperative to seek 
to influence the political process if one is not to be put at a disadvantage 
through the relative improvement for others. While everyone would be 
better off not lobbying at all, it is a requirement of rationality to engage in 
it, if only prophylactically. 
Thus, according to this reasoning, a rent-seeking democracy is inef­
ficient and even more so to the extent that it is transformed into the model 
of Leviathan we are already familiar with: a government determined and 
able to raise revenue continually to increase the surplus that remains after 
all the public goods for society have been produced or paid for so it has 
financial resources at its disposal to finance genuine rents, thus burdening 
citizens with excessive taxes. 
While the first problem of rent-seeking democracy has an almost tragic 
aspect to it, Buchanan’s second line of critique points to straightforward 
exploitation through externalization, and there is nothing “tragic” about it 
in Buchanan’s view. Who exploits whom? It is, first, political actors, both 
individual and collective (i.e., political parties), that exploit citizen taxpayers. 
Buchanan radically questions the power to tax and argues that as long as there 
is no earmarking of revenue raised and citizens cannot be sure that it is used 
for the production of public goods, it is hardly different from straightforward 
expropriation. How is this linked to an externalizing logic? 
One way of describing the rent-seeking constellation is to liken it to 
a deal between electorally relevant social categories or organizations and 

	
Democracy
91
political parties, in which the former trade votes and electoral support for 
rents that, most of the time, come at a cost. It is a deal that works for both 
sides, not least because, according to Buchanan, the costs are externalized 
and borne by the tax-paying citizenry. In light of these elaborations it be­
comes clear that the diagnosis of a “tyranny of the majority” as the crucial 
problem of democracy is at least ambiguous if not misleading. After all, 
according to Friedman, the (parliamentary) majority is actually “a majority 
composed of a coalition of minorities” (Friedman and Friedman 1984, 52) 
down to individual politicians who act as mutual enablers of generating 
rents through logrolling, vote swapping, and hammering out compromises. 
Moreover, which nonparliamentary groups are most likely to benefit most 
from rent seeking? Again, it is Friedman who makes the point, relying partly 
on Mancur Olsen’s arguments from The Logic of Collective Action. 
Small groups and minorities are seemingly weak, but they may actually 
be at an advantage in lobbying efforts. They are much easier to organize 
because they tend to be more homogeneous, and monitoring individual 
effort on behalf of the group is easier than in large heterogeneous groups. 
Furthermore, the smaller the group, the larger the individual spoils and, 
conversely, in case of reforms that threaten certain “privileges,” the worse 
the damage: “But the minorities specially affected have strong incentives 
to mount a propaganda barrage to assure that the majority are not well 
informed” (Friedman and Friedman 1984, 7). Democracy amounts to the 
exploitation of the many by the few, is the irritatingly Marxist-sounding 
first conclusion of this line of critique. Exploitation in Marx’s account was, 
among other things, based on a deceptive arrangement in which workers 
presumably were paid the equivalent of their labor power. Exploitation in 
Buchanan’s account is also based on a deceptive arrangement called general 
taxation, and it works better the larger the population across which the costs 
can be spread, because invisibly small increases in the individual tax burden 
will already generate massive surpluses (which is, incidentally, another reason 
why Buchanan is opposed to the power to tax for supranational federations). 
However, externalization of rent costs through taxation is still not the 
gravest problem democracy in its currently existing form generates, because 
as undetectable as a small tax hike may be for the average person, one would 
assume that people will eventually realize that tax volumes keep rising and 

92	
Democracy
will wonder why this is happening or will simply not vote for the government 
in the next election. In other words, the government has to resort to a more 
elegant form of deception about the costs of rents, which is also an externaliza­
tion, and in this operation future generations are the victims of exploitation. 
This is of course just another way of saying that the smoothest way of financing 
rents is not through taxation but through running deficits and accumulating 
debt, possibly in combination with a mild degree of inflation, which tends to 
reduce both the real value of the debt owed and the real (financial) value of 
rents for groups. The lack of representation of future generations in present 
democratic decision-making processes is a perennial problem for democracies 
because the basic principle of autonomy, which requires that those affected by 
decisions and rules must have a say in the respective will-formation processes, 
is inevitably violated through debt or any other decision that has an effect on 
posterity, such as the decision to use nuclear power. 
But Buchanan would probably argue that in the case of public debt, it 
is not a matter of an occasional exception to the principle of autonomy but 
a systematic and continuous practice of shifting financial burdens toward 
future generations. This directs the critical attention to a final profound 
deficiency of democracy, the short time horizon of democratic decision 
making. If it is indeed rational for politicians to think about the next elec­
tion and radically discount any other effect decisions may have far beyond 
that temporal horizon, democracy is necessarily plagued by chronic short, 
termism, unable to develop and pursue long-term policies. We do not have 
to draw on public finance to see that this concern is pertinent, but we can 
point to climate change and the loss of biodiversity as problems that present 
almost insurmountable problems in the framework of democratic decision 
making as Buchanan describes it—and for the time being, the empirical facts 
unfortunately seem to be on his side in this regard. Whether we view this 
as a willful exploitation of nature and future generations who are deprived 
of living conditions similar to ours or to an almost tragic shortsightedness 
that is the aggregate result of seemingly rational individual behavior (there 
is at least a measure of rationality in discounting future effects because 
tomorrow an asteroid could hit the earth), the rent-seeking democracy is 
prone to producing normatively and functionally questionable outcomes, 
as long as it is not effectively curtailed in its seemingly unlimited Leviathan 

	
Democracy
93
power, which is the link between the two poles of the discussion. Pluralism 
and rent seeking are phenomena that also occur in “limited democracies,” 
as Hayek calls them; conversely, while a government may have in principle 
unlimited power, it may not necessarily make use of it to the full effect—at 
least this is what Hayek hopes. However, the combination of rent seek­
ing and unlimited governmental power in a democracy leads to a spiral of 
ever more demands and ever more output. Although this would seem to 
characterize a responsive democracy, the neoliberals are convinced that it 
will have the various devastating consequences just sketched, not just for 
markets and their viability—although this remains the focus of the critique 
along the lines of the neoliberal problematic—but for the future of society 
and the world more generally.
Who are the culprits in the various accounts? Eucken and to a lesser 
degree Röpke would probably argue that, to a more or less significant extent, 
it is the masses that turn (pluralist) democracy into such a dangerous and 
rather dysfunctional governing arrangement; thus, they place themselves 
in a long tradition of rather conservative worries about some kind of “mob 
rule” or, to put it in more refined terms, ochlocracy. However, this is not 
the main thrust of the critique concerning the political actors that populate 
democracies, because Eucken and Röpke’s more or less pronounced elit­
ism suggests to them that, more often than not, the masses are the mostly 
passive object, not the subject, of political projects, thus echoing the claims 
of elite theorists such as their contemporaries Vilfredo Pareto or Gaetano 
Mosca, who attributed no independent political agency to the masses. The 
problem lies, rather, with interest groups of all kinds who seek to influence 
the political process on their behalf. By the same token it is political par­
ties who are portrayed as either the parliamentary arm of lobby groups or 
a cartel of gatekeepers who have monopolized the process of political will 
formation and are thus in a unique position to benefit from the rent-seeking 
game down to the individual politician. It is—and this is an assessment that 
is shared by all neoliberals discussed here—relatively small groups who 
benefit at the expense of a large majority or the “common good,” in the 
vocabulary of the ordoliberals. 
In my view, this is a point worth noting, not only because this general 
diagnosis can easily be articulated with an antiestablishment populist project, 

94	
Democracy
but it also resembles in certain aspects a much more left-leaning critique 
of actually existing liberal democracy. To be sure, when those neoliberals 
who subscribe to these arguments make the point that minorities benefit 
at the expense of majorities, this can of course refer to groups who receive 
transfers through some kind of social policy financed by a majority, and it 
can also refer to policies of “affirmative action” that seek to improve access 
and inclusion for minorities. However, it seems to me that a generic leftist 
criticism of political parties acting as the parliamentary arm of Wall Street, 
trading haphazard regulation of financial markets for campaign donations 
and thus affording relatively small but powerful organizations, or one might 
even say a small financial elite, massive influence in the political process, is 
also easily accommodated by the neoliberal critique of rent seeking. More 
generally, it would probably be difficult to find anyone who is not more or 
less concerned about the political influence of lobby organizations, whether 
located on K Street in Washington or in close proximity to the EU institu­
tions in Brussels. This does not imply that I find this line of critique entirely 
convincing and normatively acceptable, but at the same time, I find it hard to 
dismiss the concerns underlying it as completely unwarranted and mistaken. 
In other words, the sheer fact that the criticism comes from neoliberals does 
not automatically make it wrong. Still, what may give even those who are not 
dogmatically opposed to neoliberal thought more pause are the suggestions 
put forward in response to the normative and functional deficiencies that 
neoliberals detect, to which we now turn.
Dealing with Democracy: Between 
Restriction and Complementation
The first of four somewhat synthesized options to deal with the problems 
of democracy, introducing restrictions on state output and respective trans­
formations of state structure, has already been discussed: most important 
are Hayek’s rule of law and Buchanan’s balanced-budget rule. With regard 
to Hayek, from a democratic perspective the problem is, first and fore­
most, that he pits popular sovereignty against the rule of law in a zero-sum 
constellation. To the extent that popular sovereignty asserts itself, the rule 
of law is diminished, and vice versa. This fundamental assumption leaves 

	
Democracy
95
Hayek unable to see the conceptual possibility that the relation between 
the two principles is not conflictual but is one of mutual presuppositions, 
as argued by Jürgen Habermas (1992), among others. In this interpretation, 
only a democratic opinion and will-formation process structured by the 
rule of law is a truly democratic one, and only those rules that a populace 
has given itself, or at least had a say in, can be just in the sense of the rule 
of law. Obviously, this conciliatory reconceptualization comes with its own 
problems, but, as stated very early on, the criticism of neoliberal theses must 
not be entirely confined to an immanent critique that accepts the neoliberal 
frame of reference. At times, it must also confront neoliberal positions with 
alternatives to throw into relief assumptions that have been taken for granted 
and reveal ensuing blindspots. 
But the problem with Hayek’s position is not just the conceptualization 
of the rule of law versus popular sovereignty but also the impression that 
he aims to marginalize one at the expense of the other. As we know, Hayek 
endorses the “basic ideal” of democracy, but it is doubtful what this ideal 
entails in light of his efforts to construct a Procrustean bed for democrati­
cally legitimated state action. Moreover, his characterization of demarchy 
as the normatively desirable form of democracy as “equal law for all” seems 
to add little to the requirement contained in his notion of the rule of law. In 
other words and contrary to what Habermas would argue, the modalities 
of the process out of which this isonomia emerges and to what extent the 
citizenry is involved hardly figures in this ideal.
James Buchanan’s idea is to rein in the accrual of deficits and debt in 
order to finance rents with a balanced-budget amendment (possibly in com­
bination with a federal reshaping of state structures). I have already prob­
lematized the potential rigidity of such a rule, but from a democratic point 
of view two other issues must be raised. First, remember that public debt 
can be interpreted as a shifting of financial obligations to future generations 
subject to the effects of a decision in which they had no say, so the problem 
is one of democratic representation. This seems plausible enough at first 
glance and can be easily moralized, as political and public discourse proves, 
with the recurring trope of “burdening our children and grandchildren with 
debt”—what person could support such a practice? It is not my intention 
to trivialize the issue of public debt but to add some important qualifiers 

96	
Democracy
to the argument that raise doubts about whether it is really a clear case of 
intergenerational misrepresentation. We must note the basic fact that wher­
ever there is debt, there is someone holding that debt. What this means is 
that our children and grandchildren do not just inherit public debt; we also 
bequeath the bonds that correspond to these debts to them. 
This makes the matter far more complicated because the argument about 
democratic misrepresentation rests on the following reasoning: Nonpresent 
persons need advocates who represent their needs and interests, but in the 
case of persons not yet born, these interests are difficult to ascertain. Yet we 
can safely assume that, ceteris paribus, they do not want to be born into debt 
bondage. Even if we accept this presumed interest, only a certain part of 
the future population will be opposed to accruing debt in the present; those 
who inherit the bonds cannot be attributed with an unequivocal interest in 
terminating a practice that they benefit from financially. The matter is thus 
turned from a generational conflict into a matter of class. Furthermore, the 
ceteris paribus condition does not hold in regard to the issue of debt and 
future generations. While members of future generations presumably would 
prefer not to be burdened with debt, the question is whether this attitude 
remains unchanged if the curtailment of public debt also implies, for ex­
ample, a drastic reduction in investment in public infrastructure. Obviously, 
Buchanan’s rebuttal would point out that there is no guarantee that money is 
spent to build infrastructure rather than to placate powerful interest groups 
or even to engage in veiled Keynesian politics of raising aggregate demand 
through public investment. The problem is that these distinctions are dif­
ficult to make because investment in public infrastructure may be all of these 
things at the same time; thus, it is difficult to write an exemption for public 
investment into the amendment that might not be turned into a loophole (see 
Buchanan 1997b, 132–133). This means, at the very least, that the presumed 
interests of future generations are less straightforward than they would seem, 
because an interest in no debt has to be articulated with an equally plausible 
interest in public infrastructure—which those future generations will have 
to rely on to some degree even if they can afford private services.
The second argument for the democratic merits of the amendment re­
lates to effective popular sovereignty. What use is democratic autonomy, 
Buchanan may ask, if the power to choose politics that the citizenry endorses 

	
Democracy
97
is undercut by a lack of financial resources to implement them? Or, even 
worse, what becomes of popular sovereignty when the threat of national de­
fault forces democracies to accept financial support through the IMF, World 
Bank, or the European Troika that comes with conditions that are largely 
nonnegotiable and override the likely discontent of citizens? Obviously, this 
point cannot simply be dismissed, if only because of the striking empirical 
examples of any number of countries that struggle with more or less serious 
sovereign debt crises. Nevertheless, while excessive debt is likely to cause 
such problems (not in each and every case, though, as the United States 
proves), deficits and debt in general are not, as proved by a brief look at the 
world around us in which they are the norm and do not inhibit democratic 
sovereignty. Again, this is not to trivialize public debt but to dedramatize it 
so it cannot be mobilized as a knock-down argument for an amendment that, 
in itself, is very likely to hamper democratic sovereignty. Such an amend­
ment would deprive the state of financial resources needed to pursue certain 
political projects and instead prescribe rigorous expenditure cuts, that is, a 
state of permanent austerity. Buchanan would probably respond that this 
means to jump to conclusions because his version of the amendment simply 
stipulates that all expenditures need to be financed through taxes; therefore, 
the alternative to expenditure cuts is to raise taxes. However, this is hardly 
a convincing stance for a public-choice theorist, whose crucial point is that 
raising taxes comes close to political suicide in a democracy, which is the 
main reason that financing state outlays through deficits and inflation, which 
are not as easily detectable and more diffuse in their “cost” than taxes, is 
so much more attractive. If interpreted on the basis of Buchanan’s own as­
sumption, the balanced-budget amendment means de facto austerity politics 
and thus radically circumscribes democratic autonomy. 
The last point builds on this conclusion regarding the likely effects of the 
amendment and concerns the question whether this is a matter to be codi­
fied on a constitutional level. What are the intentions behind the demand 
to enshrine a certain norm in the constitution? Most important, the con­
stitutionalization of a norm manifests an attempt at depoliticizing a certain 
issue by codifying a respective norm on the highest and most durable level of 
juridical rules. To be sure, constitutional rules are still subject to controversy 
and conflicting interpretations, as the balanced-budget amendment would 

98	
Democracy
be, but the instrument itself is permanent; it cannot be removed through a 
simple parliamentary majority or an executive order. Therefore, to a large 
degree, its very existence is taken off the table of democratic contestation; 
thus, one could argue that constitutionalization equals decontestation. This 
is, of course, exactly the rationale behind Buchanan and others’ demand 
that public finances need to be removed from democratic politics, at least 
to a certain degree, if they are not to be misused for rent-seeking purposes. 
However, the success of such a decontestation also rests on the issue/norm 
at stake being sufficiently uncontroversial and formulated at a relative high 
degree of abstraction. Is the amendment a norm that lends itself to successful 
and legitimate depoliticization? 
As we already know, Buchanan argues that the formal character of the 
amendment ensures that no substantive economic policy is written into the 
constitution, but in light of what has been just argued concerning its likely 
austerity effects, this seems rather questionable. Furthermore, what kinds of 
political issues can be legitimately removed from democratic contestations 
because of the poor policy output this may produce? The strongest case for 
the depoliticization of certain issues through various forms of delegation (to 
institutions, agencies, or constitutions) has been made by Giandomenico 
Majone (1994), who bases his argument on a distinction between regula­
tory and redistributive politics. While the latter obviously produces win­
ners and losers, the former supposedly provides Pareto-efficient solutions, 
for example, through the introduction of common product standards or a 
common currency policy that benefits everyone involved or at least puts 
no one at a disadvantage. These issues can and should be removed from 
majoritarian institutions, then, because they are in this sense sufficiently 
uncontroversial. The problem with the balanced-budget amendment is that 
it is impossible to portray it as a form of regulatory politics because it has 
many redistributive effects; therefore, even someone as sympathetic to a 
beneficial depoliticization as Majone would undoubtedly argue that this 
is a policy in need of continued democratic legitimation that must not be 
removed from the field of contestation. We revisit this issue in the context 
of the current European austerity regime but now turn to the remaining 
neoliberal options for remedying the ills of democracy.
The cliché understanding of neoliberalism suggests that its monotonous 

	
Democracy
99
response to the problems of democracy is to strive for a replacement of its 
institutions and processes through market coordination. This is far from the 
only response on offer from neoliberal thinkers, but like many clichés this 
one also contains a kernel of truth, as the argument about the superiority 
of markets does occasionally surface, but it is much more nuanced than one 
might expect. We are already familiar with what is perhaps the strongest en­
dorsement of markets in regard to democracy: Friedman’s point that markets 
offer unanimity without conformity, while the opposite is supposed to be 
true for democracy. Let us examine the respective arguments more closely. 
One way of making the case for the market is to describe it as superior 
with regard to the efficiency of preference transmission. In political mar­
kets “you almost always vote for a package rather than for specific items” 
(Friedman and Friedman 1990, 65). Furthermore, if you vote for one party 
or person, you cannot vote for another one as well, whereas in a market you 
could split the money you spend between various goods. Most important, 
you might cast a vote for the losing party or candidate and in an even more 
fundamental way may not get what you want because you are part of the 
minority, while in the market “a dollar vote is never overruled” (Buchanan 
1954, 339). Aside from this set of issues, democracy may also produce deci­
sions of inferior (individual) rationality because of the nature of its choice 
process. This argument can be traced back to Schumpeter’s realist theory 
of democracy and points to the relative weight of the individual vote and 
the ensuing incentives to make an informed choice. After all, the value of 
anyone’s vote in a mass democracy is infinitesimally small because it is ex­
ceedingly unlikely that it will be the decisive one. Given that it has such little 
value, why would anyone incur the costs of informing themselves when this 
does not increase the value of the vote, and why would citizens ultimately 
vote at all? However, markets require decisions and place the entire respon­
sibility for them on the individual; therefore, an informed choice “pays off” 
(see ibid., 337). Finally, Buchanan also points out the deficits of democratic 
markets concerning the accountability of producers and the ability of citizens 
to control them effectively, because “political competition is intermittent” 
while the market is a continuous tribunal (1991, 97). 
It would seem, then, that the support for markets as the more perfect 
democracy might follow directly from this juxtaposition of two coordinating 

100	
Democracy
mechanisms. Nevertheless, while Friedman favors market coordination over 
minority-producing democracies, even he assumes that there are matters 
in which conformity is essential, and “it is desirable to use the ballot box, 
so far as possible, only for those decisions” (Friedman and Friedman 1990, 
66). In the case of Buchanan, who offers the most systematic comparison of 
both choice settings, all of the points just mentioned figure in the column 
of the market as well, but he also introduces some caveats about market 
choices, which are not likely to produce “greater social rationality” (1954, 
341). Neither does he support a wholesale shift of matters to the market 
but offers only considerations about various reasons to explain why some 
matters should be decided in some but not other settings. He notes that 
in a democracy, “voting choice provides individuals with a greater sense 
of participation in social decision-making, and, in this way it may bring 
forth the ‘best’ in man and tends to make individuals take somewhat more 
account of the public interest” (ibid.). This is a rather surprising appraisal 
of the “republican” aspects in democratic decision making, but it would be 
too easy to attribute it solely to the immaturity of the young Buchanan of 
1954, not yet sobered in his views by the radical realism of public-choice 
theory, as the following sections will show. In any case, the neoliberal as­
sessment of the relative merits are more nuanced than one might expect and 
hardly do we find the straightforward call for markets to replace democratic 
decision making, although the way they are juxtaposed is often highly sug­
gestive to this effect. 
Let us examine this argument critically and scrutinize its tacit assump­
tions about what democracy means. The obvious point to make about the 
market as a seemingly more perfect democracy is that despite all the advan­
tages listed by neoliberals, it lacks a fundamental requirement of democracy: 
equality. While neoliberals tend to espouse only particular kinds of equality, 
the notion of (formal) democratic equality—one person, one vote—is hardly 
ever put in doubt.8 Therefore, it is all the more surprising that someone like 
Friedman, who clearly wants to push the argument for the market (with all 
the qualifications mentioned previously), never even mentions the problem 
that purchasing power as the economic equivalent of the vote is distributed 
in the most unequal way. To be sure, political equality has always been 
and still is (perhaps even more than before) a myth that has to disregard 

	
Democracy
101
lobbying or campaign donations rampant in contemporary democracies. But 
at the very least there is the commitment that every vote has equal value 
in an election, and there is nothing comparable in economic markets. In 
contrast to Friedman, other neoliberals note this fundamental difference, 
such as Röpke, who strongly supports the “‘plébiscite de tous les jours’ in 
which every shilling spent by the consumer represents a ballot-paper,” but 
immediately adds the “disadvantage . . . of distributing the ballot-papers 
very inequitably” (1942, 253). And there are even hints at the possibility of 
addressing this problem by a redistribution of ballot-papers or, as Buchanan 
puts it, a change among individuals in the “power structure” of markets 
(1954, 341). But neither Röpke nor Buchanan pursues this systematically, 
which is perhaps not surprising given that this would lead them in the direc­
tion of a program of massive economic redistribution. 
So while the market option as a remedy to the deficits of democracy must 
already be considered flawed (even by the neoliberals’ own standards), two 
more points must be added to this discussion. First, it is important to note 
that the comparison of democracy and markets is skewed toward the latter 
because it extrapolates from a particular form of democracy to democracy 
in general. Consider the issue of the indivisibility of the vote, which forces 
citizens to spend their entire political capital exclusively on one option. 
There are plenty of municipal election systems today that offer a choice 
of splitting votes and expressing intensities (e.g., you can give a particular 
candidate three of seven votes you have and distribute the remaining four 
among other candidates representing other parties). Furthermore, votes 
for the loser of an election are entirely lost in winner-take-all/majority 
systems, while proportional representation systems capture at least some 
of the range of varying preferences among the electorate.9 And while co­
alition governments may seem highly problematic because they possibly 
distort the preference transmission process, by the same token they could 
have the beneficial effect of offering the possibility of getting two or more 
goods—political parties—at once. In other words, the characterization of 
democratic markets may fit with the empirical characteristics of American 
presidentialism and British parliamentarism, but it is hardly representative 
of all democratic markets, which may display, for example, traits of conso­
ciationalism (institutionalized forms of power sharing). 

102	
Democracy
The final point regards two additional assumptions about the meaning 
of democracy that are hidden in the favorable juxtaposition of markets and 
democratic procedures. The first is that democracy is improved when prefer­
ences are transmitted more accurately and individual citizens have a better 
chance of getting what they want. The worst that can happen in a democracy 
is that citizens are outvoted and thus do not get what they want. Only if this 
is rendered the most important issue in democracy can the market appear so 
much more desirable, because there we always get exactly what we want—if 
preferences are backed by purchasing power. Being in a minority should 
not be trivialized because, within certain limits, a government elected by 
a majority can use coercion to make the minority comply with a law. But I 
contend that underlying the neoliberal fear of being outvoted is a view of 
(democratic) “politics as zoo-keeping,” as Benjamin Barber once called it, 
which is dominated by the concern to keep everyone safe from one another 
“rather than to bring them fruitfully together” ([1984] 2003, 3, 5). Democ­
racy thus is always seen as a source of potential dangers, rarely as a context 
of cooperation, fostering mutual understanding and learning about ourselves 
and others by having our minds changed in the course of the democratic 
process. It may thus turn out that realizing our initial preferences is not 
the only issue of importance in a democracy; democracy could also turn 
out to be just as important as a context of discovery and reinterpretation of 
these preferences in exchange with others.10 This is a more encompassing 
understanding of democracy that is more republican or deliberative, and 
while there is no doubt that such an understanding is not without problems, 
I bring it up here to expose the limitations of neoliberal views of democracy 
rooted in their fundamental assumptions about it. 
Another limitation can also be identified by comparing this variety of 
neoliberal thought on democracy with republican/deliberative views. Note 
that the democratic citizen in these neoliberal arguments is typically con­
strued as a consumer of politics. The consumer is not necessarily passive 
because there is demand for certain political goods. However, these goods 
are exclusively produced by political parties or other political actors and 
offered to consumer-citizens. The democratic virtues of the latter exhaust 
themselves in making more or less informed choices in picking one or an­
other policy bundle that they can influence only indirectly through this 

	
Democracy
103
choice. For a deliberate and republican democrat this is a deeply impov­
erished understanding of democracy, especially the democratic autonomy 
of citizens, which requires that they obey only the laws they have given 
themselves. To be sure, this pathos of self-government must be adjusted to 
the conditions of modern representative mass democracy, but for democracy 
to claim legitimacy, it must provide citizens with a sense of coauthorship of 
laws, through deliberation processes in the public sphere or other forms of 
participation. This notion of coauthorship is completely lost once democ­
racy is nothing more than a specifically ordered political market, in which 
citizens choose and consume political goods, as suggested by the respective 
arguments of neoliberals.
The third variety of solutions suggested to address the problems of 
democracy might be summed up as the (semi)authoritarian option. This is 
a solution that obviously targets the dysfunctionalities arising from an exces­
sive pluralism that allegedly characterizes contemporary democracy, and it 
is mostly but not exclusively associated with the ordoliberals, whose ideas 
concerning a strong state are already familiar to us. The recurrent themes 
here are the independence and unity of the state’s will-formation process, and 
while this may not necessarily have blatantly antidemocratic implications, it 
seems rather clear that a depluralization of democracy is envisaged. Beyond 
this general point Röpke and Eucken offer few specifics about what a less 
pluralist democracy in the sense of a better insulation of the state in regard 
to societal interest groups could look like. However, Hayek, who is not a 
stranger to (semi)authoritarianism, sketches out one possibility. 
The later Hayek became more and more disillusioned with actually 
existing “bargaining” democracies, which he blamed for “the miscarriage 
of the democratic ideal” (2003, 3:98–99); and in the third volume of Law, 
Legislation and Liberty he puts forward a “model constitution” to address the 
shortcoming. The core of Hayek’s proposal is a rigid institutional separation 
of powers, in keeping with his long-held ideas with regard to the rule of law. 
Hayek sees a significant part of the problem in the confusion of tasks on 
display in existing assemblies that both legislate and govern. In his model 
constitution there is a strict separation between a governing assembly, the 
members of which are elected on the basis of parties and existing election 
systems, and a legislative assembly. It is this second chamber charged with 

104	
Democracy
legislation proper that carries the transformative weight of the proposal. It 
is supposed to be an assembly composed of relatively mature citizens elected 
for a relatively long time (fifteen years) without the possibility of reelec­
tion but with a guarantee of being employed by the state in some apoliti­
cal position afterward. Hayek furthermore stipulates very specific electoral 
rules for this assembly charged with determining nomos, the abstract rules 
of just conduct that also bind the governmental assembly, suggesting that 
elections take place on the basis of age cohorts. This means that all citizens 
aged forty-five elect fifteen of their own cohort for the assembly to replace 
the fifteen sixty-year-olds whose term is over. The following year the same 
procedure takes place for those who turn forty-five. 
Let us first understand the rationale of Hayek’s proposal before the re­
spective concerns are discussed. If the problem of parliamentary democracy 
is the combination of interest groups seeking legislative favors and politi­
cians relying heavily on granting them to further their chances at reelection, 
then this vicious collusion of interests has to be somehow broken up. We 
already know a lot about how Hayek interprets the situation in unlimited 
democracies, and his main solution to the ills of this situation so far was 
the generality of proper law that would make it impossible to treat groups 
or individuals favorably. However, Hayek was aware of the problems in ap­
plying this criterion, so he introduces an additional safeguard that operates 
on the basis of a changed incentive structure: Since reelection is impossible 
and future employment secured, there is little incentive to formulate laws 
partial to a particular lobbying group. They may still aim to influence the 
legislators but will, in all likelihood, find it more difficult to sway them in 
a certain direction; at least this seems to be Hayek’s expectation. Elections 
based on cohorts do not only ensure that there are no legislators under the 
age of forty-five; they also have a depluralizing function in Hayek’s proposal. 
Remember that the main culprits in pluralism are vested interests, politi­
cians, and political parties that end up operating as the parliamentary arm 
of these interests according to ordoliberals. Hayek imagines that each age 
cohort will have clubs divided into local chapters where the “class of 1984” 
can regularly meet until they vote for one of their own. In these clubs social 
conflict lines ought to be downplayed and the formation of political parties 
is discouraged: “If they [club meetings] should occasionally also become 

	
Democracy
105
platforms for party debates, their advantage would be that those leaning 
towards different parties would be induced to discuss the issues together, 
and would become conscious that they had the common task of representing 
the outlook of their generation and to qualify for possible later public service” 
(Hayek 2003, 3:118; my emphasis). In a best-case scenario, the members of 
the legislature would think of themselves not as representing or expressing 
social cleavages as if they were party politicians but solely as representatives 
of their cohort, which would result in a thorough depoliticization of the 
chamber in the sense of pluralist democratic politics, or, as Hayek himself 
formulated it, “the dethronement of politics” (ibid., 128). 
How is this model to be assessed? First, what are the chances of this 
attempted dethronement of politics, or what I call depluralization of democ­
racy, being successful? Several considerations mostly concern the relation 
between the two chambers and the likely effects of the strict separation of 
powers. While some commentators are concerned with the nomoi placing 
the governmental assembly in a Procrustean bed, radically diminishing the 
state’s steering capacity, others see the opposite effect to be more likely: a 
nomos that is too abstract and too formal to rein in governmental discretion 
and leaves ample room for the governmental assembly to implement and 
interpret these norms (see Plant 2009). Furthermore, it is not even clear 
whether the assignment of a certain issue to one or the other chamber can 
be decided on unequivocally, even by a Supreme Court, as Hayek sug­
gests (Gamble 1996, 149). Most of these issues are ultimately related to 
an inconsistency at the center of Hayek’s argument. He tries to shield the 
legislature against any particularistic influences so its members can frame 
laws that are truly general, which Richard Bellamy, following John Gray’s 
influential reading, interprets to warrant a Kantian test of universalizability: 
but for the “Kantian test of universalizability to produce widely acceptable 
determinate outcomes it will be necessary to assume a common good among 
the members of the community” (Bellamy 1994, 432; see also Gray 1984, 
65). At first, this conclusion is surprising because notions of the common 
good are anathema to most neoliberals and to Hayek in particular, who 
made the diversity of preferences among people a cornerstone of his cri­
tique of socialism. Yet it is rather unsurprising in light of Hayek’s efforts to 
shield the legislative chamber from “distorting” influences that range from 

106	
Democracy
his “Rousseauean banning of factions” (Bellamy 1994, 432–433) from the 
legislature to the outright disenfranchisement of anyone receiving transfer 
payments from the state—which could mean a large proportion of the citi­
zenry and would have included Hayek himself while he was a professor at a 
publicly funded university (see Hayek 2003, 3:120). This disenfranchisement 
together with the reduction of active voting rights to a single ballot at the 
age of forty-five usually draws the fiercest criticism from commentators, 
but it is still consistent with Hayek’s idea of a demarchy as law that applies 
equally to all (within the same legal category), and we must not forget that 
restrictions on active and passive voting rights are not principally anti­
democratic. Although some aspects of Hayek’s ideas could at least be said 
to follow the same, albeit radicalized logic as existing restrictions, such as 
the requirement of maturity for voters, others pursue a goal inconsistent 
with his own normative political epistemology: the fostering of a certain 
degree of homogeneity inside the legislature. Hayek may not have been an 
authoritarian out of principle, and despite the reference to homogeneity, 
the parallels to Schmitt should not be overstated, but at the very least, the 
model of democracy he proposes is a deeply antipluralist one, and with its 
assumptions and implications, it threatens to undermine some of his own 
most fundamental commitments.
The final variety of amendments aiming at an amelioration of democ­
racy’s deficiencies may easily be the most surprising one, especially in light 
of what we know so far about the overall critical stance neoliberals take on 
democracy, as much as they may differ in their reasons and resoluteness. 
The specific proposal is to introduce more direct democratic elements, 
especially referendums, as a complementation of representative democracy. 
More broadly speaking, one could say that if we have just encountered the 
(semi)authoritarian option, then this could be called the populist option to 
remedy the pathologies of representative democracy. Even Hayek endorses 
the use of referendums, if only in passing. He views the use of referendums 
as a “complement” to judicial review by the courts in his ideal system of 
government as laid out in The Constitution of Liberty, where he characterizes 
it as “an appeal to the people at large, to decide on the question of general 
principle” (2009, 168). Referendums receive the most favorable discussion 
by Buchanan, who points out various merits in a paper written while on a 

	
Democracy
107
research stay in Switzerland. Specifically, “direct democracy acts to reduce 
the special-interest legislation that becomes increasingly descriptive of mod­
ern indirect democracies,” and in it “there could arise no fear of a quasi-
permanent legislative or political class, composed of incumbents skilled 
in manipulating the interests of those groups seeking special favors from 
government, who provide the source of massive rents to the members of the 
class” (Buchanan 2001, 238).11 Remember that neoliberals think that first 
and foremost “particularistic” organizations like political parties or lobby 
groups are to blame for the problems of democracy. Thus, the strategy of 
circumventing these organizations and establishing a direct link between 
electorate and government is not wholly implausible (and this thrust of the 
argument links it with the antipluralist strategies discussed earlier), except 
to those like Eucken and Röpke, who exhibit the most pronounced fear of 
the masses.12 Even Rüstow gestures at the option of bypassing organized 
interests, suggesting that “a good democratic government distinguishes itself 
. . . by appealing directly to the people over the heads of parties and groups 
if necessary” (1963, 99; see also 69).
Still, the most populist credentials among the neoliberals, which cor­
respond with his pronounced antielitism, belong to Buchanan (see Brennan 
and Munger 2014, 337). However, the direction of this populist thrust is 
somewhat underdetermined. Buchanan is to have remarked after returning 
from a trip to Great Britain that if he had been born there, he would have 
become a socialist, given the fortified class structure of that society. While 
many leftists may commend him for this statement, the vitriol aimed at the 
“normal ‘parliamentary’ process” and the “system” that is effectively “out 
of control of the electorate” (Brennan and Buchanan 1980, 25), single-
mindedly focusing on its exploitation, is compatible not only with certain 
leftist critiques of liberal-turned-plutocratic democracy but also with the 
right-wing populism of the Tea Party and others who suspect the Washing­
ton elite of conspiring against the citizenry it represents in name only. The 
suggestion that there is a cartel of parties that together with varying lobbying 
groups has monopolized the political will-formation process lends itself as 
analytical and polemical ammunition for a wide range of political positions 
and causes that may share nothing but a more or less diffuse distrust in 
political elites and the political process. Similarly, referendums can be the 

108	
Democracy
more or less appropriate vehicle for any kind of political agenda, and as we 
will see in chapter 5, Buchanan is interested in it not only as a prophylactic 
instrument ensuring that “legislators, executives, bureaucrats, and judges 
will keep arbitrary actions within tighter boundaries when they are subjected 
to potential reversals through popular referenda” (2001, 240), but also as the 
potential vehicle of introducing the balanced-budget amendment. 
We can conclude that there is a neoliberal stance on democracy that 
is overall skeptical of existing democratic arrangements for various and often 
overlapping reasons—many of which could be agreed on by representa­
tives of other political positions as well. In many cases it is not so much the 
findings themselves with regard to democratic pathologies but rather their 
interpretation and respective remedies that seem at least debatable—even 
in the case of the direct democratic populist option. Furthermore, as we 
will see in chapter 5, the views on democracy introduce major tensions or 
lacunae in many varieties of neoliberal thought beyond the inconsistencies 
already discussed.


109
The assessment of the proper role, powers, and limits of science—particularly a 
science of economics or political economy—is of crucial substantive and 
strategic importance in addressing the neoliberal problematic. The ques­
tion is, on the one hand, to what extent economics, properly understood, 
can make a positive contribution to dealing with this problematic and thus 
function as an intellectual resource in support of a neoliberal project. On 
the other hand, neoliberals are concerned about the dangers that an ill-
conceived science of economics and, more generally speaking, a certain 
kind of rationalism may pose to a neoliberal project. Strategically speaking, 
the question is whether the benefits of enlisting the authority of science as 
justification and legitimation for neoliberal politics, and thus increase the 
chances of success of a neoliberal project, outweigh the risks of affirming 
the power and authority of science, when the main intellectual and political 
antagonist is a collectivism that describes itself as scientific socialism. 
This core ambiguity within neoliberal thought forms the basic structure 
of the following discussion. First we look at the neoliberal view that tends 
to affirm the possibility of a true science of economics, its powers, and its 
positive contribution to addressing the neoliberal problematic. Friedman’s, 
Rüstow’s, and particularly Eucken’s views can be grouped into this current 
within neoliberalism. While the other view does not outright deny the 
Science
C HAPTE R 4

110	
Science
possibility of a science of economics, it does have a very particular idea of 
what it is, a science of spontaneous orders and/or the choices that constitute 
it. Furthermore, this view tends to highlight the limitations of such a sci­
ence and warns of the damage that “scientism” and an undue emphasis on 
rationality may do to a liberal market society, broadly speaking. Here the 
protagonists are Buchanan, Röpke, and especially Hayek. We conclude by 
looking at the various positions with regard to the political significance of 
science: the role it should play and whom it should address. Here we can 
distinguish between those who either theoretically and/or performatively 
espouse the notion of scientists as political consultants and advisers, who 
offer their expertise directly to political decision makers, and those who opt 
for the electorate or the general public to be the proper audience of scien­
tists–turned–public intellectuals. The range of positions extends between 
two almost diametrically opposed poles that are inhabited by Eucken, on 
the one hand, and Buchanan, on the other.
The Powers of Science versus the Fear of Scientism
We start by examining those neoliberals who highlight the powers of eco­
nomics as science, albeit for profoundly different reasons. While Friedman 
lauds the predictive powers of economics along instrumentalist lines, Rüstow 
and Eucken make it a point to stress the truth value of economic insights 
based on the right methodology. So while all three are science enthusiasts, 
on a different level, they subscribe to opposing positions. Friedman’s sig­
nificance to the debate over economics as science seems almost inversely 
related to the volume of his contributions to it: Friedman wrote a single 
essay on the issue of method in economics in 1953, and over the decades at 
least thirty journal articles and countless book chapters have been devoted 
to it. His “Methodology of Positive Economics” begins with the distinction 
between a positive science of economics and a normative or regulative one. 
While one is concerned with the “is,” the other’s domain is the “ought.” As 
the title indicates, the essay is devoted to the former, and this is anything but 
an arbitrary choice. Normative economics in one way or another is based on 
positive economics. And in Friedman’s view most controversies in economic 
or social policy are not rooted in differences over normative economics that 

	
Science
111
express people’s differing ethical orientations but rather in disagreements 
over the effects of certain policies under consideration to achieve a goal, 
the normative value of which is not controversial. 
A skeptic may wonder about the reliability of the knowledge generated in 
just about any social science given its unwieldy object domain—humans—and 
the difficulties that arise from a dearth of controlled experiments with those 
objects. But Friedman is unimpressed with these concerns and downplays 
the distinction between natural and social sciences to a matter of varying de­
grees of precision and accuracy. Specifically, he warns of drawing the wrong 
conclusion from the relative difficulty of testing substantive hypotheses in 
the social sciences that they should become more formal: “Economic theory 
must be more than a structure of tautologies if it is to be able to predict and 
not merely describe the consequences of action; if it is to be something dif­
ferent from disguised mathematics” (Friedman 1953, 11–12). This reminder 
already contains a succinct mission statement for a science of economics ac­
cording to Friedman: Its central task is to generate hypotheses or theories 
that yield nontrivial predictions about yet-unobserved phenomena. This is 
important for two reasons. First, it is important for a science that wants to be 
politically influential, and second, it is the basis of a falsificationist method in 
which empirically false predictions imply problems in the theory that need 
to be rectified. This description of Friedman’s view is largely uncontroversial, 
but the common ground between interpreters extends no further than this. 
I focus on two disputed and interrelated points in particular: the predictive 
emphasis in Friedman’s view of science and the role that assumptions play in 
determining the quality of a theory or hypothesis. The issues at stake are the 
alleged instrumentalism and the antirealism of his metatheory of science. To 
begin with, Friedman seemingly reduces science to the sole task of making 
accurate predictions (ibid., 7). This is obviously difficult enough, but the 
problem may be not only that this mistakes what a science of economics is 
capable of achieving, as other neoliberals argue, but that it reduces science to 
an organized endeavor of pragmatic problem solving and implicitly denies 
that it may have anything to do with a search for truth. 
Needless to say, the search for truth is a concept that must be handled 
carefully in what Habermas called a “postmetaphysical age,” so let me clarify 
the limitation of Friedman’s view. In focusing on prediction, Friedman seems 

112	
Science
to opt for a philosophy of science that makes the case for science to identify 
regularities (if x, then y), which enable predictions and, by the same token, 
successful interventions into reality. Such a philosophy of science can be 
labeled “conventionalist” and “instrumentalist,” and it could be traced back 
to Hume and Nietzsche. The problem with such a view is that all it requires 
of science is that it tells us that something will happen, not why it will hap­
pen. To use a famous example, according to Friedman’s view, the goal of 
science is accomplished as soon as we can reliably predict that two or three 
days after the appearance of red spots all over someone’s body the person 
will have the measles. Obviously, though, the red spots do not explain the 
measles, although their presence enables us to make a prediction. If a view 
of science is adopted that expects it to yield not only predictions but also 
explanations, which is arguably the more enlightening aspect of science, 
instrumentalism is found wanting (see Caldwell 1990, 146; Sayer 2008, 94).1 
The other controversial aspect in Friedman’s approach can be inter­
preted as a further expression of his instrumentalism or a problem in itself, 
which also raises questions about what kind of falsificationism he ultimately 
subscribes to: his antirealism. Friedman goes to great lengths in defend­
ing “unrealistic” theories that are still successful in predicting certain phe­
nomena, which is absolutely plausible up to a certain point. Theories and 
hypotheses have to abstract from the “white noise” of reality and attribute 
explanatory/causal power to certain factors at the neglect of others, and 
they may construct ideal types, the very point of which is that they do not 
correspond with reality. A theory that does not engage in such abstraction 
is as descriptively accurate as a map with a scale of 1:1—and just as useless. 
But Friedman is not content with this and pushes the issue further. Not 
only is it unproblematic to rely on unrealistic assumptions in a theory; the 
lack of realism is a veritable indicator of its “power”: “in general, the more 
significant the theory, the more unrealistic the assumptions (in this sense)” 
(Friedman 1953, 14). Such a radical antirealism is somewhat difficult to 
bring in line with very basic intuitions about science and what constitutes 
good theories, because what Friedman contends is that a predictively ac­
curate theory that relies on assumptions that are descriptively completely 
inaccurate is preferable to one that is accurate in both respects.2 In my view, 
Friedman wants to make the case for parsimony as the prime scientific value 

	
Science
113
aside from predictive power, but parsimonious assumptions are not neces­
sarily the same as antirealistic ones. Furthermore, a metatheory that focuses 
entirely on the maximization of parsimony could be criticized for an overly 
narrow focus on one scientific value when there might be others, such as 
descriptive and predictive accuracy, to be considered; and the recipe for an 
elegant theory would be to optimize these and potential other values rather 
than maximize one. Although Friedman does not consider this, it stands to 
reason that there is a trade-off between descriptive parsimony and/or inac­
curacy and predictive accuracy, which suggests that theory building is best 
understood as a balancing act. However, Friedman is not willing to yield 
to this idea, which is of great importance, not least because it indirectly 
concerns one of the most notorious concepts in neoliberal thought, homo 
economicus. Friedman does not mention it in the essay, but his example of the 
maximization of returns on investment as an assumption about the behavior 
of companies is close enough, and the arguments against it are ultimately 
the same. Friedman vigorously defends this “unrealistic” assumption, and 
by the same token he would defend the use of homo economicus against those 
who critically point out its empirical inaccuracy. 
One last point may indicate an internal inconsistency that haunts Friedman’s 
science of positive economics aside from the noted one-sidedness in vari­
ous respects. Friedman agrees with Popper that the best way to avoid the 
problem of induction is falsificationism: An empirically testable hypothesis is 
generated, and if it is not borne out by reality, the theory must be considered 
falsified and its parameters at least modified. The most fundamental question 
here is how the commitment to falsificationism, which still understands itself 
as an endeavor to approximate truth ever more closely, although it remains 
ultimately unattainable, accords with the marginalization of any truth value 
of theories in instrumentalism, which Popper, in fact, rejected. Leaving aside 
this question, which would require a long detour, what remains unclear in 
Friedman’s essay is to what extent the theory and its assumptions would 
have to be modified if it fails to account for certain phenomena. Consider 
an example from the world of monetary economics, the theory of rational 
expectations: The government spends money in public investment to stimu­
late the economy. However, homo economicus is aware that, ultimately, the 
money spent has to come from somewhere and the investment will have 

114	
Science
to be financed, however belatedly, through higher taxes. Anticipating this, 
she will cut back on spending because she already factors in the future loss 
of money, and thus the stimulus remains ineffective. But what if it turns 
out that there is no such effect to be observed? Needless to say, there are a 
number of factors that might be able to explain the noneffect, but at some 
point one would have to consider whether the assumptions underlying the 
theory might be wrong, such as the assumption about the extremely long 
time horizon of actors who already factor in potential events of the distant 
future. The question is would Friedman be willing to relax these assump­
tions in the sense of making them descriptively more accurate after all of his 
efforts to reject the call for such modifications? Or would those assumptions, 
in contrast to actual theories, not be subject to revision, turning Friedman’s 
into a rather limited falsificationism that remains dogmatic with regard to 
its fundamental assumptions?3
Walter Eucken and Alexander Rüstow have a strong belief in the pow­
ers of science, but their thinking about science is completely opposite to 
Friedman’s. While Eucken was employed in academia at the time and 
Rüstow was working in the research department of an industrial lobby or­
ganization, both were aligned in the attempt to rejuvenate the discipline of 
political economy in Germany that was in its Weimar days still torn between 
the two opposing poles of what Eucken called the “Great Antinomy” (1951a, 
34). The debate had been going on for decades and pitted the “Historical 
School” against a much more theoretically oriented current that relied on 
deductive abstraction rather than historical ex post facto accounts that were 
rich in detail but lacked formal rigor. Eucken and Rüstow were clearly lean­
ing toward the theorists in this debate, who had more ambitious hopes than 
the Historical School for what a methodologically rigorous science could 
achieve, so it is a widely shared mischaracterization to place ordoliberal 
political economy in the middle between the two rivaling paradigms. 
It is, however, true that Eucken was not entirely satisfied with the di­
rection of theoretical economics because he suspected its agenda to be too 
formalistic and its models too far removed from economic reality.4 Eucken 
was adamant that science required methodological rigor and abstraction, but 
the starting point for all scientific endeavors had to be concrete experience, 
as he put it, thus betraying a phenomenological influence through Husserl 

	
Science
115
and others but also Weber’s notion of the social sciences as “experiential 
sciences” (Erfahrungswissenschaften). However, Eucken gave experiential 
sciences a methodological twist that put them on opposite ends of a spec­
trum. His two important methodological works (which he did not want to 
be referred to as methodological because that suggested a distancing from 
concrete economic problems, which he had criticized in the theoretical 
paradigm) are Was leistet die nationalökonomische Theorie? and The Foundations 
of Economics (Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie).
The key to bridge the gap between abstraction and experiential reality 
that Eucken introduces in the Foundations are ideal types of economic orders. 
The starting point is indeed the concrete economic problem, from which 
Eucken, through what he calls the “method of ‘isolating’ abstraction” (1951a, 
107), distills two basic ideal types, the market economy and the centrally ad­
ministered economy, and approximately one hundred subtypes. With these, 
Eucken claims, all of economic reality can be captured; thus, there is an almost 
dialectical understanding of theory as an abstraction from concrete reality that 
can and must subsequently be brought to bear on the analysis of this reality 
and, possibly, be refashioned through this encounter with the concrete and 
the particular. So in what ways does this view of economic science differ from 
Friedman’s? To be sure, Eucken agrees with Friedman that science must be 
problem driven to some extent, lest it succumb to the ivory-tower-ism of the 
“general-theoretical approach.” However, Eucken could not disagree more 
with the strictly instrumentalist conclusions that Friedman seemingly draws. 
In fact, science is very much concerned with the quest for truth in the most 
emphatic sense: “By reaching truths on the basis of the method described that 
are necessary, general, and simultaneously relevant to reality [wirklichkeitsnah] 
by expressing these in theory, political economy has found the Archimedean 
point, from which objective and exact knowledge of certain relationships in 
individual, concrete reality can be generated.” This kind of theory aims at 
“objective, generally valid truth irrespective of any arbitrariness and subjec­
tivity” (Eucken 1954, 29).5 The emphatic claim to truth also has a political 
function, but for now let us simply note that the standards Eucken puts in 
place for scientific findings seem ambitious if not strictly out of reach in light 
of contemporary (positivist and post-positivist) understandings of science, 
given the almost metaphysical connotations of his concept of truth. Eucken 

116	
Science
and Rüstow thus represent the complete opposite of Friedman in their under­
standing of science as providing valid, and thus useful, knowledge as well as 
privileged access to the realm of truth, which is granted to only a few on the 
basis of the correct methodology. This fundamental difference also extends to 
the matter of assumptions and the respective (anti)realism. For Eucken, the 
ideal types and assumptions underlying them have to be revisited cyclically 
on the basis of the empirical studies they inform. In Eucken’s view this must 
lead to a steady refinement of the analytical instruments employed, a postulate 
that places him, once more, in diametrical opposition to Friedman: What is 
wrong about the notion of homo economicus is not “its hypothetical character, 
but that it is much too far removed from concrete reality and thus amounts to 
an arbitrary construct.” He concludes: “Theoretical research has no need for 
homo oeconomicus” (ibid., 22–23). While critics of the contentious notion 
of homo economicus may appreciate Eucken’s distancing from it as represent­
ing an approach to science that fails to address economic reality properly, his 
particular way of constructing ideal types, including the assumptions built 
into them, has also drawn criticism. 
Eucken criticized Weber not only for his subjectivism but also for misun­
derstanding the link between ideal types and real types. Ironically, Rüstow, an 
otherwise ardent supporter of Eucken’s view of science, theory, and method, 
was the first to point out that Eucken’s distinction between the two types was 
as least as confusing as Weber’s, which is not surprising, because Eucken’s 
postulate of a “realistic refinement” of his concepts is bound to lead to a con­
flation of the two types. But Rüstow also pointed out that Eucken’s types of 
economic order lacked the multidimensionality of Weber’s types and focused 
only on the dimension of how many planners there are in an economy, thus 
forming “partial concepts” (Partialbegriffe) rather than ideal types (see Rüstow 
1940; Goldschmidt 2001, 51). Furthermore, Eucken is far from rigorous in 
his construction of types based on this criterion (the relevance of which is 
never discussed but simply assumed). Although he acknowledges that there 
are subtypes of centrally administered economies with (partially) free choice 
in consumption, he still fails to draw the conclusion that in such an economy 
there is obviously more than one planner, which is the sole criterion for a 
centrally administered economy; so consequently this form would have to be 
subsumed under the exchange economy type (see Haselbach 1991, 103–105). 

	
Science
117
Some observers suspect that the notably cavalier way in which Eucken con­
structs and subsumes types may be related to the final conceptual difference 
with Friedman that is at least as important as the other ones. While there is 
a debate within ordoliberalism whether it is a necessary feature of Euckenian 
Ordnungspolitik and whether it has to be spelled out in this particular way, there 
can be no doubt that Eucken himself was not willing to accept Friedman’s 
distinction between normative economics and positive economics. In other 
words, science is not confined to describing and analyzing empirical orders. 
Its supreme task is to contribute to the search for the order that ought to be, 
what he characterizes as an order “that is in accordance with the nature of 
man and the matter at hand” (Eucken 1960, 372). And while science identi­
fies it, Ordnungspolitik is charged with implementing this “free, natural and 
God given” order (ibid., 175–176). The notion of a natural order comes with 
a lot of normative metaphysical and/or religious baggage, and Eucken’s fel­
low ordoliberals hold some corresponding views. I cannot pursue this issue 
much further, but this normative naturalism pervading ordoliberal thought 
is strongly at odds with Foucault’s interpretation of ordo-/neoliberalism, who 
argues that it is the artificiality of the competitive order and its rejection of 
a deist naturalism à la Smith that constitute the major dividing line between 
neoliberalism and its liberal precursors (2008, 120). True, the desired order 
does not come about all by itself, but that does not mean that it is of artificial 
design; this is actually a concern among those neoliberals, like Röpke, who 
are skeptical of an excessive rationalism in and beyond science. But even 
those who do not share this concern, first and foremost Eucken, describe the 
“natural order” as a hybrid between a discovered and an invented order that 
figures as the telos inherent in nature, which nevertheless has to be imple­
mented by humans.6 In short, Foucauldians had better taken a closer look 
at the sources he interpreted while probably relying strongly on secondary 
literature before they adopt his stance on what distinguishes the various liber­
alisms.7 However, what matters in the present context is that this ordoliberal 
naturalism is imported into science, albeit only by the enthusiasts of science, 
while Röpke, who is arguably the most committed to the notion of a natural 
order, characteristically ties it to religious ideas.8 For Rüstow this is not an 
option because despite his roots in religious socialism, his views become more 
and more critical of religion in the Judeo-Christian tradition because of the 

118	
Science
individualism it fosters.9 But even Eucken, whose religiosity is undisputed,10 is 
adamant that the natural order can no longer be grasped through some kind 
of “immediate experience” to be derived from natural law; it can be identified 
only through the efforts of the scientifically equipped and supported intellect 
(1960, 347). After all, in Eucken’s view only science is capable of inquiring 
into social relations on the level of individual orders and their interdepen­
dence—the totality of the social. In light of this it becomes clear that Eucken’s 
political economy faces truly Herculean tasks, as it has to transform itself into 
a virtually transdisciplinary science that not only overcomes the specializing 
tendencies within any single discipline, which is bemoaned by all ordoliberals 
as well as Hayek,11 but must also reach beyond disciplinary boundaries and 
integrate the other social sciences. 
In Rüstow’s works the link between the normatively charged natural and 
science takes on a slightly different form. He envisages a novel “science of 
man,” a “new anthropology that must and will work out what we were lacking 
so far, namely a scientific foundation of our idea, our view and the direction 
of our will” (Rüstow 1963, 166–167). The scientific inquiry into the nature of 
humankind is to yield the contours of the appropriate social order, which in 
this sense is also the natural order. While the postulate of abstention from value 
judgments in scientific inquiry must not be radicalized into the fetish of pure 
objectivity, it seems difficult to dispute that Eucken’s and Rüstow’s burdening 
of science with far-reaching normative aspirations has highly problematic im­
plications, not the least of which are political ones. For now we turn from the 
enthusiasts of science, who want to enlist it in various ways for the neoliberal 
project, to those neoliberals who tirelessly warn of the dangers of scientism 
or even, more generally, of a misplaced faith in the powers of human intellect.
The positive convergence point between Hayek, Röpke, and Buchanan, 
who figure in this rubric, is, first of all, an understanding of economics/
political economy as a very particular science, the object of which is spon­
taneous orders generated on the basis of individual choices: “Economics 
is, or can be, scientific in a sense that is, I think, unique. The principle of 
spontaneous order is a scientific principle, in that it can be readily divorced 
from normative content” (Buchanan 1979a, 84). Spontaneous orders de­
velop through choices between alternatives and—importantly—exchanges 
with others. Therefore, in Buchanan’s and Röpke’s version of the argument, 

	
Science
119
political economy can be a “science” of choices/exchanges (see ibid., 
39; Röpke 1963, 14) but not a quantitative one of maximization. This 
leads Röpke and especially Buchanan to a veritable vendetta against main­
stream conventional economics that Röpke takes to task for its “quantitative 
mode of thought,” incapable of taking into account qualities, structures, 
and forms (Röpke 1950b, 50), and is derided by Buchanan for its useless 
modeling mania: “I challenge any of you to take any issue of any economics 
journal and convince yourself, and me, that a randomly chosen paper will 
have a social productivity greater than zero (1979a, 90).12 
Röpke and Buchanan tend toward a deflated account of science despite an 
occasional gesturing at the possibility of a “pure theory of politics or a genu­
inely scientific politics” (Buchanan 1979a, 159). The reason for this lies in an 
understanding of political economy as a social science that studies complex 
interaction patterns, not social utility functions, and Buchanan’s searching 
discussion of the limitations of the homo economicus model (ibid., 207). To be 
sure, Buchanan relies heavily on the model, but that has not kept him from 
subjecting it to a scrutiny that is unrivaled among the neoliberals and that, as 
we will see later, leaves him in a highly precarious position. 
The heart of the matter concerns assumptions about an agent’s indi­
vidual utility function: If prices drop, will the agent buy more? If they rise, 
will the agent cut back on consumption in line with assumptions about the 
elasticity of demand? The question here is how substantive the behavioral 
assumptions are that inform economic theories. If nothing is assumed about 
preferences and their ordering, the model can make sense of all choices, but 
by the same token it can generate no hypotheses and predictions (see Green 
and Shapiro 1994). In Buchanan’s somewhat cryptic wording, this “logical 
theory is indeed general but empty; the scientific theory is non-general but 
operational” (1979a, 46). So what and how much do we assume about the 
utility function of the agent? This becomes a particular vexing question for 
Buchanan, because actors are not fully aware of their own utility function 
but have only an implicit knowledge of it (ibid., 87); even more important, 
utility functions change constantly and are thus unable to provide a stable 
foundation of a “science of choice.” 
But first let us take a closer look at how Buchanan defends the concept 
of “economic man.” Along the lines of Friedman’s argument, Buchanan 

120	
Science
highlights the usefulness of homo economicus as a “uniquely appropriate cari­
cature of human behavior, not because it is empirically valid but because it is 
analytically germane” (Brennan and Buchanan 1985, 53). Still, the question 
is how thick or thin the rationality assumptions are that inform the model. 
Here, Buchanan begins to maneuver himself into a corner that ultimately 
turns out to be one of the major weaknesses of the entire approach. 
Rational behavior is not limited to self-interested actions narrowly under­
stood. Utility may also be derived from helping other people, but we should 
not infer that the benevolence of actors could be commonly relied on (Brennan 
and Buchanan 1985). So it would seem that there is little predictive power 
to the concept, as any kind of behavior must be considered rational because 
otherwise the actor would not have engaged in it. The thin assumptions about 
what it means to make rational choices result in a general but empty theory, 
in Buchanan’s words quoted earlier. But not only is the utility function of eco­
nomic man underdetermined; in his most philosophical moments Buchanan 
goes even further: “We are, and will be, at least in part, that which we make 
ourselves to be. We construct our own beings,” and he refers to humans as 
“artifactual animals” in this sense (1979a, 94). The consequence of this view 
of the self-production of subjects within certain limits is a problematization 
of cost-benefit analysis as the grammar of a utility function, because economic 
man “cannot do otherwise than become different. And as he does so, he must 
embody a different utility function” (ibid., 97). Buchanan employs this argu­
ment in a critique of Gary Becker’s approach and contends that the potential 
return on “investments” in human capital cannot be ascertained properly 
by homo economicus because, in part, it is an investment in changing oneself, 
or “spending on becoming” (ibid., 96). As tempting as it is to follow these 
philosophical considerations further, we must stick to the methodological 
implications of economic man as artifactual man. On the one hand, there 
is a degree of sophistication in this way of conceptualizing the behavioral 
model that makes it difficult for critics to dismiss it as nothing but the theo­
retical justification of egotism. On the other hand, it seems that Buchanan 
would have to pay a price for ratcheting up the complexity of the model in 
the form of the reduced ability to generate determinate hypotheses about 
behavior in certain settings. But while his reference to political economy as 
the science of spontaneous orders that should not pretend to know how to 

	
Science
121
manipulate macroeconomic aggregates, as the Keynesians supposedly do (see 
Buchanan 2009), is consistent with his pleas for science to be wary of provid­
ing expertise for the political system, he ultimately is unwilling to accept the 
full consequences of artifactual man and pay the price mentioned. However, 
as discussed later, this proves to be a stance that is not only theoretically in­
consistent but also deleterious to Buchanan’s political project. 
This brings us to Hayek, who is the most pronounced skeptic among 
the neoliberals regarding the powers of science and derives this skepticism 
from a view of spontaneous orders that emphasizes the limits of individ­
ual reason. For Hayek, spontaneous orders emerge as the consequence of 
human action but not human design, to use a phrase he borrows from Adam 
Ferguson. No single actor or institution could ever do what the market as a 
spontaneous order does because of the aforementioned limits of reason, or 
what Hayek provocatively calls “our institutional ignorance” (2003, 1:13). 
While nobody can predict the outcome of markets because we lack the 
knowledge about far too many particulars involved in the process, the result 
is not chaos but “ordered anarchy,” or what Hayek with his characteristic 
penchant for introducing novel vocabulary calls “catallaxy.” Much has been 
written about Hayek’s epistemological assumptions about markets and spon­
taneous orders more generally, but in the present context what interests me 
most is the characterization of catallaxy as a complex phenomenon, which 
is the crucial reason for Hayek’s reservations about the knowledge claims 
of a science of economics. 
In Hayek’s view the processes taking place in a market or in contexts such 
as an ecosystem or the emergence of a language are too complex to yield the 
kind of knowledge science can generate by analyzing other object domains. 
This complexity allows for only a specific kind of knowledge about general 
patterns, and as often done, neoliberals invoke the metaphor of games for clari­
fication. In Hayek’s Nobel lecture, “The Pretence of Knowledge,” he argues 
that if we know the rules of a game, specific plays are virtually impossible to 
predict, but this does not mean that nothing can be said about the game at all. 
“But our capacity to predict will be confined to such general characteristics of 
the events to be expected and not include the capacity of predicting particular 
individual events” (Hayek 1978c, 33; see also Hayek 1967b). Consequently, 
the “science” of spontaneous orders that economics should consider itself 

122	
Science
is more modest than the natural sciences—not because of the inferiority of 
its analytical framework but because of the inherent difficulties of its object 
domain. Scientism is the result of a failure to recognize this profound differ­
ence between economics and, for example, mechanical physics, and it creates 
the gravest dangers for society. Without dwelling on this issue, I at least note 
the ambivalence of Hayek’s critique. To be sure, there are those who paint 
Hayek as an anti-Enlightenment thinker bent on subverting the authority of 
reason, but the project could arguably also be described as “not an abdication 
of reason but a rational examination” (Hayek 2009, 61), and he would not 
be the only one to reject criticisms of such an agenda as the “‘blackmail’ of 
the Enlightenment” (Foucault 1997, 312). That is, the self-critique of reason 
is not per se a reactionary project; it might be seen rather as an attempt to 
enlighten reason about its own limits, which, after all, was Kant’s intention 
in his critiques of reason. It may seem overly provocative to place Hayek in 
intellectual proximity to Foucault and Kant; however, I have no intention of 
turning Hayek into a Kantian or a Foucauldian nor of turning Foucault into 
a Hayekian, as is currently in vogue in some quarters. It is simply a matter 
of pointing out the ambiguity of an approach that chooses as a starting point 
the limitations of individual reason and undertakes a critical examination 
of its properties. By the same token, there is no doubt that Hayek’s railing 
against scientism is ultimately aimed at what he considers the hubristic as­
sumption that socialist planning could be based on science. However, many 
scholars who continue to work in a broadly socialist tradition, as well as most 
of those working in what they consider “critical” fields and traditions, could 
probably subscribe to the general critique of scientism as a faulty application 
of the methods that worked in the natural sciences to the object domain of 
the social sciences. The natural sciences, we can conclude with Hayek, are an 
ill-suited model for the social sciences since they suggest the attainability of 
knowledge and respective control over social processes that is simply beyond 
social sciences’ reach. 
This limitation of a science of mere general pattern predictions places 
Hayek in obvious and direct opposition to Friedman’s view, which is the 
reason that Hayek thought of the Essay as “in a way quite dangerous” (Hayek 
1994, 271).13 Friedman could be charged with the same kind of hubristic 
aspirations that Hayek, but also Buchanan and Röpke, attribute not only to 

	
Science
123
the socialist would-be planners but also to the Keynesians intent on fine-
tuning the economy. The skeptical camp around Hayek might have some 
concerns regarding the emphatic notion of truth underlying Eucken and 
Rüstow’s version of science, but especially the political implications of such 
a science must be most worrisome. Eucken may believe that an incorrupt­
ible science can prove conclusively the superiority of an exchange economy 
along ordoliberal lines over a centrally administered economy, but what 
if the socialists claim the opposite and with reference to an incorruptible 
science? However, even the skeptics are not willing to give up entirely on 
mobilizing science as a resource to bolster political claims, but they do not 
invoke the almost metaphysical truths of ordoliberalism. 
The skeptics are more, but not entirely, in agreement with Eucken and 
Rüstow, concerning a principally value-neutral science. Buchanan makes the 
most pronounced endorsement of a science undergirded and to some degree 
driven by values. He even contends that “we must become more normative in 
our efforts. . . . We must use the ‘is’ to implement the ‘ought’ which the ‘is’ 
suggests, regardless of the methodological impropriety of this relationship” 
(1979a, 179). It is not really clear how this far-reaching demand is compat­
ible with Buchanan’s qualifications of the powers of political economy, but it 
speaks to an overall inconsistency in this matter that we continue to highlight. 
Hayek, of course, candidly pointed out that everything he had to say in The 
Road to Serfdom was derived from ultimate values (see 2001, vii), but it may 
be disputable whether Hayek considered this book scientific even in his more 
modest sense of the term.14 Something similar might be said about Röpke, 
who published scholarly work but whose more famous books are not easily 
characterized as science in his sense. He confronts the issue of value judgments 
directly and commits himself to the well-known Weberian position, according 
to which value judgments necessarily underlie any scientific endeavor. Fur­
thermore, he warns of a politicized science drawn into the realm of interests 
but nevertheless wants to retain the right to speak about “highest values,” 
as he arguably did himself before going into exile (see Röpke 1949, 154). 
But then Röpke characteristically suggests that these underlying value judg­
ments are not discussed because they are not controversial, which prompts the 
question how this is ascertained. The more subjective they are, he contends, 
the more they are contested, and the obvious follow-up question leads him 

124	
Science
back into the potentially conservative terrain of “natural normalcy,” because 
societies are characterized by certain norms that are ultimately derived from 
“anthropological facts” that justify the highest values, such as “truth, justice, 
peace, community” (ibid., 158). 
An ambiguity concerning this particular point is characteristically pro­
nounced in the case of the skeptical camp and concerns the question whether 
neoliberal discourse itself considers itself to be a scientific discourse. In the 
case of the enthusiasts, especially Eucken and Rüstow, there can be little 
doubt about the scientific self-understanding, but already in Friedman one 
could argue that Capitalism and Freedom is a very different genre from that 
of A Monetary History of the United States, although Friedman himself would 
probably have claimed that even his more popular books are strongly based 
on economic science and its predictive power. Buchanan’s voice at times 
oscillates between the economist in his sense and the passionate supporter 
of political reform, and we see the two continue to clash in the following 
discussion. Hayek and Röpke wrote scholarly treatises that they probably 
would consider scientific in their specific sense, but most of what they did as 
neoliberals is better located in the realm of social philosophy than in a science 
of pattern predictions. However, this philosophy does not exist in isolation 
from their scientific work, and there are complex cross-references between 
the two. We cannot disentangle these connections here but can, at least, point 
to the ambiguous status of the discourse of neoliberal skeptics of science, 
which nevertheless can claim some consistency with their overall position. If 
science-turned-scientism is more dangerous than helpful in addressing the 
neoliberal problematic, not only for substantive but also strategic reasons, 
since the neoliberals’ antagonists aggressively refer to the authority of their 
scientific foundations, the general strategy of downplaying the positive powers 
and political significance of science suggests that there is simply not as much 
to be gained for this variety of neoliberalism in explicitly presenting itself as 
science and insisting on this elevated status. 
Let me conclude by situating the persistent concerns about scientism 
in a more encompassing diagnosis about modernity that characterizes the 
neoliberal point of view—to some degree even across the divide between 
skeptics and enthusiasts of science. Recall that scientism’s fallaciousness as 
well as its fatal effects stem from a confounding of the realms of natural 

	
Science
125
and social sciences. The result of this import of natural science methods 
and philosophies of science is what might be called the hubris of feasibility: 
Social scientists assume that their exact and predictive quasi-natural sciences 
provide them with an arsenal of instruments that enable social engineering 
to whatever effect, thus wreaking havoc on social relations that are not mal­
leable and controllable in the same way as the relatively closed systems in the 
physical world, where interventions stand a better chance at being successful. 
For thinkers like Hayek and Röpke in particular, contemporary scientism 
is only a syndrome of a more far-reaching trend in modernity they label 
“rationalism” and criticize vehemently. Röpke weighs in against a “strictly 
scientific rationalism” (1950b, 158), and Hayek even refers to the “revolt 
against reason” through “rationalist constructivism” (2003, 1:31). Here 
the critique of scientism is integrated into an interpretation of intellectual 
history that distinguishes between an evolutionary rationalism and a con­
structivist one (Hayek), or a constrained one and an excessive one (Röpke). 
Both coincide in their intellectual historical narrative in blaming the French 
Enlightenment for the respective aberrations in the use of reason; and in 
Hayek’s case the positive aspect of the rationalist tradition predictably be­
longs to the Scottish Enlightenment thinkers such as Adam Ferguson and 
David Hume, who show an awareness of reason’s own limitations per se and 
in its application to the realm of the social.
In Röpke’s narrative, rationalism represents the “violence of abstrac­
tion,” which pays no heed to the concrete realities of life that in his frame­
work are time and again hypostasized into basic anthropological constants, 
disregarded at any reformer’s own peril. In seeming opposition to Röpke, 
Hayek views the rationalist revolt as “directed at the abstractness of thought” 
(2003, 32), but this is to be understood in the context of Hayek’s defense of 
abstract rules/the rule of law. Generally, excessive conceptual abstraction is 
as much a fallacy of rationalism for Hayek as it is for Röpke, as illustrated 
by Hayek’s critique of homo economicus: This “celebrated figment” belongs 
much more “to the rationalist than to the evolutionary tradition” (2009, 
55), and, accordingly, Hayek sees it as a rather questionable concept. The 
charge of abstraction can even be traced to the other side of the neoliberal 
divide on science, where its echoes are heard, if only faintly, in Eucken’s cri­
tique of the formalism of the general-theoretical approach and, much more 

126	
Science
audibly, in Rüstow’s world-historical point of view of a fateful bifurcation of 
reason and emotion that leads to a continual struggle between the forces of 
irrationalism and rationalism. Rationalism, in Rüstow’s narrative, manifests 
itself in the abstractions and blindspots of nineteenth-century laissez-faire, 
which was, simultaneously, of a “sub-theological” character, which is obvi­
ously a reference to the deism of Smith and others (Rüstow 1957, 160), but 
makes for a very curious kind of rationalism. Even though Rüstow is highly 
critical of rationalism, which he sees in line with a problematic belief in 
the progress of the natural sciences and technology, this does not preclude 
him from strongly supporting ambitious scientific endeavors that target not 
only political economy but nothing less than human nature itself, which, 
ultimately, puts him among the science enthusiasts. 
The only ones immune to the topos of antirationalism are, unsurprisingly, 
Friedman on the enthusiasts’ side and, somewhat more surprisingly but 
also more equivocally, Buchanan on the other. Despite Buchanan’s harsh 
criticisms of scientism, he never extrapolates from this what in Röpke and 
Rüstow amounts to a tragic if not outright negative philosophy of history, 
that unbounded rationalism may spell doom for civilization. This is how fatal 
Röpke and Rüstow consider rationalism to be—as does Hayek, although with 
less baggage of a philosophy of history. Hayek draws a direct connection 
between the hubris of reason and the rise of modern totalitarianism that 
Röpke concurs with to a significant degree (see Hayek 2010a, 2010b), while 
Rüstow is more Solomonic in his diagnosis: Communism is the pinnacle 
of a one-sided rationalism, while National Socialism is the expression of an 
equally one-sided irrationalist revolt against it (see Rüstow 1957).
Neoliberal Science and Politics: Technocracy 
versus “Scientized Politics” 
The final issue is one that throws the variety of neoliberal positions into 
sharp relief. It is the question of what role science, however understood, 
should play in relation to politics; whether its efforts should be directed at 
an audience beyond academia; and, most important, what the appropriate 
audience is. Here, Eucken and Buchanan represent two opposing positions. 
Needless to say, their perspective on the political role of science is closely 

	
Science
127
related, though not entirely derivable, from their respective concepts of 
a science of political economy. So it is not surprising that Buchanan, as a 
representative of the skeptics of science, harbors some reservations about 
the political role of science. 
Among the neoliberals, Buchanan is certainly the most outspoken about 
the role that science must not play in relation to politics: to offer its services 
in a form of scientific policy advice. Almost all others may have more or less 
grave concerns but are not principally opposed to such a role, even if they do 
not actively demand it, as in the case of Eucken. It is solely Buchanan who 
radically rejects the scientist in the role of policy adviser and thus represents 
one end of the range of neoliberal views on this matter. There are two main 
reasons underlying his view. The first is not related to his view on science 
but rather a consequence of his public-choice commitments. If Buchanan is 
correct in his analyses of politicians’ and political parties’ behavior, and both 
tend to do anything to gain or remain in power, then the political economist 
who approaches them with plans for constitutional reform that could be 
supported by the citizenry would have to appear naïve at best. Why would 
politicians adopt such a reform agenda when it is designed, among other 
reasons, to make it more difficult for them to play the rent-seeking game? 
At worst, sharing their insights about economic and politico-economic is­
sues, the scientist may even provide political actors with a knowledge they 
can use for their own purposes and thus inadvertently play into the hands 
of incumbents who aim to consolidate their power at the expense of the 
citizenry as a whole: “‘Economic science’ is not to be conceived as offering 
assistance to selected agents who seek to use scientific knowledge to control 
others” (Buchanan 1986, 38). The reason is clearly that “the constitutional 
perspective is irreconcilably at odds with the benevolent despot model” 
(Brennan and Buchanan 1980, 4). In fact, Keynesianism, socialism, and 
welfare economics, with its “social utility function” that must be maximized, 
are to blame for their erroneous views on strictly economic matters as much 
as they are to blame for the mistaken belief that their scientific expertise 
would be welcomed and heeded in the corridors of power. Even if Keynes 
had been right about the political economy of crises and the state’s ability to 
steer the economy through its cycles, disregarding the fact that politicians 
pay at least as much attention to election cycles betrays either a quixotic or 

128	
Science
a technocratic-elitist view of politics, or even both, in Buchanan’s view.15 
Keynesianism is a program that relies on the government to act in the scien­
tifically prescribed way but shows no acknowledgment of “the institutional 
world where decisions are and must be made” (Buchanan and Wagner 1977, 
35). Buchanan thus offers a straightforward argument against the sheer 
possibility of political consultancy by science under democratic conditions. 
But what if there were, hypothetically, benevolent despots? Would 
Buchanan refrain from advising them as well? This question points us in the 
direction of the other source of his reservations regarding scientific expert 
advice for decision makers. The most succinct formulation of the respective 
arguments can be found in the article “The Potential for Tyranny in Politics 
as Science.” Buchanan’s premises are that there is a categorical difference 
between the institutionalized practices of politics and those of science, which 
explains why conflation of both creates problems. In principle, there are two 
ways for this to happen, one of which is a completely politicized science, but 
it is the other possibility of a “scientized politics” (Buchanan 1986, 40)—or 
what we may call politics on a scientific basis, technocracy—that Buchanan 
is concerned with. Politics is a matter of values and interests, while science is 
concerned with points of view, in Buchanan’s stylized juxtaposition: “Politics 
has the functional task of settling conflicts among individual interests and 
values” (ibid., 49). The peculiar nature of politics comes to the fore in one 
of its preferred instruments of keeping overt conflict at bay, compromise. 
It shows that diverging interests and evaluations can be “managed” and 
accommodated in degrees without any party to it being put in the wrong 
by a deal. This is a terrain that is profoundly different from that of science, 
which is concerned with the “truth” (Buchanan consistently puts the term 
in quotation marks) of the views we hold. Writing long before the onset 
of the “post-truth” era, Buchanan characterizes science as a practice that 
cannot tolerate alternative truths, where the rules of the practice stipulate 
that an accepted truth necessarily makes all alternative views false in what 
could be characterized as a zero-sum game. Consequently, there is no room 
for compromise and bargaining in regard to views and beliefs. Therefore, 
“science, as an activity, is much more analogous to religion than to trade” 
(ibid., 43)—not least in regard to the intolerance of dissenters: Someone who 
believes that the earth is round cannot simply accept that others profess it 

	
Science
129
is flat, and the matter has to be settled—the truth has to be established one 
way or another to end the controversy. “The social function of ‘science,’ 
the activity of the specialists, is that of shutting off dialogue and discourse. 
. . . Agreement among the specialists in inquiry, along with the subsequent 
acceptance by nonspecialists, signals the end of scientific conflict” (ibid., 
42–43). This is a slightly drastic formulation, but what Buchanan wants to 
emphasize is the “decontestatory” function of science that puts an end to 
conflicts rather than manages them. This binary structure radically distin­
guishes science from the graduality of interests and values. 
Clearly, there is much to be questioned about this juxtaposition, and 
Buchanan himself concedes that there may be absolute values and that sci­
entific truths are no longer considered either absolutely true or false. But 
let us accept it tentatively as a stylized contrast and see what conclusions he 
draws about science in politics. Politics is the realm of the relative, the par­
laying, the provisional, and the partial. When scientific claims are brought 
to bear on this realm, its entire character changes. Once a truth has been 
established, all conflicts and negotiations end, and in this sense scientific 
politics is no longer politics as Buchanan defined them. Contesting truths 
is no longer seen as legitimate, and while conflicts of interests were toler­
able, the epistemic ones can last only until a truth has been established; after 
that, disagreement turns into semidelusion. The authoritarian implications 
are obvious: “Those who do not ‘see’ must be ‘shown the light,’ perhaps 
preferably by persuasion but, if necessary, by coercion” (Buchanan 1986, 
52). The scientifically vouched-for policy agenda crowds out all alternative 
considerations, especially in regard to the maximization, for example, of a 
social utility function; therefore, such technocratic rule must be rejected as 
inherently tyrannical, concludes Buchanan. 
There are two points to be noted here, and both concern the question 
of what this implies for Buchanan’s own scientific practice. It seems that he 
has no intention of offering his expertise to political decision makers (see 
Brennan and Munger 2014), but neither are his books written exclusively 
for academics. Recall that Buchanan places at least some of his hopes for 
a constitutional revolution in popular referenda, and consistent with this, 
his audience beyond the ivory tower is clearly the citizenry. “The subjects 
of our ultimate normative concern are taxpayers or citizens” (Brennan and 

130	
Science
Buchanan 1980, 4), who are to be informed about the way they are suppos­
edly exploited by their governments and what alternative rule options are 
available. This is a tenable position, but it also prompts the question of how 
advising the citizenry of political matters differs from advising politicians 
when the problem is science wherever it comes in too close contact with 
the realm of politics. In my view, there are two possibilities for Buchanan’s 
response to the question: Either he does not claim the label of science for 
what he does, or he sticks to the label but provides knowledge that is of a dif­
ferent nature than the zero-sum games he described as typical of science. For 
the latter option, consider the end of The Power to Tax, whose authors hope 
that they may be “shifting the grounds” in the debate over tax reform and 
do not “want to make the mistake of suggesting that a unique constitutional 
solution will necessarily emerge even from the most idealized modeling 
of constitutional choice” (ibid., 204). This suggests that it is still up to the 
people to decide what kinds of governmental constraints they favor; science 
does not present them with the kind of decontested certainty science sup­
posedly provides. However, this kind of knowledge about alternative options 
seems far less tyrannical and might even be presented to benevolent despots, 
who then make the respective choices to the best of their abilities. To put 
it differently, when switching from the more general reflection on science 
and politics to the concrete work on constitutional reform, there seem to 
be less problematic ways of linking science and politics, as in the form of 
the dreaded “social engineer” of Keynesian or socialist colors. The second 
point is to note that Buchanan’s work in many of its aspects goes beyond the 
hope that citizens opt for some kind of governmental constraint. After all, 
the balanced-budget amendment is not really portrayed as one among many 
options; if anything, its particular form might be negotiable. Even more im­
portant, how consistent is it to problematize the decontestatory function of 
science when imported into politics while at the same time demanding pas­
sage of a constitutional balanced-budget amendment that would have exactly 
such decontestatory effects? Just as science would, it would shut off dialogue 
and discourse on this issue and result in a lasting depoliticization. All these 
issues are thrown into even sharper relief once we include Buchanan’s actual 
activities in our considerations. To be sure, one would assume that advice 
to politicians would be anathema to him because they are not benevolent 

	
Science
131
dictators. Nevertheless, Buchanan and his colleagues at the Center of Public 
Choice did brief policy makers and businessmen about economic issues; 
and while this was confined to the Virginia political-economic elites at the 
time, once he joined forces with the Koch brothers, Buchanan’s outreach 
through seminars and lectures gained significantly in scope (see MacLean 
2017, 109).16 One may wonder how advising extremely wealthy citizens 
differs from advising politicians, if the extremely wealthy citizens provide 
the donations to finance the exceedingly costly campaigns of these politi­
cians. Finally, while it is difficult to ascertain Buchanan’s role precisely, it is 
now established that Buchanan—just as Friedman and Hayek did—visited 
Chile and, as MacLean chronicles, provided advice on the specifics of what 
would officially be called Chile’s “Constitution of Liberty.” “Buchanan re­
sponded with detailed advice on how to bind democracy, delivered over the 
course of five formal lectures to top representatives of a governing elite that 
melded the military and the corporate world, to say nothing of counsel he 
conveyed in private, unrecorded conversations” (ibid., 158). Aside from the 
fact that how directly and deeply Buchanan was involved remains disputed, 
it is rather telling that he chose to keep this episode from May 1980 (fol­
lowed by another trip for the MPS meeting in Santiago de Chile in 1981) 
entirely to himself—at least, it is never mentioned in any of his writings 
that I know of. Not only must he have been aware of the public backlash 
Friedman had faced; it must have also been clear to him that he had done 
what he had chided welfare economists and Keynesians for in the harshest 
words: providing expert advice for a governing elite whose sole intention 
is—and in this case it really was—to stay in power and exploit its population. 
Moving toward the other end of the neoliberal spectrum in this matter, 
we see other neoliberals who show much less restraint in getting openly in­
volved in politics: for example, Hayek met with Augusto Pinochet in Chile 
and sent letters to Margaret Thatcher when she was prime minister; and 
Friedman gave advice to Pinochet and served officially on the Economic 
Policy Advisory Board of the Reagan administration. In both cases we find 
few reflections on the proper relation between science and politics or, rather, 
the specific question of whether science can and should provide expert ad­
vice for political decision makers. In Friedman’s case it is not far-fetched to 
assume that his predictive science should not only help decontest questions 

132	
Science
regarding normative economics in the public sphere, as mentioned in the 
Essay, but also inform policy makers on the effects to be reckoned with 
after passage of certain reforms. Even more important, scientific advice 
may instruct policy makers about the futility of certain reform efforts, such 
as Keynesian demand management, which according to Friedman’s famous 
argument, does not create lasting growth but only inflation. So negative 
policy advice in this sense is arguably at least as important as its positive 
counterpart, in Friedman’s view. Still, it is worth noting that politicians are 
well advised to take into consideration that negative and positive advice is 
based on assumptions that are self-consciously unrealistic. If a political re­
form fails and the public were to demand a justification, pointing to a science 
that prides itself on its antirealism may not provide the kind of “scientific 
legitimation” that, in fact, has decontestatory effects on the citizenry. 
As we have seen, Hayek does have a lot to say about the impact of ideas 
on political macroprocesses, but only few considerations are devoted to the 
question of scientific policy advice. Some of the reasons can be found in 
Hayek’s evolutionary view of cultural history, but it could also be related 
to Hayek’s reservations regarding scientific politics. To be sure, the Fried­
manite nexus between science and politics must appear deeply problematic 
to Hayek. However, what would a science of spontaneous orders have to 
offer to decision makers anyway? Is there any direct political use for pat­
tern predictions? Not for the engineering mind, maybe, but possibly for 
the mind of the gardener. Hayek insists that “what helpful insight science 
can provide for the guidance of policy consists in an understanding of the 
general nature of the spontaneous order, and not in any knowledge of the 
particulars of a concrete situation” (2003, 1:64). And while this knowledge 
is useless for the control and manipulation of particulars, Hayek contends 
that it is still of political value, “not to shape the results as the craftsman 
shapes his handiwork, but rather to cultivate a growth by providing the 
appropriate environment, in the manner in which the gardener does this 
for his plants” (1967b, 34). While science thus has a more moderate and 
indirect impact on politics in the form of policy advice, Hayek obviously 
insists on its concrete political use. 
However, the most systematic contemplation of science’s role in politics 
coupled with the most far-reaching claim to direct political influence is found 

	
Science
133
in the works of the ordoliberals, with the partial exception of Röpke, who 
retains a certain distance from politics, which is consistent with his concerns 
over scientism. While his view of science is undoubtedly elitist and he counts 
scientists among the nobilitas naturalis, which in many aspects resembles a 
Platonic guardian class,17 he is still worried about the political appropriation 
of science and thus, in the last instance, is not entirely in agreement with 
Eucken and Rüstow.18 However, this did not keep him from working on the 
Brauns Commission established by the Weimar government and acting as 
more or less official adviser to the first governments of the Federal Republic, 
for example, with reports on currency reforms (see Hennecke 2005).
Rüstow and especially Eucken represent a view of the link between poli­
tics and science that can be referred to only as technocratic. Accordingly, it 
is a matter of gaining access to political decision makers, and this is nowhere 
more clearly on display than in the “Ordo Manifesto,” an editorial for a new 
book series, written jointly by the economist Eucken and the jurists Franz 
Böhm and Hans Großmann-Doerth in 1936: “We wish to bring scientific 
reasoning, as displayed in jurisprudence and political economy, into effect 
for the purpose of constructing and reorganizing the economic system” 
(Böhm, Eucken, and Großmann-Doerth 1989, 23). Let us reiterate that the 
scientific approach must be strictly interdisciplinary, overcoming disciplinary 
specialization (see ibid., 25), if it is to provide helpful knowledge about the 
totality of social relations and enable a coherent politics of the competitive 
order: “The treatment of all practical politico-legal and politico-economic 
questions must be keyed to the idea of the economic constitution” (ibid., 
23). The economic constitution being the focal point of practically all public 
policy, science is portrayed as indispensable for its formulation since it is the 
sole available source of knowledge that can inform such an all-encompassing 
endeavor (Eucken 1951a, 37–38; Rüstow 1963, 15–16). The complexities 
of interdependent socioeconomic orders and possibly even the workings of 
a market-based economic system may simply lie beyond cognitive reach of 
the average layperson (see Rüstow 2009, 34). Therefore, while Eucken and 
Rüstow did think about ways to gain more influence in public discourse 
generally, from plans for a journal to writing op-ed pieces for newspapers, 
the main strategy was clearly to appeal to decision makers directly and offer 
them scientifically authorized policy advice. 

134	
Science
At the top of every society are the “leading strata,” Eucken writes in 
1952, still echoing the Italian elite theorists (1960, 17). These elites have 
to be persuaded of the correct politics of a competitive order, Eucken states 
explicitly. This is especially consequential in light of the assumed irrational­
ity of the masses, which remains a concern for all ordoliberals, who were 
traumatized by the disruptive politics and struggles of Weimar Germany. 
There is no doubt, then, as Gebhard Kirchgässner (1988) notes candidly, 
that the ordoliberals dreamed of economic policy, broadly speaking, as a 
domain of wise men who would base their decisions on nothing but science 
and the truths it supposedly generated. There are theoretical reasons for 
this, but there is also very concrete evidence for such a project in the form 
of the letters between Eucken and Rüstow in the late 1920s and early 1930s, 
which document that Eucken was hoping to gain access to political circles 
through Rüstow’s connections. Rüstow, in turn, was eager to enlist Eucken’s 
scientific authority in his own attempts to influence policy making on the 
eve of the National Socialist takeover (see Sala 2011, 46). 
We will return to this mutually beneficial, if ultimately unsuccessful, 
cooperation between the two, but we must clarify why science is of such 
crucial importance for the politics of the competitive order and a ordolib­
eral project more generally speaking. It is not only the scope of scientific 
analysis that turns it into a necessary resource for such a project but, almost 
more important, because it is the only force that can cognitively neutralize 
the impact of pressure groups and their respective ideologies in pluralist 
democracies. Eucken could not be clearer in his dichotomous framing of the 
respective constellations. Scientists generate the truth—in the singular—but 
when they are cut out of the policy picture, “interested parties” and their 
ideologies take over. The link between interests and ideologies is important 
because it is not only the proper approach to political economy that en­
ables the formulation of objective truths; it is also the fact that scientists 
are supposedly aloof from all self-serving considerations: “Men of science, 
by virtue of their profession and position being independent of economic 
interests, are the only objective, independent advisers capable of providing 
true insight into the intricate interrelationships of economic activity” (Böhm, 
Eucken, and Großmann-Doerth 1989, 15). Conversely, given the fact that 
societal groups are driven by a particular interest, they necessarily express 

	
Science
135
ideological views, or at least this is what Eucken, Rüstow, and Röpke suggest. 
While science as a disinterested search for objective truth is thus aligned 
with the common good, the pluralist strife of groups that pursue particular 
interests is linked to distortive ideologies that can serve to justify just about 
any political project and are explicitly employed for the “economic struggle” 
(Eucken 1951a, 29, see also 30–33; Röpke 1950b, 134). 
It is here that the decontestatory function of science is most clearly on 
display. The ordoliberals envisage a politics that is completely depoliticized; 
both Eucken and Rüstow subscribe to the idea that theory in its proper form 
yields one and only one (true) solution to any given political problem. If 
there are two opposing views on an issue, it is a matter of faulty science or 
outright ideology. Proper science can and must overcome these confusions 
and conflicts with an authoritative formulation of what is true and, accord­
ingly, the right politics to pursue (see Sala 2011). 
It is only at this point that Röpke parts ways with his fellow ordoliberals; 
despite the occasional elevation of the “men of science” and the pathos-
laden talk of the “dignity of science” being “truth” (Röpke 1950b, 134), 
the skepticism with regard to the political dangers of science prevails when 
he polemicizes against what he calls “economocracy” (Röpke 1960, 149) 
and what amounts to the technocratic expert rule that Eucken and Rüstow 
espouse. And while Röpke never criticizes his fellow ordoliberals, he clearly 
rejects the authoritative if not absolutist claims they raise as “scientists”: “the 
scholar would be foolish if he thought himself in the possession of objective 
truth” (ibid., 136). 
Still, this ultimate and important divergence notwithstanding, for all three 
ordoliberals science provides the only beacon of stability and partiality for 
nothing but the general good in a world of politics that they experience as 
torn between fundamental antagonisms driven by particularistic actors that 
threaten to disintegrate the state and even society itself. It would seem almost 
redundant to criticize such a heroic and heavily anachronistic view of a com­
pletely disinterested science, were it not that the depoliticized technocracy it 
is supposed to inspire is clearly on display today, particularly in the European 
context, and that the mathematized formalism of today’s mainstream econom­
ics may be less outspoken about it but clearly shares the view of a neutral sci­
ence. So let us at least note that the view of scientists as constituting something 

136	
Science
like a free-floating intelligentsia, to borrow a term from Karl Mannheim, is 
not particularly self-reflective about its own position and simply declares itself 
to be free from any distortive passions or interests. 
While it is not even necessary to invoke this contrast to highlight the 
blindspot of ordoliberal theory, the juxtaposition with the self-understanding 
of Critical theory may sharpen that point even more. Somewhat surprisingly, 
in his lectures on ordoliberalism Foucault speaks of the “curious closeness 
and parallels between what we call the Freiburg School or ordoliberals, and 
their neighbours, as it were, the Frankfurt School” (2008, 105), and there 
is one broad analogy—ambition to grasp society in its totality and the cor­
responding commitment to interdisciplinarity—although the Frankfurt ver­
sion of this took a turn toward philosophical disciplinarity later. However, all 
other differences aside, the two could not be further apart in regard to self-
understanding and the requirement of a self-reflective science. While Eucken 
posits the disinterested view of science from nowhere, or rather from a realm 
that is aloof from societal pressures and political interests and must be shielded 
against any such intrusions just as the strong state must be shielded from 
pluralist demands, Critical theorists urge a constant reflection on science’s 
societal role and its position in the overall division of labor in a given social 
formation. In other words, while both traditions insist on the need for theory 
to counter the trend toward disciplinary specialization and the concomitant 
effect of scientific inquiries being more and more designed to examine (micro)
phenomena in isolation from the overall context, only Critical theory (at least 
on the programmatic level) stringently applies the respective scientific maxim 
to itself. Ordoliberal theory may be adamant about the importance of an 
“integrated theory” and the problems that loom if the mediation of a single 
moment through the totality of social relations, to put it in Critical theory 
terms, is disregarded. But they treat science itself as if it stood outside the 
interdependence of orders and as if it—its practices and its “order”—could 
be treated in isolation from this interdependence. Of course, other types 
of criticism could be raised against ordoliberal theory and the depoliticized 
politics it is to inform, but it is also and not the least inconsistent with its own 
theoretical view of society as a totality of interdependent orders. 
As in the case of Buchanan, I end with purely anecdotal evidence 
that there is not just a theoretical but also a practical or performative 

	
Science
137
inconsistency in Rüstow’s and especially Eucken’s idea of a scientifically 
neutral policy consultancy that counters the interest-peddling lobbyists 
and pressure groups and in how both pursued the project. In 1928 Eucken 
and Rüstow had already been friends for a decade. Eucken was a professor 
in Tübingen, and Rüstow held a position in the research department of 
the VDMA (Verband Deutscher Machinen- und Anlagenbau), the associa­
tion of German machine builders—a lobby group of German industry. At 
the end of 1927 Eucken had already begun to criticize the central bank’s 
policy publicly and urged a change in its direction, assumedly speaking as 
an objective scientist offering rather harsh advice to decision makers who 
are simply following the wrong economic recipes or are possibly in the 
ideological grip of some particularistic lobby group. On January 10, 1928, 
he writes to Rüstow: “Thinking about this issue, it has become clear to me 
that the machine industry has to do something at once. Why don’t you ap­
peal to the national industrial association [Reichsverband der Deutschen 
Industrie]. The fact that Sch.[acht; the president of the central bank] severely 
damages the interests of the machine building industry is clear. On top of 
that, you have the chance of improving the position of the VDMA because 
it is always good to fight a false policy that must eventually collapse, early 
on” (cited in Sala 2011, 25). Eucken was clearly trying to instrumentalize 
Rüstow’s position with the VDMA to gain influence for his own views on 
economic policy. In other words, instead of fighting against the distortive 
influence of lobby groups with the sword of impartial science, Eucken (and 
Rüstow) sought to mobilize the leverage and influence of such a group to 
further their own interests in influencing politics. This anecdote may not be 
of much theoretical significance, but it still paints a highly ironic picture and 
raises some doubt with regard to science as the realm of the disinterested 
search for truth that can outbalance and anchor the unruly particularism of 
pluralist democracy and its group ideologies. If necessary, it seems, science 
and scientists would have to become and thus turn out to be just another 
party to the “group anarchy” of pluralism (Eucken 1960, 171). 


This page intentionally left blank 

139
The central claim of this book is that neoliberal thought contains a genuinely 
political theory or at least elements thereof. Still, does it have a theory 
of politics as well? This is the question we address in this chapter. I do not 
examine the neoliberal view of politics(s) in general, because to a certain 
extent, we already know a lot about this from the various crisis diagnoses 
discussed in relation to the state, democracy, and science. What interests 
me more specifically is how these views on politics can be reconciled with 
a possible politics of neoliberal reform. In other words, how do the neoliberals 
theorize a politics that would bring about the various solutions and rem­
edies proposed for the ills of the Leviathan state, unlimited democracy and 
scientism? My overall thesis is that the politics of neoliberalism is probably 
the weakest link so far in the thought of the neoliberals, as it confronts them 
with a theoretical dilemma they appear to be unable to resolve. The basic 
pattern of the dilemma looks like this: The neoliberals paint a rather bleak 
picture of the status quo, to say the least, in which any number of pathologies 
related to state, science, and democracy unfold and manifest themselves. 
But what is worse, and what makes the diagnosis more compelling and 
the neoliberal warnings more pressing, is the suggestion that the “normal” 
politics that has supposedly led political communities to the brink of disaster 
is “locked in” for various reasons. This makes for a powerful critique, but 
Politics 
C HAPTE R 5

140	
Politics
what the overall approach gains from the very bleakness of the diagnosis 
it loses in regard to theorizing the politics of reform: sketching a plausible 
political pathway that would lead from A, the abyss of the present, to B 
or C, a society reformed in the spirit of the various ideals. While there is 
almost unanimous consensus regarding the “power of ideas”—the crucial 
long-term importance of developing ideas, discourses, or even utopias that 
present alternatives to the status quo as an indispensable precondition in 
order to prevail in the “great struggle of ideas that is under way” (Hayek 
2009, 2)1—the possibility of implementing these ideas provides a real chal­
lenge for the neoliberals. This general dilemma takes on a variety of forms, 
ranging from a conspicuous silence on the possibility of reform (and lacunae 
abound whenever the question is raised) to major inconsistencies on display 
in the struggle between the neoliberal critic of the monotonous politics of the 
iron cage of the status quo and the neoliberal reformer, who must ultimately 
seek theoretical refuge in exceptionalist political strategies and/or an almost 
eschatological hope for a politics of the extraordinary to account for the 
possibility of real political change for the neoliberal better.
The Powerlessness of the Ordoliberal Ought 
The title of this section alludes to Hegel’s critique of Kant’s moral phi­
losophy, the precepts of which supposedly have such a weak obligating 
force that they amount to hardly more than exhortations. Rational beings 
should follow the maxims that accord with the categorical imperative, but 
if there is no Sittlichkeit, in Hegel’s terminology, to back up the abstract 
ought of Kantian practical reason, its effects remain extremely limited, at 
least if we accept Hegel’s argument. Arguably, the reform agenda of Eucken 
and Röpke is confronted with very similar problems. Remember the far-
reaching transformations that Eucken and Röpke envisioned to overcome 
the dangers and pathologies of an overburdened state in the grip of vested 
interests. How should these transformations into monolithic and deplural­
ized democracies be brought about? If one consults the passages on how the 
state ought to be restructured along Euckenian lines in order to become an 
“ordering potency” (Eucken 1960, 330), there is no recipe to be found for 
how the state could manage to disentangle itself from the interest groups 

	
Politics
141
that hold sway over it. At times, Eucken comes close to conceding that the 
paradox of overcoming pluralism and establishing the competitive order is 
irresolvable in his framework of thinking: “Without a competitive order no 
state capable of action can emerge and, conversely, without a state capable 
of action no competitive order can emerge” (ibid., 338). It seems, then, that 
the Euckenian agenda is caught in a paradox where actual transformations 
of the state already presuppose these very transformations. In this sense, the 
call for a strong and unified state remains as powerless as Hegel conceived of 
the Kantian ought. Just as Kant’s rational beings lack any strong motivational 
resources to follow the precepts of morality, the masses, interest groups, 
and political parties that populate Eucken’s crisis diagnoses are unlikely to 
develop any interests or motives to overcome the failing state of pluralism. 
There remain the men of science, who strictly speaking are defined by the 
very lack of any interest or particular economic motive and thus are destined 
to make the case for the objective superiority of the competitive order. It 
is therefore no surprise that Eucken also lists them as a potential “ordering 
potency” next to the state and the churches. However, while we have seen 
that science should provide expert policy advice for decision makers, this 
remains a desideratum equally as toothless as the call for a more robust state: 
“Overcoming the biases and prejudices, science must become an ordering 
potency” (ibid., 346), but it remains a mystery how and why this endeavor 
should succeed, when Eucken himself admits that it has failed so far.
However, while they are not explicitly mentioned, Eucken’s writings 
might be implicitly addressed to another set of actors, who also have a 
prominent role in Hegel’s thought. Who could be better equipped to realize 
the general interest and take the appropriate advice from scientists solely 
dedicated to the search for truth than what Hegel termed the “universal 
class,” the state bureaucracy? Eucken might have rather been thinking of 
a strong decision maker committed to the common good than an army of 
administrators when it comes to realizing the competitive order,2 since this 
was bound to be a matter of power and determination, but the orientation 
toward the common good and the ability to transcend the particular are the 
crucial characteristics of the actors needed to implement the Euckenian, and 
the Röpkean, agenda. What is needed is no less than an enlightened guardian 
class that will faithfully pursue the technocratic politics of the competitive 

142	
Politics
order, as has been criticized especially from public-choice theorists who are 
otherwise rather sympathetic to ordoliberal ideas (see Kirchgässner 1988). 
Röpke is more explicit in identifying the class of actors who are the ap­
propriate addressees of his reform plans. At times, he simply follows Hegel 
and argues, “If the authority of the state is to be strengthened it is abso­
lutely necessary that it should be headed by a qualified civil service small in 
numbers but equipped with the highest standard of professional ethics and a 
pronounced esprit de corps” (Röpke 1950b, 305); at other times he gestures 
more vaguely at the need for people “who feel responsibility for the whole” 
(ibid., 313). The most extensive characterizations are found in his reflections 
on the nobilitas naturalis, whose members he also describes as “aristocrats of 
the public spirit” (Röpke 1960, 131). But if Röpke’s account has the advan­
tage over Eucken’s in that it explicitly identifies the actors that could be the 
transformative agents needed for a proper politics of neoliberal reform, it has 
the profound disadvantage of excelling in the proof of the utter improbability 
of such actors ever coming to exist or persist. Röpke calls for the “leadership 
of genuine clercs,” who are nothing less than “secularized saints” (ibid., 130). 
But where should this rare species come from when the world has descended 
into collectivist tyranny? “Evidently, many and sometimes difficult conditions 
must be fulfilled if such a natural aristocracy is to develop. . . . It must grow 
and mature, and the slowness of its ripening is matched by the swiftness of 
its possible destruction” (ibid., 131). In other words, as soon as the cast of the 
ordoliberal reform orchestrations is introduced, they disappear again. It seems 
as if it would take an almost otherworldly breed of people to realize a neolib­
eral politics; at least the bar is set high enough to make almost all imaginable 
empirical actors fall short of the ambitious requirements of a nobilitas naturalis. 
The nobilitas naturalis thus acquires the status of what is commonly referred 
to as a deus ex machina, and the religious connotations of this phrase are far 
from misplaced in the context of the politics of neoliberalism. 
Transitional Dictatorship
Among the ordoliberals, introducing benevolent custodians of the public 
good is not the only solution to the conundrum of reform politics under 
consideration. Rüstow, whose thought in many ways figures as the most 

	
Politics
143
ambiguous among the neoliberal thinkers discussed here, explored another 
avenue of reform early on that confirms the close proximity of some aspects 
of his thought with motives found in the work of Carl Schmitt at the time. 
In 1929 Rüstow gave a lecture at the Deutsche Hochschule für Politik in 
Berlin that was also attended by Hermann Heller and Theodor Heuss, who 
would become the first president of the Federal Republic of Germany. The 
central question of Rüstow’s lecture was how to overcome the deficiencies of 
the Weimar political system, which even before the chaos of the early 1930s 
had exhibited a unique combination of instability and paralysis. The title 
of the lecture gives a clear indication of Rüstow’s solution to the problem: 
“Dictatorship within the Boundaries of Democracy” (Rüstow [1929] 1959). 
Striking about the lecture is not only what Rüstow proposes but also the 
extent to which he relies on Schmitt’s analysis of the Weimar system and its 
weaknesses. The main problem, according to Rüstow, is a pervasive “politics 
of blame avoidance,” to use a term coined by Kent Weaver (1986), albeit in 
a very different context. The democratically elected political actors, both 
individual and collective, seem to eschew responsibility whenever they can, 
either by deferring controversial questions to the judiciary, thus leading to 
what Schmitt had already chided as a juridification of politics, or by delegat­
ing such issues to an expert committee whose verdict still formally leaves 
politicians in charge of the ultimate decision but substantially prejudges it. 
Unsurprisingly, this systematic and collective irresponsibility is said to lead 
to an “increasing political disintegration” (Rüstow [1929] 1959, 92), and, 
admittedly, this is not just unfounded alarmism if viewed in the context of 
the time, although the tone of Rüstow’s admonitions to the political estab­
lishment is characteristically shrill. 
So what exactly could be done to remedy the ills of an imploding democ­
racy? Again, Rüstow bases his elaborations on Schmitt’s anatomy of the Wei­
mar Constitution that rests on four elements placed in a particular balance 
with one another: president, cabinet, parliament, and chancellor. Rüstow 
contemplates the chances of unlocking the political process for each of them 
and arrives at a clear conclusion. While other intellectuals such as Schmitt 
would have further strengthened the presidential element to overcome the 
political stalemate, and other political forces at the time would have opted 
for more power and less individual accountability for cabinet members, he 

144	
Politics
sees the most promising option in time-limited dictatorial powers for the 
chancellor: “This means the preservation of democracy because it is a time-
limited dictatorship, not in the strict sense of the term, but, as it were, a 
dictatorship with a probational period” (Rüstow [1929] 1959, 99). After all, 
in Rüstow’s analysis of the problems of the Weimar system, it is virtually 
impossible to pursue just about any kind of politics because it is far too easy 
for those who are affected negatively by any specific policy to forge veto 
alliances and oust the responsible cabinet members or the entire govern­
ment. Therefore, if there is to be any chance at all for the kind of politics 
that the neoliberals envision, the powers of government, of the chancellor 
in particular, have to be augmented, if only temporarily. Concretely, this 
means that the head of government could introduce policies that would be 
enacted even if they were not backed by a parliamentary majority but only 
a qualified minority. These exceptional powers cease after a certain period 
of time, long enough for the government to prove its ability to govern and 
to assess whether the reforms introduced are beneficial. 
This latter aspect is important for Rüstow because of the way the or­
doliberals perceive proper neoliberal reforms and the ambivalent effects 
they are likely to have. Consider the example of the competitive order, the 
introduction of which Rüstow would also consider an appropriate goal for 
neoliberal politics. In the short term it will hurt various particular interests 
or the actors behind these interests, but in the medium and long terms it 
supposedly furthers the general interest and the common good. So Rüstow 
assumes that the reforms need some time for their beneficial effects to 
become manifest, and in this case, he assumes, the government will be con­
firmed. But why would all those representatives of particular interests such as 
political parties and lobbying groups suddenly support the politics that hurt 
them? Rüstow, it becomes clear, has a different base for this exceptionalist 
model of democracy in mind: “I believe that with this position the leader 
would have the opportunity to address the people directly, bypassing party 
organizations and irrespective of party constellations. I would think that 
such a position of leadership would command a strong plebiscitary force 
and it is this that I would find beneficial” ([1929] 1959, 99). Here we can 
see parallels to Buchanan’s populist argument, that it is necessary to sideline 
established interests and actors to overcome political blockades. 

	
Politics
145
But Rüstow’s strategy of transforming the political system in a plebisci­
tary “dictatocracy” faces a serious obstacle that he himself is also painfully 
aware of. As long as this political system is to remain within the boundaries 
of constitutionalism, the necessary changes to the constitution have to be 
passed by the very actors that have no interest in passing them: “I am not 
enough of a utopian to assume that a proposition as I just sketched it would 
normally find a majority to change the constitution in the Reichstag today. 
This is obviously not the case. If we had a Reichstag where something like 
this was conceivable then the proposition would be unnecessary” (Rüstow 
[1929] 1959, 100). In other words, Rüstow encounters the very same paradox 
we have already seen in the case of Eucken. And while he vaguely gestures at 
the possibility of changing the constitution through a referendum (another 
similarity to Buchanan’s tactics), he himself assesses the chances of success to 
be minimal. Still, Rüstow is adamant that something must be done to over­
come the paralysis of the system, and it is not enough to wait for a “strong 
leader,”3 as others suggest. He urges his audience “that we do our part in 
order to facilitate the coming of this leader,” which implies that somehow 
the constitution must be changed because “our current constitutional condi­
tions make the coming and prevailing of a leader exceedingly difficult” (ibid., 
101). There is a chilling irony to this last assessment, considering that four 
years later the “strong leader” did arrive and needed only a few months to 
do away with the entire constitutional system of Weimar.
Rüstow may be the first but he is not the only neoliberal who entertains 
the notion of a transitional dictatorship as the institutional sword that would 
cut the Gordian knot of pluralist unlimited democracy.4 Hayek has made the 
case for this exceptionalist option as a solution to the conundrum of a truly 
neoliberal politics most vehemently, but not exclusively, with reference to 
Chile. Needless to say, this is a highly contentious issue, and over the decades 
a lot of false or at least embellished claims have been made about Hayek, 
and also Friedman,5 as apologists of the military dictatorship of Pinochet, 
so it is particularly important to be careful in our assessment here. 
In his scholarly writings Hayek defended the notion of a liberal authori­
tarianism as preferable over an unlimited democracy. Still, Hayek faces the 
same issue that the ordoliberals confronted: If existing societies are already 
proto-totalitarian unlimited democracies, as Hayek suggests again and again, 

146	
Politics
then how is it possible to turn them into liberal authoritarian regimes or the 
kind of depluralized democracies with a rule of law that figures as Hayek’s 
ideal? Bridging this gap is the systematic function of transitional dictatorship 
in the overall architecture of Hayek’s thought. The most extensive discussion 
of such an exceptionalist politics can be found in Law, Legislation and Liberty, 
although the terminology differs slightly. Here Hayek writes that the basic 
principles of the rule of law and a free society may “have to be temporarily 
suspended when the long-run preservation of that order is itself threatened” 
(2003, 3:124). Two years after the publication of Hayek’s late magnum opus, 
he is much more concrete about the need for transitional dictatorships to 
overcome the threat to a free society. In an interview with the Chilean news­
paper El Mercurio Hayek is asked about his opinion on dictatorships: “As 
long-term institutions, I am totally against dictatorships. But a dictatorship 
may be a necessary system for a transitional period. At times it is necessary 
for a country to have, for a time, some form or other of dictatorial power. 
As you will understand, it is possible for a dictator to govern in a liberal way. 
. . . My personal impression . . . is that in Chile . . . we will witness a transi­
tion from a dictatorial government to a liberal government. . . . During this 
transition it may be necessary to maintain certain dictatorial powers, not as 
something permanent, but as a temporary arrangement” (El Mercurio 1981, 
D9). It seems then that Hayek had persuaded himself that in the case of 
a totalitarian democracy (in the same interview he contended that the only 
totalitarian regime in South America was the Allende government) it was 
legitimate to resort to a transitory dictatorship. This stance becomes even 
more ominous if we take into account that the Hayek of the late 1970s was 
already convinced that just about every actually existing democracy was 
ultimately bent toward totalitarianism. Consequently, dictatorial politics 
would have to be considered a legitimate option in a large number of cases. 
Not only did Hayek send the Portuguese dictator António de Oliveira Sala­
zar a copy of the Constitution of Liberty in the 1960s, arguing that this could 
be the blueprint for a renewal of Portuguese society, but he also famously 
wrote to Margaret Thatcher, who was already prime minister, supposedly 
urging her to follow the model of what Naomi Klein terms Chilean “shock 
doctrine” reforms. Equally famous is Thatcher’s response, in which she 
reminded Hayek that such drastic reforms pushed through with (quasi-)

	
Politics
147
dictatorial means were absolutely incompatible with British traditions of 
constitutionalism. 
There are obviously pressing normative concerns related to Hayek’s 
defense of a transitory dictatorship, but instead of a potentially moralizing 
critique, I would rather problematize Hayek’s account by highlighting the 
deep inconsistencies that are brought to the fore by this defense. After all, 
it was Hayek who had asserted in the Road to Serfdom that once a regime 
or a group is given unchecked power, it will do everything to consolidate 
its power, and even the most well-meaning liberal socialists will eventually 
turn a dictatorial system into a full-blown totalitarian system. Why could 
it ever be assumed that these mechanisms do not apply in the same way to 
the transitory dictatorships Hayek wants to defend? Either the latter are 
just as dangerous as the former,6 or Hayek’s slippery-slope argument in The 
Road to Serfdom loses a lot of its bite. So we see a familiar picture emerge: 
The gain in making the neoliberal critic’s diagnosis more compelling comes 
at the expense of a plausible consistent vision of realizing the neoliberal 
reformer’s agenda. Conversely, if there is to be the hint of such a vision at 
all, the critique would have to be scaled back considerably. 
But Hayek’s controversial defense of transitory dictatorship as virtually 
the only option of overcoming the ills of unlimited democracy and the incon­
sistency it introduces into Hayek’s thought are only the top layer of a more 
fundamental rift related to politics that troubles his approach more than that 
of any other neoliberal. What he shares with Buchanan, Friedman, or the 
German ordoliberals is an ambitious reform agenda, the pinnacle of which 
is his model constitution discussed previously in relation to democracy. The 
activist streak of Hayek’s approach is also clearly on display in the countless 
op-ed newspaper pieces, in which at times he calls for far-reaching reforms, 
and in the letters written to Thatcher and others. Aside from the fact that 
Hayek is forced into defending transitory dictatorships to make plausible 
that there is a way out of entrenched unlimited democracies, there is a more 
fundamental problem with the calls for radical reforms that becomes ever 
more virulent the more the mature Hayek grounds his thought in evolution­
ary theory (see particularly Hayek 1988, 11–28). 
While this is not the place to discuss the overall merits and faults of 
his particular application of evolutionary theory and how it is linked to his 

148	
Politics
epistemology and view on cognition elaborated on in The Sensory Order, we 
can ask how this stance complicates Hayek’s reform agenda. The problem is 
that Hayek’s idea of group selection and its connection to cultural evolution 
predisposes him to a rather functionalist view of social life. If cultural evolu­
tion manifests itself by some groups prevailing while others perish, there 
is a strong prima facie case for the institutions, traditions, and conventions 
of the prevailing group to be considered superior to those of other groups 
or societies. The longer such institutions and traditions, together with the 
respective societies, persist, the more reason to keep them and acknowledge 
them as achievements in the process of cultural evolution that are of un­
measurable value to the respective group. Hayek thinks of institutions and 
traditions as vessels of accumulated wisdom and knowledge; traditions are 
especially important because they can transmit the kind of tacit, implicit 
knowledge that Hayek deemed invaluable.7 At this point, it is clear that 
Hayek has backed himself into a theoretical corner with his reliance on 
arguments from evolutionary theory, because it commits him to an almost 
Burkean conservatism that had chided the iconoclasts of the French Revolu­
tion for their foolish disregard for conventions that supposedly contained 
the wisdom of the ages. 
Hayek famously laid out the reasons that he was not a conservative in the 
postscript to The Constitution of Liberty (see Hayek 2009, 343–355), but his 
critique of constructivist rationalism, the praise of traditions and conventions, 
and his thoughts on cultural evolution inevitably lead him to an assessment of 
the status quo that is effectively indistinguishable from that of a conservative 
like Burke, although the theoretical frameworks are obviously vastly different. 
But while it is not impossible, it is difficult to be a Burkean reformer; and a re­
former Hayek clearly wants to be. If it is true that the persistence of groups and 
their institutions suggests the “efficiency” of the respective arrangements, then 
Hayek would have to make peace with a number these institutions, first and 
foremost, the welfare state, which would no longer figure as the first step on 
the Road to Serfdom but a tried-and-tested institution that has clearly prevailed 
for more than a hundred years. Furthermore, even Burkean or Oakeshottian 
conservatives can arrange themselves with reforms, if the reforms are clearly 
limited in scope and resemble the pattern of organic growth more than the 
disruptions caused by drastic and far-reaching innovations. However, Hayek’s 

	
Politics
149
proposals are far from limited in scope,8 and of course nothing distinguishes 
them from the abstract blueprints for social reforms he criticizes with a view 
to constructivist rationalism. He may argue that his model constitution does 
not manifest a radical break with the status quo because it seeks to restore a 
system of the rule of law as it once existed. But it was Hayek who called for 
the development of neoliberal “utopias” (see Hayek 1960), a choice of ter­
minology that would suggest something far more ambitious than the simple 
restoration of the status quo ante—although it would still constitute a radical 
break with the status quo. Hayek must have been aware of this fundamental 
ambiguity, if not to say contradiction, pervading his late work, but there are 
only very few instances where he seeks to address the tension and show that 
it is apparently quite possible to suggest that the best politics is to do nothing 
but cultivate the growth of spontaneous orders and, simultaneously, submit 
page after page packed with any number of reform proposals that are a far cry 
from watching traditions grow and develop in slow motion.9 Still, the overall 
impression remains that sketching out what a consistent neoliberal politics of 
reform would look like and what its (realistic) conditions of possibility are re­
mains a challenge, because the assumptions underlying the various frameworks 
of neoliberal thought seem to preclude the very possibility of such a politics. 
Change as the Politics of the Extraordinary
James Buchanan was deeply unconvinced by Hayek’s turn to evolutionary 
theory and on several occasions made it clear that there was no more rea­
son for a Hayekian evolutionary optimism than there was for a respective 
pessimism: “The institutions that survive and prosper need not be those 
that maximize man’s potential. Evolution may produce social dilemma as 
readily as social paradise” (Buchanan 1975, 167). Obviously, Hayek’s oscil­
lation between evolutionary fatalism and reformist activism was foreign to 
Buchanan. While he viewed Hayek as having erred on the side of the former, 
which amounted to what he called “‘extreme constitutionalism’ because of 
its elevation of the status quo to sacredness” (Buchanan 1986, 56), Buchanan 
located himself firmly on the side of the latter:10 Constitutions needed to be 
crafted and deliberate reform efforts were required for political communi­
ties to get closer to his own ideal of a free society. But if Buchanan holds 

150	
Politics
some serious reservations concerning Hayek’s approach to the politics of 
neoliberal reform as Buchanan interprets it, the same is true for his view of 
the ordoliberal option of trusting in the somewhat unpredictable appearance 
of benevolent aristocrats of the public spirit. The intraneoliberal antagonism 
in this case could not be more extreme, at least at first glance: Buchanan was 
the one who most vehemently insisted that the idea of benevolent rulers had 
to be rejected categorically to carry out any realistic analysis of politics. So it 
would seem that he can bypass the dilemma of ordoliberal politics of reform. 
Nevertheless, Buchanan’s approach exhibits its own oscillations and ex­
emplifies the pattern identified at the beginning of the chapter as none of 
the other neoliberal varieties do. Buchanan is also the most instructive and 
possibly the most fascinating case of them all, because he does not attempt 
to gloss over the problems as most others tend to do. On the contrary, an 
inquiry into Buchanan’s vision of a neoliberal politics of reform reveals the 
struggles between the fierce critic of actually existing democracy and its 
establishment and the reformer who must essentially break with the very 
assumptions that yielded the critical diagnoses lest the diagnoses remain 
without any possible therapy.11
Let us take a closer look at these tensions and recall what Buchanan 
has to say about homo economicus as a crucial ingredient of his approach. 
The innovative move in Buchanan’s thinking was, among other things, to 
assume that politicians and bureaucrats behaved according to the model of 
homo economicus. This implied that under democratic conditions politicians 
would have an overriding interest in securing their reelection, first and 
foremost, through logrolling with other political actors and responding 
to rent-seeking demands from organizations or movements representing 
constituencies considered of vital importance to these efforts. The results 
are incoherent state policy, short-termism, inflation, and the accumulation 
of public debt. The solution is (constitutional) rules, the balanced-budget 
amendment in particular. The simple yet theoretically rather devastating 
question then directed at Buchanan is, Why would one assume and how 
could one expect that politicians as rational utility maximizers who benefit 
from the nonexistence of effective rules would ever pass such laws? In other 
words, who and where are the agents of neoliberal reform? Obviously, this 
dilemma resembles the ordoliberal conundrum, but in Buchanan’s case the 

	
Politics
151
focal point is the conceptualization of homo economicus, which most ordo­
liberals rejected. However, he ultimately does not end up too far from the 
views of Röpke and Rüstow. Buchanan clearly has a keen awareness of the 
challenge he is facing; despite the various attempts to address it, he seems 
unable to resolve the antinomy between a locked-in politics of debt and a 
politics of neoliberal reform. Let us take a closer look at the manifestations 
of Buchanan’s struggles. 
One first possible way out of the dilemma, in my interpretation, is the 
embrace of referenda to introduce a balanced-budget amendment. Embold­
ened by the successful Proposition 13 adopted in California at the end of 
the 1970s, public-finance hawks across the United States were discussing 
this model of capping state expenditure (although Proposition 13 actually 
capped state revenue) and reining in the politics of the budget on both 
the state and national levels. The referendum option at first glance is very 
much in line with the more populist or antielitist aspects of Buchanan’s 
thought, and if it is true that the current arrangements benefit the forces 
of the political establishment, from lobbying groups to individual politi­
cians, at the expense of tax-paying citizens and their debt-laden offspring, 
then what would be more sensible than trying to bypass political elites and 
place the decision in the hands of the citizenry? Their representatives may 
have an incentive to resist the introduction of “debt brakes,” but citizens, 
whose time horizon may not be confined to the next election, might be the 
appropriate addressees for Buchanan’s reform proposals. However, soon 
after Proposition 13 had been passed, he already seemed skeptical about the 
extrapolation of the success of this specific initiative to the national realm 
(see Buchanan 1979b), and, speaking more theoretically, Buchanan barred 
this way out of the dilemma of neoliberal reform for himself when he made 
it clear that in his framework people, “whether as constituency members 
or as political agents, retain essentially the same behavioral characteristics 
that they exhibit in their nonpublic roles, as participants in ordinary private 
pursuits” (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 126). And in a certain sense, this is 
the only tenable position if Buchanan wants to defend the need for strict fis­
cal rules, because if “ordinary people” had a less narrowly conceived calculus 
of utility that could also encompass future utility of others—for example, 
their children—without massive discounting, then the question would arise 

152	
Politics
why there was any need for strict rules without the possibility of exceptions 
and exemptions in the first place. After all, even self-interested politicians 
and their parties could simply run on a ticket of fiscal responsibility or 
even budget surpluses and would be rewarded by citizens with electoral 
victories—or at least this would not be ruled out as a general possibility. 
Obviously, Buchanan cannot concede this possibility and insists that “while 
there is little political resistance to budget deficits, there is substantial resis­
tance to budget surpluses” (1991, 95), as if electoral defeat was a foregone 
conclusion for such a political platform. 
Yet Buchanan is not willing to entirely give up the chance of appealing 
to the citizenry with his constitutional reform project; thus, the view of the 
actors who populate Buchanan’s world becomes more nuanced and enriched 
the more he is pressed on the possibility of reform.12 In one instance he 
gestures at a dualist political anthropology, when he refers to “the struggle 
within each of us . . . between rent-seeker and the constitutionalists, and 
that almost all citizens will play, simultaneously, both of the roles (Buchanan 
1991, 2, 10). The constitutionalist attitude can be inferred negatively from 
how the constitutionally “illiterate” are characterized: “It becomes impos­
sible to ask such persons to think of their long-term interest, and certainly 
it remains folly to ask them to think of the interests of the more inclusive 
community” (Buchanan 1986, 56)—it is an attitude that would foster sup­
port for a balanced-budget amendment. 
If we follow the thread of this argument further, the politics of Buchanan 
turn into a much more far-reaching undertaking, because if it is true that 
there are constitutionalists in each of us that neoliberal reform efforts could 
appeal to, this presupposes that homo economicus is not a monolith. Recall 
that Buchanan’s descriptions of this behavioral model are not easily reduced 
to the cliché of “economic man” dedicated single-mindedly to seeking to 
maximize his narrowly understood utility. Not only has it already been 
confirmed that economic man is just one of the personas that make up the 
actual agent; it was far from clear what it meant to maximize one’s utility 
when “artifactual man” turned out to be constantly in the making, including 
his changing utility function. In light of all this, what emerges is a view of 
the subject characterized by a certain degree of fluidity, which also implies 
a certain degree of malleability—at least, this is what Buchanan suggests by 

	
Politics
153
the way he describes his own project. Consider the following: “The reform 
that I seek lies first of all in attitudes” (Buchanan 1975, 176), and it seeks to 
“facilitate the genuine transformation in behavior patterns that must occur” 
(Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 207). Buchanan may claim in other contexts 
that “this [his] approach starts with the empirical realities of persons as they 
exist” (Brennan and Buchanan 1985, x), but this is certainly not where it 
ends; rather, it aims to foster the constitutional attitude vis-à-vis the rent 
seeker’s just as Rousseau thought the citoyen had to be strengthened vis-à-vis 
the bourgeois. It is, to put it differently, a struggle for the soul of man; and 
while this religious terminology may seem inappropriate at first, not least 
because Buchanan, self-professedly, was anything but a religious person,13 
we will come to see that it captures the thrust of his endeavors quite well. 
In The Soul of Classical Liberalism Buchanan starts out with the provoca­
tive thesis that “we have, over more than a century, failed to ‘save the soul’ 
of classical liberalism” (2000, 111). Of course, his reference to the soul is not 
to be taken entirely seriously, but it is not just a jest, because his concern is 
that advocacy of liberalism may be based on two different motivations. One 
is the arguments of science and the appeal to self-interest; the other “stems 
from an understanding of the very soul of the integrated ideational identity” 
(ibid., 112). Liberalism will not prevail if its support is solely or predominantly 
based on the former: “Science and self-interest, especially as combined, do 
indeed lend force to any argument. But a vision of an ideal, over and beyond 
science and self-interest, is necessary, and those who profess membership 
in the club of classical liberals have failed singularly in their neglect of this 
requirement” (ibid.). Buchanan goes as far as to suggest “invoking the soul 
of classical liberalism, an aesthetic-ethical-ideological potential attractor, one 
that stands independent of ordinary science, both below the latter’s rigor and 
above its antiseptic neutrality” (ibid., 114). These are remarkable statements 
because they are a clear testimony to Buchanan’s conviction that profound 
social transformations along broadly liberal lines required a campaign that 
could not rely only on the better “scientific” arguments, but neither would 
it be able to rely on appeals to the self-interest of the rent-seeker persona in 
ourselves.14 It would have to be a campaign that addresses individuals on a 
different level and appeals to them as the constitutionalists they partly are, 
with a vision or an ideal that is not attractive to them because it resonates with 

154	
Politics
any short-term preferences but because it aims to change attitudes, behav­
iors, preferences, and an entire worldview. In other words, Buchanan hopes 
to convert people to liberalism, and again, this evangelical vocabulary may 
sound far-fetched, but he writes that “it is not surprising that those who seem 
to express the elements of the soul of classical liberalism best are those who 
have experienced genuine conversion from the socialist vision” (ibid., 117) 
and famously, if half-jokingly, described himself as a “born-again economist” 
(Buchanan 2007, 68). The neoliberal vision cannot be implemented if it is 
based solely on rational self-interest of political actors and/or citizens (see 
Brennan and Munger 2014, 339); a genuine conversion is needed to break 
the hold of rent seekers over constitutionalists, and thus genuine neoliberal 
change turns effectively into a politics of the quasi-religious extraordinary. 
The impetus for reform takes on the air of an almost eschatological yearning 
for a profound rupture (a “constitutional revolution”) of the monotony of the 
ever-same.15 Similar characterizations in Friedman and Rüstow confirm this 
interpretation in their dream of truly “great politics; the politics that is the 
art of the impossible, that which wrongly was considered to be impossible” 
(Rüstow 1960, 117). They characterize the moment of rupture as the time 
when “what seemed impossible suddenly becomes possible” (Friedman and 
Friedman 1990, xiv).
We are left with a noteworthy conclusion: The politics of neoliberal re­
form is fraught with lacunae and tensions, whether the ordoliberals Röpke and 
Eucken’s hope for benevolent guardians, Rüstow and Hayek’s defense of transi­
tory dictatorships, or Hayek’s commitment to evolutionary thought that leaves 
his own agenda of deliberate reforms with a questionable status. Buchanan’s 
approach is a final and perfect case in point. Based on the assumptions of his 
own approach, he is unable to explain how the neoliberal reforms he is striving 
for would ever come to be realized. As he candidly noted, “To hold out hope for 
reform in the basic rules describing the sociopolitical game, we must introduce 
elements that violate the self-interest postulate” (Brennan and Buchanan 1985, 
146). As a result, he has to resort to the hope for conversion and revolutions: 
in short, an eschatological politics of the extraordinary. 
There is a final point to be made as we transition from a sole focus on 
neoliberal theory to integrate considerations of neoliberal practice in the 
context of the European Union. It takes us back to the beginning of this book 

	
Politics
155
and the comment about the greatest trick that the devil ever pulled, which 
was not invented by the scriptwriter for The Usual Suspects but by Charles 
Baudelaire in his short story “The Generous Gambler.” Remember that in 
the controversies over neoliberalism one of the starkest contrasts is between 
those critics who speak of neoliberal hegemony and those sympathetic to 
neoliberalism who still profess that it has never really existed—at least in 
actual practice. In light of the discussion we have to conclude that there is 
another twist to this somewhat bizarre constellation because it seems as if 
the neoliberals themselves are also virtually a part of this debate, as their 
inability to theorize a proper politics of neoliberal reform offers inadvertent 
proof that the devil, indeed, cannot exist.
But what additional conclusions are to be drawn if there is empirical 
proof that neoliberal reforms are in fact passed and, for example, balanced-
budget amendments are introduced despite Buchanan’s difficulties in theo­
rizing the possibility? Of course, it is possible to argue that this has no 
implications because the politics of austerity and the debt brakes adopted in 
the EU could be simply an instantiation of those rare windows of opportu­
nity for a politics of the extraordinary. However, in my view, even those who 
strongly oppose the talk of a “neoliberal age” as too sweeping and mostly 
politically motivated would concede that neoliberal practices and their re­
spective reforms may not be hegemonic but are far from a rare anomaly in 
an otherwise solidly entrenched non-neoliberal status quo. So I think the 
rather simple conclusion to be drawn for the moment is along the lines of 
old-fashioned Popperian falsificationism: If the theory is not borne out in 
practice and empirical observation contradicts it, there must be something 
wrong with the theory and its assumptions. Buchanan’s own attempt to ac­
count for the fact that, empirically, politicians have at times closed certain 
constitutional loopholes concedes as much: “The political economist who 
tries to remain with a rent-seeking model of democratic politics cannot 
explain these events” (1991, 11). Concretely, this means that the neolib­
eral critiques of state and democracy especially become questionable in at 
least some of their aspects because they rely on assumptions and analytical 
frameworks that yield results that are—if only in certain respects—simply 
incongruent with observed reality. 

This page intentionally left blank 

157
We now broaden the scope of the analysis to ascertain how political theory relates 
to the world of actually existing neoliberalism in the context of the EU as 
it has been reshaped over the course of the financial crisis, particularly in 
response to the Eurozone crisis.
We focus on this spatiotemporal context for two reasons. First, I am inter­
ested in an analysis of “our neoliberal present,” using Foucault’s expression, 
what it looks like after one of the gravest crises since the Great Depression and 
what marks, if any, the crisis has left on its current shape and form. Second, 
I focus on Europe because the EU and EMU easily represent the most ad­
vanced laboratory for the development of neoliberal political forms. Here we 
find neoliberal ideas encapsulated not just in nation-states and international 
(trade) regimes but in a supranational federation (with a common currency). 
Furthermore, while many of the alleged causes of the financial crisis have not 
been addressed on either side of the Atlantic, the Eurozone has seen a flurry 
of far-ranging institutional reforms in response to the so-called sovereign 
debt crisis over the last decade. The implications are so far ranging that it is 
no overstatement to suggest that Europe today constitutes one of the most 
important sites for the development and contestation of neoliberalism. 
My main thesis is that we witness a transformation of the EU, which 
amounts to its increasing ordoliberalization in many important aspects. In 
Disciplining Europe
PART I I

158	
Disciplining Europe
other words, its structural setup has come to resemble ever more closely 
the vision(s) put forward especially—but not exclusively—by those think­
ers who belong to the ordoliberal current within neoliberalism, and within 
this current, particularly Walter Eucken. Building this case requires several 
preliminary steps in the argument. First, we briefly look at the financial 
crisis and compare the European and US responses. Initially the political 
approaches to deal with the socioeconomic fallout of the crisis did not dif­
fer dramatically, but there was a marked divergence with the onset of the 
Eurozone crisis in late 2009. In the following years, the gap between the 
economic development of the United States, which had a relatively speedy or 
at least continuous recovery from the crisis, and that of the Eurozone, which 
had a prolonged economic slump, widened significantly, which prompts a 
question concerning the merits and defects of the European crisis man­
agement. To scrutinize this, I briefly introduce the various major reforms 
in economic governance structures and policy measures and their effects. 
However, to gain a full understanding of the reforms, we must also briefly 
scrutinize the structure, workings, and effects of the EMU. This also gives us 
the opportunity to explore to what extent the EMU had already conformed 
to neoliberal tenets regarding economic federations even before its most 
recent reconfiguration. 
It is indisputable that while members of the EU through their respective 
institutions officially decided on the reform process—and less officially in 
the Euro Group in matters that pertain only to the Eurozone—Germany has 
commanded the most influence since 2010. Germany was already one of the 
most powerful EU members due to its economic weight, and the economic 
crises propelled it into a leading position in orchestrating the rescue of the 
Eurozone from its looming breakup. Therefore, we review varying attempts 
to explain Germany’s reform strategy. We must also tangentially address a 
complex issue and an equally complex and perennial debate, which concerns 
the explanatory framework and the underlying ontological assumptions used 
in accounting for actors’ behavior. In principle, there are three main factors 
to consider in such explanatory endeavors: interests, institutions, and ideas, 
possibly in varying combinations. Needless to say, much has been written 
about these issues, so I confine this discussion to making the case that nei­
ther exclusively interest-based approaches, those based on rational choice, 

	
Disciplining Europe
159
nor their purely institutionalist counterparts offer an adequate account. 
In my view, this position is generalizable, but it is particularly convinc­
ing in the case at hand because ideas matter even more than usual under 
certain conditions that can be described as fundamental uncertainty. 
Under such conditions, which the European crisis produced in its several 
iterations, actors are not even sure what their interests are and must con­
sequently rely—more or less consciously—on ideas and heuristics to chart 
their course of action. Therefore, in times of crisis ideas must be taken par­
ticularly seriously; and it is ordoliberal ideas that provided German policy 
makers with the basic frameworks and road maps to interpret the crisis 
and conceive of the appropriate remedies to overcome it. The result is the 
increasing ordoliberalization of Europe.


This page intentionally left blank 

161
At this point there exist numerous accounts of the global financial crisis of 2008 and 
what led to it, from the erudite analyses of political economists like Joseph 
Stiglitz or Nouriel Roubini to investigative journalistic narratives such as 
Michael Lewis’s The Big Short, which was even turned into a movie. Given 
the abundance of literature on the topic and the fact that it is of no imme­
diate relevance to my purposes, there is no need to once more recapitulate 
at length how cheap money provided by the Federal Reserve, surplus in­
ternational capital in search of investment opportunities, sophisticated but 
ultimately fatal financial instruments such as mortgage-backed securities 
developed by Wall Street, and a real estate market bubble in the United 
States eventually led to the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. This trig­
gered the crisis through the shockwaves it sent into the political economies 
on both sides of the Atlantic and even beyond (see, e.g., Roubini and Mihm 
2010; Stiglitz 2010) and which many on the political left considered a crisis 
of neoliberalism at the time (see Stiglitz 2008; Birch and Mykhnenko 2010; 
Duménil and Lévy 2011). 
Actors in financial markets responded to the unwillingness to save the 
rather small bank with panic, and a fire sale of all those assets suddenly 
turned toxic in the balance sheets of much larger financial institutions. This 
threatened to trigger a financial meltdown of truly epic proportions. To 
European Crises: Causes and 
Consequences
C HAPTE R 6

162	
European Crises
prevent this from happening, in the United States a Republican administra­
tion under George W. Bush decided to bail out the financial sector through 
the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program and turned the Federal 
Reserve Bank into a “bad bank,” into which those toxic assets could be 
transferred and thus disappear from the balance sheets of the private sec­
tor. The administration also de facto nationalized some of the major US 
financial institutions, and this would not be the last of the policy surprises. 
Despite the bailouts the financial sector was paralyzed and interbank 
lending was anemic, which translated into restrictions on economic activity 
on the supply side, resulting in lower investment. Furthermore, the burst of 
the real estate bubble, house foreclosures, the erasure of pension funds, and 
the overall sense of insecurity added less-than-favorable conditions on the 
demand side as (debt-financed) private domestic consumption threatened 
to collapse as well, and with it one of the former pillars of the American 
accumulation regime.1 So the newly elected Obama administration con­
tinued the course of unconventional policies begun by its predecessor with 
a multifaceted attempt to stimulate the “real” economy that had begun to 
slide into a recession. Funds were appropriated for public infrastructure 
projects through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, a Cash 
for Clunkers program was initiated to subsidize the ailing American car 
industry (only to eventually nationalize parts of it as well), and the govern­
ment essentially sent out checks in the form of tax rebates to approximately 
130 million households so their members would spend money. The fiscal 
stimulus was flanked by a monetary one by the Federal Reserve Bank, which 
lowered its interest rates dramatically and kept them this low until early 
2017. Furthermore, under Chairman Ben Bernanke the Federal Reserve 
also ventured into new territory with multiple rounds of “quantitative eas­
ing,” which amounts to the creation of new money and injecting it into the 
economy—the privilege and, some would say, one of the major advantages 
of a central bank. One of those who saw this capacity as a major advantage 
was John Maynard Keynes, and it stands to reason that he would have ap­
proved of the US strategy in countering the strong recessionary tendencies 
in the economy, because Keynesianism it was by all accounts. To be sure, for 
some commentators, such as Paul Krugman, the magnitude of these mea­
sures was still insufficient given the massive scale of economic contraction 

	
European Crises
163
the country underwent, but it is still noteworthy that thirty years after the 
“Volcker Shock” had officially buried Keynesianism and ushered in mon­
etarism in the United States,2 the portfolio of Keynesian stimuli measures 
was suddenly back in demand. Moreover, it was almost forty years ago, when 
Richard Nixon found himself declaring, “We are all Keynesians now!” This 
seemed to be true again, because not only the United States rediscovered 
the instruments of demand management, which brings us to the (immediate) 
European response to the crisis. 
In the early months of the financial crisis the European attempts to rein 
in its fallout hardly differed from the American strategies. Banks that were 
particularly exposed, because of their activities in the US real estate market 
and because financial sectors on both sides were simply too deeply inter­
woven for the European ones to be unaffected by the events in the United 
States, had to be bailed out to the tune of billions of euros, especially in 
Ireland, the United Kingdom, and Germany. And as in the United States, the 
banking crisis and the ensuing credit freeze promptly triggered a downturn 
in the economy more generally speaking, which the Europeans also sought 
to contain with fiscal stimuli; the German Abwrackprämie actually served as 
the model for the American Cash for Clunkers version. But while it seemed 
that in 2009 we were all Keynesians again—even the Chinese introduced 
a massive stimulus to shield their mainly export-driven economy from the 
repercussions of a global contraction—the Keynesian revival, at least in 
Europe, was short-lived, and what followed was a dramatic course reversal 
(see Woodruff 2016, 82). The retreat from Keynesianism and the begin­
ning of the divergence between European and US economic strategies and 
outcomes can be dated fairly precisely to October 2009, when the incoming 
government of Greece publicly announced that the public deficit was not a 
little more than 6 percent of GDP but a little less than double that. It was 
the beginning of the Eurozone crisis,3 as rating agencies refocused their 
attention on public debt and deficits and Greece’s bond rating was eventu­
ally downgraded from A to BBB−. This put the country immediately on 
the brink of default because its bonds were reduced to junk status and their 
yields spiked, which meant that the burden of debt including interest would 
increase even more. Not only Greece caught the eye of rating agencies but 
also other countries such as Spain and Ireland, who had been fiscal poster 

164	
European Crises
children up until the crisis, but they had to absorb the fallout of their own 
real estate bubbles bursting in 2009, which led to dramatically increased 
levels of public debt. In the changed context of a global recession, the pos­
sibility of a Greek default,4 fears of ensuing “contagion effects,” and the 
obvious but crucial fact that Eurozone countries could not issue debt in a 
currency they controlled (see De Grauwe 2011, 2), Italy and Portugal, whose 
debt levels did not see a rise comparable to those of Ireland or Spain, sud­
denly also found themselves on the list of countries whose debt levels were 
considered potentially unsustainable and whose bonds were downgraded as 
well. With them the group of countries that would come to be referred to 
as GIPS was complete (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, with Iceland 
later adding another “I”), and just as the acronym wrongly suggested that 
they all suffered from the same financial problems for a common reason, 
fiscal profligacy, a common solution was rolled out, and not only for them: 
the politics of austerity.
Austerity, in the words of Mark Blyth, who has written its authorita­
tive critical intellectual and natural history, “is a form of voluntary defla­
tion in which the economy adjusts through the reduction of wages, prices, 
and public spending to restore competitiveness, which is (supposedly) best 
achieved by cutting the state’s budget, debts, and deficits” (2013, 2). Thus, 
fiscal consolidation, tax rises, expenditure cuts (especially with regard to 
the welfare state), and labor-market reforms to overcome “rigidities” and 
increase flexibility became the order of the day. At the G20 summit in To­
ronto in 2010 the declaration signed by the finance ministers of participat­
ing countries gave a clear indication the tide was beginning to turn, as it 
emphasized “the importance of sustainable public finances,” which, despite 
the avowal to “follow through on delivering existing stimulus plans” marked 
a notable shift from only a few months before when the position had still 
been to ensure the recovery through a continuation of public spending 
(“G-20 Toronto Summit Declaration” 2010).5 Among the G20 countries, 
particularly the Europeans, especially the Germans alongside the British, 
opted for a change in course. German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble 
had an op-ed piece published in the Handelsblatt in June 2010, in which he 
stressed that the risks of an abrupt end to these policies notwithstanding, “a 
stimulus of aggregate demand financed through credit must not become a 

	
European Crises
165
drug-like state of permanence,” and therefore they needed an “exit strategy.” 
Addressing the criticism from the United States, he added that “for the 
German population sound public finances are of considerable importance; 
public debt levels considered too high, conversely, prompt anxieties—even 
if this is difficult to comprehend on the other side of the Atlantic” (Schäuble 
2010). Schäuble’s most vocal supporters were the incoming chancellor of 
the exchequer in Great Britain, George Osborne, and European Central 
Bank (ECB) director Jean-Claude Trichet. Addressing the British parliament 
in 2010, Osborne presented his first budget, which combined expenditure 
cuts (80 percent) with tax increases (20 percent) of an overall volume of 40 
billion pounds with the words: “This Budget is needed to deal with our 
country’s debts. This Budget is needed to give confidence to our economy. 
This is the unavoidable Budget. . . . The country has overspent; it has not 
been under-taxed,” thus ushering in the era of austerity in Britain. Trichet 
(2010b) wrote that “we expect governments to confirm their determination 
to consolidate their public finances” and provided specific recommendations 
for the methods as well: “Adjustment on the spending side, accompanied by 
structural reforms to promote long-term growth, has typically been the best 
strategy, especially when combined with a credible long-term commitment 
to fiscal consolidation.” In an interview with La Repubblica a month earlier 
he had already dismissed the mounting criticisms of the German course 
summarily: “I am pleased that the German government is concentrating 
on discipline. And what I think about Germany also applies to the others” 
(Trichet 2010a). 
And so the stage was set for an approach to the Eurozone crisis that would 
seek to keep the EMU together, at least for the time being; rescue packages 
were created to bail out the respective countries and protect—once again—the 
banks that had stockpiled the countries’ bonds and were too big to be saved by 
individual governments. However, the availability of these funds was strictly 
conditional on the implementation of the notorious “structural reforms” in 
the respective countries that would have effects in line with those of the poli­
tics of austerity.6 Furthermore, even for those European countries not on the 
verge of bankruptcy, fiscal discipline became the order of the day—or rather 
a state of permanence—crowding out most other considerations and recipes 
regarding a viable road to economic recovery. But before we take a closer look 

166	
European Crises
at these measures, two points are worth highlighting: First, the European 
approach differed strongly from that pursued by the US government, which 
is illustrated by the American position when the transatlantic rift began to 
open at the G20 summit in Toronto. In a letter to the G20, Secretary of the 
Treasury Tim Geithner pointed out that “concerns about growth as Europe 
makes needed policy adjustment threaten to undercut the momentum of the 
recovery” (cited in Giles and Oliver 2010). To be sure, the United States ex­
perienced its own fair share of austerity over time, from the “fiscal cliff” to the 
“sequestration” of the budget, which led to significant retrenchment, especially 
on the substate levels that are legally required to balance their budgets (see 
Krugman 2012, 213–214; Peck 2014). However, the rigidity of the European 
course in the face of no signs of recovery led to increasing puzzlement that 
was not confined to the expected outrage by committed Keynesians such as 
Paul Krugman. Others such as Joseph Stiglitz, Martin Wolf, and Erik Jones 
regularly wrote columns in the New York Times and Financial Times chiding the 
European Union, especially Germany, for a misguided and counterproductive 
attempt to save their way toward recovery. Even the US government, which 
routinely takes a more market-oriented position than most of its European 
counterparts, strongly recommended a review of the current course, citing 
concerns over the economic health of one of its most important trading part­
ners and urging the Europeans not to “free-ride” on the expansionary politics 
elsewhere—prompting the German response along the lines of Schäuble’s, 
quoted previously. More important, while the divergence between the respec­
tive approaches may be initially accounted for by the Eurozone crisis, which 
simply was not a factor in the context of US crisis management, this will not 
suffice as an explanation. While the austerity strategy may seem intuitively 
plausible as the only possible response to debts and deficits, it really is not, 
and neither was there no alternative, because the often-cited financial markets 
had supposedly demanded it (see Woodruff 2016, 104). 
A curious expression that Schäuble used in the Handelsblatt op-ed re­
veals the inherent contradictions of the austerity path toward fiscal sustain­
ability. What was needed now, wrote Schäuble, was “expansionary fiscal 
consolidation”—but it is far from clear how this might be achieved. After 
all, if a country is burdened by debts and deficits and embarks on a course 
of retrenchment, the immediate effect to be expected is a contraction of 

	
European Crises
167
the economy, which leads to additional expenditure in the form of “auto­
matic stabilizers,” such as unemployment support and massively reduced 
tax revenue. It is unclear where exactly the expansionary aspect in fiscal 
consolidation can be found.7 The counterargument is to cite the need to 
restore confidence in the fiscal sustainability of a country, which may lead 
to a reduction in yields on sovereign bonds.8 However, the “confidence 
fairy,” as Krugman came to call it mockingly in his columns (2012, 195), is 
a fickle creature because one would assume that in the short run confidence 
in fiscal sustainability is best restored through economic growth. Therefore, 
markets were at best ambiguous with regard to the viability of the auster­
ity strategy and for years did not show much sign that their confidence 
was restored—to the contrary. This brings us to the second point, which, 
from a practical political point of view, is arguably the more important one 
and concerns the socioeconomic development of the United States and the 
Eurozone over the following years. 
The recession in the United States technically lasted from December 
2007 to June 2009. In the Eurozone the initial recession lasted from Janu­
ary 2008 to April 2009. However, beginning in the third quarter of 2011 
it relapsed into a prolonged recession that lasted another two years. Since 
2014 there were only two quarters in which economic growth across the 
nineteen countries was higher than 0.5 percent. In terms of GDP per capita, 
the Eurozone shows a picture of steady decline until the first quarter of 
2017. If we compare the Eurozone and the United States with regard to 
this indicator from 2007 to 2015, the former’s poor performance is thrown 
into sharp relief. While Eurozone GDP per capita declined by 1.8 percent, 
in the United States there was an increase of 3 percent. 
These diverging economic trends are also reflected in what is argu­
ably the most fateful socioeconomic indicator, unemployment. As of 2014, 
American unemployment was at 6.7 percent; in the Eurozone it was almost 
twice that, with Spain and Greece having to endure levels of 26.7 and 27.8 
percent, respectively, with a punishing 57.4 and 59.2 percent level of youth 
unemployment. In 2015 unemployment slowly began to decline in the Eu­
rozone, but at the end of the year it was still as high as 10.4 percent. And 
while 2016 has seen the strongest recovery—the overall rate in December 
fell to single digits (9.4 percent) for the first time since spring 2009—this 

168	
European Crises
figure compares unfavorably with the 4.7 percent in the United States in 
the same month. Furthermore, what the average hides is the continuing 
high levels in the countries hardest hit by the crisis. In early February 2017 
Greece was still confronting a staggering overall unemployment rate of 23.1 
percent; and Spain, 18 percent.9 
In Greece and other Southern European countries epidemiologists can 
literally measure the reduction of average life expectancy and increased 
levels in (mental) illnesses due to the crisis. It seems that Europeans have 
paid a heavy toll over the course of “expansionary fiscal consolidation” in 
what has been described by commentators as a lost decade. This assessment 
seems hardly exaggerated even though the Eurozone is finally showing signs 
of a sustained recovery driven not only by the German economy. But after 
almost a decade of recession, an eventual upswing is surely to be expected. 
So the question that we will come back to is this: If even the traditionally 
fiscally hawkish Americans advised against it, if the markets were ambiguous 
at best, and if it subjects entire populations to at times unbearably harsh 
sacrifices, why was the politics of austerity pursued in such a single-minded 
manner in Europe?
Restructuring the EU/EMU: An Overview 
of the Major Reforms
The first major reform triggered by the Eurozone crisis was an immediate 
response to the situation in Greece that was designed to keep the country 
solvent—just enough so it could be held in debt bondage forever, more critical 
voices would say—and prevent it from having to leave the EMU as a conse­
quence.10 The European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) was established 
in 2010. It did not provide funds but only guarantees and was specifically 
introduced as an emergency measure limited to three years to make sure it 
would not conflict with the now (in)famous no-bail-out clause of Article 125 
of the Treaty for the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), which 
prohibits member states or European institutions from financing national 
budgets. However, it soon became clear that the EFSF could not placate inves­
tors’ concerns and that Greece would not, contrary to early predictions by the 
European Commission and the proponents of austerity, return to economic 

	
European Crises
169
growth anytime soon, not to mention countries like Spain, Portugal, and 
Ireland, which were also in need of financial assistance. So in July 2011, after 
the TFEU had been amended accordingly, the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM) was created to replace EFSF and to provide Eurozone member states 
that applied for financial support with both guarantees and actual money: 80 
billion euros were available in paid-in funds by member states and another 620 
billion of callable capital. However, this money was made available only with 
strict conditions.11 Recipients, which include at the time of writing Greece, 
Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Cyprus, had to agree to sign a memorandum of 
understanding, in which they committed themselves to implement structural 
reforms in the spirit of austerity. The typical measures demanded applicants 
for ESM funds to carry out tax increases; cuts in state expenditures, especially 
related to social policies, such as reduction of pensions, health-care coverage, 
and unemployment benefits; privatization of public assets; and deregulation 
of labor markets. Given that these measures resemble very closely the typical 
contents of the Structural Adjustment Programs the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) would prescribe to countries in need of financial assistance as 
condition for its support, it may not be a surprise that the IMF also became 
involved in the ESM rescue packages as part of the infamous Troika, which 
is now officially referred to as “the institutions.” Still, it is noteworthy that 
an international organization was brought in to complement the European 
Commission and the ECB in their task of monitoring the progress made by the 
recipients of funds in implementing the required reforms. It stands to reason 
that the assumption was that the regime would be even stricter if an external 
organization with a reputation for insisting on the implementation of its often 
harsh adjustment programs was brought in and that the threat to withhold 
the next tranche of financial aid in the absence of significant progress would 
be more credible. It is highly ironic, therefore, that of the three institutions 
the IMF has emerged as the least hawkish and even threatened to leave the 
arrangement if there were not significant debt restructuring in Greece. In any 
case, with the Troika a strong and strict enforcement agent has been created, 
and it does not seem exaggerated to say that the governments of EFSF/ESM 
recipient countries have little room to maneuver in regard to accepting and 
implementing the various memoranda—even against the expressed will of 
their own citizenry.12

170	
European Crises
The ESM-cum-Troika arrangement is the part of the euro rescue op­
eration that is most easily and rightfully scandalized; commentators in the 
respective countries sometimes refer to the Troika as an “occupation regime” 
(the Troika officials actually visited the countries in question to make a 
firsthand assessment of their progress, implicitly suggesting that the reports 
filed by the local administrations and government were not trustworthy) 
and the memorandum as an “economic dictate.” However, for my thesis 
the other three major reforms are arguably even more important because 
they do not concern emergency rescue operations of countries on the verge 
of bankruptcy but constitute a structural transformation of the economic 
governance of the EU/EMU. 
The so-called Six-Pack, deliberations over which began in March 2010 in 
the middle of the initial debates over a Greek bailout, was officially adopted 
in November 2011; it is a far less prominent subject of public debate than the 
Troika, but it has far-reaching implications for the restructuring of the EU/
EMU. Its rather masculinist name derives from the fact that it consists of five 
regulations and one directive—it is part of secondary EU law—and its main 
effect can be described as tightening and complementing the existing Stability 
and Growth Pact (SGP) from 1996–1997 passed in the run-up to the introduc­
tion of the euro and designed to placate particularly German concerns over the 
stability of the future European currency. The signatories essentially commit­
ted themselves to adopt what is often referred to as a quintessentially German 
“culture of stability,” which translated into the measurable parameter of a rule 
of a maximum of 3 percent deficits and 60 percent public debt. However, the 
efficacy of the SGP had always been a matter of debate among Europeanists 
(see Heipertz and Verdun 2010; Savage 2007). The respective questions re­
garding the SGP’s efficacy loomed even larger when in the early 2000s France 
and Germany repeatedly violated the deficit rule. Even though the commission 
wanted to initiate the pact’s excessive deficit procedure, because procedural 
rules were unclear and, more important, because a sufficiently large number 
of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council (ECOFIN) members resisted, 
neither country was sanctioned.  Consequently, the SGP was reformed, but 
in the eyes of many observers the regime of fiscal discipline was considered 
so toothless that it was practically irrelevant—at least in regard to powerful 
nations such as Germany and France (see Leblond 2006).

	
European Crises
171
So the Six-Pack was to build on and restore the SGP in three ways. First, 
it tightened the already existing excessive deficit procedure by explicitly in­
cluding debt levels in it. This means that a procedure can be initiated against 
a country even if it does not fail the deficit criterion but has a debt level above 
60 percent of GDP. Second, the lesson from the standoff between Germany, 
France, and the commission in the early 2000s incorporated in the Six-Pack 
is the introduction of the “reverse qualified majority” as a decision-making 
rule in the council. Before its introduction, the commission’s recommenda­
tion to initiate a procedure had to be backed by a qualified majority in the 
council in order to go forward, obviously opening up the possibility of form­
ing blocking alliances with others for the countries in question. Now the 
recommendation to initiate the procedure and whether to fine member states 
continuously in violation is adopted if there is no qualified majority against 
it. Presumably, this makes it much more difficult to block the procedure 
and thus comes close to a quasi-automatic rule that is supposed to minimize 
political influencing, logrolling, and so on. The reverse-qualified-majority 
rule also applies to the final novelty included in the Six-Pack, which may be 
seen as an immediate response to the Eurozone crisis but, in its implications, 
is also that part of the reform package with the most far-reaching implica­
tions: the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP). 
The MIP can be considered a lesson from the debt crisis to the extent 
that “for most euro periphery member states, the crisis was mainly a bal­
ance of payment crisis, due to the building up of persistent macroeconomic 
imbalances from the launch of the single currency in 1999” (Howarth and 
Quaglia 2015, 466). In other words, it was now assumed that not only ex­
cessive deficits and debt constituted a problem individually for the country 
in question and collectively for the EMU, but excessive imbalances would 
also have to be monitored through the preventive arm or rectified through 
the corrective arm of the procedure, which in this respect was designed 
after the model of its excessive deficit counterpart. Although deficits and 
debts are much less unambiguously and objectively certified by some third 
party such as the commission than one may think, because accounting 
systems vary and sometimes are intentionally made to vary,13 this is even 
more the case with regard to a macroeconomic imbalance and the question 
of when it becomes “excessive.” Macroeconomic imbalances can be related 

172	
European Crises
to relative competitiveness, which obviously does not make matters easier, 
because the question then concerns the measurement of competitiveness. 
Accordingly, the political economists of the commission have designed 
an economic scoreboard consisting of eleven indicators that together are 
supposed to give a quantifiable expression of this relative competitiveness. 
I cannot dwell long on this scoreboard and the questions it raises,14 but 
briefly the indicators in some cases measure flows and relative changes 
over time; in others, static conditions; and with regard to all of them the 
scoreboard identifies certain thresholds that delimit the range of acceptable 
variation. If one or more indicators move outside this range, the commis­
sion can initiate the preventive arm of the MIP and, typically, conducts an 
in-depth country review; based on the review, the commission either sees 
no further cause for action or, more likely, makes recommendations about 
how to address the imbalance through the appropriate reform measures. If 
excessive imbalances that require actions are not remedied in due time, the 
commission can eventually initiate the corrective arm of the procedure and, 
as in the case of excessive deficits, sanction the country with financial fines. 
What is noteworthy about the indicators for a macroeconomic imbalance 
is what makes the effects of the procedure so far reaching: effects include 
balance of payments, real effective exchange rates, public and private debt 
levels, and real estate prices and unit-labor costs. Some of these effects 
are subject to rather limited direct governmental influence; to the extent 
that they actually can be influenced by governmental policy, the measures 
putatively required can pertain to policy areas that are explicitly outside 
EU competencies, such as social and labor-market policy. Accordingly, 
the MIP broadens the scope of European influence through the commis­
sion on national policy far beyond the formal domain of the EU, and it 
presupposes a much more in-depth knowledge of domestic politics and 
arrangements, as an official from the secretariat general of the commission 
confirms: “The excessive deficit targets are relatively straightforward, but 
advising member states what to do about the development of real estate 
prices, their pension systems, or their unemployment benefits requires 
a completely different kind of knowledge” (cited in Savage and Verdun 
2015, 110). One can argue that the MIP constitutes a step away from the 
exclusive focus on debts and deficits and is therefore to be welcomed, but 

	
European Crises
173
it nevertheless broadens the scope of the commission’s scrutiny and influ­
ence dramatically, which is not only questionable from a democratic but 
also from an EU law point of view. 
The next reform package is the Two-Pack, consisting of two regulations 
adopted in 2013. Its main purpose is to standardize the national budgeting 
processes of the Eurozone members in the framework of the so-called Euro­
pean Semester introduced in 2011 and to increase the commission’s supervi­
sory powers over national budgeting. In the intricate schedule introduced by 
the reform package, national governments have to submit their draft budgets 
at a particular time to the commission for review to assess whether it is in 
line with medium-term budgetary objectives based on forecasts regarding 
the economic development of the country in question. Importantly, the 
budget has to be submitted to the commission, which expects a response to 
its assessment regarding its feasibility before the national parliaments can view 
and debate the budget. To be sure, national parliaments ultimately decide 
officially on the budget, and over the course of the European Semester the 
European Parliament and the council are also consulted and can give opin­
ions, but the overall effect of the reform is a significant shift in influence 
from the legislative to the executive branches, which is noteworthy given 
that budgetary power of the purse is historically considered the core com­
petency of parliaments. But it also involves a shift from the national to the 
supranational scale, as the commission acquires unprecedented monitoring 
and at least indirect influencing capacities over national budget processes. 
Finally, these new rules, just as monitoring done with regard to the preven­
tive arms of excessive deficit and macroeconomic imbalance procedures, 
apply not only to exceptional cases of countries facing bankruptcy, as in the 
case of the ESM-cum-Troika regime, but to all member states of the EU, 
or the Eurozone in the case of the European Semester.
The final and most recent reform we consider is the Treaty on Stability, 
Coordination and Governance that was signed in 2012 and came into effect 
in 2013. Originally, it was not part of EU law but an international treaty 
signed by all EU members except the United Kingdom and the Czech Re­
public. However, in December 2017, it was adopted as part of EU law. While 
it includes other elements that consist mostly of calls for increased coopera­
tion and coordination, its most important part is the Fiscal Compact. The 

174	
European Crises
Fiscal Compact once more targets deficits and debts because it requires the 
signees to pass balanced or surplus budgets; the maximum deficits allowed 
in accordance with the pact are −0.5 percent or −1 percent if a country’s 
debt is significantly below 60 percent of GDP. If a country is above the 
60 percent threshold, it is required to work toward reducing its debt by 5 
percent annually. Again, it is first and foremost the commission that is in 
charge of monitoring adherence to the Fiscal Compact, and it presents the 
countries in violation with restructuring programs designed to bring their 
fiscal status in line with treaty requirements. In addition, it can install stabil­
ity councils in the respective countries. If a country fails to deliver on the 
requirements, the commission and individual signatory states can take the 
matter to court and sue in the European Court of Justice (ECJ), which may 
fine the country. Last, and by far not least, the Fiscal Compact stipulates that 
all signees should introduce a “debt brake” or balanced-budget amendment 
along the lines of what Germany passed in 2009 through national legislation, 
preferably on the level of constitutional law. The balanced-budget amend­
ment seemingly is informed by practical experience and scholarship on the 
efficacy of supranational fiscal rules, which suggests that such rules tend 
to have a much more tangible effect if they are part of national legislation 
rather than international or EU law (see Marneffe et al. 2011). With these 
major reforms clarified in their basic contours and respective thrust, we now 
explore how they fit into the larger context of the EU/EMU.15 
The Evolution of the EU
It goes without saying that it is impossible to provide a comprehensive 
account of the EU and its transformation from its nucleus, the European 
Coal and Steel Community to the European Community established sixty 
years ago in the Treaty of Rome to the set of overlapping unions—the EU 
proper, the EMU, and the Schengen Area—which are not in complete con­
gruence. It is also beyond the scope of this chapter to provide an exhaustive 
analysis of the various institutions of the EU from the European Parliament, 
to the European Commission, the Council of the European Union / the 
European Council, and the ECJ, although I will reference them on occa­
sion. The twofold task of this section is more limited. First we need a basic 

	
European Crises
175
grasp of the structure and dynamics of the EMU to comprehend how they 
contributed to the specific characteristics of the Eurozone crisis and to allow 
us to assess the logic of the various reforms described previously. We can 
then pursue the question of whether and to what extent the EMU—even 
before the most recent restructuring—conformed to neoliberal visions of a 
federation as they are found in the works of Hayek, Buchanan, and Röpke, 
analyzed in Chapter 2. 
After the Single European Act of 1986 revived the aspirations first ex­
pressed in the Treaty of Rome, the European Community was committed to 
form a “common market” based on what is usually referred to as the “four 
freedoms”: free movement of goods, capital, services, and people across 
borders. The aim was to form a market on which there would be no restric­
tions for “insiders” to move and allocate. In the legal language used by the 
ECJ, the market was to be based on a rigorous application of the principle 
of nondiscrimination of EU citizens, companies, and other organizations. 
One of the essential preconditions for markets and effective competition is 
to increase mobility of factors and reduce restrictions on their allocation as 
far as possible. Companies should be able to invest their capital and even 
relocate wherever the law of value suggests without having to face bureau­
cratic hurdles or other protective measures like tariffs from the jurisdic­
tion in question, even if domestic competitors might be negatively affected. 
People also should be able to take a job and simply decide to live in whatever 
jurisdiction they choose without any restriction, although the assumption 
among the creators of the common market always was that people would 
exhibit the least mobility compared to that of goods, capital, and services; 
consequently, the aim was to create efficient “local factor markets” rather 
than count on people migrating between countries in massive numbers 
(see Jones 2013, 149). In the eyes of many observers the EU has a rather 
disappointing record regarding integration and development of common 
positions, such as in the area of foreign and defense policy, but the common 
market has always been regarded as an area where “integration through law” 
had proceeded most forcefully. The commission emerged as a determined 
actor in enabling and fighting any restrictions of competition; competition 
policy is probably the most Europeanized policy area in the EU. The ECJ, 
similarly, established itself as a strict guardian and enforcer of the principle 

176	
European Crises
of nondiscrimination, granting all legal or natural persons who considered 
themselves restricted in their market access and their right to compete on 
equal footing the right to take the case to court; and the large majority of 
cases were decided in their favor. 
With the Common Market spearheading European integration, the 
next logical next step would seem to be to enable even more efficient factor 
allocation and trade by introducing a common currency. However, behind 
the Euro and EMU were not only economic but also political considerations. 
Even before German reunification the former Federal Republic of Germany 
was an economic heavyweight with regard to output and a currency, the 
Deutschmark, which represented stability to the extent that several other 
European countries had their currencies more or less officially pegged to 
it. The idea of a common currency was born in the negotiations over a 
potential German reunification in 1989–1990. Among the former Allies, 
especially the United Kingdom, there was considerable concern over the 
prospect of a reunified Germany, which possibly would put the “German 
question” back on the agenda: how a Germany located at the geographical 
center of the continent, too small for a hegemon but much bigger, especially 
economically speaking, than all of its neighbors, could be peacefully accom­
modated in a European framework. The answer to the German question, 
albeit provisional, was the euro. To simplify, the deal struck particularly 
between France and Germany was that the Germans would give up their 
highly valued—both in real and symbolic terms—Deutschmark in return 
for French support of reunification and the pledge to ensure institutionally 
that the future euro would be as stable as the Deutschmark had been. The 
ECB was to be fashioned after the model of the German Bundesbank with 
complete independence from political influence and a mandate that was, 
arguably, to be even narrower than the Bundesbank’s in its sole focus on and 
limitation to ensuring price stability. Furthermore, the Germans insisted 
not only on strict convergence criteria, especially regarding deficits/debt 
and currency stability, for countries to be eligible to join the EMU; they 
also wanted assurance that countries, once they had joined, would not slide 
back into possibly running deficits and accumulating debt. Rather, countries 
were expected to live up to the requirements of a “culture of stability,” as it 
is typically referred to, and thus the SGP was conceived. Finally, and also 

	
European Crises
177
most fatefully, in Article 125 of the TFEU the no-bail-out clause was codi­
fied, making it illegal for any member state or the ECB to directly finance 
the budget of another member state, thus supposedly ensuring no country 
could ever be held liable for another’s debt and signaling clearly to each 
member state that it could not rely on anyone’s support if it found itself in 
dire financial straits. 
It is quite obvious from this clearly selective and simplified recapitula­
tion of the events leading to the formation of EMU that the initial political 
case for the euro was arguably strong among all concerned parties. The new 
arrangement gave France, the Netherlands, and Belgium, who joined EMU 
right away, at least a seat at the table of monetary policy, since the national 
central bank directors formed the board of the ECB; previously these countries 
were affected by the monetary course of the Bundesbank without having any 
say in it. The Germans, however, were granted the approval to reunify and 
received the institutional guarantees they wanted from the ECB’s mandate 
to the no-bail-out clause. Furthermore, the EMU became especially attrac­
tive for countries that had not been known for their culture of stability and 
therefore had had to pay high yields on their sovereign bonds. Once they 
had met the convergence criteria and joined the euro, the yields dropped 
to almost German levels, with investors obviously operating under the as­
sumption that Italian or Spanish debt was ultimately guaranteed by German 
economic power. In this sense there were obviously good economic reasons 
for these countries to join the euro because their access to capital increased 
tremendously. However, although Spain did indeed benefit from its debt being 
effectively treated like German debt, the Germans, in turn, benefited from 
their currency not only being treated like the Spanish one but it in fact being 
the same. As a consequence the value of the euro was much lower, relatively 
speaking, than the Deutschmark would have been, thus providing exchange-
rate levels that were highly favorable for a country that had come to rely 
strongly on an export-led accumulation regime and, with the euro, would 
come to depend on it even more. 
While there were strong economic reasons to join the euro, economic 
reason did not necessarily look favorably on the EMU, because as soon as 
the idea of the common currency was codified in the Maastricht Treaty in 
1992, there was no shortage of economists who pointed out the vagaries of 

178	
European Crises
such an undertaking. The future Eurozone, they pointed out, was not an 
“optimum currency area” (Mundell 1961), essentially meaning that there 
was not sufficient ability to absorb asymmetric shocks, such as an economic 
crisis, through labor-force mobility and interregional transfers; and the 
disparities between widely differing varieties of capitalism or accumula­
tion regimes would ultimately drive the currency union apart (see, e.g., 
Feldstein 1997). If at all, the euro should be introduced at the end of a 
long process of economic convergence, the argument went; but in combi­
nation with the political rationale of an ever-closer union with a common 
currency the opposite view was victorious in the debate. The existence of 
disparities between the EMU members was not disputed, but the sequence 
of the “coronation theory” that saw the euro as the crowning achievement 
at the end of economic convergence was reversed: Now the Euro was to 
provide the common monetary framework that, once adopted, would slowly 
but steadily push the various economies toward convergence.
However, the years following the introduction of the euro in 1999 in­
stead showed a pattern of persisting, if not widening, gaps between the 
various political economies. One of the major reasons for this development 
was what many consider to be the fatal flaw of the EMU and among the root 
causes of the debt crisis, a common monetary policy that had to operate ac­
cording to one size fits all without a common fiscal policy. What happened 
in the early 2000s can be exemplified by Germany and Spain. For a number 
of reasons in the early years of this century, Germany was not the economic 
powerhouse it is seen as today. In fact, it was considered the “sick man of 
Europe,” with sluggish growth, high unemployment, an aging population, 
and what commentators at the time chided as an oversized welfare state 
and rigid labor market. Before the EMU was established, the value of the 
Deutschmark might have decreased to the benefit of the export sector in this 
situation. Furthermore, given the very low levels of inflation, the Bundes­
bank could have provided some monetary impulses to spur economic growth. 
However, the value of the common currency did not decrease, and the ECB 
had to consider not only Germany’s economic fate and its position closer to 
the bottom of the business cycle but also that of Spain, which experienced 
a massive influx of capital; the resulting economic activity, especially in the 
real estate sector, heated up the economy, resulting ultimately in rising 

	
European Crises
179
wages and prices. The dilemma the ECB was in and continues to be faced 
with is obvious. An expansionary German monetary policy with lowered 
interest rates would have been well within its mandate, given the low real 
inflation levels, and recommendable, given the slow economic growth; but 
Spain, which experienced the opposite conditions, would have required a 
much more contractive course in monetary policy. Aside from some minor 
instruments of regionally fine-tuning its policy, the ECB simply had to strike 
a balance between the two and all other EMU member states. In the real­
ity of a nonoptimum currency zone the one-size-fits-all policy of the ECB 
turned out to be closer to one size fits none. Given the obvious dilemma 
and the resulting deficiencies of ECB policy, one cannot help asking why 
the EMU was introduced without a common fiscal policy that could, for 
example, provide funds for interregional transfers and in other ways provide 
the instruments to counterbalance the uniform monetary policy according 
to national/regional needs and conditions. It is a question we return to later 
but can only speculate about at this point. It is well known that especially in 
the early years, European integration took place not necessarily behind the 
backs of the European citizenry but in the face of its benevolent indifference 
to the technical details of coal and steel market integration or competition 
law. The theory that captures this pattern best is neofunctionalism; according 
to its key concept the prime engine of ever-deeper integration was spillover 
effects of a mostly but not exclusively functional nature. If a particular policy 
area had been integrated, it simply made technical sense to integrate those 
affected by this integration accordingly, and there may have been the hope 
that the spillover effect from a common monetary policy could be a com­
mon fiscal policy in the framework of a real political union. However, for 
manifold reasons, the cunning of neofunctionalist reason failed this time 
and left the EMU to stand on just one leg of monetary policy.
To return to the situation in the early 2000s, the German government 
made a decision with far-reaching implications to overcome the economic 
difficulties through Agenda 2010, which primarily aimed at a labor-market 
deregulation resulting in an increased commodification of labor power, 
which, in combination with union wage restraint, drove down production 
costs in the German economy and enhanced its relative competitiveness. At 
the same time, Spain enjoyed the influx of capital because of its booming 

180	
European Crises
economy but also because banks were happy to buy government bonds, 
either assuming that Spanish debt would be as good as German debt or 
wagering that if they only bought enough bonds, the banks would have to 
be bailed out in the worst-case scenario. The result was, first, a decrease 
in Spanish competitiveness for reasons already mentioned and, second, an 
ever-closer but fateful union, not between European countries but states 
and banks, in what is often referred to as the “sovereign-bank nexus,” which 
proved to be one of the problems in the Eurozone crisis.16 
But what happened to all of the capital that flowed into countries such 
as Spain, Ireland, and Greece up to the onset of the financial crisis? Was 
it all spent on “women and drink,” as the president of the Euro Group, 
Jeroen Dijsselbloem, quipped inflammatorily in a 2017 interview? What­
ever it was, a lot of it came from Germany: While the hegemonic crisis 
narrative is that of profligately spending states and individuals in Southern 
Europe, suggesting that the only plausible and moral response is to tighten 
belts, resort to the politics of austerity, and become more competitive 
like the Germans already had done, this narrative omits, once more, the 
other side of the equation of the German recovery and fails to appreci­
ate the conditions of economic interdependence. Cost-cutting your way 
to economic growth is difficult in a closed economy, because those pro­
ducers—employees who now earn less—also buy less as consumers, and 
therefore the strategy can work only if someone else buys all the goods 
that are now produced more cost-competitively. To exaggerate a little, it is 
not least due to the willingness of Spaniards and Greeks to use the cheap 
money available to them to buy products made in Germany that Germany 
was able to return to economic growth. If their fellow Europeans really 
were to follow the German example in a more determined manner, a lot 
more products would be produced at cheaper prices, but in Europe no 
one would buy them (see Sandbu 2015, 18).
So here we have the deeper roots of the Eurozone crisis, which has, of 
course, something to do with macroeconomic imbalances, relative competi­
tiveness, and debt, all of which are supposedly addressed by the reformed 
economic governance structures. But they are not necessarily the respon­
sibility of any individual country and its alleged profligacy, but they are at 
least coproduced through a systemic context of overleveraged banks in a 

	
European Crises
181
deadly embrace with indebted states, a nonoptimum currency zone, and an 
economic policy for the Eurozone that has to act solely with its one monetary 
arm, the fiscal one being tied behind its back.
Neoliberal Thought and European Integration
Before we return to the institutional responses to the Eurozone crisis, how 
they can be accounted for, and to what extent they correspond to the tenets 
of the political theory of ordoliberalism in particular in the next chapter, we 
must first assess in which respects the European Union already conformed 
to neoliberal precepts long before the recent restructurings and even before 
it became a monetary union and was only the European Economic Com­
munity (EEC) founded through the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Obviously, 
Eucken’s untimely death prevented him from an assessment of early Euro­
pean integration, and Rüstow rarely discussed the issue in a detailed manner. 
However, the few times he addresses the EEC in his published works, his 
views are surprisingly skeptical. He contends, for example, that “the common 
market in reality . . . has further divided Europe” (1963, 111, see also 22).17 
Röpke (1955) is by far the most prolific commentator on early European 
integration, and despite his strong support of federalism in the abstract 
we already know that his criticisms of the concrete European integration 
project, from its earliest manifestation of the European Coal and Steel Com­
munity onward, are harsh. Röpke’s position is centered around three core 
arguments:18 First, if the overall goal of economic policy is to free market 
interaction from undue constraints beyond the rules of an economic order, 
this goal can be achieved through both a common market and a free-trade 
zone (which would still leave decisions on trade policy with nation-states, 
to name but one important difference). This would simply mean that each 
nation-state liberalizes its trade regime and opens up its market for foreign 
capital, goods, and so on, and in this sense true economic integration “starts 
at home,” as he puts it (Röpke 1954, 311). The advantage of such a free-
trade zone is that it comes without the risk Röpke highlights with regard 
to the common market and a customs union: an inside-outside dialectic, 
in which internal liberalization corresponds with external protectionism. 
Such regional economic blocks could pose an obstacle to what he still has 

182	
European Crises
in mind as an ultimate telos of international integration, a universalist, mul­
tilateral world market along the lines of those of the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries (see Röpke 1958, 171; 1953a, 21; Slobodian 2018). 
Specifically, he warns of the potentially exclusionary thrust of a post-Rome 
core Europe that would seal itself off economically from both the remaining 
European states and the United States. Instead, Röpke promotes the idea of 
an openly integrating common market, which not only offers access to other 
European countries but would also, in due time, include the United States 
in a transatlantic union, a vision undoubtedly fueled by Cold War anxieties 
as well (see Wegmann 2002, 325–328). 
Second, Röpke is concerned about the mode of the integration process, 
which in the early years and decades of European integration in many respects 
followed the pattern of sectoral microlevel integration that would produce its 
own spillover dynamic and thus lead to ever-more-encompassing integration. 
Arguably, the crucial recipe for success of this mode of functional integration was 
to strategically favor economic over political integration, and as we can infer 
from Röpke’s views of federalism more generally, he strongly objected to 
economic integration preceding political integration (see 1954, 313). 
Third, and most important, Röpke was well aware that while there is 
an undeniable “ordoliberal imprint” on the EEC (Joerges 2015, 74), there 
were other rivaling projects pursued within the framework of the common 
market, hoping to apply to it the techniques of Keynesian macroeconomic 
management. After all, Italy and especially France, as founding members 
of the EEC, had a long history of a more statist understanding of economic 
governance, which in the 1950s and 1960s merged with Keynesianism and 
thus provided the European antipode to predominantly German ordoliberal 
views of the single market. For Röpke, there is a real danger that Europe­
anization of certain competencies in economic and especially competition 
policy, which is the requisite of building the single market, will be seized on 
by the forces of Keynesianism and dirigisme in their attempt to reconfigure 
the EEC into the dystopia of a centralized “collectivist European state” 
(1953a, 26). And concomitant with such a “superstate,” Röpke suspects a 
sweeping “harmonization” of regulations and social standards, if not even a 
“race to the bottom” with regard to monetary discipline that will leave the 
EEC with ever-rising inflation rates (ibid.).

	
European Crises
183
This last line of argument is a curious one because rhetorically it often 
figures as the core of Röpke’s position, as he continually raises the specter 
of large-scale collectivism. But at the same time, the urgency of Röpke’s 
warnings is significantly diminished when he ensures his readers that a 
centralized European state can never become reality, thus echoing Hayek’s 
prewar argument regarding the supranational scale in federations. Both are 
adamant that it is inconceivable for European nations to delegate to “such 
an international Leviathan power competencies that the majority of them 
would not even grant their own national government” (Röpke 1953a, 26). 
So while there seems to be no real danger of a collectivist Europe, Röpke’s 
rhetorical strategy relies as much on what he views as the benefits of free 
trade as on his premonitions of European integration gone awry in a central­
ist fashion. What we have then is an initially surprising finding: While many 
commentators point to the neoliberal and ordoliberal elements in the EEC 
(see Dardot and Laval 2017, 194), the one ordoliberal thinker who has exten­
sively written on early European integration is, on balance, more of a critic 
than a supporter. In my reading, Röpke’s reluctance to endorse European 
economic integration because of concerns over an excessively centralist su­
pranationalism is also related to the lingering tensions in neoliberal thought 
regarding the prima facie contradictory strategies of decentralizing and 
recentralizing state structures, discussed in chapter 2. Remember that while 
one variety of neoliberal thought opted for the decentralization of statehood, 
including Hayek, Röpke, and Buchanan, the other emphasized the need to 
recenter the nation-state with Hayek and—to some extent—Röpke arguing 
this case as well. Röpke’s overall critical stance with regard to European 
integration can be read as an expression of his theoretical undecidedness 
in these matters. Ultimately, Röpke’s abstract embrace of federalism as the 
crucial step in overcoming national sovereignty stands in stark contrast to the 
overall line of argumentation in the context of European integration, where 
he vehemently points to the continued importance of nation-states within 
federations, which is consistent with his notion of federalism. Beyond that 
he suggests that the real desideratum of international economic order, free 
trade, can be achieved best in a classic Westphalian system of nation-states 
in which each signs bilateral agreements with the others.19 So it is not even 
entirely clear whether in the concrete European context, Röpke is no more 

184	
European Crises
than a federalist in name only. His last text on Europe from 1964 is symp­
tomatic in this regard, as he spends the better part of it pointing out the ills 
of harmonizing policies and delegating powers to the supranational scale 
up to the misconceived plan of a “common European government” (1964, 
235). He then adds in the very last sentence the reminder that “everything 
should be done to promote the political and cultural integration of Europe” 
(ibid., 243). It remains a mystery what political integration refers to, if not 
exactly to those processes of Europeanization Röpke opposes. 
Before looking at the neoliberal views on the EMU, we should inquire 
what neoliberal logic—now in the sense of Hayek and Buchanan—pre­
vails in the single market, all of Röpke’s concerns notwithstanding. The 
most consistent and systematic arguments I highlight in this regard come 
from what I am tempted to call the Cologne School of scholars in political 
economy/sociology based at the Max Planck Institute, such as Fritz Scharpf, 
Wolfgang Streeck, and Martin Höpner. For them, the crucial effect of the 
single market is the loss of boundary control of the various nation-states. 
This leads to a bigger market, more efficient factor allocation, and increased 
competition between private market actors, as well as to a competitive federal­
ism not dissimilar to Hayek’s and Buchanan’s visions. Scharpf analyzes the 
inner workings and dynamics of this arrangement (1999, 2010). 
By most accounts, building the single market based on political ne­
gotiations in the council (under the unanimity rule) and the principle of 
harmonization of technical standards and other production and product-
related regulations stalled in the years after the Treaty of Rome was signed. 
The achievements of integration through politics thus remained rather 
limited, but in this situation a new actor, the ECJ, emerged who would 
come to shape the single market and the EU in general in a lasting way 
(see Höpner 2014). The first landmark ruling of the court pertained to 
the trade of goods and established principles that would later be applied 
to the other freedoms as well. In the famous Dassonville case from 1974 
the court ruled that all trading rules that hinder trade, whether directly 
or indirectly, actually or potentially, were inadmissible (see ECJ C-8/74, 
Dassonville). The preconditions for this ruling had been provided by the 
court itself in two earlier cases from the 1960s, when it had effectively 
established the doctrine that European law trumps national law and ruled 

	
European Crises
185
that the Treaty of Rome rules granted individual rights so that natural and 
legal persons could sue against alleged violations of the four freedoms. 
The court had thus empowered itself in a rather remarkable manner and, 
with the Dassonville case, set the tone for a much more aggressive stance 
on what may be considered undue constraints on cross-border economic 
activities. Dassonville was soon followed by the equally famous Cassis rul­
ing that introduced certain exceptions to the principle of Dassonville to 
increase its flexibility, but this also meant that the court acquired much 
more discretionary power in deciding whether national rules could be 
justifiably upheld or would have to be struck down. Furthermore, the 
ruling introduced the doctrine of “mutual recognition,” the recognized 
equivalence of national rules and regulations. This doctrine eventually 
served as the cornerstone of a new strategy of integration that would prove 
far more effective than harmonization, when the ruling held that there was 
no valid reason that products produced and marketed in one member state 
could not be introduced into another member state (see ECJ C-120/78, 
Cassis de Dijon). These rulings in particular reinvigorated the project of 
the single market as integration through politics was increasingly replaced 
by integration through law. However, in political negotiations integration 
in principle could be achieved through removal of market-constraining 
rules and passage of new, possibly market-embedding rules, but integra­
tion through law is mostly limited to negative integration in the form of 
removal of portions of national legislation and regulations. This gives the 
integration of the single market its particular thrust. Although in the wake 
of the Single European Act the council adopted the qualified majority 
rule in decisions pertaining to the single market, there is still a marked 
asymmetry between the two modes of integration. In the language of Karl 
Polanyi, the disembedding judicial activism of the court strongly outweighs 
attempts of compensating for the loss of national rules through market-
reembedding legislation on the European scale. The result is a market 
that may have impressive positive effects for consumers but in which, for 
example, the rights of labor based on national law are struck down if they 
seem to conflict with the economic freedom of companies, as ruled in 
Laval, Viking, and other cases; it is a market in which companies can pur­
sue a strategy of regime shopping and elect to choose the least-regulated 

186	
European Crises
business environment (see ECJ C-438/05, Viking; ECJ C-341/05, Laval). 
While some commentators contend that the ECJ must not be exclusively 
viewed as an agent of liberalization and labor-market deregulation (see 
Caporaso and Tarrow 2009), Scharpf and others in the Cologne School 
make a strong case that despite some pro-labor rulings, the overall ef­
fect remains a negative form of integration through law (see Höpner and 
Schäfer 2010). They conclude, first, that the very structure of what might 
be tentatively called the economic constitution of the single market es­
tablished through actual legislation and further developed through the 
doctrines developed in ECJ rulings is biased against certain forms of capi­
talism. Scharpf, in particular, argues that the setup of the single market 
systematically puts the socioeconomic arrangement of what the varieties 
of capitalism literature knows as coordinated market economies at a dis­
advantage and, conversely, favors liberal market economies. In this sense, 
the single market can never be what in the German context (but also in 
some European documents) is referred to as a social market economy, with 
its particular historical compromise between capital and labor relying, for 
example, on exactly those labor rights that the court deemed inimical to 
economic freedom (see Scharpf 2010, 238). Furthermore, there is reason 
to assume that the preponderance of negative integration may lead to 
a growing politicization of the single market and its effects, as workers 
in particular may feel disenfranchised by the court rulings. The likely 
response is a growing resentment against the EU and the strengthening 
of national-protectionist orientations, which seems to conform squarely 
with the recent surge of right-wing nationalist populism not only, but 
particularly, in the EU (see Höpner and Schäfer 2010, 25).
It seems, then, that Buchanan’s and Hayek’s designs of a competitive 
federalism we encountered in chapter 2 are realized to a remarkable degree 
in the single market: As Buchanan favorably notes with reference to the 
EU, the “ordinary citizen may be affected much more by the constraints, or 
limits, that the Europeanization of the economic will place on the powers 
and authority of the politicians, within his or her own country or region, to 
interfere with his or her life, both economic and otherwise” (Buchanan and 
Lee 1994, 221). And while Hayek did not anticipate the central role a court 
would play in dismantling national regulatory regimes, his overall assessment 

	
European Crises
187
of the skewed nature of the integration process proved to be fairly accurate: 
“In a federation, certain economic powers, which are now generally wielded 
by the national states, could be exercised neither by the federation nor by 
the individual states” (1980, 266). In other words, the ability to influence 
socioeconomic arrangements broadly speaking that are lost on the national 
scale is, if at all, only insufficiently compensated for through supranational 
competencies. The result is a market of jurisdictions, which have to compete 
over highly mobile capital, in particular, with the supranational scale, which 
has relatively few competencies in other areas but considerable powers for 
enforcing the rules of this single market. This matches precisely Buchanan’s 
demands for the split of competencies between the various governmental 
levels: “Reform requires the establishment of a strong but limited central 
authority, empowered to enforce the openness of the economy, along with 
the other minimal state functions. In this way, and only in this way, can the 
vulnerability of the individual European to exploitation by national political 
units be reduced” (1995a, 266).20
The reasons for this disparity in European powers are also related to a 
theoretically trivial but rather crucial point: Competition policy comes at a 
rather low “price,” while those policies that could ameliorate the hazardous 
effects of increased competition in the single market would mostly involve 
more or less voluminous financial transfers; and aside from some social, 
structural, and cohesion funds, the EU simply lacks the monetary means 
for such policies. It may be that Hayek and Röpke were right to assume 
that citizens and nation-states would be unwilling to cede far-reaching and 
costly competencies to the supranational level, but the more tangible reason 
is the EU’s ineligibility to independently levy taxes.21 In this sense it also 
conforms to a considerable degree to Buchanan’s key idea with regard to 
the fiscal constitution of federations, which called for a model of reverse 
revenue sharing, ensuring that the revenue base at the supranational level 
would be strictly dependent on revenue sharing at lower levels.22 Despite 
some minor aberrations from his precepts (see Buchanan and Lee 1994, 
225), the overall result must have been to Buchanan’s liking. The community 
budget is primarily financed by member states’ dues and, unsurprisingly, 
is much too small to serve as a financial resource for policies that would 
counter the logic of the single market; in 2017 it will be around 150 billion 

188	
European Crises
euros and thus not even half the German budget of 329 billion euros for the 
same year. The coming months will show whether this will change, given 
that French president Emmanuel Macron has put forward a proposal for a 
Eurozone budget, which was met with unsurprising wariness by the German 
government at the time.
Finally, we look at the neoliberals’ views on a monetary union, the EMU 
in particular. Needless to say, the ordoliberals had no firsthand experience 
of EMU, and while Rüstow and particularly Eucken had much to say about 
monetary orders, to my knowledge they never discussed the possibility of 
a transnational monetary union. Recall that Röpke was a supporter of the 
gold standard but by the 1930s had given up hope that it could be rees­
tablished. Beyond this, he was obviously adamant about the necessity of a 
stable currency, but it is only in his postwar writings that he addresses the 
question of a European monetary order. Now he distinguishes between an 
economic monetary union based on, for example, a currency system like the 
gold standard and a political monetary union based on agreements between 
nation-states and contends that the latter has little chance of success (see 
Feld 2012, 8). Röpke clearly welcomes the potentially disciplinary effects 
of an international/European monetary union, as the gold standard proved 
while it lasted, but in the absence of this option, he is hesitant to support 
any alternative on the supranational scale. In 1964 he strongly opposes a 
European monetary union, including a European central bank, pointing 
out, somewhat presciently, that “such a system [a common monetary union] 
supposes a common economic, financial, and social policy” (Röpke 1964, 
235–236), which he believed would never come to pass. 
The remaining three neoliberals speak more directly to the advantages 
and disadvantages of a common currency in a federation. In the run-up to 
the introduction of the euro Buchanan is still strongly opposed to it and 
offhandedly dismisses “the premature project for a single currency and a 
monolithic central bank” that is certain to “fail” (1996, 255). However, the 
pragmatist/realist in Buchanan takes over when the euro is actually intro­
duced and the ECB is charged with exclusive control of monetary policy. 
Buchanan always emphasized the importance of contextualizing analyses 
and diagnoses and starting with the status quo of the here and now when 
considering the desirability and feasibility of alternative arrangements and 

	
European Crises
189
respective reforms. Accordingly, in an article written in 2004 on the now 
fully operational ECB, Buchanan distinguishes between two steps in his 
inquiry: First, there is the question whether the EMU was the best possible 
“constitutional choice” at the time, which Buchanan still denies, and he 
actually points to the late Hayek’s idea of a competitive currency regime as 
a viable and even more desirable alternative (see Buchanan 2004, 14). More 
important, though, in the second step the question is whether there is a 
more desirable alternative to the institutional status quo, and Buchanan is 
not of two minds in this regard: “That is to say, the ECB does pass muster 
as being ‘constitutionally efficient’ in this sense” (ibid.). Elaborating on 
this diagnosis, he addresses the core problem many, especially the rather 
monetarist-minded observers, see in the powers of a central bank, which is its 
potential discretion in decision making, whereas the ideal would be “actions 
to be automatically triggered by shifts in objectively agreed upon economic 
parameters” (ibid., 15). Nevertheless, Buchanan commends the bank for at 
least having found a feasible second-best alternative with the target of price 
stability, which is assessable somewhat objectively; accordingly, the public 
can hold the bank accountable if it fails in this task. Furthermore, Buchanan 
highlights the political independence of the ECB and thus concludes that 
“a ‘runaway’ ECB, one that exploits its range of discretionary authority in 
allowing gross departures from monetary stability to be generated, seems 
much less likely to emerge than in the case of any single-country central 
bank” (ibid., 16)—an assessment that many of today’s critics of the ECB 
would undoubtedly find premature. This is a matter we will revisit later. 
Now we turn to Milton Friedman’s perspective, which is almost diametrically 
opposed to Buchanan’s and Hayek’s.
It goes without saying that Friedman also harbors concerns regarding the 
ECB’s discretionary powers; after all, he advised that monetary policy was 
too important to be left to central bankers and instead raised the signature 
demand of monetarist neoliberalism, a legislated rule of a steady expansion 
of the money supply (see 2002, 54; 1960). Friedman is quite clear that rules 
for central bankers may not achieve a maximum constraint with regard to 
their discretionary powers, but it is the optimum in his view.23 The alterna­
tive that would constrain central bank power even further, to the point of 
almost irrelevance in terms of making independent decisions on monetary 

190	
European Crises
policy, would be an arguably fully automated commodity-backed currency 
like the gold standard. But in contrast to others like Röpke, Friedman, who 
built his scholarly reputation not least on a detailed study of US monetary 
history, has a thoroughly unnostalgic view of the gold standard, which is 
not only no longer feasible, as Röpke would agree, but was never desirable 
in the first place. “It is not desirable because it would involve a large cost in 
the form of resources used to produce the monetary commodity. It is not 
feasible because the mythology and beliefs required to make it effective do 
not exist” (Friedman 2002, 42).
But what does that mean with regard to the EMU? Friedman has never 
addressed the core concern of the discretionary power of the ECB, and he 
passed away before a solid empirical assessment of the ECB’s policies was 
possible, but he may have been placated by Buchanan’s arguments regard­
ing the rather clear and narrow mandate of the bank.24 However, Friedman 
addressed other aspects of the EMU in a succinct but outspoken fashion. 
In a short article written around the time the SGP was passed in 1997, 
Friedman examines the merits of the euro’s introduction and offers a skep­
tical, if not outright damning verdict. He points out the limited ability 
to absorb (asymmetrical) economic shocks due to the greater rigidity in 
prices and wages and lower intra-European mobility compared to that of 
the United States, as well as the lack of federal/supranational funds to offset 
adverse effects in the wake of (regional/national) economic crises. Friedman 
notes furthermore that a core group of countries has already pegged their 
currency to the Deutschmark, so it is a de facto monetary union, which 
anybody else could in principle join as well—but everyone would retain the 
option of simply unpegging their currency if need be, for example, through 
a depreciation in case of a crisis or other shocks. A monetary union without 
either political unity or exit option would create a scenario that sounds strik­
ingly familiar in light of the developments since 2010: “It [the adoption of 
the euro] would exacerbate political tension by converting divergent shocks 
that could have been readily accommodated by exchange rate changes into 
divisive political issues” (Friedman 1997). 
The scene is now set for a virtual intraneoliberal disagreement concern­
ing not so much the strictly economic effects of EMU but rather, I argue, 
a diverging assessment of the possibilities and risks involved. Despite his 

	
European Crises
191
occasional theoretical brinkmanship, Friedman is actually the more conser­
vative voice in this virtual debate, as he highlights the risks of an EMU that 
deprives nation-states of their monetary policy, leaves them no formalized 
exit option, and remains “incomplete,” that is, without a fiscal complement 
worth mentioning, let alone a full-fledged political union. However, what if 
this situation is exactly the goal of the federal arrangements? Remember that 
Hayek’s federation was imagined to have a common currency, and, accord­
ingly, “the states within the Union will not be able to pursue an independent 
monetary policy” (1980, 259). Hayek does not rule out a common fiscal 
policy (ibid., 256), which could then do what the federal government in the 
United States does in case of regional crises, but the crucial assumption in 
Hayek’s federative arrangement is that peoples and nation-states will refrain 
from granting the central authority highly interventionist and/or highly 
distributive policy competencies (including the power to tax), because there 
is not enough social capital available to routinely engage in institutionally 
mediated solidarity among strangers. So a fiscal policy will not complement 
the monetary arm of the federation in due course, and this appears to be far 
from a construction mistake but rather the intended effect because, after 
all, Hayek’s overall rationale for a federation was to eliminate certain policy 
options on the national scale without the chance of gaining an equivalent on 
the supranational scale. Obviously, while there is a supranational monetary 
policy, it clearly does not offer the equivalent of possibilities of a national 
monetary policy. In this sense one could conclude that while there may 
have been observers that had placed hope in the EMU being completed 
through the cunning of neofunctional reason, which would in due course 
and in light of the technical necessities add a fiscal arm to the EMU, the 
more sober reading of the situation is that the locked-in incomplete EMU 
actually already manifests the cunning of reason—not neofunctionalist but 
neoliberal reason. Buchanan drives this point home. While his assessment 
of the trajectory of the ECB may be considered slightly off target, he clear-
sightedly analyzes the opportunities for (neoliberal) reforms in the setting 
of an “incomplete” EMU: “The EMU has been criticized because it is 
alleged to take away one dimension of adjustment to shifting economic 
circumstances in particular countries and to force internal institutional ad­
justments in place of exchange rate shifts. It may be argued, however, that 

192	
European Crises
because exchange rate adjustments cannot take place that serve to cover 
up the requirement for internal reforms . . . the institutional structures 
will be moved to further reforms” (Buchanan 2004, 16; see also Feld 2012, 
12). Thus, the EMU as it exists may be viewed as a potentially disastrous 
arrangement that some neoliberals such as Friedman do not consider to be 
worth taking the risk and actually warn of its consequences. Others, such as 
Hayek and Buchanan, in my reading, are willing to accept the risk in light 
of the transformative potential involved with regard to long-established and 
seemingly entrenched politico-economic structures and policies within the 
member countries. The EMU thus turns into a gigantic lever that may effect 
changes even in status quo–biased democracies, which, otherwise, Hayek 
and Buchanan could imagine to be possible only under the conditions of 
(transitional) dictatorships and the politics of the extraordinary of a genuine 
constitutional revolution. 


193
I now address the thorny issue mentioned earlier pertaining to the link between 
(neoliberal) theory and practice. My main point to prove in this far-reaching 
debate is the indispensability of ideas for any comprehensive approach to 
understanding political developments, because these developments cannot 
be reduced to institutional path dependence or the pursuit of agents’ in­
terests. I begin by showing that, despite the apparent parsimony of purely 
interest- or institution-based accounts, they run into problems that neces­
sitate the introduction of ideas as an additional variable. However, ideas are 
mostly treated as “auxiliary variables” in these approaches, brought in only 
when there is an anomaly that cannot be accounted for in standard ways 
through institutions and/or interests. I argue instead for an approach along 
the lines of what is now called discursive or constructivist institutionalism, 
which systematically integrates ideas and considers them to be of explana­
tory importance, not only during times of turmoil and crisis but whenever 
we seek to explain and understand phenomena of the social world.
Ideas, Crises, and Uncertainty
Discursive institutionalism is the youngest of the “new institutionalisms.” 
To a certain extent it is a response to the complementary deficiencies of 
Ideas, Uncertainty, and the 
Ordoliberalization of Europe
C HAPTE R 7

194	
Ideas
those three new institutionalisms: rational choice institutionalism, histori­
cal institutionalism, and sociological institutionalism (see Hall and Taylor 
1996; Schmidt 2008). The problem lies in the institutionalisms’ poor ability 
to account for the dynamics of institutions. Here we have to differentiate 
between rational choice institutionalism and the other two because their 
respective difficulties are mirror images of each other. Rational choice insti­
tutionalism views institutions as the result of interested-based rational be­
havior of agents. Institutions help individuals realize gains from cooperation 
and/or coordination by reducing free-rider problems—that is, they enable 
collective and binding decisions and, more generally, decrease uncertainty 
(see, e.g., North 1990). However, rational choice institutionalists find it dif­
ficult to account for the stability of institutions despite strong incentives to 
defect, and they also find it difficult to explain why a particular institutional 
settlement has been “rationally” chosen by individuals when others would 
have been equally possible (see Gofas and Hay 2008, 16). While in this 
case it is mostly actors that shape institutions, which will in turn provide a 
set of constraints on actors, historical and sociological institutionalists as­
sume a more profound influence of institutions on the behavior of agents. 
Institutions are even considered capable of shaping the very preferences of 
actors through their impact on their self-understanding. Consequently, it 
is fair to say that in the case of historical and sociological institutionalism, 
institutions shape behavior—unless it is behavior that shapes institutions, 
and this qualifier concisely contains the other two new institutionalists’ 
main problem. Their biggest challenge concerns the question of how it is 
possible that there are time windows in which things seem to operate the 
other way round: Actors shape and reshape institutions. The view of history 
that emerges from these perspectives is one of “punctuated equilibriums” 
in which, for the most part, institutions are stable; however, in periods 
of unrest, external shocks, and so forth this equilibrium is interrupted at 
intervals and its place taken by a situation of largely unpredictable flux that 
ultimately gives way to a new institutional equilibrium. Ideas are brought 
in, then, as the decisive factor that constitutes the difference between a 
“normal” situation of institutional stickiness that shapes actors’ behavior 
and the opposite, in which institutions become the object of reform and 
actors reshape them. 

	
Ideas
195
The problem with both versions of bringing ideas into an explanatory 
institutionalist framework is that they are mostly only afforded the status 
of auxiliary variables. This means that both rational choice and historical 
institutionalists tend to turn toward ideas only when their conventionally 
used approach fails to provide satisfactory explanations. But as long as it is 
not deemed necessary, both research traditions opt not to take ideas into 
consideration and instead rely on the supposedly more parsimonious expla­
nations based on interests or institutions. The basic contention of discursive 
or constructivist institutionalism (see Hay 2010, 66), which is the preferable 
term in my view, is to argue, in contrast, for the systematic integration of 
ideas into explanatory frameworks, not just as an auxiliary add-on. 
I share the view that ideas (or discourse for that matter) must be an in­
tegral element in any comprehensive explanatory approach simply because 
the alternative of relying solely on institutions or interest is an unviable 
strategy in most contexts. Let me briefly spell out the problems with re­
gard to interest-based accounts.1 The appeal of interests as the fundamental 
explanatory variable is clearly the alleged parsimony of such an account, 
which is typically based on the assumptions that actors have certain interests 
that translate into preferences that are rationally pursued, as in the case of 
the conventionally understood homo economicus. But what exactly is in the 
interest of an actor in a given situation? Rational choice scholars face the 
challenge of going beyond a tautological definition of interests as “revealed 
preferences” through the actions of the agent because in this case whatever 
these actions are and however misguided they seem, they would by defini­
tion have to be in the interest of the agent; otherwise, she would have acted 
differently. Instead, the assumption is that the interests of an actor can be 
derived from the particular strategic context in which the actor is situated, 
and, as a consequence, behavior becomes predictable. But what if the actor 
fails to behave in the way the researcher had predicted? This points us in 
the direction of the complexity of a seemingly simple concept such as (real) 
interests. After all, what the identification of actual interests presupposes is 
a considerable amount of knowledge on the part of the researcher and the 
agent: Clarifying which course of action is in the best interest of an actor in 
a given situation, strictly speaking, presupposes knowledge of every possible 
option and, even more dauntingly, also requires knowledge of the various 

196	
Ideas
intended and unintended consequences that a particular course of action 
yields. It is “a combination of omniscience about the present and perfect 
foresight” (Hay 2010, 76). If this is an accurate assessment, then interest-
based accounts are far less parsimonious in their assumptions than they 
appear to be, because in any but the most stylized model scenarios the real 
interests of actors are far from self-evident. A further complication stems 
from the fact that interests become actionable only to the extent that they 
are interpreted through cognitive and normative ideas—ideas regarding 
how the world hangs together and ideas regarding what I should do as a 
(moral) actor who is also trying to realize his idea of a good life. Concretely, 
whether it is in my best interest to light up a cigarette right now is, strictly 
speaking, undecidable as long as my normative design for life (somewhere 
between “live long and prosper” and “live fast, die young”), as well as my 
views, for example, on the reliability of the findings in medical research, 
are not taken into consideration. The consequence of both arguments is 
that what matters for explanations are not real interests but interests as they 
are perceived and interpreted by agents in light of ideas. This complicates things 
considerably, at least for those who hold aspirations for social science to turn 
itself into a quasi-natural science with predictive capabilities. After all, in 
a purely interest-based account it mattered relatively little who the agents 
in question were, because any given agent would act in the same way in a 
given situation if provided with the same information. If interests are always 
ideationally impregnated and mediated, it does matter who the agents are, 
what beliefs they hold, and through which discourses these beliefs were 
formed. While this is a sobering prospect for a predictive social science, on 
the bright side there is the potential for more comprehensive explanations 
based on this broadly constructivist view of things. Furthermore, in restor­
ing agency in the proper sense to actors instead of modeling them as agents 
that are capable only of “behaving” in the Arendtian sense, such an approach 
also addresses the problem we have encountered in differing degrees and 
forms in both neoliberal and some variants of institutionalist thought: how 
to theorize change in a theoretical framework that suggests that the status 
quo is more or less “locked-in.” We must be careful not to overstate the 
significance of ideas and note at once that they are only one factor that may 
drive change, but they may also further cement the status quo, not least 

	
Ideas
197
through widely shared conventions. Incorporating this dimension and the 
variance it introduces in how interests are perceived and rendered actionable 
stands a much better chance of providing a theorization of change than its 
purely interest- or institution-based alternatives.
There is one other line of argumentation that must be considered in regard 
to the significance of ideas and discourse for political practice. In many ways 
this is the smallest common denominator in what is sometimes called the 
“ideas debate,” since both constructivists and rational choice scholars could 
probably agree that it is in times of crisis that ideas matter most and have the 
greatest potential impact on political practices and institutional reshaping. 
There are two main reasons for this: First, crises are not objectively given. 
Strictly speaking, a crisis comes into existence only once it has been called 
a crisis and this signification resonates sufficiently with the relevant audi­
ence (see Blyth 2002; Hay 1996). The sheer fact that there is an economic 
slowdown even for a prolonged time does necessarily turn the situation into 
a crisis. What constitutes a crisis is thus not just a matter of (economic) data 
but also a matter of interpretation, construction, and narration.2 Arguably 
even more important is the question of what kind of crisis it is. Again, this is 
a question that cannot be addressed by simply looking at the facts, because 
there will be more than one explanation that fits a particular set of facts, and, 
moreover, what constitutes a relevant fact is to some degree a function of the 
explanatory hypothesis itself. Crises thus need to be interpreted, and which 
interpretation prevails is obviously of the utmost importance, because with 
the diagnoses of what the nature of the crisis is, the therapies prescribed and 
the measures of crisis management undertaken vary. Considering the example 
we have discussed in the preceding chapters, it matters significantly whether 
what ails the EU and the Eurozone is considered a banking crisis, a sovereign 
debt crisis, a euro crisis, or a combination of all three, because in each case the 
responses would have to differ to a certain degree. Needless to say, given the 
underdetermined nature of crises, which of the various crisis narratives prevails 
is emphatically not just a matter of more or less accuracy or correspondence 
to facts but one of discursive power and contestation.3 Interpretation and nar­
ration as two crucial elements in the construction and definition of a crisis are 
ineradicably idea laden, and their import thus indirectly shapes both crisis 
management and, possibly, institutional transformations. 

198	
Ideas
Finally, crises not only enhance the influence of ideas generally; they 
may also serve as an opening for new ideas, particularly if the crisis also 
extends to the established frameworks of interpretation. Hence, it makes a 
significant difference whether the dominant narrative is that of a crisis in 
Keynesianism or a crisis of Keynesianism, to again refer to the context of 
the 1970s: The prevailing narrative then suggested that the Western world 
was confronted not only with an economic crisis but also an epistemologi­
cal one, as the dominant framework of socioeconomic interpretation was 
arguably incapable of explaining one of the most prominent manifestations 
of the economic crisis, stagflation. As a result of this “invalidation” and 
fading support, erstwhile marginalized alternatives like monetarism could 
challenge Keynesianism and ultimately replace it as hegemonic paradigm. 
However, we must note at once that the crisis of a paradigm, even if plausi­
bly narrated, must not necessarily result in its replacement by an alternative, 
as the example of the recent crises show. While there were commentators 
who proclaimed that neoliberalism was experiencing its own “stagflationary 
moment,” there is literally no one who would argue that we have witnessed 
a departure from neoliberalism tout court as a dominant but far-from-
uncontested framework of interpretation or the respective practices. The 
reasons are related to the second source of ideational influence in times of 
crisis, which is uncertainty. Even among rational choice institutionalists 
uncertainty is considered one of the main reasons that ideas can matter 
under certain circumstances. In situations characterized by complexity, 
when it becomes exceedingly difficult to compute all relevant information 
and accordingly calculate actions and consequences, actors turn to ideas as 
“heuristics” to bridge the informational gap and provide them with “road 
maps” for a terrain that is difficult to survey (Goldstein and Keohane 1993, 
8). While I agree that ideas can serve as heuristics and road maps among 
other things, in my view the informational problem pertains to crises as 
well as most other situations. Furthermore, the question is what exactly we 
understand by uncertainty. Mark Blyth has argued persuasively that uncer­
tainty is more than complexity in the sense it was just described. Drawing 
on a distinction made famous by a member of the “first” Chicago School, 
Frank Knight, who was a teacher of both Friedman and Buchanan, he 
argues that crises produce situations that are not characterized by risk but 

	
Ideas
199
genuine uncertainty (see Blyth 2002, 31–34). In situations of risk it is pos­
sible, albeit at times difficult, to assign a certain probability to event x based 
on past experience and the frequency of events like x over a period of time. 
Uncertainty in the Knightian sense differs from this constellation because the 
situation in question is so unique that there are no empirical data from the 
past available to assign probabilities. When agents thus have to make deci­
sions without being able to calculate effects and outcomes, they are acting 
under uncertainty in the strict sense of the term. Furthermore, in contrast 
to accounts that view uncertainty as sheer complexity, Knightian uncertainty 
is of a more fundamental nature; the problem for agents is not confined to 
choosing the right strategy to realize their interests as far as possible, but 
“agents are unsure as to what their interests actually are, let alone how to 
realize them” (ibid., 9). Under such circumstances of Knightian uncertainty, 
there is little else than ideas to turn to (not necessarily consciously) to develop 
a certain interpretation of the situation and a corresponding course of action. 
With a view to the Eurozone crisis and the response to it, my point is that the 
various crises produced multiple moments of genuine Knightian uncertainty 
in which actors were particularly unsure about what was in their best interests, 
and with decisions still having to be made under time constraints, ideas figure 
prominently as one important explanatory factor for the overall outcomes. 
Even those who are skeptical about the entire project of “bringing ideas back 
in” to empirical social science could probably concur with this view of a rare 
but decisive impact ideas may have in moments of crisis-induced Knightian 
uncertainty. In principle, I could have simply resorted to this argument to 
make my case regarding the significance of an ordo-/neoliberal interpretive 
framework for the European crisis management over the last half decade. 
However, what I am arguing is that the stark juxtaposition of normal times 
when ideas do not matter and the few moments of crisis and uncertainty when 
they do is difficult to maintain given the general ideational impregnation 
of interests; it also remains too close to a view of political change resulting 
from exogenous shocks and rare moments of the extraordinary, as seen in 
some neoliberal accounts. Ideas may matter in particular in those moments 
of crisis, but this does not mean, conversely, that they do not whenever such 
circumstances do not prevail4—ideas matter in general, but they particularly 
do so in times of Knightian uncertainty. 

200	
Ideas
Furthermore, the view of our (political) environment as one that pres­
ents us with risk and the respective task of risk management most of the 
time, while uncertainty is an exceedingly rare occurrence, may also be in­
accurate, because we simply mistake for risk management what is actually 
acting under uncertainty. After all, how do we know that we have sampled 
the past sufficiently to assign probabilities when it is not clear whether we 
know the actual generators of a phenomenon such as a financial crisis? As 
Blyth argues, the appearance of normalcy and stability may indeed itself be 
a matter of constructions based on ideas that provide the foundations of 
institutions. Despite this stabilizing work, ontologically speaking, the world 
is still one of uncertainty; and despite the efforts of turning it into a world 
of risk, “unfortunately, we actually have succeeded only in constructing a 
world of fat tails, where risk and uncertainty live side-by-side. We therefore 
think and model the world as a world of risk while living in a world of un­
certainty; where contingency reigns, we see necessity; and where stability 
is constantly reconstructed and renegotiated by agents, researchers look 
for equilibria as the norm” (Blyth 2010, 96). During crises uncertainty may 
be extreme, but its pervasiveness suggests both that the status quo is never 
quite as locked in as neoliberal accounts suggest and that the power of ideas 
may be enhanced during crises but is not confined to these episodes, because 
they always matter.
The Ordoliberalization of Europe
As we approach the end of this inquiry into the political theory of neolib­
eralism, the European Union, and the current crises haunting it, it is time 
to draw the various argumentative threads together for a final diagnosis of 
“what our present is” (Foucault 1989) and what the distinct characteristics 
of actually existing neoliberalism in Europe after almost a decade of crises 
and crisis management are.5 
What does it mean to refer to an ordoliberalization of Europe? The core 
of my argument is that the economic governance structures of the EU 
and the EMU in their current configuration can be interpreted as a com­
petitive order or economic constitution along the lines of what particularly 
Walter Eucken (2017b) proposed as a framework for markets. However, the 

	
Ideas
201
economic constitution of postcrisis Europe is not just designed to orga­
nize the competition between private-market actors; more important, it is 
a competitive order in which the actors are nation-states and their political 
economies with the EU increasingly performing the functions that the or­
doliberals and Eucken in particular had envisioned for the state in relation 
to companies, trade unions, and so forth: an impartial enforcer of the, ide­
ally, quasi-automatic rules of the competition game; an umpire that relies 
on the powers of science in designing the rules and is unassailable by the 
players in its decision making. Thus, I will show that the ordoliberalization 
of Europe pertains not only to the level of policies and the goals pursued 
through these policies—to increase competition and competitiveness as the 
quintessential ordoliberal values—but also to the structural prerequisites for 
implementing these policies, a technocratic regime of rules and sanctions 
that codify the specifics of how competition is to take place. In short, as the 
dust has settled after the most dramatic periods of the Eurozone crisis—and 
such periods may well return, as the underlying problems have not been 
solved altogether—the reforms have turned the economic constitution of 
Europe into a competitive order that in many respects comes quite close 
to what ordoliberals, especially Eucken, had in mind when they spoke of a 
framework for a truly competitive market. 
The first step in making this argument is to take a closer look at the 
European crisis management and the actor(s) that shaped it decisively. Deal­
ing with crises is typically the domain of executives, so when identifying 
the institutional centers that shaped the overall thrust of European crisis 
management, it is not the European Parliament or the ECJ that we must 
look to, first and foremost, but the European Council as the forum where 
members of national executives meet and make official decisions. Further­
more, the Eurozone finance ministers meet in the Euro Group and make 
no official decisions, as it is not an official institution, but they still exert 
considerable influence on the course of events, as the Greek delegation 
around Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis came to realize in the meetings 
in the summer of 2015 (see Galbraith 2016). These two fora were not the 
only institutional sites on the level of the EU that were of importance for 
the crisis management; the ECB emerged as, arguably, the crucial European 
actor in dealing with the crisis soon after the beginning of Mario Draghi’s 

202	
Ideas
tenure in late 2011. After all, it was Draghi’s pledge to do whatever it takes 
to save the euro in July 2012 that finally placated markets and investors 
sufficiently to bring down the bond yields of the various crisis countries in 
the Eurozone. For now I focus on the other two fora and will return to the 
issue of ECB policies. 
If the council and the Euro Group are the sites where the decisions 
on the reforms in response to the crisis were prepared and made, then the 
next question is obviously whether it is possible to provide assessments of 
the power structures within these (quasi-)institutions. Obviously, a detailed 
answer cannot be offered here, but it is also not necessary for my purposes, 
since I am mostly interested in the role that Germany plays and here the 
analyses found in the literature are practically unanimous. Over the course of 
the crisis Germany emerged as the indispensable nation for the EU. Another 
way of describing the status of Germany is to say that its resistance against 
a particular reform measure, for example, eurobonds, usually means that 
the reform will not happen.6 And yet another way to describe the status, at 
least during the crucial periods of crisis management when reform decisions 
were made, is to refer to Germany as the quasi-, albeit reluctant, hegemon of 
Europe (see Bulmer 2013). Whatever the exact terminology may be, the fact 
remains that in the latest restructuring of the EU in response to the crisis, 
“Germany has played an outsized role,” the various Merkel governments 
having acquired an “unprecedented amount of leverage in redesigning the 
institutional underpinnings of monetary union” (Art 2015, 183). So while 
Germany certainly did not act alone and unilaterally in reshaping the EU 
(ibid., 199), there can be little doubt about the crucial influence it had on 
the outcomes. 
So if we have to focus on Berlin and Frankfurt when explaining the tra­
jectory and substance of European crisis management, the next question is 
whether there is any plausibility to the claim that ordoliberal ideas figured at 
all in the perspectives of German political elites. Obviously, I cannot claim 
to provide an exhaustive empirical study of the attitudes and interpretive 
frameworks held and shared among those in charge of formulating and 
implementing strategies of crisis management, but there is a considerable 
amount of circumstantial and anecdotal evidence that suggests that it is at 
least far from implausible that ordoliberal ideas played a role in the process. 

	
Ideas
203
Despite its relative marginalization within economics departments, for any­
one studying the subject it is quite likely that the individual will at some 
point be exposed and introduced to ordoliberal views, especially regarding 
the more practical issue of economic policy making (see Dullien and Guérot 
2012).7 Aside from the dissemination through academic socialization, ordo­
liberal ideas are transmitted indirectly through institutional heritages. The 
German Ministries of Economic Affairs and Finance, as well as the Bundes­
bank in particular, have long been considered strongholds of ordoliberalism, 
which is seen to provide the institutional DNA thus shaping the outlook of 
the actors within them as well.8 It is well known that ordoliberal thinkers 
such as Böhm and Röpke had close ties to the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
in its early days, and according to the admittedly unrepresentative empirical 
study by Peter Nedergaard and Holly Snaith, the ordoliberal spirit has not 
vanished entirely in the Ministries of Finance and Foreign Affairs. “Yes, 
there is a very strong ordoliberal tradition within the administration, which 
is irrespective of left-right patterns,” confided one official, and another added 
that there is a “deep ingrained preference for a kind of German ordoliberal 
crisis management” (cited in Nedergaard and Snaith 2015, 1097).9 
But the Bundesbank also cultivates a basic outlook, which is at least 
highly attuned to ordoliberal views, and several of its more prominent 
representatives have also been outspoken about the importance of the or­
doliberal tradition for their own approach to monetary policy. Consider 
Jürgen Stark, who held positions in the Ministries of Economic Affairs and 
Finance as well as the Bundesbank before he became a member of the ECB’s 
executive board and its chief economist in 2006. In November 2008, at the 
height of the financial crisis, Stark gave a speech in Frankfurt in which he 
offered an ordoliberal interpretation of the financial crisis and appropriate 
remedies. The intellectual foundation of Stark’s analysis is Eucken’s Prin­
ciples of Economic Policy and the six constitutive principles we encountered in 
chapter 2; he highlighted in particular the principle of unlimited liability: 
States mainly contributed to the financial crisis by, first, “neglecting their 
rule-setting role” in regard to (financial) markets and the resulting failure 
to establish the principle of liability in a determined manner. Second, “ex­
pansionary monetary policies around the globe” fed real estate and other 
bubbles, and thus the principle of monetary stability was violated, which 

204	
Ideas
would eventually have to lead to necessary but painful adjustments. What 
follows from this crisis narrative with regard to its management? In the short 
and medium terms, financial-market regulation should be improved, but 
aside from that there is no reason to resort to “activist” fiscal or monetary 
policy. Stark opposes fiscal stimuli and with regard to the role of the ECB 
he acknowledges its provision of liquidity to maintain the interbank market, 
but whatever it does, it must remain within the boundaries of its mandate, 
which is “to maintain price stability over the medium term. This mandate 
must be adhered to both in normal times and in times of crisis. The mon­
etary policy stance appropriate to fulfil our mandate depends exclusively on 
our assessment of the balance of risks to price stability and nothing else.”10 
Finally, Stark considers what can be done to prevent future crises beyond 
the immediate crisis management. The general answer is as simple as it is 
expected: “The commitment to price stability and sound public finances 
is the best contribution monetary and fiscal policies in the euro area can 
make to financial stability.” More specifically, crisis prevention should aim 
to strengthen the forces of competition in markets, abstain from discre­
tionary measures and instead devise general rules for markets (and states), 
and assert the principle of individual liability. We can conclude that the 
political-economic world would be in better shape, according to Stark, if it 
again adhered to Eucken’s principles.
Stark may be an outlier in his outspoken enthusiasm for the Principles 
of Economic Policy, and while Lars Feld, the current director of the Walter 
Eucken Institute, who is also a member of the German Council of Economic 
Experts, once suggested (presumably in jest) that all politicians should sleep 
with the book under their pillow (Feld 2011), it is not my assumption that 
they heeded this advice. Still, while few were consciously consulting seminal 
ordoliberal texts in their assessment of the crisis and their considerations 
on the appropriate response, in light of what has been argued so far, it does 
not seem far-fetched to assume that ordoliberal ideas provided a basic in­
terpretive framework for German political elites, which they more or less 
consciously resorted to, not just but especially during periods of Knightian 
uncertainty produced repeatedly over the course of the Eurozone crisis. 
Ordoliberalism provided the acting elites with ideas on the level of problem 
definitions, to make use of a common distinction (see Mehta 2011), and by 

	
Ideas
205
the same token a crisis narrative; it also offered them concrete prescriptions 
in the sense of policy solutions aimed at tackling the problem as it was defined 
on the basis of ordoliberal reason (see Van Esch 2014). 
However, before we spell out the specifics beyond Stark’s comments, 
there is a final step to build the argument for the importance of ordoliberal 
ideas in understanding the response to the crisis. A skeptic of constructivist 
institutionalism may argue that it is unnecessary to resort to an idea-based 
account and thus complicate explanations when the German government 
simply pursued a course of action according to its national interests. I have 
presented some general points contradicting such a view of “objective” or 
“material” interests, but for the sake of the argument, let us consider what 
an interest-based account would look like. Frank Schimmelfennig (2015) 
has provided an explanation for the outcomes of the Eurozone crisis from 
the perspective of liberal intergovernmentalism, which can be considered 
representative of an interest- or preference-based approach. In his view, the 
debates over rescue operations and institutional reforms can be modeled as 
mixed-motive games where, for the most part, the common interest of the 
players was to maintain an intact Eurozone, while the divergent preferences 
concerned the questions of how to achieve this and how to distribute the 
costs. According to Schimmelfennig the outcomes reflect very closely the 
preferences of Germany as the most powerful actor in the respective negotia­
tions, and, supposedly, this proves the ability of liberal intergovernmentalism 
to offer convincing explanations of the Eurozone constellation. This is a 
sophisticated account that goes beyond asserting some monolithic national 
interest, as it is found in some realist writings, but it is still worth taking a 
closer look at how it conceives of national preferences. For Schimmelfennig 
preferences are formed on the basis of conditions of interdependence and 
the “fiscal position of the state” (ibid., 191), but is it really convincing to 
derive the various preferences solely from the relative solvency of a state? 
In fact, it is Schimmelfennig himself who draws attention to an explanatory 
problem in his account, and the way it is solved is rather telling in light of 
what has been argued previously. France’s position with regard to eurobonds 
is not entirely consistent with its fiscal position, but Schimmelfennig sug­
gests that this anomaly is probably attributable to the relative influence of 
Keynesianism in France in contrast to the ordoliberal influence in Germany: 

206	
Ideas
“The stark difference to German preferences, however, is difficult to explain 
by material conditions only, but points to the relevance of ordoliberal vs 
Keynesian economic ideas” (ibid., 183). It is a classic case of bringing in 
ideas as auxiliary variables whenever interests fail to explain behavior; thus, 
once again, interest-based explanations turn out to be more complicated 
than they initially appear. And again, my point is not that we should pit 
interest-based accounts against ideas-based ones, and I am not disputing the 
merits of analyses like Schimmelfennig’s in a wholesale fashion, but while 
I agree that Germany mostly got what it wanted with regard to the crisis 
management, it got what it considered to be in its best interest in a highly 
volatile situation of Knightian uncertainty. 
This means that we do not have to go as far as to suggest that the in­
terpretive framework of ordoliberalism led German decision makers to act 
against their interests because, again, they do not exist in any other form 
than perceived interests. Matthias Matthijs shares this view generally, but 
in his assessment of the German-led crisis management there are a few 
formulations that come close to suggesting that they do: “Germany’s ordo­
liberal policies would actually lead it down a road of hurting its own national 
interests by triggering contagion in the short run, while giving up further 
control over fiscal and financial powers in the long run, by delegating those 
powers to the EU level. Germany’s ideas did not just lead to suboptimal 
outcomes from Berlin’s interest point of view; they actually caused the crisis by 
making it a systemic one” (2016, 378).11 Matthijs’s point is that the reluctant 
and indecisive crisis management we have already addressed, together with 
the politics of “expansionary contraction,” made the crisis worse and could 
be even said to have started it in the first place. If Germany had agreed to 
orchestrate a Greek bailout right after the news about the deficits and debt 
became public, the Eurozone crisis as a systemic crisis might never have 
happened. It would have cost German money but much less than it ended 
up costing, and the same logic goes for various other instances when Ger­
many’s insistence on ordoliberal principles ended up increasing the overall 
price tag of the crisis. There are accounts suggesting that it was Merkel’s 
deliberate strategy throughout the crisis never to do more than just enough 
to keep the Eurozone barely afloat. This meant that she could present the 
reforms she wanted to see passed as being without alternative to stave off 

	
Ideas
207
the imminent demise of the euro; furthermore, framing the rescue of ailing 
Eurozone members as necessary to protect the sheer existence of the euro 
ensured that the German Constitutional Court would not rule against the 
introduction of the ESM (see Art 2015). Still, this seems to overestimate the 
strategic foresight of actors—even if it is Angela Merkel—and in my view 
it is more plausible to argue along the lines of Matthijs and a constructivist 
institutionalist approach more generally: German decision makers were 
acting under uncertainty about what exactly would be the effects of their 
decisions, and what exactly lay in their interest, and thus went with the 
quintessential ordoliberal maxim that the rules must be upheld, as their 
perceived best interest. As Merkel put it in a speech before the Bundestag in 
December 2011, “The lessons are very simple: Rules must be adhered to, 
adherence must be monitored, non-adherence must have consequences.” 
Let us conclude for now that there are sufficient grounds to argue that 
ordoliberal ideas may have had a certain degree of influence on the crisis 
management led by the Germans and thus on the latest institutional recon­
figuration of the EU. 
So in which respects does the EU in its current form correspond to ordo­
liberal tenets, particularly those associated with the work of Walter Eucken? 
As mentioned previously, the crucial point is to strike an analogy between 
what Eucken described as the competitive order with its various principles 
and the role that the state, democracy, and science ought (not) to play in 
the politics of this order, on the one hand, and the economic constitution of 
the EMU as a competitive order for nation-states and national economies, 
on the other. My claim is that in many respects this latter supranational 
competitive order in its original form, but especially in its reformed form, 
comes close to Eucken’s ideals. 
Let us recapitulate the core assumptions in Eucken’s view of desirable 
competition. The indispensable preconditions are first and foremost a func­
tioning price system, because distortions in it send wrong signals to produc­
ers and consumers concerning scarcity, risks, and so forth. This means that 
inflationary tendencies and deliberate expansionary monetary policy have 
to be avoided because the latter distorts the “price” of money. Monetary 
stability is thus the most fundamental of the various constitutive principles 
of the competitive order.12 But it is followed closely in importance by the 

208	
Ideas
principle of unlimited individual liability because it also ensures that there 
is no distortion of risk. It must be enforced, as competition is designed to 
produce winners and losers, and losing must entail bearing the full burden 
of the loss up to the point of market exit, just as much as winning means 
reaping all rewards individually (see Eucken 1960, 279). Obviously, this last 
principle not only is of functional importance but also has some signifi­
cant moral import (e.g., not being held liable creates situations of “moral 
hazard”), since market competition in the Euckenian version is not just an 
evolutionary advantage, as the later Hayek at times seemed to suggest, but 
also a matter of ethics and norms. After all, it was not just any kind of com­
petition that Eucken wanted to stimulate through the market framework but 
what he called Leistungswettbewerb (ibid., 247), which translates somewhat 
awkwardly into “performance competition.” The notion of performance 
competition stipulates that gaining market advantage, making a profit, must 
be achievable only through a superior performance, which partly explains 
why Eucken is so vehemently opposed to cartels and monopolies, because 
they could gain market advantage through Behinderungswettbewerb (ibid., 
43), or “competition through obstruction.” Again, the normative aspect of 
this notion is clearly detectable. Profits must be earned properly (in contrast 
to “rents” incurred through monopolies) and are justifiable since they are 
reaped in exchange for some kind of real service at cheaper prices or better 
quality for consumers—whose interests are the only universalizable ones, 
as more contemporary ordo- and neoliberals would add.
So how do all of these elements figure into the European constellation? 
It almost goes without saying that the fundamental structural principle of 
ordoliberal thought—the legal framework of an economic constitution—al­
ready figured heavily in the basic setup of the EMU through the Maastricht 
Treaty and the SGP; with the recent reforms this rule-based regime has been 
extended further, specified, and tightened. Whether through the various 
procedures or the Fiscal Compact, the rules of jurisdictional competition 
have been further codified through the latest reforms, and while some argue 
that the economic constitution of the EMU has been undermined through 
the plethora of emergency measures in response to the crisis, I contend that 
the institutional and constitutional reforms passed do confirm the Maas­
tricht Order and increase the chances of enforcing the various requisites. 

	
Ideas
209
It is true that almost every aspect of the crisis management, including the 
new rules introduced, are challenged by legal experts, but up to this point 
none of it, including the ESM, has been struck down in any court of law 
(see Joerges 2014), so it may be slightly too alarmist to raise the specter of 
an “emergency constitution,” despite the occasional Schmittian inclinations 
found in some ordoliberal thought. The point remains that ordoliberalism 
can be seen as the ideational resource behind these reforms, not just with 
regard to substantive contents and goals but also in the sense of a definition 
of the problem and how to solve it technically. The ordoliberal mind-set 
suggests that rules need to be adhered to and the problem of the Eurozone 
crisis was that the rules were broken. Accordingly, the solution is to have 
more and better rules. In this sense, the crisis was the opposite of an open­
ing for new ideas and approaches to political economy, as the presumed 
solution to the crisis is based on the same modal recipe as the supposedly 
flawed status quo ante. 
If it is the function of the economic constitution of Europe, consisting 
of primary and secondary EU law, to establish a framework for desirable 
competition, as just recapitulated, the principles of liability and monetary 
stability must be realized. Jens Weidmann agrees with these assumptions, 
which is of some significance, because he is currently the president of the 
Bundesbank and may even become the next president of the ECB after Mario 
Draghi. Especially for those who are concerned about the ECB’s course, 
and there are many among German policy makers, Weidmann would be 
the perfect choice, as he provides us with the ordoliberal theory of a com­
petitive order for European jurisdictions and does so, aptly, in the Walter 
Eucken lecture in 2013. 
Weidmann also highlights the principle of individual liability, which 
provides the main element of the ordoliberal crisis narrative, which also 
happened to become the dominant one in public discourse: The origin of 
the crisis lies in the behavior of individual countries that lost their “competi­
tiveness” and accumulated debts that were unsustainable (Weidmann 2013). 
Consequently, the crisis is not a systemic one of a questionable architecture 
of the Eurozone, and neither is it a banking crisis that has morphed into 
something different; it is a crisis of individual sovereigns incurring too much debt 
and living beyond their means. According to the principle of liability, those 

210	
Ideas
responsible for entrepreneurial failure have to suffer the full consequences 
of their action; therefore, there ought to be no debt reduction because it 
would produce moral hazard. Furthermore, it was the failure to provide a 
credible commitment to the principle that contributed to the buildup of the 
crisis in the first place, according to Weidmann, because bond buyers did not 
believe that the no-bail-out clause would be adhered to when push came to 
shove, which explains why countries such as Greece had bond yields close 
to German ones. In other words, the pricing system of the bond market 
was distorted because individual liability was not established firmly enough, 
and the ensuing misleading signals about risks led to countries like Greece 
getting much more credit than they should have. And if more individual 
liability could have helped prevent the crisis, it is no surprise that Weidmann 
is at the least very skeptical, with regard not only to bailouts but also to 
debt mutualization. Individual market actors, whether companies or nation-
states, have to be held fully liable if competition is to work. Since emergency 
bailouts of countries, as they happened during the crisis in several varieties, 
would undermine this principle, it is only stringent of Weidmann to consider 
rules for a sovereign default as an alternative. After all, from an ordoliberal 
perspective, the European market of jurisdictions remains flawed as long as 
the “lash of competition” (Eucken 2017a, 52) remains constrained by the 
impossibility of market exits. In my view, therefore, the introduction of a 
“sovereign insolvency order” along the lines of what already exists on the 
level of municipalities in the United States, for example, would consequently 
be the next step in the ordoliberalization of Europe.13 
Let us take a look at the fundamental principle of monetary stability for 
functioning competition. As mentioned previously, the problem with mon­
etary instability is that it also distorts the functioning of the price mechanism, 
so the question from an ordoliberal perspective is how to ensure that the ECB 
adheres to the Euckenian principle. From Weidmann’s point of view, the 
monetary constitution of the EMU has two key elements to ensure stability. 
First, the ECB is probably the most independent central bank, which means 
that it is not easily harnessed for political purposes, particularly printing 
money, by any EMU member; and second, it has a decidedly narrow mandate 
that assigns it the sole task of ensuring price stability. Is this a structural setup 
of the monetary order that conforms to and realizes the ordoliberal principle? 

	
Ideas
211
This is a question that is, somewhat surprisingly, debated heatedly. Röpke and 
Eucken were proponents of the gold standard or some kind of commodity 
reserve currency because of the automatic adjustments of the system through 
the flows of gold, which had no need for any discretionary decision making 
by central bankers. However, it seems far-fetched in my view to infer from 
this that central bank independence (CBI) “is not at all compatible with Or­
doliberalism” (Bibow 2004, 19). It is correct that Eucken was as skeptical as 
Friedman of central bankers’ discretionary setting of interest rates and, in a 
typical fashion, sought to design a monetary system in which, ideally, there 
would be an “automatically working monetary stabilizer” (Eucken 1949, 91). 
Nevertheless, can we infer that from an ordoliberal perspective the combina­
tion of an independent central bank with a mandate to ensure price stability 
is a considerable problem? At least, this seems to come close to providing a 
rule for monetary policy: to aim at an inflation rate of just below 2 percent. 
However, what is interesting about Eucken’s skepticism regarding CBI is how 
much it confirms his view of a strong and unified state and the persistent 
specter of “pluralism.” The concern he has is that “an all too independent 
. . . central bank is difficult to fit into the structure of the state. It will be 
tempted to position itself in opposition to the general economic policy of 
the state. A ‘pluralism’ will easily develop that would jeopardize the unity of 
state policy” (cited in ibid., 16). 
In their attempt at a direct refutation of the ordoliberalization thesis, Lars 
Feld, Ekkehard Köhler, and Daniel Nientiedt also go to great lengths to show 
that the institutional structures and mandates of neither the Bundesbank nor 
the ECB conform to ordoliberal precepts:14 CBI may have been granted, but 
with that came also far too much discretionary power in monetary policy for 
the ordoliberal taste. But over the course of their working paper the argument 
takes a curious turn. The authors also bring up the principle of liability and 
conclude correctly that “the traditional rule-based perspective of Ordnung­
spolitik can explain the German stance against bailouts and further fiscal in­
tegration” (Feld, Köhler, and Nientiedt 2015, 15). But this led to unintended 
consequences because the unwillingness to mutualize debt contributed to a 
prolongation of the crisis and eventually caused Mario Draghi to interfere 
with his (in)famous statement that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to 
save the euro. This is a problem for Feld and his colleagues not least because 

212	
Ideas
it politicized the monetary constitution of the euro and the resistance to debt 
mutualization; thus, further fiscal integration on behalf of Germany was es­
sentially bought at the expense of CBI. The authors conclude that it would 
have been better to make concessions on partial debt mutualization than to 
jeopardize CBI (ibid. 2015, 18). This turns out to be even more important 
than the principle of liability after the director and two other members of 
the Walter Eucken Institute spent so much time proving that ordoliberals, 
Eucken in particular, were never in favor of CBI. At least they leave no doubt 
about why the general setup of the EMU must still be appreciated from an 
ordoliberal perspective. The answer, in brief, is that no Eurozone country has 
control over its currency, and therefore it becomes impossible to manipulate 
it through inflation or money creation for political purposes. In the ability 
to curb these possibilities EMU is only comparable to the gold standard—a 
similarity that thinkers as diverse as Wolfgang Streeck and Milton Friedman 
recognized and considered problematic for different reasons;15 and for the 
gold standard supporters Eucken and Röpke, this may have been one more 
reason to appreciate EMU. 
After this brief excursion into the issue of CBI we return to Weidmann 
and the principle of monetary stability. If countries cannot manipulate the 
unit of value and the central bank has the sole responsibility of ensuring 
price stability, then the only possible source of inflationary pressures that 
remains is excessive government debt: “Putting an effective limit on govern­
ment borrowing is thus a primary pillar of any policy of stable money. 
Monetary union, as a union of stability, therefore required sound public 
finances” (Weidmann 2013). The SGP constituted the initial attempt to 
address this issue; the Fiscal Compact, Six-Pack, and the European Semester 
are intended to put it to rest at the price of constitutionalized austerity. So 
the picture of the normative ideal of jurisdictional competition within the 
Eurozone emerging from this is straightforward: There is a certain form of 
competition that is desirable, and its flames are stoked, but this presupposes 
that other forms of competition or strategies of gaining competitiveness are 
prohibited—and in this case simply as a matter of fact. After all, one possible 
way of gaining competitiveness in relation to another political economy is 
devaluation of the currency, because exports become cheaper and imports 
become more expensive. But just as “competition through obstruction” is 

	
Ideas
213
not considered competition in the proper sense, competition through de­
valuations is not considered desirable from an ordoliberal point of view 
because “they generally do not lead to any lasting gains in competitiveness. 
Often, renewed depreciations are necessary” (ibid.), which may result in 
“competitive devaluation” among various countries. But if this is an undesir­
able, possibly even amoral, way of competing that does not involve any 
superior performance, then what is the proper way to become competitive?16 
The answer is clear because if adjustment processes cannot take place via 
exchange rates, which is impossible in a Eurozone of fixed exchange rates, 
then adjustment has to take place through internal devaluation, or the poli­
tics of austerity: “a form of voluntary deflation in which the economy adjusts 
through the reduction of wages, prices, and public spending to restore com­
petitiveness, which is (supposedly) best achieved by cutting the state’s budget, 
debts, and deficits” (Blyth 2013, 2). The redesigned SGP in combination 
with the Fiscal Compact ensures that the state does not run excessive deficits 
and thus is constrained in trying to boost the economy through fiscal stimuli 
or public investment. But that is just the state dimension of austerity. Adjust­
ment processes that lead to a gain in competitiveness crucially take place in 
labor markets. And if we take the Euckenian conviction seriously that the 
most important precondition for competitive markets is the undistorted 
functioning of the price mechanism, then this must also hold for the prices 
on labor markets. In other words, a lack of competitiveness might be ad­
dressed through a downward flexibility of prices and wages; accordingly, 
the structural reforms required in the memoranda of understanding with 
ESM-recipient countries and implemented in many others always include 
measures aimed at liberalizing labor markets to tackle wage “rigidities” based 
on union power and/or labor-market regulation. Price and wage flexibility 
is the key to overcoming crises, as Eucken noted in a discussion of German 
crisis management during the Great Depression. While mass unemployment 
is considered a grave moral problem, the politics of full employment, 
Keynesianism, does not provide a real solution to it, according to Eucken, 
because it leads to “instability” in other markets and an ever-stronger trend 
toward centralization (1951b, 16). The real problem is thus not addressed, 
and the same is true for an expansionary monetary policy that provides cheap 
money and thus creates only a temporary stimulus and—even worse—pays 

214	
Ideas
the price of a distortion of the price system, because with cheap money any 
supply can find its demand.17 The real problem, as we might have guessed, 
is economic power, or what Eucken refers to as the “corporative structure 
of the labor market” (ibid., 60), which prevents an adjustment of prices and 
wages. “In the crisis year of 1930, Berlin builders, for instance, had to reckon 
with relatively firm prices of materials, such as iron and cement, which were 
fixed by syndicates, and also with relatively fixed wages, where housing prices 
were dropping rapidly” (ibid., 78). According to Eucken, the consequence 
of the “stickiness” of prices was the deflationary depression that hit Germany 
in the early 1930s. So the only proper way of competing is through produc­
tivity increases, as the MIP scoreboard confirms: One of the eleven indica­
tors is unit labor costs, and in a market of homogeneous goods these costs 
may fall in the medium term through investment in technology and human 
resources; but in the short run and in a context of an economic downturn 
the only realistic but still difficult option to achieve a reduction is wage 
suppression, including payroll taxes and employer contributions to insurance 
schemes. This prescription is backed by ordoliberal thought, as both Eucken 
and Rüstow considered it a bitter but necessary medicine (see Rüstow 
1930),18 as well as, supposedly, by the successful recovery of Europe’s erst­
while sick man, Germany, at the beginning of the twenty-first century. After 
all, was it not the prudent and disciplined wage restraint of German labor 
unions, in addition to the liberalization of the German labor market and 
the increase of the retirement entry age (under a coalition of Social Demo­
crats and Greens), that paved the way for this recovery? To be sure, it was 
bought at the price of real wage decreases for many, a more punitive ap­
proach to unemployment and increased social inequality, but German com­
petitiveness on the eve of the financial crisis was restored—for whatever 
reasons, as the narrative that attributes the successful recovery to the Agenda 
2010 is questionable in many regards—and in light of this ideational and 
empirical background, it is far from surprising that German elites established 
this recipe for all current sick men of Europe. Needless to say, this recipe 
comes with some serious side effects and can work only in certain conditions. 
This means that, strictly speaking, it would also have to affect Germany 
since it could only recover during the 2000s because other countries pro­
vided the required demand (often on credit). Additionally, competitiveness 

	
Ideas
215
is a relative term: If there is to be at least a halt in the further divergence of 
relative competitiveness between Eurozone countries and Greece, Italy, and 
Spain are to gain in it, by definition, Germany must accept a decrease. So 
even if we assume for the sake of the argument that the ordoliberal analysis 
is correct, as long as Germany jealously defends its title of “export world 
champion” and shrugs off criticism of exorbitant current account surpluses, 
and as long as the German finance minister clings to the “Black Zero,” which 
stands for a close to balanced budget, and refrains from increasing public 
investment significantly, the therapy that has caused so much misfortune, 
grievance, and outrage throughout Europe is bound to fail, because “we 
cannot all be austere at once” (Blyth 2013, 9).19 The constellation is almost 
bizarre. While Finance Minister Schäuble professed that “we Germans don’t 
want a German Europe” (2013), the German-led crisis management has 
given the Eurozone/EU an economic constitution that distinguishes be­
tween different kinds of competition, between jurisdictions and outlaws; or 
it otherwise makes impossible certain kinds of competition considered un­
desirable, so the only possible kind of competition happens to be the kind 
that conforms to ordoliberal tenets, which Germany specializes in: a text­
book case of interests perceived through the interpretive framework of ideas. 
The EU has forced a certain model of competition on itself that gives a 
competitive advantage to certain varieties of democratic capitalism—that 
is, socioeconomic and political settlements. The result is increasing pressure 
on all those countries that differ more or less profoundly from the German 
settlement and its accumulation regime to adapt to this accumulation regime 
through structural reforms from social to labor-market policies—irrespective 
of the widely varying institutional preconditions and “cultures of capital­
ism.”20 We witness a “forced structural convergence in the Eurozone” 
(Scharpf 2016), and the point is not to defend this variety for its own sake, 
as Jürgen Habermas has critically noted in an exchange with Scharpf, but 
to draw attention, first, to the costs that are incurred in many currencies, 
including that of human life chances; and second, to the almost paradoxical 
nature of the endeavor, because Europe can become more German only if 
Germany itself becomes less German.
As we know from the discussions in part 1, the ordoliberals, particularly 
Walter Eucken, believed that a consistent politics of the competitive order 

216	
Ideas
was pursuable only under certain institutional conditions, which amounted 
to a technocratic form of rule that included a strong state relatively insu­
lated from societal influence. With regard to Europe, both the content of 
the politics of the competitive order and these institutional preconditions 
suggest an increasing ordoliberalization of the EU. 
This may seem like a stretch initially, but let us take a closer look at the 
various aspects of Euckenian rule. A strong state suggests that it is at least 
possible to switch to an authoritarian mode of politics to implement certain 
policies, even against the resistance of those subject to it.21 The first thing 
that comes to mind is the Troika, its memoranda of understanding, and 
the supervision of correct implementation of structural reforms. It seems 
difficult not to describe this as a form of authoritarian rule, as it suspended 
the sovereignty of those under its rule and enforced policies against the 
expressed will of the citizenry, if it was even allowed to express its will 
officially. When Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou announced a 
referendum on the conditions of further European support, he was forced 
into resignation, and an interim government of unelected technocrats took 
over, similar to the interim government under Mario Monti that stepped in 
after Silvio Berlusconi’s ouster in Italy. A skeptic may argue that this does 
not say much about a structural transformation of the EU, since the draco­
nian Troika rule concerns only extreme cases of countries on the verge of 
bankruptcy. However, the Troika is also likely to serve as a model for how to 
govern an “ordered” sovereign default, analogous to a liquidator in a private 
insolvency, and what is already being tried in insolvency procedures in US 
municipalities: strict austerity, outsourcing, and privatization in exchange 
for partial debt forgiveness. Still, I agree that if it were the Troika alone, it 
would not be sufficient to redeem my claim, but it is not. The commission 
has been invested with far-reaching powers of surveillance, monitoring, and, 
if need be, sanctioning of member states that strike at the heart of a core 
competency of national parliaments, the power of the purse. It may seem 
ludicrous to bring up the commission as the equivalent of a strong state 
on the European level, but before we dismiss the point, let us not forget 
that the commission had indeed turned out to be the “unexpected winner 
of the crisis” (Bauer and Becker 2014). Intergovernmentalists are bound to 
respond that power is still centered in the council and even refer to a “new 

	
Ideas
217
intergovernmentalism” that allegedly developed over the course of the crisis 
(see Bickerton, Hodson, and Puetter 2015). But this fails to acknowledge 
that the influence of the council has been explicitly and significantly reduced 
through the introduction of the reverse majority principle, which makes it 
much more unlikely that the council will stop a certain procedure once it 
has been initiated by the commission. But does the commission function 
as an effective watchdog over the new rules, making use of the new instru­
ments? As James Savage and Amy Verdun (2015) show, the commission 
has responded to its new and expanded agenda with considerable internal 
restructuring, for example, including more directorates-general and the 
commission president in assessing the budgetary and overall economic 
situation of a member state and proposing reform measures. A member of 
the Secretariat-General characterized the changed role of the commission 
and especially the Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs 
(ECFIN) in the following way: “What has fundamentally changed is that 
ECFIN has traditionally had more of an advisory and analytical role. With 
the crisis and a more comprehensive policy co-ordination [responsibility], 
they have become much more of a policy development DG . . . and rule 
implementation organization” (cited in ibid., 113). So it is not a stretch to 
conclude that the commission is at least moving closer to the ideal enforc­
ing umpire that ordoliberalism wanted the strong state to be. Nevertheless, 
from an ordoliberal perspective, it still falls short of this ideal. The reasons 
are reliably laid out by Jens Weidmann, who acknowledges the attempt to 
tighten the rules and make them “quasi-automatic,” but this is exactly the 
problem: They are only quasi-automatic. While the procedures themselves 
are shielded as much as possible from political influence, the decision about 
initiating them still gives too much discretion to the commission: “Torn 
in two directions in its dual role as a political institution and guardian of 
the treaties, the Commission is frequently inclined to compromise at the 
expense of budgetary discipline” (Weidmann 2017). Weidmann’s concern 
is not unfounded, as the commission has been rather lenient in dealing 
with France’s deficits and Italy’s debt, citing overall positive prospects as 
reasons. But the commission’s argument obviously offers no consolation for 
ordoliberals concerned about the oft-cited culture of stability in the EMU. 
For them the commission is still too political in its decisions instead of 

218	
Ideas
simply executing the rules. Consequently, Weidmann suggests what would 
be another next step in the ordoliberalization of Europe: “A more rigorous 
interpretation of the rules could be achieved by giving responsibility for 
fiscal surveillance to an independent authority instead of the Commission. 
At the very least that would clearly show where unbiased analysis ends and 
political concessions begin” (ibid.). The impartial and unassailable umpire 
stoically enforcing the rules unperturbed by political influence thus remains 
the overall ideal of the ordo-/neoliberal state executive or its equivalent on 
the supranational level. 
But while to the dismay of ordoliberals, the commission remains at 
least a rudimentarily political institution, another precondition for a proper 
politics of the competitive order has almost been realized with its empow­
erment: Aside from the ECJ and the ECB the commission is easily the 
EU institution that is best shielded against the influence of democratic 
majorities, although the same cannot be said for the influence of lobbyists 
more generally, which makes matters only more problematic. Investing the 
commission with enhanced powers of budgetary surveillance and correc­
tion has been interpreted as “the relocation of political-economic decisions 
from the national to a new, specifically constructed international level . . . , 
an institutional context, in other words, that unlike the nation-state was 
consciously designed not to be suitable for democratization” (Streeck 2015b, 
365). While I do not share Streeck’s skepticism with regard to the general 
possibility of democratizing the EU, for the time being we have to note 
that he is correct when he writes: “Where there are still democratic in­
stitutions in Europe, there is no economic governance any more, lest the 
management of the economy is invaded by market-correcting non-capitalist 
interests. And where there is economic governance, democracy is elsewhere” 
(ibid., 366). Again, this is not even taking into consideration the blatantly 
undemocratic Troika rule but refers to the general budgetary regime in the 
EU/Eurozone that every member state is subjected to and that takes away 
fiscal decision-making powers from elected parliaments and places it in the 
hands of the commission. The commission may have a slightly more sub­
stantive democratic legitimation today than a decade ago, but it remains a 
rather thin one and, some would argue, deliberately so. This brings us back 
to Majone (1994) and his concept of the regulatory state. Majone argued in 

	
Ideas
219
regard to the EU and its earlier incarnations that delegating certain powers 
to counter-majoritarian institutions such as the commission or the ECB 
could actually enhance their overall democratic legitimacy, as long as these 
powers concerned only Pareto-optimal, nonredistributive policies such as 
watching over product standards on the single market. This argument may 
have had its merits before the last round of reforms, although it was highly 
contested even then (see Follesdal and Hix 2006), but there is no question 
that the new powers of the commission cannot be justified with resort to it. 
Majone assumed that tasks for such regulatory institutions were narrowly 
defined, and the various new instruments and the MIP in particular expand 
the scope of surveillance and monitoring agendas significantly. Moreover, 
the various recommendations for reforms are the opposite of nonredis­
tributive politics because they are bound to produce winners and losers in 
the process. Therefore, even Majone (2014) has voiced doubts about the 
continued legitimacy of the commission’s agenda, and that does not even 
take into consideration that the new competencies expand the commission’s 
influence to policy areas that are explicitly the domain of national policy 
making (see Höpner and Rödl 2011). Overall, we have to conclude that 
the latest restructuring of the EU has even enhanced its already significant 
democratic deficit. It is not my position that this implies that powers have 
to migrate back to the nation-state, but in the current multilevel insti­
tutional architecture it is striking how much power is invested in exactly 
those institutions, such as the commission and the ECB, that are farthest 
removed from electoral influence and parliamentary oversight. If one of 
the prime ordoliberal concerns was that there may be undue influence on 
economic policy making through the democratic masses—or just elected 
parliaments—this concern must be considered addressed in the distribution 
of competencies in the Eurozone of today.
Now we look at the third major ingredient of a political theory of or­
doliberalism, science and the role it ought to play in politics. Eucken in 
particular invested considerable hope in the powers of science if it was 
practiced in the proper way and, consequently, postulated an obligation for 
scientists to become involved in the policy-formation process as experts, not 
only to contribute to the design of the competitive order but also to crowd 
out the influence of interested parties and, if need be, that of a misguided 

220	
Ideas
demos. Does the EU of today exhibit an equivalent of these technocratic 
notions? To be sure, the charge of technocratic rule is not exactly a novelty 
in the discussions of the EU, especially the work done by the commission. 
I have no intention of criticizing the commission for regulating the use of 
vacuum cleaners and light bulbs; however, there is a more disconcerting kind 
of technocratic element to the new governance structures of the Eurozone in 
particular, which have even prompted commentators like Habermas (2015) 
to warn of the “lure of technocracy.” Through the European Semester and 
the preventive arms of the EDP, especially the MIP, the commission gains 
considerable influence on member state’s policy making and not just with 
regard to fiscal policy in the narrow sense. Recall that the MIP scoreboard 
includes indicators that range from the trend in real estate prices to private 
debt ratios and labor-unit costs. So whenever the values of these indicators 
move beyond the acceptable threshold, the commission makes recommenda­
tions and monitors implementation in its in-depth country reviews.22 “The 
remarkable point about many of these indicators is that their correction by 
all accounts would require measures in policy fields that are the domain of 
nation-states and that it is difficult for states to influence the prices of real 
estate markets or labor-unit costs if they happen to have a decentralized 
wage-bargaining system. However, what is most striking in the present con­
text is that the question about the proper measures to address imbalances is 
often quite controversial. Furthermore, whatever the recommended course 
of action for a national government to implement, it will not be an example 
of regulatory politics in the sense of Majone. And these latter two points are 
the heart of the matter in regard to the lure of technocracy in Europe today. 
Eucken, Rüstow, and Friedman believed that science could be the anchor 
of stability, especially in times of socioeconomic upheaval, by depoliticizing 
questions of policy making by invoking the decontestatory authority of sci­
ence. But if following scientific advice leads to a redistribution of burdens 
and there is not even a solid consensus on the policies in question, there is 
no other option than to call this technocratic rule, consisting in a failure to 
treat eminently and inherently political questions as such and instead treat­
ing them as if they were technical ones that could be addressed in a rational 
depoliticized way with resort to some established politico-economic wisdom. 
The politics of austerity, to choose but the most obvious example, neither 

	
Ideas
221
were and are emphatically uncontroversial among “the men of science” 
referenced in the ordoliberal manifesto, nor were they nonredistributive. 
Therefore, putting the power to decide over this and other recipes into 
the hands of the undoubtedly exceptionally well-trained but poorly legiti­
mated hands of the economists and lawyers in the commission and the ECB 
may have provided satisfaction at long last to those who lamented their 
dethronement in 1936, but it just adds to the legitimation gap of ordoliberal 
Europe. To be sure, other neoliberals like Hayek and possibly Röpke would 
have voiced concerns over what Hayek may have criticized as the “pretence 
of knowledge,” but those on the other side of the debate on the powers and 
political significance of science, including Eucken, may have looked more fa­
vorably on these arrangements, which put scientists in charge at the expense 
of both politicians and the electorate. To quote Jens Weidmann (2016) in 
his musings on an independent fiscal authority, which will undoubtedly be 
one of the subjects of the upcoming debates between Germany and France, 
“That body should be staffed by experts, not politicians.” 
Final questions need to be addressed: To what extent are the commis­
sion’s “personalized” recommendations still to be considered a rule-based 
politics (see Scharpf 2011)? And to what extent does the ECB’s course con­
stitute the opposite of a quintessentially ordoliberal rule-based politics as 
it acts as a “bond buyer of last resort” (Sandbu 2015, 158) and, arguably, 
disregards maybe not the letter but the spirit of the no-bail-out clause? The 
latter in particular is often portrayed as prime evidence for the decline of 
an economic constitution and thus of an ordoliberal kind of governing. In 
my view neither of these points serves as a refutation of the diagnosis of 
the ordoliberalization of Europe. First, it may well be worth questioning 
whether the Draghi course of the ECB is compatible with ordoliberal tenets, 
but let us at least note that Draghi himself claimed just that in an address 
given in Jerusalem in 2013: “In this context, it is worth recalling that the 
monetary constitution of the ECB is firmly grounded in the principles of 
‘ordoliberalism.’ . . . Does the fact that our operations include some credit 
risks on the balance sheet of the central bank imply a violation of our or­
doliberal principles? . . . My answer is no. . . . The risks we take onto our 
balance sheet in the context of our operations are controlled, and they are 
accepted only insofar as they are strictly necessary for the pursuit of price 

222	
Ideas
stability.” Of course, we must not be naïve and take Draghi’s words at face 
value, but let us not forget that up to this point, the task of the ECB to 
pursue price stability, understood as a Eurozone inflation rate of just below 
2 percent, has not been compromised by whatever unorthodox policies have 
been pursued so far. Moreover, contrary to the warnings of Weidmann and 
others, when the ECB changed its course, there was not even a trace of 
inflationary tendencies. If anything, there were deflationary ones as the rate 
dropped from just over 2 percent to as low as −0.5 percent between 2012 and 
2015. So it seems that expansionary measures would be in order to counter 
these tendencies. Finally, and most important, we must consider the timing 
of the ECB’s change of course in 2012. After all, this was a time when all 
the important structural reforms in countries such as Ireland and Portugal, 
and to some extent Greece, were under way. And the ECB had not been 
exactly an innocent bystander. As David Woodruff chronicles, the ECB sent 
several letters to the various governments demanding that they implement 
the required reforms. If they refused, the ECB would stop providing direly 
needed emergency credit lines: “The ECB leadership implicitly or explicitly 
threatened to withhold its help unless policy or institutional changes imple­
menting Brussels-Frankfurt priorities (especially labor market liberalization 
and fiscal austerity) were adopted. These threats were made credible by the 
rigid rules on the ECB’s independence and mandate, and the prospect of 
vigorous German political and legal opposition to exceeding the mandate” 
(2016, 98). He concludes that the ECB actually played a game of “good cop, 
bad cop” alongside the German government, and only once both got what 
they wanted—structural reforms, fiscal compacts, and so on—did the ECB 
change course. The expansionary policy—and of course the indirect support 
for states’ debt service—was the price to be paid for more and tighter rules: 
“These institutional changes were, then, entirely in the spirit of Ordoliberal­
ism, restructuring rules and the actors subject to them in ways designed to 
facilitate the operation of a market economy and make further discretionary 
interventions both unnecessary and unavailable” (ibid.).
A similar argument can be made about whether the commission’s highly 
specific recommendations mark a departure from a rule-based politics. The 
recommendations are, in principle, aimed at making themselves superflu­
ous once the various national economies have been restructured so they 

	
Ideas
223
can compete in the way that the economic constitution has defined and 
codified desirable competition. It is doubtful whether this can and will ever 
happen, but this is certainly the thrust of what the ECB and especially the 
commission endeavor with their push for structural reforms. So if one wants 
to interpret the recommendations as discretionary interventions, they are 
still interventions aimed at ensuring that in the future there will be juris­
dictional competition according to the rules. The exception to the rule 
may thus be justifiable as the price for a better functioning of the rules in 
the future (ibid., 97). The ordoliberalization of Europe is still a work in 
progress, as the economic constitution remains incomplete in many ways. 
The interventions by the commission and the existence of the ESM must 
be interpreted in this context as a consequence of the continued “market 
failure” produced by this incompleteness: If states refused to restructure their 
internal politico-economic arrangements, they may run the risk of dwindling 
competitiveness and, ultimately, default. At the moment, this is still a serious 
problem from the point of view of the competitive order, because while the 
ESM is in place to provide conditional financial support in these cases, it is 
not large enough to bail out an economy such as Italy’s, which is the latest 
source of concern in the Eurozone. There also remains a certain degree of 
moral hazard, although this is significantly reduced given the considerable 
strings attached to the support. Accordingly, from the ordoliberal perspec­
tive, the problem is that there is still no mechanism in place to let countries 
like Italy default in an orderly fashion without jeopardizing the existence 
of the Eurozone. If such a mechanism were in place, countries would not 
have to be bailed out through the ESM and possibly would not have to be 
disciplined by EU/Eurozone institutions; the market would take care of it, 
and the ordoliberalization of Europe would be taken one step further. After 
all, the ordo-/neoliberal problematic is concerned with the preconditions 
of functioning markets, and the fundamental one is the possibility of exits 
from the market, by private actors as well as nation-states. As Eucken wrote, 
“If one rejects the consequences of collectivism, one must want the laws of 
competition to rule. And if the market is to rule one must not refuse to adjust to 
its requirements” (1960, 371, my emphasis). 
We must conclude that the political theory of neoliberalism, especially 
the elements on which I have focused, are a far cry from purely theoretical 

224	
Ideas
designs with no bearing on the world of actually existing neoliberalism. As 
has been shown, it is especially the tenets of a Euckenian ordoliberalism 
that correspond with many elements of the governance of the Eurozone and 
the EU. However, this does not imply that the structures are incompatible 
with what other neoliberals were arguing for if one considers, for example, 
the Fiscal Compact and the constitutional debt brakes it stipulated, which 
come very close to the kind of constitutional balanced-budget amendment 
that Buchanan tirelessly advocated. European institutions and politics cannot 
be reduced to an ordoliberal economic constitution. Political reality does 
not correspond exactly to theoretical designs because political reality is the 
site of contestation and rivaling political projects. What I have argued is 
that there is a discernible tendency toward an ordoliberalization of Europe 
in the sense of establishing a competitive order for national economies and 
enforcing the rules of the game, even against the resistance of an individual 
player. Furthermore, the governance of this competitive order is broadly in 
line with what ordoliberals and, specifically, Eucken saw as the appropriate 
role of state, democracy, and science. The response to this tendency cannot 
be to drum up the need to return powers and competencies to nation-states 
and dismantle the Eurozone. The competitive order of Europe instead needs 
to be repoliticized, and, more specifically, it needs to be democratized. In 
other words, it needs to be less ordoliberal. Discussing the most promis­
ing strategies to achieve this would require a study in itself, so I confine 
myself to the levels of analysis and diagnosis, which leads to this summary: 
If Europe does not manage to redemocratize its will-formation processes 
and repoliticize some of its institutions, there is a distinct danger that its 
ordoliberalization will slowly stagger toward its eventual completion; but 
in a world of uncertainty, nothing is set in stone. 


225
Introduction
1.  For biographical information on these thinkers, respectively, see Klinckowstroem 
2000; Hennecke 2005; Meier-Rust 1993; Friedman and Friedman 1998; Buchanan 
2007; Hayek 1994; Caldwell 2003.
2.  The neoliberals were keenly aware of this shift, and it was one reason that they 
thought an alternative version of a “new” liberalism needed to be developed. Because 
of the terminological ambivalence resulting from this shift, many neoliberals tacitly 
abandoned the label later. The next chapter deals more extensively with these issues. 
3.  “The fallacy of identifying neoliberalism exclusively with economic theory 
becomes apparent when we notice that the historical record teaches that the neo­
liberals themselves regarded such narrow exclusivity as a prescription for disaster” 
(Mirowski 2009, 427).
4.  I revisit these issues in part 2 and offer more extensive thoughts on how we 
may conceptualize the influence of (neoliberal) ideas on political practice. 
Chapter 1
1.  To be precise, the term itself can be found even before this time. In a book 
from 1925 the Swiss economist Hans Honegger refers to a “theoretical neoliberal­
ism” (13). Even earlier in 1911, somewhat surprisingly, Hans Kelsen uses the term in 
his Habilitation, albeit in a strictly uneconomic meaning. In both instances, however, 
the term does not refer to the kind of theoretical and political agenda of those who 
actually called themselves neoliberals. See Kelsen (1923) 1960.
2.  Burgin refers to The Good Society as “the foundational text of neoliberal­
ism” (2012, 67), but this ignores the fact that several years before the publication of 
Notes

226	
Notes to  Chapter 1
Lippmann’s book, thinkers like Rüstow or Eucken had formulated very similar ideas in 
the context of the end crisis of the Weimar Republic and thus developed a neoliberal­
ism avant le lettre. See particularly Rüstow 2017b; and Eucken 2017a. 
3.  While Buchanan was a relentless critic of Keynesianism in all its aspects, 
Friedman may have been strongly opposed to the Keynesian remedies but not nec­
essarily all of its diagnostics. Before turning into a staunch critic of Keynes, the 
young Röpke still advocated a “jump start” for the economy in case of a “secondary 
depression” (1936, 119), which is hardly distinguishable from Keynesian demand 
management. Hayek actually became friends with Keynes during World War II, 
but while he respected his intellectual opponent (see Hayek 1994, 89–97), Hayek 
remained convinced that Keynesianism was a thoroughly erroneous view of econom­
ics. All translations from German are mine.
4.  This is a less trivial statement than particularly English-speaking readers 
might assume. There has been a long and heated debate, conducted predominantly 
in German, over the role of ordoliberalism between 1933 and 1945, and the op­
position to the Nazis is not as principled as one might have expected in the case 
of some of the ordoliberals, but not Rüstow or Röpke, who went into exile. And 
while Eucken is a slightly more complicated case, his personal antifascist credentials 
are beyond doubt. See Ptak 2004; Goldschmidt 2005; Dathe 2010; Biebricher and 
Vogelmann 2017. 
5.  Hayek himself confirmed this link in an interview given years later: “It [The Road 
to Serfdom] was aimed against what I would call classical socialism; aimed mainly at the 
nationalization or socialization of the means of production. Many of the contemporary 
socialist parties have at least ostensibly given up that and turned to a redistribution/
fair-taxation idea—welfare—which is not directly applicable. I don’t believe it alters the 
fundamental objection, because I believe this indirect control of the economic world 
ultimately leads to the same result, which is a very much slower process . . . destroying 
the market order and making it necessary, against the will of the present-day socialists, 
gradually to impose more and more central planning” (1994, 108).
6.  I quote this from A Humane Economy from the late 1950s, but the criticism 
dates back to Röpke’s Civitas Humana from 1944. See particularly Röpke 1949, 
250–267.
7.  “And some miraculous rediscovery of eighteenth-century political wisdom 
would scarcely get us out of the woods” (Buchanan 1975, 92).
8.  Ignoring this can lead to an ironic déjà vu, as Bruno Amable has pointed out 
with regard to the discussions following the financial crisis: “The current debate on 
the financial and economic crisis that focuses on the danger of ‘market fundamental­
ism’ and the lack of morals in markets lead to the conclusion that market regulation 
and morals could save capitalism from its worst tendencies. Unknowingly, most 
participants in these discussions re-enact the debates of the 1930s that led to the 
invention of neo-liberalism. Are those who ignore the lessons of economic history 
condemned to reinvent neo-liberalism?” (2010, 27). 

	
Notes to Chapter 2
227
Chapter 2
1.  As Foucault puts it in his lectures on ordoliberalism, “Government must ac­
company the market economy from start to finish” (2008, 121).
2.  The hard line of ordoliberal thinkers with regard to monopolies and economic 
power sets them apart from other varieties of neoliberal thought exemplified in the 
works of Friedman and Hayek, who are much less concerned about existence and 
effects of monopolies. See, for example, the later Hayek’s oblique critique of the 
ordoliberal fixation on monopolies (2003, 3:83) and Friedman’s judgment that a 
private monopoly is still better than a public one, both directed at Eucken (2002, 
28). This laconic quote from Hayek sums up these positions quite well: “Monopoly 
is certainly undesirable but only in the same sense in which scarcity is undesirable: 
in neither case does it mean that we can avoid it” (2009, 231). 
3.  However, it is important to note that Eucken does not consider the competi­
tive order an end in itself; rather, it is a worthy goal to be pursued because it is the 
“order that is in accordance with the nature of man and things” (1960, 372). We 
return to this “natural order” later. 
4.  The underlying intuition of this criterion is taken up by a number of other 
neoliberals, especially with regard to social policy issues. See Friedman 2002, 192; 
Hayek 2002, 39, 124–125.
5.   “At the constitutional stage, the state emerges as the enforcing agency or 
institution, conceptually external to the contracting parties and charged with the 
single responsibility of enforcing agreed-on rights and claims along with contracts 
which involve voluntarily negotiated exchanges of such claims” (Buchanan 1975, 
68).
6.  This is one of the reasons for Buchanan’s critique of Friedman’s “quantitative” 
version of a budget rule. See Buchanan 1997b, 132. 
7.  This should also be read against the backdrop of Buchanan’s highly problem­
atic critical stance on desegregation in the Southern states—including Virginia—
decided by the Supreme Court and enforced by the federal executive against the 
resistance of a number of state governments. See MacLean 2017. 
8.  This would seem to suggest that Hayek is actually a critic of a state that is 
run like an enterprise. Yet it has become commonplace in some of the literature 
on the actually existing neoliberal state that it is being assimilated to a private or­
ganization and slowly transformed into an enterprise. See particularly Dardot and 
Laval 2017, 215–254. This may be the case, but the demand for the state to be run 
in this way is nowhere to be found in Hayek’s works or that of any other neoliberal 
considered here.
9.  On the explicitly globalist orientation of early neoliberal thought, see Slobodian 
2018.
10.  Here Röpke emphasizes the conflation of imperium and dominium as one 
of the crucial factors in these processes, leading to the economic realm becoming 
increasingly politicized. See Röpke 1959a, 75. 

228	
Notes to  Chapters 2 and 3
11.  However, in a comment on Europe Buchanan concedes that there is an 
argument to be made for equalizing grants. See Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 178.
12.  Rüstow is a case in point. While he is an ardent advocate of the strong state 
in the 1930s, in the 1950s he still refers to a “pluralistic degeneration of the political 
process” but also writes with regard to the authoritarian state that “such a state no 
longer exists in Germany, and it will never return” (Rüstow 2014, 463, 470). 
13.  On the notion of the strong state in ordoliberalism, see also Bonefeld 2012, 2017.
14.   “On the contrary, not busyness [sic] but independence from group interests 
and the inflexible will to exercise its authority and preserve its dignity as a representa­
tive of the community, mark the really strong state” (Röpke 1950b, 192). 
15.   “It is all very well to go on explaining . . . that a strong, impartial and en­
lightened government should break the dominance of organized pressure groups and 
safeguard the fair rules of competition [but this requires] a change in the pathological 
condition of society and state themselves” (Röpke 1942, 238). 
16.  Note that for the moment I will not distinguish systematically between 
“dictatorship” and “authoritarianism,” not the least because neoliberals seem to use 
the terms interchangeably. However, I revisit the matter of dictatorship in particular 
in chapter 5. 
17.  As is well known, Hayek is not the only neoliberal with a controversial 
relation to Chile and Pinochet. There has been a long debate over Friedman’s 
involvement through the training of the “Chicago Boys,” who were to implement 
economic reforms in Chile, at the University of Chicago and his advice to the regime 
regarding the feasibility of reforms. For a measured reconstruction of Friedman’s 
role and position on Chile, see Meadowcroft and Ruger 2014. Even Buchanan was 
willing to associate with the dictatorship on occasion. 
18.  By now there is a considerable body of scholarship on Hayek’s controversial 
stance on Chile and other military dictatorships at the time, such as Argentina. See, 
for example, Farrant, McPhail, and Berger 2012; Meadowcroft and Ruger 2014. 
The focus of this literature tends to be on the model of a transitional dictatorship 
that paves the way toward a properly liberal democratic order rather than long-term 
authoritarianism. While I interpret Hayek here as defending the latter, I consider 
the arguments for a transitional dictatorship later. 
19.  “Yet anyone who would maintain that the authoritarian direction of state 
and economic life . . . represents an approximation to the collectivist principle of 
society, makes it thereby clear that he cannot distinguish between dictatorship and 
the collectivist state” (Röpke 1942, 256).
Chapter 3
1.  Elsewhere I have developed a different account of neoliberal varieties centered 
on the restriction, replacement, and complementation of representative democracy. 
See Biebricher 2015.
2.  For alternative accounts of Hayek’s view on sovereignty that portray it as 
strongly informed by a Schmittian conceptualization, see Scheuerman 1997; Cristi 
1998; and Biebricher 2015.

	
Notes to Chapter 3
229
3.  A Pareto optimum is the point in an interactive exchange at which none of 
the participants can gain a further advantage without putting at least one actor at a 
disadvantage through continued exchange.
4.  “The mass organizations of interested parties dangerously increase the 
already alarming power of separate interests” (Röpke 1960, 145). Röpke makes 
the clarification that critique of the state must not imply a principled hostility 
toward it “because after all the state is the embodiment of the common good 
that is located above group interests, or at least it should be” (1959a, 45). The 
postwar Rüstow offers a similar interpretation of the common good: “Of course, 
one can be of different minds for good reasons over this bonum commune, 
this common interest, general interest, general welfare, as we should still call 
it, despite the misuse of this term by the Nazis. These disagreements over the 
common problem of the state’s interest, the general interest; that is the nature 
of politics and not the representation of particular interests or the compromise 
between these interests” (1963, 63). 
5.  There is a brief discussion of democratic matters in a text from 1948, but it 
does not suggest that Eucken has changed his views. The problem is still that “mo­
nopolies exert far more political influence because of their economic power. . . . It 
then has to be asked whether it is possible to maintain a parliamentary democracy 
at all in such circumstances” (Eucken 1989, 32).
6.  This is also confirmed by the case of Röpke, who bemoans that “the monistic 
state of democratic doctrine has developed into the pluralistic state of democratic 
practice.” And while he continues to introduce a differentiation between a “sound” 
and an “unhealthy” pluralism, the first simply amounts to minority rights against 
the undue use of the majority principle, whereas the second entails what I have 
characterized as pluralist democracy. See Röpke 1960, 142, 144. 
7.  Buchanan at times voices similar concerns that are hard to differentiate from 
neoconservative positions: “Methods, manners, morals, and standards were cavalierly 
tossed on the junk heap of history. . . . Democracy seemed unable to control its own 
excesses” (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, 22). 
8.  The partial exception to this rule in the form of Hayek’s model constitution 
is discussed later in this chapter.
9.  However, this may lead to a fragmentation of the party system and thus in­
creased pluralistic particularism, which the neoliberals find so problematic. See the 
critical view on proportional representation in Rüstow 1957, 174. 
10.  It must be noted that Hayek explicitly mentions the potential learning ef­
fects stemming from democracy. Yet, as Gamble points out, this point is not pursued 
further. See Hayek 2009, 96; Gamble 1996, 95. 
11.  It goes without saying that Buchanan would only like to see constitutional de­
mocracy with a strong rule of law amended through more direct democratic elements. 
12.  Buchanan himself at times exhibited this fear and disdain, as his comments on 
voting rights reforms in the 1990s suggest: “We are increasingly enfranchising the 
illiterate” (cited in MacLean 2017, 197). 

230	
Notes to  Chapter 4
Chapter 4
1.  Ascribing a straightforward instrumentalist view to Friedman is a matter 
of debate to some degree, because at some point he does imply that science has 
explanatory tasks as well: “A hypothesis is important if it ‘explains’ much by little” 
(1953, 14). However, in my view and in much of the literature this is interpreted 
as a case of imprecise use of terminology—not to mention that the crucial term is 
put in quotation marks. 
2.  We should also note that Friedman’s monetarism replacing Keynesianism as 
the dominant paradigm in the “science” of economic policy is hardly that it is more 
unrealistic or parsimonious in its assumptions but that it has the ability to account 
for phenomena that could not be adequately captured in the rival paradigm—as 
Friedman (1977) himself described it in his Nobel lecture. 
3.  Once again, the salience of this criticism is difficult to determine because 
Friedman gestures at the possibility of revising assumptions in some passages; in 
others he seems opposed. 
4.  I mostly focus on Eucken in this discussion because we know from the letter ex­
change between him and Rüstow that the latter subscribed almost entirely to Eucken’s 
view of what it meant to practice political economy as a science. See Sala 2011.
5.  See also Eucken (1951a, 350n71), where he strongly rejects any relativiza­
tion of the notion of truth. For Rüstow’s equally enthusiastic assessment of political 
economy’s abilities in generating truth see Rüstow (1963, 20). 
6.  “The competitive order does not implement itself; in this sense it is not a 
natural order, no ordre naturel. . . . But in a different sense it is a natural order or Ordo. 
It amplifies the tendencies that push toward perfect competition in the industrial 
economy. . . . We do not find the competitive order, we find its elements in concrete 
reality. We do not force anything but bring to fruition what exists—alongside other 
forms—in reality. The remarkably strong tendencies toward perfect competition we 
find in the things themselves, we aim to bring to fruition” (Eucken 1960, 373–374). 
See also Hayek’s rejection of the “false dichotomy of ‘natural’ and ‘artificial,’” which 
is completely consistent with Eucken’s view (2001, 20).
7.  Dardot and Laval offer a perceptive discussion of these matters, but at times 
they tend to explain away the lingering naturalism in ordoliberal thought without 
a proper justification (2017, 82). 
8.  One of Röpke’s articles from 1948 even bears the title “The Natural Order.” 
9.  For one of the few explicitly conciliatory remarks on Christian religion and, 
tellingly, Catholic social thought, see Rüstow 1960, 175–177. Here he also affirms 
the commitment to natural law theory that is a common denominator among the 
ordoliberals.
10.  Eucken’s letters to Rüstow leave little doubt about this. In one of them he 
writes that the decline of liberalism began “when it lost its religious-metaphysical 
substance.” In another he declares that he could “neither exist nor work, if I did not 
know that god exists” (cited in Lenel 1991, 12–13).
11.  Röpke attacks the “cult of dissection” in science, and even Hayek, somewhat 

	
Notes to Chapters 4 and 5
231
surprisingly, given his overall stance, points out critically that “although the problem 
of an appropriate social order is today studied from the different angles of econom­
ics, jurisprudence, political science, sociology, and ethics, the problem is one which 
can be approached successfully only as a whole” (2001, 1:4).
12.  This critical stance continues up to the aftermath of the financial crisis of 
2008, which turned out to be an embarrassment for the majority of economists, as 
much of the scientific knowledge they had produced was “exposed as irrelevant and 
essentially useless” (Buchanan 2009, 151). 
13.  Friedman returned the favor by submitting that he was an “enormous ad­
mirer” of Hayek, “but not for his economics” (Ebenstein 2001, 81).
14.  This is not to suggest that Hayek was principally opposed to a science that 
expressed value judgments, at least in certain contexts and for certain purposes: “An 
ideal picture of a society, which may not be wholly achievable . . . is nevertheless 
not only the indispensable precondition of any rational policy, but also the chief 
contribution that science can make to the solution of the problems of practical 
policy” (2003, 1:65).
15.  “There is little mystery about Keynes’s own assumptions concerning the 
politics of economic policy. Personally, he was an elitist, and his idealized world 
embodied policy decisions being made by a small and enlightened group of wise 
people” (Buchanan and Wagner 1977, 78).
16.  The Buchanan Center funded by the Koch brothers offered seminars for 
lawmakers and members of the judiciary on the federal and state levels, and it was 
only once these activities were made public in a fund-raising effort and the integrity 
of the center was at stake did Buchanan sever his ties to the Kochs in the late 1990s. 
See MacLean 2017, 199–204. 
17.  At one point Röpke refers to “science whose leadership functions and re­
sponsibility are obvious [with its] authority of the highest rank” (1960, 133).
18.  For a detailed discussion of the role of science, which at least considers the 
possibility of political consultancy, see Röpke 1953b, 381–382.
Chapter 5
1.  See also Hayek 2003, 1:65, 70; Friedman and Friedman 1990, 285; and Eucken 
1949, 38. See also Röpke, who approvingly cites Louis de Bonald as suggesting “that 
ideas are the true masters of the world” (1950b, 40).
2.  The choice of an economic system is conceived of as a decision, with slightly 
Schmittian undertones: “By an ‘economic constitution’ we mean the decision as 
to the general ordering of the economic life of a community” (Eucken 1951a, 88). 
3.  Here it becomes clear that there is some overlap between Röpke’s explicit 
and Eucken’s implicit hope for benevolent guardians and Rüstow’s notion of a ple­
biscitary dictatorship—democracy. However, Rüstow obviously opts for a different, 
institutional strategy, all the difficulties in spelling out its feasibility aside. 
4.  Röpke does not explicitly endorse transitional dictatorships, but he goes to 
conspicuously great lengths to differentiate between “modern dictatorships,” such as 

232	
Notes to  Chapter 5
Turkey, Greece, and Portugal (in the early 1940s), and the modern tyrannies, such 
as Nazism and communism. See Röpke 1942, 247. 
5.  I will not systematically investigate Friedman’s role with regard to the Chilean 
military dictatorship. Overall, he seems to have been less favorably inclined toward 
the regime form than Hayek was. Nevertheless, he did offer economic advice in a 
letter to Pinochet, not to mention the other “Chicago Boys,” or those trained in 
Chicago who played a vital role in the implementation of the economic reforms. 
For a measured assessment, see Meadowcroft and Ruger 2014. 
6.  See also Hayek’s own assessment that is difficult to square with the defense of 
dictatorship: “The powers which modern democracy possesses would be even more 
intolerable in the hands of some small elite” (2009, 348). 
7.  Man’s tools “consist of what we call ‘traditions’ and ‘institutions,’ ” which he 
uses because they are available to him as a product of cumulative growth without 
ever having been designed by any one mind” (ibid., 25).
8.  “Liberalism is not averse to evolution and change; and where spontaneous 
change has been smothered by government control, it wants a great deal of change 
of policy” (ibid., 345).
9.  “It is at least conceivable that the formation of a spontaneous order relies 
entirely on rules that were deliberately made” (Hayek 2003, 1:45).
10.  For a conciliatory perspective regarding this issue, see Vanberg 1981, 1994.
11.  While I will not systematically discuss his case, it should be noted that Friedman 
is implicitly confronted with a very similar dilemma to the extent that he adopts core 
tenets of public-choice theory in his works of the 1980s and blames the rigidity of the 
system on the power of “special interests” in democracies: “Taken together, the three 
corners of the iron triangle [bureaucrats, politicians, and beneficiaries of governmen­
tal policy] guard against dismantling the functions of government. The tyranny of 
the status quo is strong and difficult to break” (Friedman and Friedman 1984, 51). 
True, Friedman lays out a strategic path toward a constitutional amendment along his 
lines—slightly different from what Buchanan envisions—by involving state legislatures, 
which Buchanan also endorsed in his practical political activities (see MacLean 2017). 
However, Friedman himself concedes that in the past, all attempts to introduce such 
amendments have faltered when members of Congress safeguarded their own interests 
and were pressured by the public. See Friedman and Friedman 1984, 61.
12.  Brennan and Munger are therefore entirely correct in their assessment 
that “Buchanan was always somewhat ambivalent on the homo oeconomicus issue” 
(2014, 339).
13.  As his colleagues and collaborators recall, “he was antagonistic toward re­
ligion of all kinds. His opposition was not just to ‘organized’ religion: he was (if 
possible) even less sympathetic to unorganized populist mystics and new-age spiri­
tualists” (ibid., 331).
14.  A similar perspective on the presuppositions of a politics of fundamen­
tal change seems to be contained in Hayek’s call for a “liberal utopia” mentioned 
previously.

	
Notes to Chapters 5 and 6
233
15.  Neoliberal thought is not the only tradition that confronts the challenge 
of the theorizing change. Various kinds of institutionalism face similar problems, 
as we see in part 2.
Chapter 6
1.  On this regime of “privatized Keynesianism,” see Crouch 2009; Streeck 2017.
2.  This refers to the director of the Federal Reserve at the time, Paul Volcker, 
who in the late 1970s dramatically raised interest rates and thus stamped out in­
flation—at the price of a recession in the United States and a debt crisis in South 
America. 
3.  For a succinct overview of the crisis, see Ioannou, Leblond, and Niemann 
2015, 156–157. I do not use the conventional term “sovereign debt crisis” because it 
was not necessarily sovereign debt in itself that caused the crisis. Rather, the explod­
ing sovereign debt in many, if not most, cases was an effect of the preceding banking/
financial crisis, the costs of which had to be absorbed by public budgets. We return 
to this later and see how important the characterization of a crisis is. 
4.  Seemingly, this possibility was only seriously taken into consideration by in­
vestors once Angela Merkel was heard on German TV in February 2010 brusquely 
saying that “right now we can help Greece by stating clearly that it has to fulfill its 
duties” (Weisenthal 2010). 
5.  While there is a notable shift between the Toronto summit and the one in 
Pittsburgh on the eve of the sovereign debt crisis in September 2009, the Pittsburgh 
summit’s declaration already contained hints of an impending change. See “G20 
Leaders Statement” 2009. 
6.  Consider the Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece from May 2010, 
authored by the European Commission, which accompanied the very first rescue 
package and is representative of those to come—for Greece and other countries: 
“The immediate priority is to contain the government’s financing needs and reassure 
markets of the determination of authorities to do whatever it takes to secure medium- 
and long-term fiscal sustainability.” “In parallel with short-term anti-crisis fiscal 
measures, there is a need to prepare and implement an ambitious structural reform 
agenda to strengthen external competitiveness, accelerate reallocation of resources 
from the non-tradable to the tradable sector [i.e., privatization of public assets], and 
foster growth” (European Commission 2010, 10, 90). On the adjustment programs 
administered through ESM and the Troika, see also Stiglitz 2016, 177–213. The 
actual memoranda of understanding signed by the heads of government of receiving 
countries can be found on the IMF website.
7.  The theory that austerity might actually have expansionary effects is most 
vehemently defended by Alberto Alesina and Silvia Ardagna (2009). See also 
Giavazzi and Pagano 1990. For a decidedly more critical look at the possibility of 
expansionary austerity, see Perotti 2013; and the IMF working paper by Guajardo, 
Leigh, and Pescatori 2011. For a detailed discussion of the various claims, see Blyth 
2013, 205–216.

234	
Notes to  Chapter 6
8.  The other major argument floating around in those years came from a now-
discredited paper by Reinhardt and Rogoff titled “This Time It’s Different,” sug­
gesting that beyond a certain threshold public debt had a tangible negative impact on 
growth. However, it turned out later that they had committed some basic technical 
errors in reaching their conclusion.
9.  This is far from suggesting that the United States (or non-Eurozone countries) 
was impeccable in its crisis management, but the fact remains that “the eurozone’s 
performance on all accounts has been worse than those countries that do not belong 
to the eurozone, and worse than in the United States” (Stiglitz 2016, 161–162). 
10.  For a helpful overview, see, e.g., Pisani-Ferry 2015.
11.  The conditionality of the funds was the crucial reason that the ESM, accord­
ing to the ECJ’s Pringle ruling (ECJ C-370/12, Pringle), does not violate Article 125 
of the TFEU. See on this point, and the court’s role with regard to the management 
of the crisis, Hinarejos 2015.
12.  In a widely reported referendum in 2015 the Greek population voted against 
the implementation of further reforms in exchange for financial support, but its gov­
ernment was unable to negotiate better terms. Note also that Portugal and Greece 
received EFSF funds only once opposition parties had pledged that they would not 
try to renegotiate the memoranda if they came into power. 
13.  As Jones notes, “All measures are relative to the accounting practices that 
underpin them. . . . Deciding whether a government is actually running an excessive 
deficit is essentially a political choice” (2013, 157). 
14.  For a more detailed account from a Foucauldian perspective that interprets 
the scoreboard and the MIP as part of a disciplinary regime, see Biebricher 2017. 
15.  Two additional reforms (Euro Plus Pact and Banking Union) were passed, 
but they are of only limited relevance to my argument and therefore are not 
discussed.
16.  On the “deadly embrace” between banks and sovereigns, see, e.g., Acharya, 
Drechsler, and Schnabl 2014; on the international dimension, see Breckenfelder 
and Schwaab 2015.
17.  On the cultural foundations of Europe, see also Rüstow 1956.
18.  For an in-depth account of Röpke’s views on European integration, see 
Wegmann 2002.
19.  Razeen Sally lauds what he calls Röpke’s “liberalism from below,” which, 
however, seems hardly inclined toward genuine federalism: “To Röpke, the cardinal 
emphasis must be on national-level unilateral action and foreign economic policy . 
. . out of which international order emerges as a byproduct” (1999, 49). 
20.  We should note that with regard to the power to tax and the related pos­
sibility of equalizing transfers from the higher to lower levels, the EU comes much 
closer to Buchanan’s ideal than the United States does.
21.  Buchanan also ends up subscribing to this argument in the concrete context 
of the European Union (1991, 628–629).
22.  “Our central suggestion is to deny the European Union the independent 
power to tax” (Buchanan and Lee 1994, 220).

	
Notes to Chapters 6 and 7
235
23.  For a more radical critique of central banks, see Friedman 1994.
24.  When once asked whether the bank should stick to its mandate or modify 
it, Friedman (2003) was adamant it should stick with it.
Chapter 7
1.  With regard to institutionalist accounts the following would be a concise argu­
ment: “It is not just institutions but the very ideas on which they are predicated and 
which inform their design and development that exert constraints on political autonomy. 
Institutions are built on ideational foundations that exert an independent path-dependent 
effect on their subsequent development” (Hay 2010, 69). For a historical institutionalist 
account of the latest EU restructurings, see Steinberg and Vermeiren 2015.
2.  As Hay writes in his ideational institutionalist account of the “crisis” (which, 
according to him, is derived from the Greek word Krino, meaning “a moment of 
decisive intervention”) of Keynesianism in the 1970s: “To make a decisive interven­
tion requires a perception of the need to make a decisive intervention” (2001, 203). 
3.  For a highly informative account of such contesting crisis narratives in the 
context of the financial crisis in the United States, see Mirowski 2013. On ideas and 
their various powers, see Carstensen and Schmidt 2016.
4.  Although this is also the position shared by Blyth, in his earlier work there 
were passages that could be read as if ideas did not matter whenever there is no acute 
crisis. See the critique by Gofas and Hay 2008, 15.
5.  For important alternative accounts about what “our neoliberal present is,” 
see especially Brown 2015; Mirowski 2013; Dardot and Laval 2017; Davies 2016; 
Fraser 2017; MacLean 2017.
6.  An EU official complained that “when the German position changes on an 
issue the kaleidoscope shifts as other countries line up behind them. That’s unprec­
edented in the history of the EU” (The Economist 2013, 1).
7.  See also Peter Bofinger (2016), who is a (often dissenting) member of the 
German Council of Economic Experts: “German university students read the same 
macroeconomic textbooks as students in other countries and at the advanced level 
the standard DSGE models are taught and applied. But behind the formal theoretical 
apparatus one can identify a specific paradigm to economic policy, called ‘Ordnung­
spolitik,’ which in this form does not exist in other countries. While there are no 
university courses on this topic, Ordnungspolitik plays an important role in German 
academic debate on policy issues and actual economic policy.” 
8.  On the European level the Directorate-General for Competition is also 
considered to be a stronghold of ordoliberal ideas, which is consistent with the 
scholarship on the ordoliberal influence on European competition policy. See 
Gerber 1998. 
9.  On the influence of ordoliberalism on German elites, see also Jacoby 2014; 
Denord, Knaebel, and Rimbert 2015; Van Esch 2014; and Lechevalier 2015.
10.  In this context it is worth noting that this proved to be more than lip service, 
as the ECB actually raised interest rates with reference to its commitment to price 
stability in the middle of the crisis year of 2011.

236	
Notes to  Chapter 7
11.  On the “unintended consequences“ of ordoliberal crisis management strate­
gies, see also Nedergaard and Snaith 2015.
12.  “Accordingly, there is the primacy of monetary policy for the competitive 
order” (Eucken 1960, 256). 
13.  The significance of insolvency law for the functioning of the competitive 
order is already mentioned in ibid., 282. See also Feld (2012, 13), who notes critically 
that a sovereign insolvency order was not considered in the Maastricht negotiations.
14.  For similar and additional arguments against the significance of ordolib­
eralism for the current reshaping, see Young (2017), whose views have apparently 
changed since Young (2014).
15.  See Streeck 2015a, 24; Friedman 1997.
16.  As Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, who happened to be born in 
Freiburg and even brings this up occasionally, reminded the readers of the Guard­
ian in 2013, all reform efforts were aimed at “improving the competitiveness of all 
eurozone countries.”
17.  “Price loses its selective function when all commodities can find a market” 
(Eucken 1951b, 72).
18.  While he concedes that wages are worth protecting for “reasons of social 
policy,” he is still adamant that in order to battle unemployment, it is indispensable 
to increase profitability through a reduction of the various production costs: “It is 
self-evident that of these elements [the various costs] wages are the most voluminous” 
(Rüstow 1930, 1403). 
19.  For the most recent argument to that effect, see The Economist (2017) and 
its cover story, “The German Problem.”
20.  That Germany was capable of recovering in part through wage restraint was 
premised on a certain system of wage bargaining that simply does not exist in other 
countries. See Höpner and Lutter 2014. As Friedman (1997) had already noted in 
his discussion of the advantages of devaluation over wage-price adjustments, “If 
one country is affected by negative shocks that call for, say, lower wages relative to 
other countries, that can be achieved by a change in one price, the exchange rate, 
rather than requiring a change in thousands and thousands of separate wage rates.”
21.  For arguments for a return of “authoritarian liberalism” in Europe, see 
Streeck 2015b; Wilkinson 2013; Bruff 2014.
22.  In 2017 there had been thirteen in-depth country reviews carried out. See 
European Commission, “In-Depth Reviews,” https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-
economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-coordination/eu-economic-governance
-monitoring-prevention-correction/macroeconomic-imbalance-procedure/depth
-reviews_en.

237
Acharya, Vitali, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl. 2014. “A Pyrrhic Victory? 
Bank Bailouts and Sovereign Credit Risk.” Journal of Finance 69 (6): 2689–2739.
 Alesina, Alberto, and Silvia Ardagna. 2009. “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes 
versus Spending.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15438. 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15438.pdf.
Amable, Bruno. 2010. “Morals and Politics in the Ideology of Neo-liberalism.” 
Socioeconomic Review 9 (1): 3–30.
Art, David. 2015. “The German Rescue of the Eurozone: How Germany Is Get­
ting the Europe It Always Wanted.” Political Science Quarterly 130 (2): 181–212.
Barber, Benjamin. (1984) 2003. Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age. 
Reprint, Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Barry, Andrew, Thomas Osborne, and Nikolas Rose, eds. 1996. Foucault and Political 
Reason: Liberalism, Neo-liberalism and Rationalities of Government. London: UCL 
Press.
Bauer, Michael, and Stefan Becker. 2014. “The Unexpected Winner of the Crisis: 
The European Commission’s Strengthened Role in Economic Governance.” 
Journal of European Integration 36 (3): 213–229.
Bellamy, Richard. 1994. “‘Dethroning Politics’: Liberalism, Constitutionalism and 
Democracy in the Thought of F. A. Hayek.” British Journal of Political Science 
24:419–441.
Bibow, Jörg. 2004. “Investigating the Intellectual Origins of Euroland’s Macro­
economic Policy Regime: Central Banking Institutions and Traditions in West 
Germany after the War.: The Levy Economics Institute Working Paper 406. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=547122.
References

238	
Bibliography
Bickerton, Christopher, Dermot Hodson, and Uwe Puetter. 2015. “The New Inter­
governmentalism: European Integration in the Post-Maastricht Era.” Journal of 
Common Market Studies 53 (4): 703–722. 
Biebricher, Thomas. 2014. “Sovereignty, Norms, and Exception in Neoliberalism.” 
Qui Parle? 23 (1): 77–108.
———.  2015. “Neoliberalism and Democracy.” Constellations 22 (2): 255–266.
———.  2017. “Disciplining Europe: The Production of Economic Delinquency.” 
Foucault Studies 23:63–85.
Biebricher, Thomas, and Frieder Vogelmann, eds. 2017. The Birth of Austerity: 
German Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neoliberalism. London: Rowman and 
Littlefield International.
Birch, Kean, and Vlad Mykhnenko, eds. 2010. The Rise and Fall of Neoliberalism: The 
Collapse of an Economic Order? London: Zed Books.
Blyth, Mark. 2002. Great Transformations: Economic Ideas and Institutional Change in 
the Twentieth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———.  2010. “Ideas, Uncertainty, and Evolution.” In Ideas and Politics in Social Sci­
ence Research, edited by Daniel Béland and Robert Cox, 83–101. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
———.  2013. Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea. New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press. 
Boas, Taylor, and Jordan Gans-Morse. 2009. “Neoliberalism: From New Liberal 
Philosophy to Anti-liberal Slogan.” Studies in Comparative International Develop­
ment 44 (2): 137–161.
Bofinger, Peter. 2016. “German Macroeconomics: The Long Shadow of Wal­
ter Eucken.” VOX, June 7. http://voxeu.org/article/german-macroeconomics
-long-shadow-walter-eucken.
Böhm, Franz, Walter Eucken, and Hans Großmann-Doerth. 1989. “The Ordo-
Manifesto of 1936.” In Germany’s Social Market Economy: Origins and Evo­
lutions, edited by Alan Peacock and Hans Willgerodt, 15–25. New York: 
Palgrave.
Bonefeld, Werner. 2012. “Freedom and the Strong State: On German Ordoliberal­
ism.” New Political Economy 17 (5): 633–656.
———.  2017. The Strong State and the Free Economy. London: Rowman and Little­
field International.
Bourdieu, Pierre. “The Essence of Neoliberalism.” Le Monde Diplomatique, Decem­
ber 1998. https://mondediplo.com/1998/12/08bourdieu.
Breckenfelder, H.-Johannes, and Bernd Schwaab. 2015. “The Bank-Sovereign Nexus 
across Borders.” ECB Working Paper. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/dce2
/4a46356db0a5b24a01b699c10c9e69ccdb51.pdf.
Brennan, Geoffrey, and James Buchanan. 1980. The Power to Tax: Analytical Founda­
tions of a Fiscal Constitution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———.  1985. The Reason of Rules: Constitutional Political Economy. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.

	
Bibliography
239
Brennan, Geoffrey, and Michael Munger. 2014. “The Soul of James Buchanan?” 
Independent Review 18:331–342.
Brenner, Neil, Jamie Peck, and Nik Theodore. 2010. “Variegated Neoliberalization: 
Geographies, Modalities, Pathways.” Global Networks 10 (2): 182–222. 
Brenner, Neil, and Nik Theodore. 2002. “Cities and the Geographies of ‘Actually 
Existing Neoliberalism.’” Antipode 34 (3): 349–379.
Brown, Wendy. 2015. Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution. New 
York: Zone Books.
Bruff, Ian. 2014. “The Rise of Authoritarian Neoliberalism.” Rethinking Marxism 
26 (1): 113–129.
Buchanan, James. 1954. “Individual Choice in Voting and the Market.” Journal of 
Political Economy 62 (4): 334–343.
———.  1975. The Limits of Liberty: Between Anarchy and Leviathan. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press.
———.  1979a. “The Potential of Taxpayer Revolt in American Democracy.” Social 
Science Quarterly 59:691–696.
———.  1979b. What Should Economists Do? Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Press.
———.  1986. Liberty, Market and State: Political Economy in the 1980s. Brighton, 
UK: Harvester Press, 1986.
———.  1991. “An American Perspective on Europe’s Constitutional Opportunity.” 
Cato Journal 10 (3): 619–630.
———.  1995a. “Federalism and Individual Sovereignty.” Cato Journal 15 (2–3): 
259–268. 
———.  1995b. “Federalism as an Ideal Political Order and an Objective for Con­
stitutional Reform.” Publius 25 (2): 19–27.
———.  1996. “Europe as Social Reality.” Constitutional Political Economy 7:253–256.
———.  1997a. “The Balanced Budget Amendment: Clarifying the Arguments.” 
Public Choice 90:117–138.
———.  1997b. Has Economics Lost Its Way? Reflections on the Economists’ Enterprise 
at the End of the Century. Fairfax, VA: Institute for Humane Studies at George 
Mason University.
———.  2000. “The Soul of Classical Liberalism.” Independent Review 4:111–119.
———.  2001. “Direct Democracy, Classical Liberalism, and Constitutional Strat­
egy.” Kyklos 54:235–242.
———.  2004. “Constitutional Efficiency and the European Central Bank.” Cato 
Journal 24 (1–2): 13–17.
———.  2007. Economics from the Outside In: ‘Better Than Plowing’ and Beyond. Col­
lege Station: Texas A&M University Press.
———.  2009. “Economists Have No Clothes.” RMM, Perspectives in Moral Science, 
edited by M. Baurmann and B. Lahno. http://www.frankfurt-school-verlag.de/
rmm/downloads/010_buchanan.pdf.
Buchanan, James, and Dwight R. Lee. 1994. “On a Fiscal Constitution for the Eu­
ropean Union.” Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines 5 (2–3): 219–232.

240	
Bibliography
Buchanan, James, and Richard Musgrave. 1999. Public Finance and Public Choice: Two 
Contrasting Visions of the State. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Buchanan, James, Robert Tollison, and Gordon Tullock. 1980. Toward a Theory of 
the Rent-Seeking Society. College Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Buchanan, James, and Richard Wagner. 1977. Democracy in Deficit: The Political Legacy 
of Lord Keynes. London: Academic Press.
Bulmer, Simon. 2013. “Germany and the Eurozone Crisis: Between Hegemony and 
Domestic Politics.” West European Politics 37 (6): 1244–1263.
Burgin, Angus. 2012. The Great Persuasion: Reinventing Free Markets since the Depres­
sion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cahill, Damien. 2014. The End of Laissez-Faire? On the Durability of Embedded Neo­
liberalism. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishers. 
Caldwell, Bruce. 1990. “Critique of Friedman’s Methodological Instrumentalism.” In 
Milton Friedman: Critical Assessments, edited by John Wood and Ronald Woods, 
3:142–153. London: Routledge.
———.  2003. Hayek’s Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Caporaso, James, and Sidney Tarrow. 2009. “Polanyi in Brussels: Supranational 
Institutions and the Transnational Embedding of Markets.” International Orga­
nization 63 (4): 593–620.
Carstensen, Martin, and Vivien A. Schmidt. 2016. “Power over, through and in 
Ideas: Conceptualizing Ideational Power in Discursive Institutionalism.” Journal 
of European Public Policy 23 (3): 318–337.
Chomsky, Noam. 1999. Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order. New York: 
Seven Stories Press.
Cristi, Renato. 1998. Carl Schmitt and Authoritarian Liberalism: Strong State, Free 
Economy. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.
Crouch, Colin. 2009. “Privatized Keynesianism: An Unacknowledged Policy Re­
gime.” British Journal of Politics and International Relations 11:283–299.
———.  2011. The Strange Non-death of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Crozier, Michael, Samuel Huntington, and Jofi Watanuki. 1975. The Crisis of De­
mocracy: Report of the Ungovernability of Democracies to the Trilateral Commission. 
New York: New York University Press.
Dardot, Pierre, and Cristian Laval. 2017. The New Way of the World: On Neoliberal 
Society. London: Verso.
Dathe, Uwe. 2010. Walter Euckens Weg zum Liberalismus (1918–1934). Freiburger 
Diskussionspapiere zur Ordnungsökonomik 08/10. Freiburg, Germany: 
Walter-Eucken-Institut. 
Davies, William. 2016. “The New Neoliberalism.” New Left Review 101:121–134.
De Grauwe, Paul. 2011. “The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone.” Centre for 
European Policy Studies Working Paper 346. https://www.ceps.eu/system
/files/book/2011/05/WD%20346%20De%20Grauwe%20on%20Eurozone%20
Governance.pdf.

	
Bibliography
241
Denord, François, Rachel Knaebel, and Pierre Rimbert. 2015. “Germany’s 
Iron Cage.” Le Monde Diplomatique, August. https://mondediplo.com/2015
/08/03ordoliberalism.
Draghi, Mario. 2013. “Opening Remarks at the Session ‘Rethinking the Limitations 
of Monetary Policy.’” European Central Bank, June 18. https://www.ecb.europa
.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130618.en.html.
Dullien, Sebastian, and Ulrike Guérot. 2012. “The Long Shadow of Ordoliberalism: 
Germany’s Approach to the Euro Crisis.” European Council of Foreign Relations 
Policy Brief 49. https://www.ecfr.eu/publications/summary/the_long_shadow
_of_ordoliberalism_germanys_approach_to_the_euro_crisis.
Duménil, Gerard, and Dominique Lévy. 2011. The Crisis of Neoliberalism. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ebenstein, Alan. 2001. Friedrich Hayek: A Biography. New York: Palgrave. 
The Economist. 2013. “Europe’s Reluctant Hegemon: Special Report Germany.” The 
Economist, June 13.
———.  2017. “Why Germany’s Current Account Surplus Is Bad for the World 
Economy.” The Economist, July 8. 
Eucken, Walter. 1949. “Die Wettbewerbsordnung und ihre Verwirklichung.” ORDO 
3:1–99.
———.  1951a. The Foundations of Economics: History and Theory in the Analysis of Eco­
nomic Reality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Originally published in 1940.
———.  1951b. This Unsuccessful Age or the Pains of Economic Progress. London: Wil­
liam Hodge.
———.  1954. Kapitaltheoretische Untersuchungen. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr 
Siebeck.
———.  1960. Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck.
———.  1989. “What Kind of Economic and Social System.” In Germany’s Social 
Market Economy: Origins and Evolution, edited by Alan Peacock and Hans Will­
gerodt, 27–45. London: Macmillan. 
———.  2017a. “Structural Transformations of the State and the Crisis of Capital­
ism.“ In The Birth of Austerity: German Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neolib­
eralism, edited by Thomas Biebricher and Frieder Vogelmann, 51–72. London: 
Rowman and Littlefield International. Originally published in 1932. 
———.  2017b. “What Is the Competitive Order?” In The Birth of Austerity: German 
Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neoliberalism, edited by Thomas Biebricher and 
Frieder Vogelmann, 99–107. London: Rowman and Littlefield International.
European Commission. 2010. The Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece. 
Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, Occasional Papers 
61. http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/occasional_paper/2010
/pdf/ocp61_en.pdf.
Farrant, Andrew, Edward McPhail, and Sebastian Berger. 2012. “Preventing the 
‘Abuses’ of Democracy: Hayek, the ‘Military Usurper’ and Transitional Dicta­
torship in Chile.” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 71 (3): 513–538.

242	
Bibliography
Feld, Lars P. 2011. “Für Fehler geradestehen.“ Wirtschaftswoche, October 23.
———.  2012. “Europa in der Welt von heute: Wilhelm Röpke und die Zuku­
nft der Europäischen Währungsunion.” Freiburg Discussion Papers on Con­
stitutional Economics 12/2. https://www.eucken.de/en/publications/freiburg
-discussion-papers-on-constitutional-economics/.
———.  2014. “James Buchanan’s Theory of Fiscal Federalism: From Fiscal Equity 
to the Ideal Political Order.” Freiburg Discussion Papers on Constitutional 
Economics 14/06. https://www.eucken.de/en/publications/freiburg-discussion
-papers-on-constitutional-economics/.
Feld, Lars P., Ekkehard A. Köhler, and Daniel Nientiedt. 2015. “Ordoliberalism, 
Pragmatism and the Eurozone Crisis: How the German Tradition Shaped Eco­
nomic Policy in Europe.” CESIFO Working Paper 5368. https://econpapers
.repec.org/paper/cesceswps/_5f5368.htm.
Feldstein, Martin. 1997. “The Political Economy of the European Economic and 
Monetary Union: Political Sources of an Economic Liability.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 11 (4): 23–42.
Follesdal, Andreas, and Simon Hix. 2006. “Why There Is a Democratic Deficit 
in the EU: A Response to Majone and Moravcsik.” Journal of Common Market 
Studies 44 (3): 533–562.
Foucault, Michel. 1989. “What Our Present Is.” In Foucault Live, edited by Sylvère 
Lotringer, 407–415. New York: Semiotext(e). Originally published in 1983.
———.  1997. “What Is Enlightenment?” In Michel Foucault: Ethics, Subjectivity and 
Truth, edited by Paul Rabinow, 303–320. New York: New Press. 
———.  2008. The Birth of Biopolitics. Lectures at the Collège de France 1978–79. New 
York: Palgrave.
Fraser, Nancy. 2017. “The End of Progressive Neoliberalism.” Dissent Maga­
zine, January 2. https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/progressive
-neoliberalism-reactionary-populism-nancy-fraser.
Friedman, Milton. 1951. “Neo-liberalism and Its Prospects.” Farmand, February 
17, 89–93.
———.  1953. “The Methodology of Positive Economics.” In Essays in Positive 
Economics, by Milton Friedman, 3–43. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———.  1955. “Liberalism.” In 1955 Collier’s Year Book, edited by William Couch, 
360–363. New York: P. F. Collier and Son.
———.  1960. A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University 
Press.
———.  1977. “Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Employment.” Journal of Political 
Economy 85 (3): 451–472.
———.  1994. “Do We Need Central Banks?” In Monetary Management in Hong 
Kong, 44–47. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
———.  1997. “The Euro: Monetary Unity to Political Disunity?” Project Syn­
dicate, August 28. https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-euro
—monetary-unity-to-political-disunity. 

	
Bibliography
243
———.  2002. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———.  2003. “Should the European Central Bank Change Its ‘Two Percent Infla­
tion Ceiling’?” International Economy 17 (1): 46.
Friedman, Milton, and Rose Friedman. 1984. Tyranny of the Status Quo. San Diego: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Originally published in 1983.
———.  1990. Free to Choose: A Personal Statement. Orlando, FL: Harvest Books.
———.  1998. Two Lucky People: Memoirs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Furet, François. 1999. The Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twen­
tieth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
“G20 Leaders Statement: The Pittsburgh Summit.” 2009. G20 Information Centre, 
September 24–29. http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2009/2009communique0925
.html. 
“The G-20 Toronto Summit Declaration.” 2010. G20 Toronto, June 26–27. https://
www.oecd.org/g20/summits/toronto/g20-declaration.pdf.
Galbraith, James K. 2016. Welcome to the Poisoned Chalice: The Destruction of Greece 
and the Future of Europe. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gamble, Andrew. 1996. Hayek: The Iron Cage of Liberty. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gerber, David. 1998. Law and Competition in Twentieth-Century Europe: Protecting 
Prometheus. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano. 1990. “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be 
Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries.” NBER Working Paper 
3372. http://www.nber.org/papers/w3372.
Giles, Chris, and Christian Oliver. 2010. “G20 Drops Support for Fiscal Stimulus.” 
Financial Times, June 6. https://www.ft.com/content/786776b4-708f-11df-96ab
-00144feabdc0.
Gofas, Andreas, and Colin Hay. 2008. “The Ideas Debate in International and European 
Studies: Towards a Cartography and Critical Assessment.” IBEI Working Paper 
2008/11. ttps://www.ibei.org/en/the-ideas-debate-in-international-and-european
-studies-towards-a-cartography-and-critical-assessmen_20677.
Goldschmidt, Nils. 2001. Entstehung und Vermächtnis ordoliberalen Denkens: Walter 
Eucken und die Notwendigkeit einer kulturellen Ökonomik. Münster, Germany: LIT. 
———.  2005. “Die Rolle Walter Euckens im Widerstand: Freiheit, Ordnung und 
Wahrhaftigkeit als Handlungsmaximen.” In Wirtschaft, Politik und Freiheit: 
Freiburger Wirtschaftswissenschaftler und der Widerstand, edited by Nils Gold­
schmidt, 289–314. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr.
Goldstein, Judith, and Robert Keohane. 1993. Ideas, Interests and American Trade 
Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Gray, John. 1984. Hayek on Liberty. Oxford: Blackwell.
Green, Donald, and Ian Shapiro. 1994. Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory: A Cri­
tique of Applications in Political Science. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Guajardo, Jamie, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2011. “Expansionary Auster­
ity: New International Evidence.” IMF Working Paper 11/158. https://www.imf
.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11158.pdf. 

244	
Bibliography
Guggenberger, Bernd, and Claus Offe, eds. 1984. An den Grenzen der Mehrheits­
demokratie. Politik und Soziologie der Mehrheitsregel. Opladen, Germany: West­
deutscher Verlag.
Habermas, Jürgen. 1992. Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory 
of Law and Democracy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———.  2015. The Lure of Technocracy. London: Polity.
Hahn, Roland. 1993. Sozialromantik und Marktwirtschaft: Die programmatische Er­
neuerung des Liberalismus in Deutschland unter dem Einfluss der Ideen Wilhelm Röpkes 
und Alexander Rüstows. Frankfurt: Hänsel-Hohenhausen, 1993.
Hall, Peter, and Rosemary Taylor. 1996. “Political Science and the Three New 
Institutionalisms.” Political Studies 44 (5): 936–957.
Hartwich, Oliver Marc. 2009. “Neoliberalism: The Genesis of a Political Swear­
word.” CIS Occasional Paper 114. https://www.cis.org.au/app/uploads/2015/07
/op114.pdf.
Harvey, David. 2005. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Haselbach, Dieter. 1991. Autoritärer Liberalismus und Soziale Marktwirtschaft: Ge­
sellschaft und Politik im Ordoliberalismus. Baden-Baden, Germany: Nomos, 1991.
Hay, Colin. 1996. “Narrating Crisis: The Discursive Construction of the ‘Winter 
of Discontent.’” Sociology 30 (2): 253–277.
———.  2001. “The ‘Crisis’ of Keynesianism and the Rise of Neoliberalism in Brit­
ain.” In The Rise of Neoliberalism and Institutional Analysis, edited by John Campbell 
and Ove Pedersen, 193–218. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
———.  2007. “The Genealogy of Neoliberalism.” In Neoliberalism: National and 
Regional Experiments with Global Ideas, edited by Ravi K. Roy, Arthur T. Denzau, 
and Thomas D. Willett, 51–70. London: Routledge, 2007. 
———.  2010. “Ideas and the Construction of Interests.” In Ideas and Politics in 
Social Science Research, edited by Daniel Béland and Robert Cox, 65–82. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hayek, Friedrich August. 1960. “The Intellectuals and Socialism.” In The Intel­
lectuals: A Controversial Portrait, edited by George Huszar, 371–384. Glencoe, 
IL: Free Press.
———.  1967a. “The Principles of a Liberal Social Order.” In Studies in Philosophy, 
Politics and Economics, by F. A. Hayek, 160–177. London: Routledge. Originally 
published in 1966.
———.  1967b. “The Theory of Complex Phenomena.” In Studies in Philosophy, 
Politics and Economics, by F. A. Hayek, 22–42. London: Routledge.
———.  1978a. “The Campaign against Keynesian Inflation.” In New Studies in 
Philosophy, Politics, Economics and the History of Ideas, by F. A. Hayek, 191–231. 
London: Routledge.
———.  1978b. “Liberalism.” In New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics and 
the History of Ideas, by F. A. Hayek, 119–151. London: Routledge. Originally 
published in 1973.

	
Bibliography
245
———.  1978c. “The Pretence of Knowledge.” In New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, 
Economics and the History of Ideas, by F. A. Hayek, 23–34. London: Routledge.
———.  1980. Individualism and the Economic Order. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———.  1988. The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism. London: Routledge.
———.  1992. “Opening Address to a Conference at Mont Pèlerin.” In The Fortunes 
of Liberalism: Essays on Austrian Economics and the Ideal of Freedom, edited by Peter 
G. Klein, 237–248. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
———.  1994. Hayek on Hayek: An Autobiographical Dialogue. Edited by Stephen 
Kresge and Leif Wenar. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
———.  2001. The Road to Serfdom. London: Routledge.
———.  2002. “Competition as a Discovery Procedure.” Quarterly Journal of Austrian 
Economics 5 (3): 9–23.
———.  2003. Law, Legislation and Liberty: A New Statement of the Liberal Principles 
of Justice and Political Economy. 3 vols. London: Routledge. Originally published 
in 1982.
———.  2009. The Constitution of Liberty. London: Routledge.
———.  2010a. “Individualism: True and False.” In Studies on the Abuse and Decline 
of Reason, by F. A. Hayek, 47–76. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
———.  2010b. Studies on the Abuse and Decline of Reason. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Heipertz, Martin, and Amy Verdun. 2010. Ruling Europe: The Politics of the Stability 
and Growth Pact. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heller, Hermann. (1933) 2015. “Authoritarian Liberalism?” European Law Journal 
21 (3): 295–301.
Hennecke, Hans Jörg. 2005. Wilhelm Röpke: Ein Leben in der Brandung. Stuttgart: 
Schäffer-Pöschel. 
Hinarejos, Alicia. 2015. The Euro Area Crisis in Constitutional Perspective. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hobsbawm, Eric. 1987. The Age of Empire 1875–1914. London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicholson.
———.  1994. Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–1991. London: 
Michel Joseph. 
Höpner, Martin. 2014. “Wie der Gerichtshof und die europäische Kommission 
Liberalisierung durchsetzen: Befunde aus der MPIfG-Forschungsgruppe zur 
politischen Ökonomie der europäischen Integration.” MPIfG Discussion Paper 
14/8. http://www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp14-8.pdf.
Höpner, Martin, and Mark Lutter. 2014. “One Currency and Many Modes of Wage 
Formation: Why the Eurozone Is Too Heterogeneous for the Euro.” MPIfG 
Discussion Paper 14/14. www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp14-14.pdf.
Höpner, Martin, and Florian Rödl. 2011. “Illegitim und rechtswidrig: Das neue 
makroökonomische Regime im Euroraum.” Wirtschaftsdienst 92:219–225.
Höpner, Martin, and Armin Schäfer. 2010. “Polanyi in Brussels? Embeddedness and 

246	
Bibliography
the Three Dimensions of European Economic Integration.” MPIfG Discussion 
Paper 10/8. http://www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp10-8.pdf.
Howarth, Ben, and Lucia Quaglia. 2015. “The Political Economy of the Euro Area’s 
Sovereign Debt Crisis: Introduction to the Special Issue of the Review of In­
ternational Political Economy.” Review of International Political Economy 22 (3): 
457–484.
Ioannou, Demosthenes, Patrick Leblond, and Arne Niemann. 2015. “European 
Integration and the Crisis: Practice and Theory.” Journal of European Public 
Policy 22 (2): 155–176.
Jackson, Ben. 2010. “At the Origins of Neo-liberalism: The Free Economy and the 
Strong State, 1930–1947.” Historical Journal 53 (1): 129–151. 
Jacoby, Wade. 2014. “The Politics of the Eurozone Crisis: Two Puzzles behind the 
German Consensus.” German Politics and Society 34:70–85.
Jessop, Bob. 2016. “Neoliberalismen, kritische politische Ökonomie und neoliberale 
Staaten.” In Der Staat des Neoliberalismus, edited by Thomas Biebricher, 123–152. 
Wiesbaden, Germany: Nomos.
Joerges, Christian. 2014. “Law and Politics in Europe’s Crisis: On the History of 
the Impact of an Unfortunate Configuration.” Constellations 21 (2): 249–261.
———.  2015. “The Legitimacy Problématique of Economic Governance in the EU.” 
In The Governance Report 2015, edited by Mark Dawson, Henrik Enderlein, and 
Christian Joerges, 69–95. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jones, Erik. 2013. “The Collapse of the Brussels-Frankfurt Consensus and the Fu­
ture of the Euro.“ In Resilient Liberalism in Europe’s Political Economy, edited 
by Vivien A. Schmidt and Mark Thatcher, 145–170. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kelsen, Hans. (1923) 1960. Hauptprobleme der Staatsrechtslehre: Entwickelt aus der 
Lehre vom Rechtssatze. Reprint, Aalen, Germany: Scientia.
Keynes, John Maynard. (1944) 1980. “Letter to Hayek.” In Collected Writings, vol. 
27, Activities 1940–1946, edited by Elizabeth Johnson and Donald Moggridge, 
385–388. Reprint, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirchgässner, Gebhard. 1988. “Wirtschaftspolitik und Politiksystem: Zur Kritik der 
traditionellen Ordnungstheorie aus der Sicht der Neuen Politischen Ökonomie.” 
In Ordnungspolitik, edited by Dieter Cassel, Bernd-Thomas Ramb, and Jörg 
Thieme, 53–75. Munich: Vahlen.
Klinckowstroem, Wendula Gräfin von. 2000. “Walter Eucken: Eine biographische 
Skizze.” In Walter Eucken und sein Werk: Rückblick auf den Vordenker der sozialen 
Marktwirtschaft, edited by Lüder Gerken, 53–116. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr 
Siebeck. 
Kolev, Stefan. 2013. Neoliberale Staatsverständnisse im Vergleich. Stuttgart: Lucius 
and Lucius.
Krugman, Paul. 2012. End This Depression Now! New York: W. W. Norton. 
Larner, Wendy. 2000. “Neo-liberalism: Policy, Ideology, Governmentality.” Studies 
in Political Economy 63:5–25.

	
Bibliography
247
Leblond, Patrick. 2006. “The Political Stability and Growth Pact Is Dead: Long 
Live the Economic Stability and Growth Pact.” Journal of Common Market Stud­
ies 44 (5): 969–990.
Lechevalier, Arnaud. 2015. “Eucken under the Pillow: The Ordoliberal Imprint 
on Social Europe.” In Social Europe: The Dead End. What the Eurocrisis Is Doing 
to Europe’s Social Dimension, edited by Arnaud Lechevalier and Jan Wielghos, 
49–102. Copenhagen: Djof Publishing. 
Lenel, Hans Otto. 1991. “Walter Euckens Briefe an Alexander Rüstow.” ORDO 
42:11–14.
Linz, Juan J. 2000. Totalitarian and Authoritarian Regimes. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner.
Lippmann, Walter. 1937. The Good Society. Boston: Little, Brown. 
MacLean, Nancy. 2017. Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical Right’s 
Stealth Plan for America. New York: Viking.
Majone, Giandomenico. 1994. “The Rise of the Regulatory State in Europe.” West 
European Politics 17 (3): 77–101.
———.  2014. “From Regulatory State to a Democratic Default.” Journal of Common 
Market Studies 52 (6): 1216–1223.
Marneffe, Wim, Bas van Aarle, Wouter van der Wielen, and Lode Vereeck. 2011. 
“The Impact of Fiscal Rules on Public Finances in the Euro Area.” CESifo DICE 
Report 3:18–25.
Matthijs, Matthias. 2016. “Powerful Rules Governing the Euro: The Perverse Logic 
of German Ideas.” Journal of European Public Policy 23 (3): 375–391.
Meadowcroft, John, and William Ruger. 2014. “Hayek, Friedman, and Buchanan: 
On Public Life, Chile, and the Relationship between Liberty and Democracy.” 
Review of Political Economy 26 (3): 358–367.
Mehta, Jal. 2011. “From ‘Whether’ to ‘How’: The Varied Role of Ideas in Politics.” 
In Ideas and Politics in Social Science Research, edited by Danile Béland and Robert 
Cox, 23–46. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meier-Rust, Kathrin. 1993. Alexander Rüstow: Geschichtsdeutung und liberales Engage­
ment. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
El Mercurio. 1981. “Friedrich von Hayek: Lider y maestro de liberalismo económico.“ 
El Mercurio, April 12, D8–9.
Merkel, Angela. 2011. “Regierungserklärung vom Bundeskanzlerin.” Die Bundesr­
egierung, December 2. https://www.bundesregierung.de/Content/DE/Bulletin
/2010-2015/2011/12/131-1-bk-bt.html.
Mirowski, Philip. 2009. “Postface: Defining Neoliberalism.” In The Road from Mont 
Pèlerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective, edited by Philip Mirowski 
and Dieter Plehwe, 417–455. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———.  2013. Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism Survived the 
Financial Meltdown. London: Verso.
Mirowski, Philip, and Dieter Plehwe, eds. 2009. The Road from Mont Pèlerin: The Mak­
ing of the Neoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

248	
Bibliography
Mudge, Stephanie Lee. 2008. “What Is Neo-liberalism?” Socio-Economic Review 
6:703–731.
Mundell, Robert. 1961. “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas.” American Economic 
Review 51 (4): 657–665.
Nedergaard, Peter, and Holly Snaith. 2015. “‘As I Drifted on a River I Could Not 
Control’: The Unintended Ordoliberal Consequences of the Eurozone Crisis.” 
Journal of Common Market Studies 53 (5): 1094–1109.
Nientiedt, Daniel, and Ekkehard A. Köhler. 2016. “Liberalism and Democracy—a 
Comparative Reading of Eucken and Hayek.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 
40:1743–1760.
North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Offe, Claus. 1984. “Ungovernability: On the Renaissance of Conservative Theories 
of Crisis.” In Observations on the “Spiritual Situation of the Age,” edited by Jürgen 
Habermas, 67–88. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Osborne, George. 2010. “Statement on the Emergency Budget.” The Telegraph, 
June 22. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/budget/7846849/Budget-2010-Full
-text-of-George-Osbornes-statement.html.
Peck, Jamie. 2008. “Remaking Laissez-Faire.” Progress in Human Geography 32 (1): 
3–43.
———.  2010. Constructions of Neoliberal Reason. New York: Oxford University Press.
———.  2014. “Pushing Austerity: State Failure, Municipal Bankruptcy and the 
Crises of Fiscal Federalism in the USA.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy 
and Society 7:17–44.
Perotti, Roberto. 2013. “The ‘Austerity Myth’: Gain without Pain?” In Fiscal Pol­
icy after the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi, 
307–358. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pisani-Ferry, Jean. 2015. “Rebalancing the Governance of the Euro Area.” In Beyond 
the Crisis: The Governance of Europe’s Economic, Political, and Legal Transforma­
tion, edited by Mark Dawson, Henrik Enderlein, and Christian Joerges, 62–82. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Plant, Raymond. 2009. The Neo-liberal State. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———.  2016. “Friedrich August von Hayek: Der (neo-)liberale Staat und das Ideal 
des Rechtsstaats.“ In Der Staat des Neoliberalismus, edited by Thomas Biebricher, 
73–97. Baden-Baden, Germany: Nomos.
Polanyi, Karl. 2001. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of 
Our Time. New York: Beacon Press. Originally published in 1944.
Ptak, Ralf. 2004. Vom Ordoliberalismus zur Sozialen Marktwirtschaft: Stationen des 
Neoliberalismus in Deutschland. Wiesbaden, Germany: VS-Verlag. 
Reinhoudt, Jurgen, and Serge Audier. 2018. The Walter Lippmann Colloquium: The 
Birth of Neo-liberalism. New York: Palgrave.
Röpke, Wilhelm. 1936. Crises and Cycles. London: William Hodge. Originally pub­
lished in 1932.

	
Bibliography
249
———.  1942. International Economic Disintegration. London: William Hodge.
———.  1948. “Die natürliche Ordnung: Die neue Phase der wirtschaftspolitischen 
Diskussion.” Kyklos 2 (3): 211–232.
———.  1949. Civitas Humana: Grundfragen der Gesellschafts- und Wirtschaftsreform. 
Erlenbach-Zürich, Switzerland: Eugen Rentsch Verlag. Originally published 
in 1944.
———.  1950a. Maß und Mitte. Erlenbach-Zürich, Switzerland: Eugen Rentsch.
———.  1950b. The Social Crisis of Our Time. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———.  1953a. “Europäische Wirtschaftsgemeinschaft.“ In Aufbau eines neuen Eu­
ropa: Fünf Aufsätze über wirtschaftliche Zusammenarbeit, 7–33. Berlin: Grunewald 
Verlag.
———.  1953b. Der wissenschaftliche Ort der Nationalökonomie.“ Studium Generale 
6:374–382.
———.  1954. Internationale Ordnung—heute. Erlenbach-Zürich, Switzerland: Eugen 
Rentsch, 1954.
———.  1955. “Europäische Investitionsplanung: Das Beispiel der Montanunion.” 
ORDO 7:71–102.
———.  1958. “Political Enthusiasm and Economic Sense: Some Comments on 
European Economic Integration.” Modern Age 2 (2): 170–176. 
———.  1959a. International Order and Economic Integration. Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Reidel Publishing.
———.  1959b. “Die Massengesellschaft und ihre Probleme.” In Masse und De­
mokratie, edited by Louis Baudin and Albert Hunold, 13–38. Erlenbach-Zürich, 
Switzerland: Eugen Rentsch.
———.  1960. A Humane Economy: The Social Framework of the Free Market. Chicago: 
Henry Regnery. Originally published in 1958.
———.  1963. Economics in the Free Society. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
———.  1964. “European Economic Integration and Its Problems.” Modern Age 8 
(3): 231–244.
———.  1987. Two Essays by Wilhelm Röpke: The Problem of Economic Order / Welfare, 
Freedom and Inflation. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Roubini, Nouriel, and Stephen Mihm. 2010. Crisis Economics: A Crash Course in the 
Future of Finance. New York: Allen Lane.
Roy, Ravi K., Arthur T. Denzau, and Thomas D. Willett. 2007. “Introduction: 
Neoliberalism as a Shared Mental Model.” In Neoliberalism: National and Re­
gional Experiments with Global Ideas, edited by Ravi K. Roy, Arthur T. Denzau 
and Thomas D. Willett, 3–13. London: Routledge. 
Rüstow, Alexander. (1929) 1959. “Diktatur innerhalb der Grenzen der Demokratie: 
Dokumentation des Vortrags und der Diskussion von 1929 an der Deutschen 
Hochschule für Politik.” Vierteljahreshefte für Zeitgeschichte 7 (1): 85–111.
———.  1930. “Selbstkostensenkung, Lohnabbau und Preisabbau.” Der deutsche 
Volkswirt 4 (2): 1403–1406.

250	
Bibliography
———.  1940. “Zu den Grundlagen der Wirtschaftswissenschaft.” Revue de la Faculté 
des Sciences Economiques de l’Université d’Istanbul 2:105–154.
———.  1942. “General Sociological Causes of the Economic Disintegration and 
Possibilities of Reconstruction.” In International Economic Disintegration, by Wil­
helm Röpke, 267–283. London: William Hodge. 
———.  1949. “Politik und Moral.” Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft 
105:575–590.
———.  1956. “Geistige Grundlagen des Bewußtseins der europäischen Einheit.” 
In Europa—Erbe und Aufgabe, edited by Martin Göhring, 3–13. Wiesbaden, 
Germany: Franz Steiner Verlag.
———.  1957. Ortsbestimmung der Gegenwart: Eine universalgeschichtliche Kulturkritik. 
Dritter Band: Herrschaft oder Freiheit? Erlenbach-Zürich, Switzerland: Eugen 
Rentsch.
———.  1960. “Paläoliberalismus, Kollektivismus und Neoliberalismus in der 
Wirtschafts- und Sozialordnung.” In Christentum und Liberalismus, edited by 
Karl Forster, 149–178. Munich: Karl Zink.
———.  1963. Rede und Antwort. Ludwigsburg, Germany: Martin Horch.
———.  2009. Die Religion der Marktwirtschaft. Münster, Germany: LIT.
———.  2014. Freedom and Domination: A Historical Critique of Civilization. Edited 
by Dankwart Rustow and Salvator Attanasio. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni­
versity Press.
———.  2017a. “Social Policy or Vitalpolitik (Organic Policy).” In The Birth of Aus­
terity: German Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neoliberalism, edited by Thomas 
Biebricher and Frieder Vogelmann, 163–177. London: Rowman and Littlefield 
International. Originally published in 1951. 
———.  2017b. “State Policy and the Necessary Conditions for Economic Liberal­
ism.” In The Birth of Austerity: German Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neoliberal­
ism, edited by Thomas Biebricher and Frieder Vogelmann, 143–149. London: 
Rowman and Littlefield International. Originally published in 1932. 
Sala, Roberto. 2011. “Methodologische Positionen und soziale Praktiken in der 
Volkswirtschaftslehre: Der Ökonom Walter Eucken in der Weimarer Repub­
lik.” WZB Discussion Paper No. SP IV 2011-401. https://www.econstor.eu
/handle/10419/71267.
Sally, Razeen. 1999. “Wilhelm Röpke and International Economic Order: ‘Liberal­
ism from Below.’” ORDO 50:47–51.
Sandbu, Martin. 2015. Europe’s Orphan: The Future of the Euro and the Politics of Debt. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Savage, James. 2007. Making the EMU: The Politics of Budgetary Surveillance and the 
Enforcement of Maastricht. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Savage, James, and Amy Verdun. 2015. “Strengthening the European Commission’s 
Budgetary and Economic Surveillance Capacity since Greece and the Euro Area 
Crisis: A Study of Five Directorates-General.” Journal of European Public Policy 
23 (1): 101–118.

	
Bibliography
251
Sayer, Andrew. 2008. Realism and Social Science. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Scharpf, Fritz. 1999. Governing in Europe: Effective and Democratic? Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
———.  2010. “The Asymmetry of European Integration, or, Why the EU Cannot 
Be a ‘Social Market Economy.’” Socio-Economic Review 8:211–250.
———. 2011. Monetary Union, Fiscal Crisis and the Preemption of Democracy. 
MPIfG Discussion Paper 11/11.
———.  2016. “Forced Structural Convergence in the Eurozone—or a Differenti­
ated European Monetary Community.” MPIfG Discussion Paper 16/15. www
.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp16-15.pdf.
Schäuble, Wolfgang. 2010. “Nachhaltiges Wachstum durch nachhaltiges Sparen—
die deutsche Finanzpolitik ist auf dem richtigen Weg.“ Handelsblatt, June 24. 
https://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/DE/Reden/2010/2010-06
-24-handelsblatt.html.
———.  2013. “We Germans Don’t Want a German Europe.” The Guardian, 
July 19. ttps://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/19/we-germans
-dont-want-german-europe.
Scheuerman, William. 1997. “The Unholy Alliance of Carl Schmitt and Friedrich 
A. Hayek.” Constellations 4 (2): 172–188.
Schimmelfennig, Frank. 2015. “Liberal Intergovernmentalism and the Euro Area 
Crisis.” Journal of European Public Policy 22 (2): 177–195.
Schmidt, Vivien A. 2008. “Discursive Institutionalism: The Explanatory Power of 
Ideas and Discourse.” Annual Review of Political Science 11:303–326.
Schmidt, Vivien A., and Cornelia Woll. 2013. “The State: The Bête Noire of Neo-
liberalism or Its Greatest Conquest?” In Resilient Liberalism in Europe’s Political 
Economy, edited by Vivien A. Schmidt and Mark Thatcher, 112–141. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Schmitt, Carl. 1998. “Appendix: Carl Schmitt, Strong State and Sound Economy: An 
Address to Business Leaders.” In Carl Schmitt and Authoritarian Liberalism: Strong 
State, Free Economy, by Renato Cristi, 212–232. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.
Skocpol, Theda. 1985. “Bringing the State Back In: Strategies and Analysis in Cur­
rent Research.“ In Bringing the State Back In, edited by Peter B. Evans, Friedrich 
Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol, 3–37. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Slobodian, Quinn. 2018. Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stark, Jürgen. 2008. “Monetary, Financial and Fiscal Stability in Europe.” Speech 
delivered at 11th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt, November 18.
Steger, Manfred B., and Ravi K. Roy. 2010. Neoliberalism: A Very Short Introduction. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Steinberg, Federico, and Mattias Vermeiren. 2015. “Germany’s Institutional Power 
and the EMU Regime after the Crisis: Towards a Germanized Euro Area?” 
Journal of Common Market Studies 54 (2): 388–407. 

252	
Bibliography
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2008. “The End of Neo-liberalism?” Project Syndicate, July 2. https://
www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-end-of-neo-liberalism?barrier=true.
———.  2010. Freefall: Free Markets and the Sinking of the Global Economy. New 
York: Allen Lane. 
———.  2016. The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe. 
New York: W. W. Norton.
Streeck, Wolfgang. 2015a. “Heller, Schmitt and the Euro.” European Law Journal 
21 (3): 361–370.
———.  2015b. “Why the Euro Divides Europe.” New Left Review 95:5–26.
———.  2017. Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism. London: 
Verso.
Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2010a. “Interview with La Repubblica.” La Repubblica, June 24. 
https://www.bis.org/review/r100625a.pdf.
———.  2010b. “Stimulate No More—It Is Time for All to Tighten.” Financial Times, 
July 27. https://www.ft.com/content/1b3ae97e-95c6-11df-b5ad-00144feab49a.
Turner, Rachel S. 2007. “The ‘Rebirth of Liberalism’: The Origins of Neo-liberal 
Ideology.” Journal of Political Ideologies 12 (1): 67–83. 
Van Esch, Femke. 2014. “Exploring the Keynesian-Ordoliberal Divide: Flexibility 
and Convergence in French and German Leaders’ Economic Ideas during the 
Euro-Crisis.” Journal of Contemporary European Studies 22 (3): 288–302.
Vanberg, Viktor. 1981. Liberaler Evolutionismus oder vertragstheoretischer Konstitu­
tionalismus? Zum Problem institutioneller Reformen by F. A. von Hayek und J. M. 
Buchanan. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr.
———.  1994. “Cultural Evolution, Collective Learning and Constitutional Design.” 
In Economic Thought and Political Theory, edited by David Reisman, 171–204. 
Boston: Kluwer.
———.  2014. “Liberalismus und Demokratie: Zu einer vernachlässigten Seite der 
liberalen Tradition.” HWWI Policy Paper 85. http://www.roepke-institut.org
/fileadmin/roepke/roepke-dokumente/8_Roepke_Vorlesung_Viktor_Vanberg.pdf.
Walpen, Bernhard. 2004. Die offenen Feinde und ihre Gesellschaft: Eine hegemonietheo­
retische Studie zur Mont Pèlerin Society. Hamburg: VSA.
Weaver, Kent. 1986. “The Politics of Blame Avoidance.“ Journal of Public Policy 6 
(4): 371–398.
Wegmann, Milène. 2002. Früher Neoliberalismus und europäische Integration: Interde­
pendenz der nationalen, supranationalen und internationalen Ordnung von Wirtschaft 
und Gesellschaft (1932–1965). Baden-Baden, Germany: Nomos.
Weidmann, Jens. 2013. Crisis Management and Regulatory Policy. Walter Eucken 
Lecture, February 11. http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Reden/2013
/2013_02_11_weidmann_eucken.html. https://www.bis.org/review/r130214c.
pdf.
———.  2016. “Fiscal Rules Need More Bite.” BILD, December 26. https://www.bild.de
/geld/mein-geld/jens-weidmann/lohnt-sich-sparen-ueberhaupt-noch-49488690.
bild.html.

	
Bibliography
253
———.  2017. “Prospects for the Economy.” Speech delivered at the Jahresemp­
fang der Wirtschaft, February 7. https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/
Reden/2017/2017_02_07_weidmann.html.
Weisenthal, Joe. 2010. “Merkel: There Is ‘No Possibility’ of Bailing Out Greece.” 
Business Insider, February 28. http://www.businessinsider.com/angela-merke
l-denies-greek-bailout-2010-2?IR=T.
Wilkinson, Michael. 2013. “The Specter of Authoritarian Liberalism: Reflections 
on the Constitutional Crisis of the European Union.” German Law Journal 14 
(5): 527–560.
Woodruff, David. 2016. “Governing by Panic: The Politics of the Eurozone Crisis.” 
Politics & Society 44 (1): 81–116. 
Young, Brigitte. 2014. “German Ordoliberalism as Agenda Setter for the Euro Crisis: 
Myth Trumps Reality.” Journal of Contemporary European Studies 22 (3): 276–287.
———.  2017. “Is Germany’s and Europe’s Crisis Politics Ordoliberal and/or Neolib­
eral?” In The Birth of Austerity: German Ordoliberalism and Contemporary Neoliber­
alism, edited by Thomas Biebricher and Frieder Vogelmann, 221–237. London: 
Rowman and Littlefield International.


This page intentionally left blank 

255
absolutism, 5, 8, 135
abstraction, 4, 51, 98, 112, 114, 115, 
125, 126
alarmism,70, 143, 209 
anarchy, 52, 121, 137
antagonism, 20, 109, 124, 135, 150
antirealism, 111–13, 132
aristocracy, 75, 142, 150
atomization, 23, 42
austerity, 55, 98, 166, 167, 169, 212, 
216, 222; politics of, 3,53, 97, 155, 
164, 165, 168, 180, 213, 220 
authoritarian government, 74–76, 216, 
228n12
authoritarianism, 3, 6, 72–77, 103, 
145, 228n16
authoritarian liberalism, 69, 76
autonomy, 54, 78, 92, 96, 97, 103
bailout, 69, 162, 165, 170, 206, 210, 
211, 223
balanced-budget amendment, 46, 55, 
94, 95, 97, 98, 150, 152, 155, 174; 
constitutional, 53, 65, 130, 224; 
and referenda, 108, 151
Blyth, Mark, 164, 197–200, 213, 215
Buchanan, James, 2, 110, 175, 198, 
227n7, 229n7, 229n12, 231n12, 
231n16; and balanced-budget 
amendment, 53–55, 94–98, 224, 
227n6; and constitutional econom­
ics, 52; and EMU, 186–92; and 
exploitation, 90–92; and homo 
economicus, 89, 149–55; and 
Leviathan, 83, 84; and majority 
principle, 84, 85, 86; and market 
vs. democracy, 99–101; and neo­
liberal politics, 31, and neoliberal 
problematic, 27; and power to tax, 
53; and referendums, 106–8, 145, 
229n11; and rent seeking, 89, 90; 
and reverse revenue sharing, 66; 
and science, 110, 118–24, 126–31; 
and separation of powers, 56–58; 
and state, 34; and (supranational) 
federation, 65, 68, 69, 77
Index

256	
Index
Bundesbank, 176, 177, 178, 203, 209, 
211
capitalism, 4, 5, 15, 41, 45, 90, 215, 
226n8; varieties of, 178, 186
cartel, 38, 93, 107, 208
centralization, 15, 17, 19, 20, 58, 66, 
68, 182, 213
Chile, 74, 131, 145, 146, 228nn17–18, 
232n5
class, 96, 107, 133, 141
coercion, 35, 49, 50, 53, 56, 62, 102, 
129
collectivism, 18–19, 25, 75, 80, 109, 
223; cum-totalitarianism, 20, 73; 
gradual, 20, 21
Colloque Walter Lippmann, 13, 14, 
17–19, 21, 22
Communism, 17–20, 43, 59, 76, 126
community, 22, 43, 44, 59, 105, 124, 
149, 152, 231n2; political, 52, 61
competitiveness, 3, 164, 172, 179, 180, 
201, 209, 212–15, 223
competitive order, 37, 38, 47, 86, 141, 
144, 223, 227n3, 230n6; artificial­
ity of, 117; design of, 219; and 
the European Monetary Union /
Eurozone, 3, 200, 201, 207, 224; 
guardian of, 37, 77; maintenance 
of, 40, 87; politics of, 37, 39, 72, 
133, 134, 215, 216, 218; theory of, 
209. See also order
conditionality, 165, 223
constitutionalism, 48, 56, 81, 82, 145, 
147, 149, 152
crisis, 190, 191, 193, 199–202, 208, 
211, 217; buildup of, 210; condi­
tions of 3, 16; debt, 171, 178; 
diagnoses, 139; economic, 178; of 
Keynesianism, 198; liberal 16, 17, 
75; of neoliberalism, 161; politi­
cal economy of, 127; prolongation 
of, 211; sovereign debt, 53, 97, 
157, 197, 233n3, 233n5; times of, 
159, 197, 198, 204; of the Weimar 
regime, 76, 226n2; winner of, 216; 
year, 214, 235n10
crisis management, 15, 166, 197, 
200, 203, 204, 206, 207, 209, 215; 
European, 158, 199, 201, 202; US, 
166; German, 213, 215 
crisis of liberalism, 2, 12–14, 18, 22, 26 
crisis narrative, 22, 23, 180, 197, 204, 
205, 209 
currency, 133, 164, 170, 179, 189, 190, 
211, 215; area, 178, 179, 181, 189; 
common, 3, 63, 98, 157, 176, 177, 
178, 188, 191; devaluation of, 47, 
212; union, 178; single, 171, 181
decentering, of the state, 29, 58, 59, 
64, 66–68, 77, 78
decentralization, 44, 45, 58, 61, 64, 65, 
77, 183, 220
decontestation, 98, 129–32, 135, 220
default, 223; Greek, 163, 164; national, 
97; sovereign, 210, 216
delegation, of powers/competences, 
98, 143, 183, 184, 201, 206, 219
demarchy, 83, 95, 106
demassification, 42, 44, 45
democracy, 2, 29, 31, 82–92, 95–98, 
100–102, 108, 229n7, 229n10; 
actually existing, 80, 94, 103, 146, 
150; constitutional, 229n11; con­
temporary, 76, 79, 81; critique(s) 
of, 30, 85, 86, 94; depluralization 
of, 105; effects of, 27; mass, 88, 
99; modern, 232n6; and neoliberal 
politics, 140, 143–45, 147, 155; 
and ordoliberalization of Europe, 
215, 218, 219, 224; parliamentary, 
229n5; pluralist, 3, 77, 88, 93, 103, 
137, 229n6; problems of, 81, 94, 
99, 103, 107; representative, 80, 
103, 106, 228n1; and science, 128, 
131, 134, and state, 48, 49, 52, 54, 
55, 58, 70–75; unlimited, 139, 145

	
Index
257
democratization, 218, 224
depluralization, 103–5, 140, 146
depoliticization, 76, 97, 98, 105, 130, 
135, 136, 220
deregulation, 11, 169, 179, 186
devaluation, 41, 47, 212, 213
devolution. See decentralization 
dictatorship, 31, 73, 75, 131, 143, 144, 
146, 154, 231; military, 74, 145, 
228n18, 232n5; transitional, 142, 
145–147, 192
discretion, 49, 50, 56, 105, 189, 217
discrimination, 50, 51, 66
disintegration, 60, 63, 70, 71, 86, 135, 
143
Draghi, Mario, 201, 202, 209, 211, 
221, 222
ECB. See European Central Bank
ECJ. See European Court of Justice
economists, 17, 27, 124, 127, 131, 133, 
154, 155, 177, 203, 221, 231n12; 
political, 161, 172
EDF. See Excessive Deficit Procedure
elites, 31, 84, 93, 94, 134, 214, 232; 
political, 30, 107, 131, 151, 202, 
204
elitism, 88, 93, 133, 231
EMU. See European Monetary Union
Enlightenment, 24, 122, 125
epistemology, 88, 106, 121, 129, 148, 
198
equality, 50, 51, 53, 83, 95, 100, 101, 
176
equilibrium, 16, 68, 89, 194, 200
ESM. See European Stability 
Mechanism
EU, 155, 175, 186, 187, 201, 209, 215, 
218, 220; competencies, 172; and 
democracy, 80, 86–88, 93, 103, 
107; Eucken, Walter, 2, 19, 30, 
158, 188, 226n4, 227n3, 229n5, 
230nn5–6; and European Court 
of Justice, 184; and European 
Monetary Union, 2, 3, 157, 168, 
170, 174, 197, 223, 224; and 
Germany, 202; law, 173, 204; 
members of, 53, 158; and neoliber­
al politics, 140–42, 145; and ordo­
liberalism, 207; ordoliberalization 
of, 216; and ordoliberalization of 
Europe, 200, 201, 203, 204, 207–
15, 219–21, 223, 224; restructur­
ing of, 219; and science, 109, 110, 
114–18, 123–27, 133–37; and state, 
34, 37–40, 42, 47, 53, 70–73, 76
Eurobonds, 202, 205
European Central Bank, 177–79, 188–
91, 201–204, 209–11, 222, 223; 
and Bundesbank, 176; director of, 
165; and European Commission, 
169, 218, 219, 221 
European Commission, 168–75, 
216–23
European Council / Council of the 
European Union, 171, 173, 174, 
184, 185, 201, 202, 216, 217
European Court of Justice, 174, 175, 
184–86, 201, 218
European integration, 3, 59, 62, 176, 
179, 181–83
European Monetary Union, 158, 165, 
171, 175–79, 200, 210, 217; eco­
nomic constitution of, 207, 208; 
and EU, 2, 3, 157, 168, 170, 174; 
neoliberal views on, 184, 188–192; 
setup of, 208, 212
European Stability Mechanism, 169, 
170, 173, 207, 209, 223
Europeanization, 175, 182, 184, 186
Eurozone, 64, 169, 178, 188, 197, 202, 
213, 218–20, 222–24; and competi­
tive order, 3; members/countries 
in, 164, 173, 177, 207, 212, 215; 
and recession, 167
Eurozone crisis, 165, 166, 168, 199, 
201, 204, 206, 209; characteristics 
of, 175; onset/beginning of, 158, 

258	
Index
163; outcomes of, 205; response(s) 
to, 157, 171, 181; roots of, 180 
Excessive Deficit Procedure, 170–73
executive, 56, 59, 201, 218, 227n7
expertise, 110, 121, 127, 129
experts, 128, 131, 135, 141, 143, 219, 
221
exploitation, 39, 65, 66, 80, 90–92, 
107, 130, 131, 187
externalities, 36, 38, 91
falsificationism, 111–14, 155
Fascism, 17–20, 43, 76
federalism, 59–67, 77, 78, 181–84, 186; 
competitive, 64, 66, 67, 184, 186
federation, 60, 61, 65, 78, 158, 175, 
183, 187, 188, 191; interstate, 64; 
supranational, 3, 58, 59, 62, 91, 157
financial crisis, 23, 158, 163, 180, 200, 
203, 214, 226n8, 231n12; causes 
of, 157; global, 161; interpretation 
of, 203
Fiscal Compact, 173, 174, 208, 212, 
213, 222, 224
fiscal policy, 178, 179, 191, 220
fiscal redistribution, 38–40, 47
fiscal rules, 151, 174
fiscal stimulus, 162, 163, 204, 213
Foucault, Michel, 5, 20, 47, 117, 122, 
136, 157, 200, 227n1; and field of 
adversity, 18; ON markets, 67
freedom, 23, 35, 37, 61, 70, 78, 124, 
185, 186
Friedman, Milton, 2, 147, 154, 
211, 212, 220, 227n6, 231n13, 
232n5; and Chile, 145, 228n17; 
on decline of liberalism, 22–24; 
on democracy, 81, 83–85, 89, 91, 
99–101; on Eurozone, 189–92, on 
Keynesianism, 226n3; on princi­
ples of public policy, 33–38, 41, 55; 
on science, 109–17, 119, 122, 124, 
126, 131, 132, 230nn1–3
Germany, 176, 178, 180, 202, 206, 
212, 214, 215, 221; and austerity, 
166; and balanced-budget amend­
ment, 174; and bank bailout, 163; 
and fiscal discipline, 165; and 
France, 170, 171, 176; preference 
of, 205; reform strategy, 158
governance, 3, 29, 170, 173, 182, 218, 
224; structures, 158, 180, 200, 220 
Great Depression, 15–17, 157, 213
Greece, 163, 164, 167<->169, 180, 
210, 215, 222
guardian(s), 133, 141, 175, 217; benev­
olent, 154, 231n3; of the common 
good, 83, 89
harmonization, of policies, 61, 182, 
184, 185
Hayek, Friedrich August, 2, 15, 93, 
208, 221, 226n5, 229n10, 230n6, 
232n6; on authoritarianism, 
73–76, 145; and Chile, 228nn17–
18; on collectivism, 18,19; on 
competitive order, 37; on decline 
of liberalism, 24, 25; on EMU, 
184, 186, 187, 191, 192; on evolu­
tion, 232nn7–9; on Keynes, 226n3; 
on majority principle, 84, 85; on 
model constitution, 103–6, 229n8; 
on monopoly, 227n2; on neolib­
eral politics, 131, 132, 140; on 
rationalism, 122, 126; on rule of 
law, 48–53, 56–58, 94, 95; on sci­
ence, 118, 121, 123, 124, 231n11; 
on scientism, 110, 122, 125; on 
sovereignty, 228n2; on suprana­
tional federation, 59, 62–66, 68, 
78, 183; on transitional dictator­
ship, 146–50, 154; on unlimited 
democracy, 81–83 
hegemony, 16, 59, 155, 180, 198
homo economicus, 89, 113, 116, 120, 

	
Index
259
150–52, 195, 232n12; assumptions 
of, 31; behavioral model of, 84; cri­
tique of, 125; limitations of, 119
ideas, power of, 140, 200
ideology, 2, 6, 8–10, 30, 74, 79, 134, 
135, 137
IMF (International Monetary Fund), 
97, 169
individualism, 18, 19, 22, 24, 42, 44, 
68,118; methodological, 83; nor­
mative, 52
inflation, 132, 178, 179, 182, 207, 211, 
212, 222; and public-choice theory, 
92, 97, 150
insolvency, 68, 69, 210, 216
institutionalism, 159, 193–96, 198, 
205, 207
instrumentalism, 110–13, 115, 230n1
interdependence, 38, 70, 72, 118, 133, 
136, 180, 205
intergovernmentalism, 205, 216, 217
interventionism, 23, 34, 36, 38, 40–42, 
45–48, 191, 222, 223
judiciary, 57, 59, 143, 231n16
juridification, 97, 143
Kant, Immanuel, 59, 105, 122, 140, 
141
Keynes, John Maynard, 16, 17, 20, 
127, 162, 226n3, 231n15
Keynesianism, 17, 20, 25, 127, 128, 
205, 213, 226n3, 230n2; crisis of, 
198; and financial crisis, 162, 163; 
rise of, 16
Keynesians, 121, 123, 131, 163, 166
laissez-faire, 1, 16, 23–26, 35, 42, 126
legislation, 57, 103, 104, 107, 146, 174, 
185, 186, 189
legislature, 30, 48–50, 55–59, 82, 
103–7, 173, 232n11
legitimacy, 51, 85, 88, 98, 103, 218, 
219
Leviathan, 63, 65, 66, 83, 84, 90, 92, 
139, 183
liberalism, 15, 17, 19, 43, 60, 81, 154, 
230n10, 232n8; classical, 1, 14, 21, 
48, 70, 153, 154; decline of, 21–26; 
meaning of, 6, 7; new, 5, 225n2; 
and rule of law, 48; and totalitari­
anism, 74
Lippmann, Walter, 13–15, 19, 20, 
226n2
lobbying, 73, 89–91, 93, 94, 101, 114, 
137, 218; group(s), 104, 107, 144, 
151
macroeconomic imbalance procedure, 
171, 173
market economy, 4, 23, 38, 39, 47, 76, 
78, 222, 227n1; capitalist, 25; and 
centrally administered economy, 
115; social, 186 
market exit, 67, 208, 210
market failure, 63, 223
market fundamentalism, 25, 26, 226n8
market of jurisdictions, 3, 63, 64, 187, 
210
market regulation, 39, 204, 213, 226n8
masses, 15, 42, 75, 93, 99, 103, 141, 
213, 219; fear of, 107; ignorant, 30; 
influence of, 71; irrationality of, 
88, 134; laboring, 34 
massification, 42–44, 88
materialism, 6, 8
memoranda of understanding, 169, 
170, 213, 216
methodology, 30, 110, 116
MIP. See macroeconomic imbalance 
procedure
monetarism, 163, 198, 230n2
monetary constitution, 178, 210–12, 
221
monetary economics, 113

260	
Index
monetary policy, 16, 177–79, 188, 189, 
191, 203, 204, 207, 211, 213
monetary stability, 189, 203, 207, 
209–12
monetary union, 2, 181, 188, 190, 202, 
212
monopoly, 40, 50, 64, 227n2
nation-state(s), 61, 191, 210, 218–20, 
223, 224; agreements between, 
188; boundary control of, 184; and 
citizens, 187; competitive order 
for, 207; decentering of, 58, 64; 
governments, 64, 66; importance 
of, 183; and international trade 
regimes, 157; level, 62, 66; need to 
recenter, 183; and political econo­
mies, 201; powers, 63, 65; sover­
eignty, 77; structures, 3; and trade 
policy, 181; Westphalian system of, 
183. See also state 
neoliberal thought, varieties of, 2, 3, 
26, 29, 33, 80, 227n2
no-bail-out clause, 168, 177, 210, 221
nomos, 49, 51, 104, 105; and thesis, 49, 
50
oligopoly, 38, 69
ordoliberalism, 38, 117, 136, 211, 
217, 221, 223, 224, 226n4; and 
democracy, 86; and Euckenian, 37, 
224; Eurozone crisis, 206, 209; and 
Foucault, 136, 227n1; and neolib­
eralism, 3; political theory of, 181, 
219; and science, 123; strongholds 
of, 203; and strong state, 71, 72, 
228n13
ordoliberalization of Europe, 3, 159, 
193, 200, 201, 210, 218, 223, 224; 
diagnosis of, 221
Pareto Optimum, 85, 98, 219, 229n3
planning, 14, 17–20, 63, 116, 122, 123; 
central(ized), 15, 62, 68, 75, 226n5
pluralism, 70, 86–88, 103, 104, 137, 
141, 211, 229n6
political economists, 127, 155, 161, 
172
political economy, 8, 115, 118–20, 126, 
133, 134, 184, 209, 230n4; disci­
pline of, 114; discourse in, 27; sci­
ence of, 109, 127; powers of, 123
political integration, 61–63, 182, 184
political parties, 87, 91, 93, 101, 104, 
107, 127, 141, 144; criticism of, 94
political theory of neoliberalism, 1, 2, 
9, 10, 27, 29–31, 200, 223 
populism, 93, 106–8, 144, 151, 186
positivism, 4, 48, 115
privatization, 8, 11, 169, 216
progressivism, 5, 25, 49
public-choice theory, 83, 97, 100, 127, 
142, 232n11
rationality, 88–90, 92, 99, 100, 110, 
120
recentralization, 29, 64, 67, 69, 77, 183
recession, 39, 162, 164, 167, 168
redistribution, 38–40, 47, 66, 69, 98, 
101, 220, 226n5
referee. See umpire 
referendum, 106–8, 129, 145, 151, 216
religion, 23, 117, 118, 128, 142, 153, 
230n9, 232n13
rent seeking, 30, 89,153
representation, 86, 92, 95, 101, 229n9
reverse revenue sharing, 66, 69, 187
revitalization, of liberalism, 21, 23, 25, 
163
revolution, 58, 129, 148, 154, 192
rights, 17, 52, 57, 85, 106, 185, 186, 
227n5, 229n12
risk, 198–200, 208, 210, 221
The Road to Serfdom, 18–20, 24, 62, 75, 
123, 147, 148, 226n5
Röpke, Wilhelm, 2, 17, 20, 34, 203, 
221, 227n10, 229n4, 232n4; on 

	
Index
261
compatible interventions, 46–48; 
on decentralization, 44, 45; on 
decline of liberalism, 22–24, on 
elites, 140–42, 154, 231n17; on 
European integration, 181–84, on 
gold standard, 188, 211, 212; on 
Keynes, 226n3; on liberal inter­
ventionism, 40–43; on massifica­
tion, 88, 93, 107; and National 
Socialism, 226n4; on natural order, 
117, 230n8; on pluralism, 86, 103, 
229n6; on rationalism, 122–26; on 
science, 110, 118, 119, 133, 135; 
on strong state, 70–73, 75, 76, 
228nn14–15, 228n19; on supra­
national federation, 59–63, 78; on 
welfare state, 14 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 87, 106, 153
rule-based politics, 38, 53, 55, 208, 
211, 221, 222
rule of law, 46, 51–53, 55, 56, 82, 103, 
125, 146, 149; and democracy, 48, 
94, 95, 146, 229n11; and liberal­
ism, 48, 81; decline of, 49; limits 
of, 49, 50
Rüstow, Alexander, 2, 17, 19, 181, 214, 
226n2, 230n4, 230n9; on common 
good, 229n4; on decline of liberal­
ism, 22–24; on liberal interven­
tionism, 40, 41; on massification, 
88; on neoliberal politics, 151, 
154, on pluralism, 86, 229n9; on 
Vitalpolitik, 42–46; on rationalism, 
126; on science, 107, 109, 110, 
114, 116–18, 123, 124, 133–35, 
137; on strong state, 70, 72, 76, 77, 
228n12; on transitional dictator­
ship, 142–45, 231n3, on suprana­
tional federation, 59 
Schäuble, Wolfgang, 164–66, 215
Schmitt, Carl, 76, 87, 106, 143, 209, 
228n2, 231n2
science of economics, 30, 109–11, 121
scientism, 30, 110, 118, 122, 124–26, 
133, 139
scientists, 30, 110, 125, 127, 133–35, 
137, 141, 219, 221
self-interest, 31, 120, 152–54
separation of powers, 48, 55–58, 72, 
103, 105
SGP (Stability and Growth Pact), 170, 
171, 176, 190, 208, 212, 213
Six-Pack, 170, 171, 212
slippery slope, 74, 75, 147
socialism, 6, 14, 15, 18, 25, 107, 122, 
123, 127; classical, 226n5; critique 
of, 105; path to, 75; religious, 117; 
scientific, 109; unfeasibility of, 62; 
wartime, 17
social policy, 39, 41, 42, 44, 94, 110, 
188, 227n4
social sciences, 30, 111, 115, 118, 119, 
122, 125, 196, 199
sociology, 43, 70, 184, 194, 231n11
solidarity, 61, 65, 66, 191
sovereignty, 48, 77, 81, 82, 97, 216, 
228n2; national, 62, 183; parlia­
mentary, 81, 82; popular, 94–96; 
transfer of, 78
spillover effect, 61, 179, 182
state action, 27, 39, 41, 46, 49, 50, 52, 
71, 95; (im-)permissible, 47, 48; 
paternalist, 36; positive, 35, pro­
ductive, 53; scope of, 40; 
state output, 29, 35, 41, 48, 55, 94 
state structure(s), 3, 29, 35, 67, 77, 94, 
95, 183
subjectivism, 84, 115, 116, 123
Switzerland, 60–62, 65, 107
taxation, 47, 50–53, 63, 66, 91, 92; and 
power to tax, 51, 53, 65, 66, 90, 91, 
130, 191
taxes, 54, 63, 90, 97, 114, 187, 214
taxpayers, 90, 91, 129, 151

262	
Index
technocracy, 3, 30, 126, 128, 129, 133, 
135, 141, 201, 216, 220
TFEU (Treaty for the Functioning of 
the European Union), 168, 169, 
177
totalitarianism, 18, 20, 74–76, 83, 126, 
146, 147
totality, 118, 133, 136
tyranny, 75, 84, 91, 128–30, 142, 
232n4
umpire, 34–37, 41, 52, 56, 57, 201, 
217, 218
unanimity, 84, 99, 184
uncertainty, 159, 193, 194, 198–200, 
204, 206, 207, 224
unions, 20, 40, 73, 174, 201, 214
United States, 59, 97, 151, 165, 182, 
190, 210, 234n20; and austerity, 
53, 166; and capitalism, 4; and 
constitutionalism, 56; and financial 
crisis, 161–3, 234n9, 235n3; gov­
ernment, 57, 191and liberalism, 4; 
and socioeconomic development, 
158, 167, 168, 233n2
utility, maximization of, 54, 68, 89, 
150–52
utility function, 119, 120, 127, 129, 
152
vote(s), 85, 91, 92, 99, 101, 104
voting rights, 106, 229n12
Weidmann, Jens, 209–10, 212, 217–18, 
221, 222
Weimar Republic, 70, 72, 73, 76, 114, 
133, 134, 143–45, 226n2
welfare state, 15, 19–21, 25, 36, 43, 
148, 164, 178. See also state
zero-sum game, 94, 128, 130

In the wake of recent events such as the global fi nancial crisis, the Occupy 
Wall Street Movement, and the rise of anti–student-debt activism, the need 
for a more sophisticated encounter between economic theory and social 
and political philosophy has become pressing. The growth of new forms 
of money and fi nance, which has only accelerated since the fi nancial crisis, 
is recognized as one of the defi ning developments of our time. But even as 
fi nance continuously breaches limits and forces adjustments, much scholarly 
commentary remains focused on the limits of the market and the need to 
establish some prior state of political stability, thus succumbing to a nostalgia 
that blunts its critical edge. Not content to adopt a defensive posture, books 
in this series move beyond well-rehearsed denunciations of out-of-control 
markets and seek to rethink the core institutions and categories of fi nancial-
ized capitalism. Currencies will serve as a forum for work that is situated at 
the intersection of economics, the humanities, and the social sciences. It will 
include conceptually driven historical or empirical studies, genealogies of 
economic ideas and institutions, and work that employs new or unexplored 
theoretical resources to rethink key economic categories and themes.
Lisa Adkins, The Time of Money
Martijn Konings, Capital and Time: For a New Critique of Neoliberal Reason
C U R R E N C I E S
New Thinking for Financial Times
Melinda Cooper and Martijn Konings, Editors


