

Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst
Supported by:
The Global Impact of
Open Data
Key Findings from Detailed Case
Studies Around the World
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96467-5
[LSI]
The Global Impact of Open Data
by Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Shannon Cutt
Production Editor: Nicholas Adams
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing, Inc.
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
September 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-09-13: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The Global Impact
of Open Data, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xi
Part I. 
Open Data’s Impact—Lessons Learned
1. Understanding the Impact of Open Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
Introduction                                                                                       3
I. What Is Open Data?                                                                       5
II. The Case Studies                                                                           6
III. What Is the Impact of Open Data on People’s Lives?           14
IV. What Are the Enabling Conditions that Significantly
Enhance the Impact of Open Data?                                          17
V. What Are the Challenges to Open Data Making an
Impact?                                                                                          20
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-
Data Roadmap                                                                              25
Key Remaining Questions                                                              37
Part II. 
Case Studies: Improving Government
2. Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
Making Public How Public Money Is Spent
Context and Background                                                                42
iii

Project Description and Inception                                                46
Impact                                                                                               50
Challenges                                                                                         54
Looking Forward                                                                             57
3. Openaid in Sweden. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
Enhanced Transparency and Accountability
Context and Background                                                                60
Product Description and Inception                                              62
Impact                                                                                               66
Challenges                                                                                         69
Looking Forward                                                                             72
4. Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75
Establishing Trust in Government
Context and Background                                                                77
Impact                                                                                               83
Challenges                                                                                         90
Looking Forward                                                                             94
5. Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  97
Elections: Free, Fair, and Open Data
Context and Background                                                                98
Project Description and Inception                                              102
Impact                                                                                             105
Challenges                                                                                       108
Looking Forward                                                                           110
6. Denmark’s Open Address Data Set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
Consolidating and Freeing-up Address Data
Context and Background                                                             114
Project Description and Inception                                              116
Impact                                                                                             121
Challenges                                                                                       129
Looking Forward                                                                           132
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

7. Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data. . . . .  135
Accountability of Charities through Open Data
Context and Background                                                             136
Project Description and Inception                                              138
Impact                                                                                             141
Challenges                                                                                       149
Looking Forward                                                                           156
Part III. 
Case Studies: Empowering Citizens
8. Open Education Information in Tanzania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  161
A Tale of Two Dashboards
Context and Background                                                             162
Product Description and Inception                                            165
Impact                                                                                             168
Challenges                                                                                       172
Looking Forward                                                                           174
9. Kenya’s Open Duka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
Open Data for Transactional Transparency
Context and Background                                                             178
Project Description and Inception                                              182
Impact                                                                                             187
Challenges                                                                                       188
Looking Forward                                                                           190
10. Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
Empowering Citizens to Make Data-Driven
Context and Background                                                             196
Product Description and Inception                                            200
Impact                                                                                             203
Challenges                                                                                       208
Looking Forward                                                                           211
11. Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  215
Empowering Citizens to Make Data-Driven
Context and Background                                                             216
Table of Contents 
| 
v

Product Description and Inception                                            218
Impact                                                                                             220
Challenges                                                                                       225
Looking Forward                                                                           227
Part IV. 
Case Studies: Creating Opportunity
12. Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  231
A Clash of Business Models
Context and Background                                                             232
Project Description and Inception                                              237
Impact                                                                                             243
Challenges                                                                                       250
Looking Forward                                                                           258
13. United States’ New York City Business Atlas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  261
Leveling the Playing Field
Context and Background                                                             262
Project Description and Inception                                              265
Impact                                                                                             271
Challenges                                                                                       275
Looking Forward                                                                           277
14. United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in
Collaboration with Businesses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  281
Creating a New Industry Through Access to Weather Data
Context and Background                                                             282
Project Description and Inception                                              285
Impact                                                                                             293
Challenges                                                                                       298
Looking Forward                                                                           302
15. United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  307
Creating a Global Public Utility
Context and Background                                                             308
Project Description and Inception                                              310
Impact                                                                                             318
Challenges                                                                                       326
vi 
| 
Table of Contents

Looking Forward                                                                           330
Part V. 
Case Studies: Solving Public Problems
16. Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  337
Data Sharing to Improve Crisis Response
Context and Background                                                             338
Project Description and Inception                                              340
Impact                                                                                             349
Challenges                                                                                       353
Looking Forward                                                                           356
17. New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  361
Open Data for Improving Emergency Response
Context and Background                                                             362
Project Description and Inception                                              364
Impact                                                                                             374
Challenges                                                                                       377
Looking Forward                                                                           379
18. Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  381
Open Data for Public Health
Context and Background                                                             382
Project Description and Inception                                              387
Impact                                                                                             390
Challenges                                                                                       392
Looking Forward                                                                           394
19. United States’ Eightmaps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  397
The Unintended Negative Consequences
Context and Background                                                             398
Project Description and Inception                                              403
Impact                                                                                             406
Challenges                                                                                       410
Looking Forward                                                                           413
Table of Contents 
| 
vii

20. Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  417
Open Data as Evidence
Context and Background                                                             418
Case Description and Inception                                                  421
Impact                                                                                             425
Challenges                                                                                       428
Looking Forward                                                                           431
A. Appendix. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  433
viii 
| 
Table of Contents

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Omdiyar Network for supporting
this project. In particular, Laura Bacon, principal of policy invest‐
ments, has been instrumental in developing the case studies. This
work would not have been possible without the tireless efforts of our
colleagues at the GovLab, including the case studies research team:
Ali Clare, Auralice Graft, Juliet McMurren, Christina Rogawski,
David Sangokoya, and Rebecca Young; Akash Kapur who provided
crucial editorial support; and the GovLab developer team: Chris
Wong, Claudio Mendonca, Batu Sayici, and Mark Adkins-Hastings
who created odimpact.org where this research lives online. Thanks
also to the GovLab’s Beth Simone Noveck, Fred DeJohn, Lauren Yu,
Dinorah Cantú, Julia Root, Irene Tello-Arista, and María Hermosilla
for their input and support throughout the development of this
research.
The research contained in this volume was developed thanks to the
following experts and stakeholders who generously gave their time
and provided essential on-the-ground knowledge about their inspir‐
ing and transformative work: Neil Ackroyd, Kim Alexander, Robert
Andrews, Jay Bhalla, Uuf Brajawidagba, François Brouard, Iain
Campion, John Carpenter, Daniel Carranza, Julian Carver, Pablo
Clark, Izabela Corrèa, Jeff de la Beaujardiere, Leodelma de Marilac
Felix, Vivien Deparday, Patrick DuFour, Ee-Peng Lim, Carl Elm‐
stam, Peter Elson, Felipe Estefan, Aidan Eyakuze, Stephen Ferris,
Christian Fischer, Mike Flowers, Rafael García Aceves, Zachary
Goldstein, Hanna Helquist, Thorhildur Jetzek, Al Kags, Jason Kim,
Verena Luise Knippel, Daniel Kreiss, David Lasby, Michael Lencz‐
ner, Morten Lind, Andrew Loveless, Lindsay Marchessault, Arnold
Minde, Lindsay Mollineaux, Oscar Montiel, Otávio Moreira de Cas‐
ix

tro Neves, Ainun Najib, Bitange Ndemo, Bo Overgaard, Tim Owen,
Allan Parnell, Ed Parsons, Maria Patterson, Hilary Pearson, Karl
Peterson, Florent Peyre, Peter Rabley, Tara Ramchandani, Ira Rubin‐
stein, Fabrizio Scrollini, Diah Setiawaty, Rupert Simons, Singapore
National Environment Agency, Gabriel Sipos, Diego Soria, Allison
Soussi-Tanani, Javier Teran, Samhir Vasdev, Eva Vozárová, Neil
Weston, Alyssa Wright, and Alexandra Zapata Hojel.
Finally, our gratitude to the following dedicated individuals who
provided invaluable input during the open peer review process of
this research: Karin Ahlin, Antonio Almansa Morales, Andi Argast,
Jos Berens, Keitha Booth, J. Albert Bowden II, Mark Cardwell, Cor‐
inne Cath, Emmy Chirchir, Rafael García Aceves, Erik Holmlund,
Brendan Kenny, Alessia Lefebure, Ulrich Mans, Valerie Moye, Alina
Östling, Giuseppe Reale, Fathima Rifaa, Julian Singh, Rayna Stam‐
boliyska, Julian Tait, Jamie Van Ymeren, Mario Velasco, Niki Virani,
Johanna Walker, Andrew Weller, Ian White, Raymond Yee, and
Maria Zuffova.
x 
| 
Acknowledgements

Executive Summary
Recent years have witnessed considerable enthusiasm over open
data. Several studies have documented its potential to spur eco‐
nomic innovation and social transformation as well as to usher in
fresh forms of political and government accountability. Yet for all
the enthusiasm, we know little about how open data actually works
and what forms of impact it is really having.
This report seeks to remedy that informational shortcoming. Sup‐
ported by Omidyar Network, the GovLab has conducted 19 detailed
case studies of open-data projects around the world. The case stud‐
ies were selected for their sectoral and geographic representative‐
ness. They were built in part from secondary sources (“desk
research”), but also from a number of first-hand interviews with
important players and key stakeholders. In this report, we consider
some overarching lessons that we can learn from the case studies
and assemble them within an analytical framework that can help us
better understand what works—and what doesn’t—when it comes to
open data.
The report begins (“I. What Is Open Data?” on page 5) with an over‐
view of open data. Like many technical terms, open data is a contes‐
ted and dynamic concept. The GovLab has conducted a study of
nine widely used definitions to arrive at the following working defi‐
nition, which guides our discussion here:
Open data is publicly available data that can be universally and
readily accessed, used, and redistributed free of charge. It is struc‐
tured for usability and computability.
“II. The Case Studies” on page 6 includes a brief summary of our 19
case studies, each of which is detailed at considerably greater length,
xi

in Parts II through V. Sections III through V represent the core of
our analytical framework; they identify the key parameters and vari‐
ables that determine the impact of open data.
“III. What Is the Impact of Open Data on People’s Lives?” on page
14 discusses what we have identified as the four most important
dimensions of impact. Based on the case studies, GovLab has deter‐
mined that open data projects are improving government, primarily
by making government more accountable and efficient; empowering
citizens, by facilitating more informed decision-making and ena‐
bling new forms of social mobilization; creating new economic oppor‐
tunities; and helping policymakers and others find solutions to big,
previously intractable public problems (e.g., related to public health or
global warming).
These types of effects cannot be taken for granted. They are evident
to varying degrees across our case studies, and sometimes not at all.
Our research also identified four enabling conditions that allow the
potential of open data to manifest (“IV. What Are the Enabling Con‐
ditions that Significantly Enhance the Impact of Open Data?” on
page 17). Overall, we found that open data projects work best when
they are based on partnerships and collaborations among various
(often intersectoral) organizations; when they emerge within what
we call an “open data public infrastructure” that enables the regular
release of potentially impactful data; when they are accompanied by
clear open data policies, including performance metrics; and when
they address or attempt to solve a well-defined problem or issue that
is an obvious priority to citizens and likely beneficiaries.
“V. What Are the Challenges to Open Data Making an Impact?” on
page 20 identifies the key challenges that open data projects face.
These include a lack of readiness, especially evident in the form of
low technical and human capacity in societies or nations hosting
open data initiatives; projects that are unresponsive—and thus inflex‐
ible—to user or citizen needs; projects that result in inadequate pro‐
tections for privacy or security; and, finally, projects that suffer from
a shortage of resources, financial and otherwise. None of the 19 ini‐
tiatives we studied was immune to these obstacles; the most success‐
ful ones had found ways to surmount them and build applications
or platforms that were nonetheless able to tap into the potential of
open data.
xii 
| 
Executive Summary

“VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data
Roadmap” on page 25 features a set of 10 recommendations directed
at policymakers, entrepreneurs, activists, and others contemplating
open-data projects. Each of these broad recommendations is accom‐
panied by more specific and concrete steps for implementation.
Together, these recommendations and steps for implementation add
up to something of a toolkit for those working with open data.
Although preliminary, they are designed to guide the open-data
community in its ongoing efforts to launch new initiatives that ach‐
ieve maximum societal, economic, political, and cultural change.
The report ends with each of our 19 in-depth case studies, presented
in full and organized by their dimension of impact.
Executive Summary 
| 
xiii


PART I
Open Data’s Impact—Lessons
Learned


1 Manyika, James, Michael Chui, Diana Farrell, Steve Van Kuiken, Peter Groves, and
Elizabeth Almasi Doshi. “Open Data: Unlocking Innovation and Performance with Liq‐
uid Innovation.” McKinsey Global Institute. November 12, 2013.
2 Gruen, Nicholas, John Houghton, and Richard Tooth. “Open for Business: How Open
Data Can Help Achieve the G20 Growth Target.” Omidyar Network. June 2014.
CHAPTER 1
Understanding the Impact
of Open Data
Introduction
Recent years have witnessed considerable enthusiasm over the
opportunities offered by open data. Across sectors, it is widely
believed today that we are entering a new era of information open‐
ness and transparency, and that this has the potential to spur eco‐
nomic innovation, social transformation, and fresh forms of
political and government accountability. Focusing just on economic
impacts, in 2013, for example, the consulting firm McKinsey estima‐
ted the possible global value of open data to be more than $3 trillion
per year.1 A study commissioned by Omidyar Network has likewise
calculated that open data could result in an extra $13 trillion over
five years in the output of G20 nations.2
Yet despite the evident potential of open data, and despite the grow‐
ing amounts of information being released by governments and cor‐
porations, little is actually known about its use and impact. What
kind of social and economic transformations has open data brought
about, and what transformations might it effect in the future? How
3

—and under what circumstances—has it been most effective? How
have open-data practitioners mitigated risks (e.g., to privacy) while
maximizing social good?
As long as such questions remain unanswered, the field risks suffer‐
ing from something of a mismatch between the supply (or availabil‐
ity) of data and its actual demand (and subsequent use). This
mismatch limits the impact of open data and inhibits its ability to
produce social, economic, political, cultural, and environmental
change. This report begins from the premise that in order to fully
grasp the opportunities offered by open data, a more full and
nuanced understanding of its workings is necessary.
Our knowledge of how and when open data actually works in prac‐
tice is lacking because there have been so few systematic studies of
its actual effect and workings. The field is dominated by conjectural
estimates of open data’s hypothetical influence; those attempts that
have been made to study concrete, real-world examples are often
anecdotal or suffer from a paucity of information. In this report, we
seek to build a more systematic study of open data and its effect by
rigorously examining 19 case studies from around the world. These
case studies are chosen for their geographic and sectoral representa‐
tiveness. They are built not simply from secondary sources (e.g., by
rehashing news reports) but from extensive interviews with key
actors and protagonists who possess valuable and thus far untapped
on-the-ground knowledge. They go beyond the descriptive (what
happened) to the explanatory (why it happened, and what is the
wider relevance or impact).
To provide these explanations, we have assembled an analytical
framework that applies across the 19 case studies and lets us present
some more widely applicable principles for the use and impact of
open data. Impact—a better understanding of how and when open
data really works—is at the center of our research. Our framework
seeks to establish a taxonomy of impact for open-data initiatives,
outlining various dimensions (from improving government to creat‐
ing economic opportunities) in which open data has been effective.
In addition, the framework lays out some key conditions that enable
impact, as well as some challenges faced by open-data projects.
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

I. What Is Open Data?
It is useful to begin with an understanding of what we mean by open
data. Like many technical terms, open data is a contested concept.
There exists no single, universally accepted definition. The GovLab
recently undertook an analysis of competing meanings, with a view
to reaching a working definition. The Appendix contains nine
widely used definitions and our matrix of analysis.
Based on this matrix, we reached the following working definition,
which guides our research and discussion throughout this report:
Open data is publicly available data that can be universally and
readily accessed, used, and redistributed free of charge. It is struc‐
tured for usability and computability.
It is important to recognize that this is a somewhat idealized version
of open data. In truth, few forms of data possess all the attributes
included in this definition. The openness of data exists on a contin‐
uum, and although many forms of information we discuss here
might not be strictly open in the sense just described, they can none‐
theless be shareable, usable by third parties, and capable of effecting
wide-scale transformation. The 19 case studies included here there‐
fore include a variety of different kinds of data, each of which is
open in a different way, and to a different degree. Here are some
examples:
• Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal is an example of the
most “traditional” type of open-data project: a downloadable set
of open government data accessible to the public.
• Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela is the result of a nongovernmental
organization compiling and presenting data (including open
government data) in easily digestible forms.
• The Global Positioning System (GPS) is arguably not an “open
data” system at all, but rather a means for providing access to a
government-operated signal.
• The United Kingdom Ordnance Survey offers a combination of
free and paid spatial data, suggesting the possibilities (and limi‐
tations) of a mixed model of open and closed data.
In each of these cases, “open” has different meanings and connota‐
tions. Many—but not all—of the cases, however, demonstrate the
importance of shared and disseminated information, and highlight
I. What Is Open Data? 
| 
5

open data’s potential to enhance the social, economic, cultural, and
political dimensions of our lives.
II. The Case Studies
Methodology
To select our case studies, we undertook a multistep process that
involved several variables and considerations. To begin with, we
examined existing repositories of open-data cases and examples in
order to develop an initial universe of known open-data projects
(see http://odimpact.org/resources.html). This initial scan of existing
examples allowed us to identify gaps in representation—those sec‐
tors or geographies that often remain underrepresented in existing
descriptions of open data and its effect (or lack thereof). To fill in
some of these gaps (and more generally widen our list of case study
candidates), we also reached out to a number of experts in relevant
subject areas; for example, open data, open governance, civic tech‐
nology, and other related fields. We also attended and conducted
outreach at a number of open-data-related events, notably the 2015
International Open Data Conference in Ottawa, Canada and Con‐
Datos in Santiago, Chile.
Based on this process, we identified a long list of approximately 50
case studies from around the world. These included examples from
the private sector, civil society, and government, and spanned the
spectrum of openness just mentioned. The next step was to conduct
a certain amount of preliminary research to arrive at our final list of
19 case studies. To do this, we took into account several factors: the
availability and type of evidence in existence; the need for sectoral
and geographic representativeness; and the type of impact demon‐
strated by the case study in question (if any). We also considered
whether previous, detailed case studies existed; as much as possible,
our goal was to develop case studies for previously unexplored and
undocumented examples.
Having selected our 19 cases, we then began a process of more in-
depth researching. This involved a combination of desk research
(e.g., using existing media and other reports) and interviews (usu‐
ally by telephone). For many of our examples, there existed very lit‐
tle existing research; the bulk—and certainly the most useful—of
our evidence came from a series of in-depth interviews we conduc‐
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

ted with key participants and observers who had been involved in
our various cases.
Upon completing drafts of each case study, and in the spirit of open‐
ness that defines the field under examination, we open-sourced the
peer review process for each case and this paper. Rather than shar‐
ing drafts only with a select group of experts, we made our report
and each of the case studies openly accessible for review in the inter‐
est of gaining broad input on our findings and collaboratively pro‐
ducing a common resource on open data’s effects for the field.
Through broad outreach at events like the 2015 Open Government
Partnership Summit in Mexico City, Mexico, and through social
media, more than 50 individuals from around the world signed up
to peer review at least one piece.
During the month-long open-peer-review process, more than two
dozen of those who signed up shared their input as Recognized Peer
Reviewers through in-line comments and in-depth responses to the
ideas and evidence presented in this report. Additionally, each ele‐
ment of the report was made openly accessible to the public, allow‐
ing anyone to share suggestions, clarifications, notes on potential
inaccuracies and any other useful input prior to publishing. Much of
this input was integrated into the final version of this report.
The 19 Cases
The standalone impact case studies (see Parts II through V) include
detailed descriptions and analyses of the initiatives listed later in the
report. In addition, the following table summarizes their main fea‐
tures and key findings. Here, we include a brief summary of each
example:
Outcome: Improving Government
Brazil: Open Budget Transparency Portal
Sector: Public
Impact: Tackling corruption and transparency
Description: A tool that aims to increase fiscal transparency of the
Brazilian Federal Government through open government budget
data. As the quality and quantity of data on the portal have
improved over the past decade, the Transparency Portal is now one
of the country’s primary anti-corruption tools, registering an aver‐
II. The Case Studies 
| 
7

age of 900,000 unique visitors each month. Local governments
throughout Brazil and three other Latin American countries have
modeled similar financial transparency initiatives after Brazil’s
Transparency Portal.
Sweden: openaid.se
Sector: Philanthropy and aid
Impact: Tackling corruption and transparency
Description: A data hub created by the Swedish Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency (Sida) built on open government data. The website visual‐
izes when, to whom, and why aid funding was paid out and what the
results were. The reforms are seen to be an important force for
enhanced transparency and accountability in development coopera‐
tion at an international level and increased cooperation and involve‐
ment of more actors in Swedish development policy.
Slovakia: Open contracting projects
Sector: Public sector
Impact: Tackling corruption and transparency
Description: In January 2011, Slovakia introduced a regime of
unprecedented openness, requiring that all documents related to
public procurement (including receipts and contracts) be published
online, and making the validity of public contracts contingent on
their publication. More than two million contracts have now been
posted online, and these reforms appear to have had a dramatic
effect on both corruption and, equally important for the business
climate, perceptions of corruption.
Indonesia: Kawal Pemilu
Sector: Politics and elections
Impact: Tackling corruption and transparency
Description: A platform launched in the immediate aftermath of
the contentious 2014 Indonesian presidential elections. Kawal Pemi‐
lu’s organizers assembled a team of more than 700 volunteers to
compare official vote tallies with the original tabulations from poll‐
ing stations and to digitize the often handwritten forms, making the
data more legible and accessible. Assembled in a mere two days,
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

with a total budget of just $54, the platform enabled citizen partici‐
pation in monitoring the election results, increased public trust in
official tallies, and helped ease an important democratic transition.
Denmark: consolidation and sharing of address data
Sector: Geospatial services
Impact: Improving services
Description: In 2005, the Building and Dwelling Register of Den‐
mark started to release its address data to the public free of charge.
Prior to that date, each municipality charged a separate fee for
access, rendering the data practically inaccessible. There were also
significant discrepancies between the content held across different
databases. A follow-up study commissioned by the Danish govern‐
ment estimated the direct financial benefits alone for the period
2005–2009 at €62 million, at a cost of only €2 million.
Canada: T3010 charity information return data
Sector: Philanthropy and aid
Impact: Improving services
Description: In 2013, the Charities Directorate of the Canada Reve‐
nue Agency (CRA) opened all T3010 Registered Charity Informa‐
tion Return data since 2000 via the government’s data portal under a
commercial open-data license. The resulting data set has been used
to explore the state of the nonprofit sector, improve advocacy by
creating a common understanding between regulators and charities,
and create intelligence products for donors, fundraisers and grant-
makers.
Outcome: Empowering Citizens
Tanzania: Shule and Education Open Data Dashboard
Sector: Education
Impact: Social mobilization
Description: Two recently established portals providing the public
with more data on examination pass rates and other information
related to school performance in Tanzania. Education Open Data
Dashboard is a project established by the Tanzania Open Data Ini‐
tiative; Shule was spearheaded by Arnold Minde, a programmer,
entrepreneur, and open-data enthusiast. Despite the challenges
II. The Case Studies 
| 
9

posed by Tanzania’s low Internet penetration rates, these sites are
slowly changing the way citizens access information and make deci‐
sions. They are encouraging citizens to demand greater accountabil‐
ity from their school system and public officials.
Kenya: Open Duka
Sector: Public sector
Impact: Informed decision-making
Description: A platform developed by the civil society organization,
the Open Institute, that aims to address issues of opacity in gover‐
nance in the private and public sectors, promoting corporate
accountability and transparency by providing citizens, journalists,
and civic activists with insight into the relationships, connections
(and, to some extent, the dynamics) of those in and around the pub‐
lic arena. As a case study, it exemplifies the challenge for open-data
initiatives to generate sufficient awareness and use necessary meth‐
ods to achieve impact.
Mexico: Mejora Tu Escuela
Sector: Education
Impact: Informed decision-making
Description: A platform created by the Mexican Institute for Com‐
petitiveness (IMCO) that provides citizens with information about
school performance. It helps parents choose the best option for their
children, empowers them to demand higher-quality education, and
gives them tools to get involved in their children’s schooling. It also
provides school administrators, policymakers, and NGOs with data
to identify hotbeds of corruption and areas requiring improvement.
Data available on the site was used in a report that uncovered wide‐
spread corruption in the Mexican education system and stirred
national outrage.
Uruguay: A Tu Servicio
Sector: Health
Impact: Informed decision-making
Description: A platform that lets users select their location and then
compare local health care providers based on a wide range of
parameters and indicators, such as facility type, medical specialty,
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

care goals, wait times and patient rights. A Tu Servicio has intro‐
duced a new paradigm of patient choice into Uruguay’s health care
sector, enabling citizens not only to navigate through a range of
options but also generating a healthy and informed debate on how
more generally to improve the country’s health care sector.
Outcome: Creating Opportunity
Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey
Sector: Geospatial services
Impact: Economic growth
Description: Data from Ordnance Survey (OS), Britain’s mapping
agency, supports essentially any UK industry or activity that uses a
map: urban planning, real estate development, environmental sci‐
ence, utilities, retail, and much more. OS is required to be self-
financing and, despite the launch of its OS OpenData platform in
2010, uses a mixed-cost model, with some data open and some data
paid. OS OpenData products are estimated to deliver between a net
£13 million to £28.5 million increase in GDP over its first 5 years.
United States: New York City Business Atlas
Sector: Business
Impact: Economic growth
Description: Developed by the Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics
(MODA), the Business Atlas is a platform designed to alleviate the
market research information gap between small and large businesses
in New York City. The tool provides small businesses with access to
high-quality data on the economic conditions in a given neighbor‐
hood to help them decide where to establish a new business or
expand an existing one.
US: NOAA: Opening up global weather data in collaboration with
businesses
Sector: Weather
Impact: Economic growth
Description: Opening up weather data through NOAA has signifi‐
cantly lowered the economic and human costs of weather-related
damage through forecasts; enabled the development of a multibil‐
lion dollar weather derivative financial industry dependent on sea‐
II. The Case Studies 
| 
11

sonal data records; and catalyzed a growing million-dollar industry
of tools and applications derived from NOAA’s real-time data.
US: Opening GPS data for civilian use
Sector: Geospatial services
Impact: Economic growth
Description: Over the past 20 years, Global Positioning System
(GPS) technology has led to a proliferation of commercial applica‐
tions across industries and sectors, including agriculture, construc‐
tion, 
transportation, 
aerospace 
and—especially 
with 
the
proliferation of portable devices—everyday life. Were the system to
be somehow discontinued, losses are estimated to be $96 billion. In
addition to creating new efficiencies and reducing operating costs,
the adoption of GPS technology has improved safety, emergency
response times and environmental quality, and has delivered many
other less-readily quantifiable benefits.
Outcome: Solving Public Problems
Sierra Leone: Battling Ebola
Sector: Health
Impact: Data-driven engagement
Description: In 2014, the largest Ebola outbreak in history occurred
in West Africa. At the beginning, information on Ebola cases and
response efforts was dispersed across a diversity of data collectors,
and there was little ability to get relevant data into the hands of
those who could make use of it. Three projects—Sierra Leone’s
National Ebola Response Centre (NERC), the United Nations’
Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX), and the Ebola GeoNode—sig‐
nificantly improved the quality and accessibility of information used
by humanitarians and policymakers working to address the crisis.
New Zealand: Christchurch earthquake GIS clusters
Sector: Emergency services
Impact: Data-driven engagement
Description: In February 2011, Christchurch was struck by a severe
earthquake that killed 185 people and caused significant disruption
and damage to large portions of a city already weakened by an ear‐
lier earthquake. In the response to the quake, volunteers and offi‐
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

cials at the recovery agencies used open data, open source tools,
trusted data sharing, and crowdsourcing to develop a range of prod‐
ucts and services required to respond successfully to emerging con‐
ditions, including a crowdsourced emergency information web app
that generated 70,000 visits within the first 48 hours after the earth‐
quake, among others.
Singapore: Dengue cluster map
Sector: Health
Impact: Data-driven engagement
Description: In 2005, the Singapore National Environment Agency
(NEA) began sharing information on the location of dengue clusters
as well as disease information and preventive measures online
through a website now commonly known as the “Dengue Website.”
Since then, the NEA’s data-driven cluster map has evolved, and it
became an integral part of the campaign against a dengue epidemic
in 2013.
US: Eightmaps
Sector: Politics and elections
Impact: Data-driven engagement
Description: A tool, launched anonymously in 2009, that provided
detailed information on supporters of California’s Proposition 8,
which sought to bar same-sex couples from marrying. The site col‐
lected information made public through state campaign finance dis‐
closure laws and overlaid that information onto a Google map of the
state. Users could find the names, approximate locations, amount
donated, and, where available, employers of individuals who dona‐
ted money to support Prop 8. Eightmaps demonstrates how the
increased computability and reusability of open data could be acted
upon in unexpected ways that not only create major privacy con‐
cerns for citizens, but could also lead to harassment and threats
based on political disagreements.
US: Kennedy v the City of Zanesville
Sector: Law
Impact: Data-driven assessment
II. The Case Studies 
| 
13

Description: For more than 50 years, even though access to clean
water from the City of Zanesville, Ohio, was available throughout
the rest of Muskingum County, residents of a predominantly Afri‐
can American area of Zanesville were only able to use contaminated
rainwater or drive to the nearest water tower. One of the key pieces
of evidence used during the court case was a map derived from open
data that showed significant correlation between the houses occu‐
pied by the white residents of Zanesville and the houses hooked up
to the city water line. The case went in favor of the African-
American plaintiffs, awarding them a $10.9 million settlement.
III. What Is the Impact of Open Data on
People’s Lives?
What lessons can we learn from these examples of open-data appli‐
cations, platforms, and websites? In this and the following sections,
we outline some overarching insights derived from our 19 case stud‐
ies. First, we focus on impact. What is the effect of open data on
people’s lives? What are the real, measurable, and tangible results of
our case studies? And, just as important, who (which individuals,
institutions, demographic groups) are most affected?
Taxonomy of Open-Data Impact
Determining impact requires taking certain nuances into account.
In many cases, open-data projects show results in more than one
dimension of impact. In addition, the effect of our case studies on
people’s lives is often indirect (and thus somewhat more subtle),
mediated by changes in the way decisions are made or other broad
social, political, and economic factors. Nonetheless, despite these
nuances, our analysis suggests that there exist four main ways in
which open data is having an influence on people’s lives
(Figure 1-1):
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Figure 1-1. The open data taxonomy of impact
• First, open data is improving government around the world. It is
doing so in various ways, but in particular by, a) making gov‐
ernments more accountable, especially by helping tackle cor‐
ruption and adding transparency to a host of government
responsibilities and functions (notably budgeting), and, b) mak‐
ing government more efficient, especially by enhancing public
services and resource allocation.
Improvements in governance are evident in six of our 19 case
studies. Notable examples include the Brazil Open Budget
Transparency Portal, which brings accountability and citizen
oversight to the country’s budget processes; Slovakia’s Central
Registry, which is a global model for the open-contracting
movement; and Canada’s opening of tax return data submitted
by charities, the first move in a broader global effort to increase
the transparency and accountability of philanthropies.
III. What Is the Impact of Open Data on People’s Lives? 
| 
15

• Open data is empowering citizens to take control of their lives
and demand change by enabling more informed decision-
making and new forms of social mobilization, both in turn
facilitated by new ways of communicating and accessing infor‐
mation.
This dimension of impact plays a role in four case studies. Some
notable examples in this category include Uruguay’s A Tu Servi‐
cio, which empowers citizens to make more informed decisions
about health care, and education dashboards in Mexico (Mejora
Tu Escuela) and Tanzania (Shule and Education Open Data
Dashboard), each of which enables parents to make more
evidence-based decisions about their children’s schools.
• Open data is creating new economic opportunities for citizens
and organizations. Around the world, in cities and countries,
greater transparency and more information are stimulating eco‐
nomic growth, opening up new sectors, and fostering innova‐
tion. In the process, open data is creating new jobs and new
ways for citizens to prosper in the world.
This category of impact often follows from applications and
platforms built using government data. It is evident in four of
our case studies, each of which relies for its underlying data on
information released by governments. Two notable examples
include New York’s Business Atlas, which lets small businesses
use data to identify the best neighborhoods in which to open or
grow their companies; and the various platforms and companies
built around data released by the National Oceanic and Atmos‐
pheric Administration (NOAA) in the US.
• Finally, open data’s effect is evident in the way it is helping solve
several big public problems, many of which have until recently
seemed intractable. Although most of these problems have not
been entirely solved or eliminated, we are finally seeing path‐
ways to improvements. Through open data, citizens and policy‐
makers can analyze societal problems in new ways and engage
in new forms of data-driven assessment and engagement.
Open data has created notable impacts during public-health cri‐
ses and other emergencies. In Sierra Leone, open data helped to
inform the actions of people working on the ground to fight
Ebola. The government and citizens of Singapore are using a
Dengue Fever Cluster Map to try to limit the spread of dengue
fever during outbreaks like that experienced in 2013. The efforts
16 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

to rebuild following devastating earthquakes in Christchurch,
New Zealand were also aided by open data. It is important to
recognize, however, that attempts to solve problems can also
have unintended consequences. We see this, for example, in the
case of Eightmaps, where efforts to address discrimination and
other issues unintentionally created new privacy (and even per‐
sonal security) problems.
IV. What Are the Enabling Conditions that
Significantly Enhance the Impact of Open
Data?
Although our initial analysis told us what types of change open data
was creating, a further round of analysis was required to understand
how change comes about. In examining open data projects around
the world, we are struck by the wide variability in outcomes. Some
work better than others, and some simply fail. Eightmaps is an
example of how open data can lead to unintended consequences, but
there are many, many more examples that the GovLab did not select
for this group of case studies due to the lack of meaningful, measur‐
able effect to date. Some projects do well in a particular dimension
of success while failing in others. If we are to achieve the believed
potential of open data and scale the impact of the individual case
studies included here, we need a better, more granular understand‐
ing of the enabling conditions that lead to success.
Based on our research, we identified four key enabling conditions,
each of which allows us to articulate a specific “premise” for success:
Partnerships
The power of collaboration was evident in many of the most suc‐
cessful open-data projects we studied. Effective projects were
built not from the efforts of a single organization or govern‐
ment agency, but rather from partnerships across sectors and
sometimes borders. Two forms of collaboration were particu‐
larly important: partnerships with civil society groups, which
often played an important role in mobilizing and educating citi‐
zens; and partnerships with the media, which informed citizens
and also played an invaluable role in analyzing and finding
meaning in raw open data. In addition, we saw an important
IV. What Are the Enabling Conditions that Significantly Enhance the Impact of Open Data? 
|
17

role played by so-called “data collaboratives,” which pooled data
from different organizations and sectors.
Virtually all the case studies we examined were the products of
some form of partnership. Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio was an
important example of how civil society can work with govern‐
ment to craft more effective open-data initiatives. NOAA’s many
offshoots and data initiatives are an equally important example
of collaboration between the private and public sectors. New
York City’s Business Atlas was similarly an illustration of a
public-private partnership; its data set, built both from govern‐
ment and private-sector information (supplied by the company
Placemeter), is an example of an effective data collaborative.
Premise 1: Intermediaries and data collaboratives allow for
enhanced matching of supply and demand of data.
Public infrastructure
Several of the most effective projects we studied emerged on the
back of what we might think of as an open data public infrastruc‐
ture; that is, the technical backend and organizational processes
necessary to enable the regular release of potentially impactful
data to the public. In some cases, this infrastructure takes the
form of an “open by default” system of government data genera‐
tion and release. The team behind Kenya’s Open Duka, for
example, is responding to its lack of impact to date by attempt‐
ing to build such an infrastructure with county-level govern‐
ments to improve the counties’ internal data capacity, improving
the data available on Open Duka as a result.
An open-data public infrastructure does not, however, only
involve technical competencies. As part of the push around Bra‐
zil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal, for example, organizers
not only developed an interoperable infrastructure for publish‐
ing a wide variety of data formats, but also launched a culture-
building campaign complete with workshops seeking to train
public officials, citizens and reporters to create value from the
open data.
Premise 2: Developing open data as a public infrastructure ena‐
bles a broader impact across issues and sectors.
18 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Policies and performance metrics
Another key determinant in the success of open-data projects is
the existence of clear open data policies, including well-defined
performance metrics. The need for clear policies (and more gen‐
erally an enabling regulatory framework) is a reminder that
technology does not exist in a vacuum. Policymakers and politi‐
cal leaders have an essential role to play in creating a flexible,
forward-looking legal environment that, among other things,
encourages the release of open data and technical innovation;
and that spurs the creation of fora and mechanisms for project
assessment and accountability.
In addition, high-level political buy-in is also critical. It is not
sufficient simply to pass enabling laws that look good on paper.
Policymakers and politicians must also ensure that the letter of
the law is followed, that vested interests are adequately comba‐
ted, and that there are consequences for working against open‐
ness and transparency.
Among the many case studies that benefited from a conducive
policy environment, a few stand out. In Mexico, we can see how
an open-data initiative (in this case, the Mejora Tu Escuela
project) can benefit from high-level government commitments
to opening data that trickles down to—and empowers—local
and regional governments. Slovakia’s Central Registry is another
good example; it shows how laws can be redesigned, in this case
to encourage transparency by default in contracting, and in the
process greatly increase openness. The openness of GPS, though
ingrained in daily life for many, was the subject of questions fol‐
lowing the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001; those ques‐
tions were put to rest with the enactment of a new policy
commitment in 2004 to maintain unfettered global access to the
geospatial system.
Premise 3: Clear policies regarding open data, including those
promoting regular assessments of open-data projects, provide
the necessary conditions for success.
Problem definition
We have repeatedly seen how the most successful open-data
projects are those that address a well-defined problem or issue. It
is very challenging for open-data projects to try to change user
behavior or convince citizens of a previously unfelt need. Effec‐
IV. What Are the Enabling Conditions that Significantly Enhance the Impact of Open Data? 
|
19

tive projects identify an existing—ideally widely recognized—
need, and provide new solutions or efficiencies to address that
need.
Singapore’s Dengue Fever Cluster Map is a good example in this
regard. Its core area of activity (public health) has clear, tangible
benefits; it seeks to limit the spread of an illness that policymak‐
ers widely recognize as a problem, and that citizens dread. Uru‐
guay’s A Tu Servicio is another good example: it provides clear,
tangible benefits to citizens, giving them the means to take
action that improves their health care. It is perhaps no coinci‐
dence that both of these examples are in the health sector: The
most successful projects often touch on the most basic human
needs (health, pocketbook needs, etc.). In a case involving one
of the most essential human needs, the use of open data in Ken‐
nedy versus the City of Zanesville accomplished its singular
goal: demonstrating beyond a reasonable doubt that water
access decisions were being made on the basis of citizens’ race.
Premise 4: Open data initiatives that have a clear target or prob‐
lem definition have more effect.
V. What Are the Challenges to Open Data
Making an Impact?
The success of a project is also determined by the obstacles and
challenges it confronts. The challenges are themselves the function
of numerous social, economic, and political variables. In addition,
some regions might face more obstacles than others.
As with the enabling conditions, we found widespread geographic
and sectoral variability in our analysis of challenges. Broadly, we
identified four challenges that recurred the most frequently across
our 19 case studies:
Readiness
Perhaps unsurprisingly, countries or regions with overall low
technical and human capacity or readiness often posed inhospit‐
able environments for open-data projects. The lack of technical
capacity could be indicated by several variables, including low
Internet penetration rates, a wide digital divide, or overall poor
technical literacy. In addition, technical readiness can also be
indicated by the existence of a group of individuals or entities
20 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

that are technically sophisticated and that believe in the trans‐
formative potential of technology, particularly of open data.
Repeatedly, we have seen that such “data champions” or “tech‐
nological evangelists” play a critical role in ensuring the success
of projects.
Low technical capacity did not necessarily result in outright
project “failures.” Rather, it often stunted the potential of
projects, making them less impactful and successful than they
could otherwise have been. In Tanzania, for instance, the Shule
and Education Open Data Dashboard portals were limited by
low Internet penetration rates and by a general low awareness
about open data. Slovakia’s Central Registry was in many ways
very successful; yet it, too, was restricted by a lack of technical
capacity among government officials and others (particularly at
the lower level). In these projects and others, we see that success
is relative, and that even the most successful projects could be
enhanced by greater attention to the overall technical environ‐
ment or ecosystem.
Premise 5: The lack of readiness or capacity at both the supply
and demand side of open data hampers its impact.
Responsiveness
Success is also limited when projects are unresponsive to feed‐
back and user needs. As we saw in the previous section, the most
successful projects address a clear and well-defined need. A cor‐
ollary to this finding is that project sponsors and administrators
need to be attuned to user needs; they need to be flexible
enough to recognize and adapt to what their users want.
For Sweden’s OpenAid project, for example, user experience was
not a core priority at launch, and much of the information
found on the site is too complex for most citizens to digest.
Despite this high barrier to entry, the site only offers limited
engagement opportunities—namely, a button for reporting bugs
on the site. Moreover, project titles found on the site often con‐
tain cryptic terms interpretable only to those with close famili‐
arity with the project at hand.
NOAA, on the other hand, has some of the most mature and
wide-reaching open-data efforts in any of the cases studied here.
But given that breadth, for the agency’s essential information to
remain useful to the evolving needs of its users, an increased
V. What Are the Challenges to Open Data Making an Impact? 
| 
21

focus needs to be placed on customer analytics and user behav‐
iors. The UK’s Ordnance Survey has very sophisticated user
analytics and prioritizes customer satisfaction; however, the sep‐
aration of OS OpenData from its other data sets and products is
potentially limiting.
Premise 6: Open data could be significantly more impactful if
its release would be complemented with a responsiveness to act
upon insights generated.
Risks
A major challenge arises from the trade-offs between the poten‐
tial of open data and the risks posed by privacy and security vio‐
lations. These risks are inherent to any open-data project—by its
very nature, greater transparency exists in tension with privacy
and security. When an initiative fails to take steps to mitigate
this tension, it risks not only harming its own prospects, but
more broadly the reputation of open data in general.
Concerns about privacy and security dogged many of the
projects we studied. In Brazil, more than 100 legal actions were
brought against the Open Budget Transparency Portal when it
inadvertently published the salaries of public servants. In New
York, despite steps being taken to mitigate such harms, there
has been concern that citizen privacy might be violated as cam‐
eras collect data for the project in public spaces.
Without question, the clearest example of open data leading to
privacy concerns (and even outright violations) can be found in
the Eightmaps case study, which used public campaign finance
disclosure laws to publish various identifying information about
and home addresses for donors to California’s Proposition 8,
leading to instances of intimidation and harassment.
For all the very real—and legitimate—concerns, our case studies
also show that the scope for privacy and security abuses can be
mitigated. For example, NOAA stood out for its creation of a
dedicated Cyber Security Division to address data security chal‐
lenges when collecting and releasing data (the sole instance of
such a dedicated division in our 19 case studies). Singapore, too,
took proactive steps to anonymize data to protect the privacy of
citizens. Addressing risks to privacy and security, though
important, can also work against the goals of openness and
transparency. For example, in the city of Zanesville, Ohio, secu‐
22 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

rity concerns have been raised (controversially) to restrict access
to data that has proven essential in addressing decades-old civil
rights violations. Such examples are an important reminder of
the tensions that exist between openness and security/privacy,
and of the need for careful, judicious policymaking to achieve a
balance.
Premise 7: Open data does pose a certain set of risks, notably to
privacy and security; a greater, more nuanced understanding of
these risks will be necessary to address and mitigate them.
Resource allocation
Finally, we found that inadequate resource allocation was one of
the most common reasons for limited success or outright fail‐
ure. Many of the projects we studied were “hackable”—that is,
easily put together on a very limited budget, often created by
idealistic volunteers. Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu, for example, was
assembled with a mere $54. Over time, though, projects require
resources to succeed; although they might emerge on the backs
of committed (and cheap) idealists, they are fleshed out and
developed with real financial backing.
The limited success of Kenya’s Open Duka is a good example.
Although the project was well conceived and based on a sound
premise, it has been limited by the unanticipated effort involved
in data collection. More resources would almost certainly have
helped address this challenge. In addition, Mexico’s Mejora Tu
Escuela is just one project that relies on foundation funding to
operate, leading to some level of uncertainty about the long-
term sustainability of such projects should any of those funding
streams be discontinued. The UK’s Ordnance Survey, mean‐
while, is required to be self-financing, forcing the agency to rely
heavily on private sector customers paying to access the more
sophisticated data products not included in OS OpenData.
Even an initiative as central and widely used as GPS experiences
funding challenges. In a government climate focused on budget
cuts at every corner, new features and capabilities, even for a
“global public utility,” can be difficult to finance through public
money.
Premise 8: Even though open-data projects can often be
launched cheaply, those projects that receive generous, sus‐
V. What Are the Challenges to Open Data Making an Impact? 
| 
23

tained, and committed funding have a better chance of success
over the medium and long term.
The Eight Premises that Determine the Impact of Open
Data
The following is a compilation of our eight premises:
Premise 1
Intermediaries and data collaboratives allow for enhanced
matching of supply and demand of data.
Premise 2
Developing open data as a public infrastructure enables a
broader impact across issues and sectors.
Premise 3
Clear policies regarding open data, including those promoting
regular assessments of open-data projects, provide the necessary
conditions for success.
Premise 4
Open data initiatives that have a clear target or problem defini‐
tion have more effect.
Premise 5
The lack of readiness or capacity at both the supply and demand
side of open data hampers its impact.
Premise 6
Open data could be significantly more impactful if its release
would be complemented with a responsiveness to act upon
insights generated.
Premise 7
Open data does pose a certain set of risks, notably to privacy
and security; a greater, more nuanced understanding of these
risks will be necessary to address and mitigate them.
Premise 8
Even though open-data projects can often be launched cheaply,
those projects that receive generous, sustained and committed
funding have a better chance of success over the medium and
long term.
24 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Supply Versus Demand Trajectories
In studying the ways in which open data has been made available,
we’ve found consistent trajectories depending on whether the data
is pushed from the government or made available by users in civil
society or the general public extracting that data from reluctant
institutions. Interestingly, we’ve found that as both open data push
and pull trajectories advance, the optimal end point is the same:
greater collaboration between data holders and data users.
Trajectory of open data push
Data release
Simply making some amount of data available
Open by default
Creating the infrastructure and processes needed for constant,
automatic data release
Demand-driven collaboration
Working with users to make the most useful data available in
the most useful ways
Trajectory of open data pull
Data audit and gap identification
Outside assessment of where data could have an effect if made
accessible
Creation and demand
Through scraping, Freedom of Information requests, data leaks
or other methods, data users finding ways to make government
data accessible without the direct involvement (and often
without the blessing) of the data holding institution
Collaboration
Working with government to craft impactful data release
strategies
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next
Generation Open-Data Roadmap
Our case studies clearly indicate the tremendous potential and pos‐
sibilities offered by open data. Around the world, open data has
improved governments, empowered citizens, contributed solutions
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
25

to complex public problems, and created new economic opportuni‐
ties for companies, individuals, and nations.
But despite this clear potential, the hurdles are also apparent. We
outlined several of the particular issues faced by open-data projects
in the preceding sections. In addition to these specific challenges,
there is the more general problem of scaling: How do we move
beyond a “points of light” narrative that celebrates individual case
studies to a broader narrative about the social, economic, and politi‐
cal transformation that could result from a far broader deployment
of open data? In this section, we outline 10 steps or recommenda‐
tions for policymakers, advocates, users, funders, and other stake‐
holders in the open-data community that we believe could usher in
such wholesale transformation (Figure 1-2). For each step, we
describe a few concrete methods of implementation—ways to trans‐
late the broader recommendation into meaningful impact.
Figure 1-2. Recommendations for a next generation open data road‐
map
Together, these 10 recommendations and their means of implemen‐
tation amount to a Next Generation Open Data Roadmap. They let
us better understand how the potential of open data can be fulfilled,
across geographies, sectors, and demographics.
26 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Recommendation 1:
Focus on and Define Key Problem Areas for Which Open
Data Can Add Value
A core premise offered by our case studies is that the impact of open
data is often dependent on how well the problem it seeks to address
is defined and understood. It is therefore essential for open-data
advocates and practitioners to clearly define their goals, the problem
they are seeking to address, and the steps they plan to take. Here are
some possibilities for how this focus can be achieved:
• Set up a crowdsourced “Problem Inventory” to which users can
contribute specific questions and answers, both of which can
help define open-data projects. The UK Ordnance Survey’s
GeoVation Hub is an interesting model focusing on the latter. It
poses very specific questions (e.g., “How can we improve trans‐
port?” and “How can we feed Britain?”) for users to answer
using OS OpenData.
• Facilitate user-led design exercises to help define important
public and social problems and how open data can help solve
them.
• To guide such exercises, it can be useful to establish “Problem
and Data Definition toolkits”—potentially modeled on and
informed by Freedom of Information requests—that help for‐
mulate clearly defined public issues and connect them with
potentially useful open-data streams.
Recommendation 2:
Encourage Collaborations Across Sectors (Especially
Between Government, Private Sector, and Civil Society)
to Better Match the Supply and Demand of Open Data
Large public problems are by definition cross-sectoral and interdis‐
ciplinary. They define boundaries and require a variety of expertise,
knowledge, and data to be successfully addressed. It therefore stands
to reason that the most successful open-data projects will similarly
be collaborative and work across sectors and disciplines. Working in
a collaborative manner can help draw on a diverse pool of talent and
can also lead to innovative, out-of-the-box solutions. Perhaps most
important, by allowing data users and data suppliers to work
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
27

together and interact, collaborative approaches can improve the
match between data demand and supply, thus enhancing the overall
efficiency of the demand-use-impact value chain for open data.
Here are some pathways to achieving the required collaborative and
cross-sectoral approaches:
• Create data collaboratives to improve the efficiency and effec‐
tiveness of the demand-use-impact cycle. The value of data col‐
laboratives is clearly illustrated by New Zealand’s Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority’s data sharing with construc‐
tion companies, which is projected to deliver NZ$40 million in
savings. In addition, NOAA’s Big Data Partnership, which for‐
malized a sector partnership with five leading private-sector
data and cloud technology companies, is also a good example.
• Engage and nurture data intermediaries, especially from civil
society, to help spread awareness and disseminate data (and
their findings) more widely. Data intermediaries play a particu‐
larly important role in countries with low technical capacity
(e.g., as is evident in our Tanzanian case study); they offer a vital
link between technology and society, helping citizens maximize
and make real, effective use of data in their everyday lives.
Recommendation 3:
Approach and Treat Data as a Form of Vital 21st-
Century Public Infrastructure
Too often, policymakers and decision-makers focus solely on open‐
ing up data, as if open data on its own provides a silver bullet for a
society’s problems. In fact, as repeatedly evidenced in our case stud‐
ies, data—in its raw form—needs to be supplemented by a host of
other commitments: sustained and sustainable funding, skills train‐
ing among those charged with data collection and use, and effective
governance structures for every step of the data collection and use
cycle. Approaching data in this broader, more holistic way means
treating it as a vital form of public infrastructure. And this infra‐
structure is one that is at the heart of a society or nation, essential
for its success, and embedded within wider social, economic, and
political structures.
28 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

3 http://opendatacharter.net/
There are several steps policymakers can take to advance a “data-as-
infrastructure” approach, including the following:
• Developing a systems design and mapping methodology. Map‐
ping the public and private sector data infrastructure as well as
local, national, and global data infrastructures that can affect the
value creation of open data is a first and necessary step to
approach data as infrastructure. A systems map could enable
the more targeted, coordinated, and collaborative development
of open-data technical standards and best practices across sec‐
tors.
• Embracing and implementing the Open Data Charter,3 which
seeks to “foster greater coherence and collaboration” around
open-data standards, practices, and, in particular, the following
principles:
— Open by default
— Timely and comprehensive
— Accessible and usable
— Comparable and interoperable
— Developed for improved governance and citizen engagement
— Designed for inclusive development and innovation
• Taking advantage of existing public infrastructure, such as libra‐
ries, schools, and other cultural and education institutions, so
that data is more firmly embedded into other forms of public
investment and public life. Open Referral, for example, is creat‐
ing a data backend for the social safety net, allowing pilot part‐
ners, including libraries, to tap into a wide, interconnected
range of potentially impactful data on civic and social services.
• Developing skills and capacity around data collection, cleaning,
and standardization to ensure better quality data is being
released. This is especially important within agencies and
organizations releasing data (to ensure its quality), but also, to
the extent possible, within the community of users.
• Viewing and treating open data as a public good, something to
which citizens and taxpayers are entitled. Moving toward a view
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
29

of open data as a public good requires as much of a cultural
change as a policy change. As our case studies have repeatedly
shown, the success of open data initiatives depends crucially on
government stakeholders accepting that citizens, whether they
be researchers, journalists, or just average individuals, have a
right to demand access to government data.
Recommendation 4:
Create Clear Open-Data Policies That Are Measurable
and Allow for Agile Evolution
Our research illustrates the vital enabling role played by a national
legal and regulatory framework that supports open data. Well-
articulated internal rules and priorities are equally important when
the releasing entity is a company or other organization. In both
cases, clarity is essential: open data thrives when there is an unam‐
biguous commitment to its cause. Importantly, open-data policies
should include provisions to measure the success (or otherwise) of
an initiative; systems for measurement and assessment are vital to
ensuring accountability.
There are several steps policymakers can take to ensure the neces‐
sary clarity of open data policies. These include the following:
• Cocreating open-data policies with citizen and other groups,
which can be an important way not only of drafting inclusive
(and thus more legitimate) policies, but also of ensuring that
policies are responsive to actual conditions and needs. Our
research repeatedly shows that policies drafted without ade‐
quate public input and participation are less effective than those
that draw on a wider range of experiences and expertise. Of
course, attention must be paid to knowledge and power asym‐
metries involved in such cocreation processes.
• Engaging the public in defining and monitoring metrics of suc‐
cess: citizen participation in measuring the results of open-data
initiatives is as important as in drafting policies, and for the
same reasons. It is a vital part of ensuring accountability and in
enhancing the legitimacy and effectiveness of open-data
projects.
• Creating a “Metrics Bank” of important indicators, with input
from stakeholders, researchers, and experts in the field. Such a
30 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Metrics Bank could be built around the variety of categories of
open data’s effects, such as economic concerns (like return on
investment or private sector economic revenues generated),
public problem solutions (lives saved, increases in the efficiency
of service delivery), and others. In line with the previous sug‐
gestion, the Metrics Bank should be reviewed on a regular basis
by a citizens’ group or panel created specifically for that pur‐
pose.
Recommendation 5:
Take Steps to Increase the Capacity of Public and
Private Actors to Make Meaningful Use of Open Data
Repeatedly, we have seen how open data initiatives are limited by a
lack of capacity and preparedness among those who could poten‐
tially benefit most. Often, this manifests quite simply as a lack of
awareness: those who do not know about the potential of open data
are likely to use and benefit less from it. It is important to recognize
that low capacity is a problem both on the demand side and supply
side of the open-data value chain—policymakers and those tasked
with releasing data are often as unprepared as intended beneficia‐
ries.
Several steps can be taken to increase capacity and preparedness:
• Set up coaching and training centers to teach policymakers and
key stakeholders among citizens about the potential benefits
and applications of open data. Brazil’s Open Budget Transpar‐
ency Portal, for instance, benefited tremendously from TV cam‐
paigns and regular workshops designed to train citizens,
reporters, and public officials on how to use the Open Budget
Transparency Portal. In addition, a combined overview or
searchable directory of coaching opportunities already in place
and provided by, for instance, the GovLab Academy and the
Open Data Institute, could enable easier navigation and match‐
ing of interests and needs worldwide.
• Establish mentor and expert networks for those seeking to use
open data. Such networks can serve as valuable resources, pro‐
viding guidance on the optimal uses of open data and helping
citizens and policymakers overcome hurdles or navigate
obstacles.
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
31

• Invest in and promote user-friendly data tools such as data visu‐
alizations and other analytic tools. Raw data can often be over‐
whelming for novice users; platforms and apps that include
analytics and visualizations are often far more accessible. Nota‐
ble examples from our case studies include the UK Ordnance
Survey’s OS OpenMap, NYC’s Business Atlas, and Mexico’s
Mejora Tu Escuela.
• Use online and offline meet-ups and similar tools to create a
culture that encourages knowledge sharing and collaboration.
Many off-the-shelf tools already exist. if they are integrated
within open-data initiatives or data labs—like the Justice Data
Lab in the United Kingdom—they can provide a helpful online
supplement to the types of training efforts and expert-mentor
networks mentioned above.
Recommendation 6:
Identify and Manage Risks Associated with the Release
and Use of Open Data
As our case studies have shown, open data can be a force for good,
but it is not without risks. Two of the most important risks involve
potential violations of privacy and security that can result from
widespread releases of data. Such risks were apparent in a number of
our case studies, notably Eightmaps, Brazil’s Open Budget Transpar‐
ency Portal, and New York’s Business Atlas. Mitigating such risks is
essential not only for its inherent value, but also because privacy and
security violations undermine trust in open data and, over the long
run, limit its potential.
Several steps can be taken to mitigate risks:
• Develop data governance “decision trees” to help decision-
makers track the potential risks and opportunities around cer‐
tain types of data releases. These decision trees can also help
weigh the pros and cons and relative risks of data releases.
• Create innovative, collaborative open-data risk-management
frameworks so that governments and other institutions releas‐
ing data can draw on a clear, structured, step-by-step process to
strategically respond to breaches of privacy, security or other
risks. NOAA, for example, is working with outside experts to
crowdsource new frameworks for data management.
32 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

• Involve all stakeholders (including citizen groups) in developing
data quality and risk standards. A participatory, collaborative
approach to mitigating risks can build trust and help achieve the
right balance between social goods like innovation, on the one
hand, and risks like privacy and security, on the other hand.
Crowdsourcing can be a valuable tool here, giving policymakers
a way to solicit a wide range of responses from diverse stake‐
holder groups.
Recommendation 7:
Be Responsive to the Needs, Demands, and Questions
Generated from the Use of Open Data
We have seen that public participation is essential in the drafting of
open-data policies and in decisions about what data to release. It is
equally important in understanding the impact of open data and in
taking advantage of the opportunities it offers. For example, open
data can generate insights that require government action; open data
can likewise reveal inefficiencies that need concrete steps in order to
be addressed. And as we have seen in the Brazilian case study on
preventing government corruption, meaningful responsiveness
requires the ability to take such steps and actions; what’s required
are communities focused on problem solving, not simply on releas‐
ing data.
Meaningful responsiveness can be achieved through the following
methods:
• Develop open and online feedback mechanisms, including
Q&As, ratings and feedback tools to gauge public opinion and
solicit insights from citizens. For example, Denmark’s Open
Address Initiative has a single portal for users to correct data
errors across all agencies. Simplified mechanisms such as this
help establish a virtuous open-data cycle, allowing open data to
generate insights and ensuring meaningful action on those
insights.
• Designate an open-data ombudsman function to consistently
track the usefulness of open data and whether necessary follow-
up actions are being taken. This ombudsman should itself be
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
33

open and transparent, and ideally include a wide range of stake‐
holder inputs.
Recommendation 8:
Allocate and Identify Adequate Resources to Sustain
and Expand the Necessary Open-Data Infrastructure in
a Participatory Manner
As noted, open-data initiatives are often cheap to get off the ground,
but require resources and investment over time. Goals such as
increased participation and transparency are laudable, but without
resource commitments, they might remain unachievable. Kenya’s
Open Duka project is a good example of a laudable open-data initia‐
tive that has been limited by a lack of resources. Similarly, as of late
2015, Canada’s Open Charity Initiative T3010 has not been updated
since its original 2013 release, in part due to a lack of funding. This
means that anyone seeking recent data on Canadian charities must
now scrape information independently.
Adequate resource allocations can be achieved by doing the
following:
• Implementing participatory budgeting initiatives, which let citi‐
zens choose their priorities and how public funds are allocated.
Such initiatives can ensure that the most useful open-data ini‐
tiatives receive the most funding.
• Undertaking more rigorous cost/benefit analyses of open-data
initiatives, which would give policymakers and other stakehold‐
ers the means to assess the relative opportunities offered by
projects against their costs and possible risks. Among our case
studies, NOAA and the UK Ordnance Survey both commis‐
sioned cost/benefit studies before launching their projects. This
played a vital role in bolstering support and long-term commit‐
ments from policymakers and government stakeholders.
• Exploring innovative avenues for funding, especially crowd‐
sourcing, which can offer the public (and other interested par‐
ties) an avenue not only for funding initiatives, but also for
establishing and ensuring the sustainability of their priorities.
34 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

4 http://opendataresearch.org/sites/default/files/posts/Common%20Assessment%20Work​
shop%20Report.pdf
Recommendation 9:
Develop a Common Research Agenda to Move Toward
Evidence-Based Open Data Policies and Practices
The most effective avenue to understanding how open data works
and how to achieve maximum positive effect, is through collabora‐
tion. Our knowledge of open data today is in many ways fragmen‐
tary, spread across organizations and individuals who are
themselves scattered across the globe. There is a need for more com‐
munication and pooling of analysis (and resources). To achieve the
potential of open data, we need a common research agenda, based
on a wider evidential foundation. Importantly, this research frame‐
work should integrate a better understanding of impact into its core
agenda. Too often, open data research focuses simply on the best
ways of releasing data, with its effect—positive or negative—being
simply an afterthought.
To achieve this common research agenda, we should do the
following:
• Set up mechanisms for communication and interaction among
various stakeholders (individuals and organizations) currently
working in the field of open data. Such mechanisms could
include annual meetings or conferences, listservs, monthly
hangouts, and other offline and online tools. The goal of these
interactions would be to trade insights and ideas, to share evi‐
dence, and to collaboratively develop best practices. Events like
the Open Data Research Summit within the context of the
International Open Data Conference can provide, for instance,
the impetus toward improved exchange and collaboration
among researchers in this field.
• Build on the taxonomy of impact developed through these 19
case studies and have other researchers test the premises we
identified earlier. In addition, the open-data research commu‐
nity could consider further fine-tuning of the open-data com‐
mon assessment framework4 GovLab developed together with
Web Foundation and others in order to create a standardized
tool for evaluating every stage of the open-data value chain.
VI. Recommendations: Toward a Next Generation Open-Data Roadmap 
| 
35

• Create a directory (perhaps in wiki format) of various assess‐
ment frameworks (in addition to our own), spread across coun‐
tries and sectors. Such a directory would also include a list of
key contacts and organizations, and would help facilitate discus‐
sion by establishing a baseline of sorts toward achieving a com‐
mon research agenda.
Recommendation 10:
Keep Innovating
Open data fuels innovation, but how can we innovate open data? We
need to recognize different forms and models of open data, includ‐
ing big and small data and text-based data, and encourage stake‐
holders to think broadly about what data is and what open really
means. Even while we work to better understand open data and its
effect (for example, through exercises such as this one), we should
foster a culture of proactive experimentation and innovation.
There are many ways to foster such a culture. Here are a few:
• Institutionally, we can look at creating new entities or interme‐
diaries, for example a global open-data innovation lab whose
explicit purpose would be to think outside the box and research
new models of open data that can be tested across sectors,
regions and use cases.
• The need for collaborative research mentioned earlier can also
be institutionally developed into a cross-border and interdisci‐
plinary open-data innovation network. Such a network would
draw on global expertise and ideas.
• Perhaps most important, we need to be open to new ideas and
insights, and always remain in question mode. This report has
outlined several recommendations and suggestions for how to
maximize the value of open data. But we recognize that this is
just a beginning. Our research has raised as many questions as it
has suggested answers.
We end, therefore, with what we believe to be some of the most
important questions we should be asking ourselves about open data:
questions that can help direct future research, but, perhaps most
important, fuel a culture of innovation and flexibility when it comes
to how we think about open data.
36 
| 
Chapter 1: Understanding the Impact of Open Data

Key Remaining Questions
The preceding findings and recommendations for policymakers and
stakeholders in the open-data community are based on the exami‐
nation of 19 case studies of open-data initiatives from around the
world. Though this effort enabled a major step forward in our
understanding of open data and its real and potential impacts, key
questions remain, including the following:
• What are the optimal value propositions (e.g., fighting corrup‐
tion, spurring economic activity, citizens’ right to government
information) to highlight in order to spur open-data activity in
different contexts based on local priorities and needs?
• What are the conditions to scale the effect of open data?
• How can open data initiatives be made sustainable?
• What comparative insights are transferable in a universal
manner?
• What is the optimal internal data infrastructure for enabling
impactful open-data initiatives?
Key Remaining Questions 
| 
37


PART II
Case Studies: Improving
Government
Our research shows that open data is helping to improve the func‐
tioning of government. By making public previously inaccessible
data sources, open data is playing a role in both tackling corruption
through increased transparency and accountability, and enhancing
public service delivery and resource allocation.
The case studies in this section examine:
• The exposure and a reduction of corruption among public offi‐
cials in Brazil;
• The discovery of tax fraud among charities in Canada and sav‐
ings in how development aid is spent in Sweden;
• Procurement improvements in Slovakia; and
• Improved public services in Denmark as a result of greater
accuracy in address data.


CHAPTER 2
Brazil’s Open Budget
Transparency Portal
Making Public How Public Money Is Spent
By Auralice Graft, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew Young
Summary: In 2004, the Brazilian Office of the Comptroller General
(CGU) created the Transparency Portal, a tool that aims to increase
fiscal transparency of the Brazilian Federal Government through
open government budget data. Developed in partnership with the
Federal Data Processing Service, the Transparency Portal relies on
the collaboration of diverse ministries and bodies of the Federal
Public Administration to advance transparency and to offer a tool
that stimulates citizen participation. As the quality and quantity of
data on the portal have improved over the past decade, the Trans‐
parency Portal is now one of the country’s primary anti-corruption
tools, registering an average of 900,000 unique visitors each month.
The project is regarded as one of the most important e-government
initiatives with regard to control over public spending. Local gov‐
ernments throughout Brazil and three other Latin American coun‐
tries have modeled similar financial transparency initiatives after
Brazil’s Transparency Portal.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Tackling Trans‐
parency Corruption and Transparency
Key Takeaways:
• Open data initiatives can help uncover illegal or irresponsible
government spending, engage citizens in anti-corruption cam‐
41

1 Corruption Perceptions Index 2014: Results. Transparency International. http://
www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results
2 Rio de Janeiro metropolitan area profile. Bookings Global Cities Initiative. Accessed
October 13, 2015. http://www.brookings.edu/about/programs/metro/~/media/
455849BC16B24B7CA98FE5C5FDE3C0EF.ashx
3 Barth, Philipp. “The persistence of corruption in Brazilian politics.” DW. May 10, 2014.
http://www.dw.com/en/the-persistence-of-corruption-in-brazilian-politics/a-17974970.
paigns, and lead to meaningful public policy changes that might
not occur without the public outrage created by disclosure.
• Anonymous feedback channels are an important way to supple‐
ment existing government-maintained databases, especially
those focused on corruption. Giving whistleblowers a platform
for sharing information can lead to more comprehensive cor‐
ruption data—although the risk of false positives should not be
overlooked.
• Some information, such as in-depth budgetary data, might
require some level of translation to make it truly accessible and
useful to average citizens in terms of technological availability
and comprehensibility. Additional efforts, of course, must be
made to ensure that any personally identifiable financial infor‐
mation is anonymized before being made public.
Context and Background
Corruption in Brazil
As with many of the countries included in this series, Brazil has long
suffered from corruption. The country is ranked 69 among 175
countries in Transparency International’s 2014 Corruption Percep‐
tions Index, which also reports that the country’s legal system is
“plagued with inefficiencies and corrupt judges.”1 Brazilian elections
are also believed to be infiltrated by corruption and, despite public
outrage, politicians with prior convictions are often voted back to
office. In Rio de Janeiro, for example, Brazil’s third-largest state with
a population of 11.9 million as of 2012,2 “only one single politician
in the Brazilian state of Rio de Janeiro is said to have never fallen
foul of the law,” according to one news report.3 Additionally, a 2009
World Bank and IFC1 Enterprise Survey found that 70 percent of
global and domestic companies viewed corruption as a “major con‐
42 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

4 Cruz, Marcos and Alexandra Lazarow. “Innovation in government: Brazil.” McKinsey &
Company Insights & Publications. September 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
public_sector/innovation_in_government_brazil.
5 “Business Corruption in Brazil.” Business Anti-Corruption Portal. Accessed October
13, 2015. http://www.business-anti-corruption.com/country-profiles/the-americas/brazil/
show-all.aspx.
6 Savarese, Mauricio. “No End in Sight for Brazil’s Petrobras Scandal.” Americas Society /
Council of the Americans. August 5, 2015. http://www.as-coa.org/articles/no-end-sight-
brazil%E2%80%99s-petrobras-scandal.
straint to doing business” in Brazil, while a Federation of the Indus‐
tries of the state of São Paulo investigation found that corruption
cost Brazil almost $40 billion (about 2.3 percent of GDP) in 2008
alone.4
Somewhat paradoxically, Brazil is often cited for its strong legal
framework aimed at limiting corruption, and is considered a role
model among developing countries in terms of its legal and regula‐
tory efforts. While the Penal Code criminalizes the embezzlement of
public funds, extortion, public graft, breach of public duty and brib‐
ery (passive and active), a 2014 anti-bribery law makes companies
liable for acts of corruption committed by their employees. The law
applies to the bribing of domestic and foreign officials, and convic‐
ted companies must pay a fine of up to 20 percent of their gross
annual income and may also face suspension of operations, confis‐
cation of assets, or closure.5
Yet despite these formal mechanisms, corruption has proven deep-
rooted and difficult to eradicate. Recent major scandals include the
Petrobras scandal, which involves money laundering through a net‐
work of political corruption and that investigators believe cost state
oil giant Petrobras more than $2 billion.6 In addition, media head‐
lines have been dominated by the 2005 Mensalao (“big monthly pay‐
ment,” in Portuguese) political bribery scandal, where public funds
were reportedly used to pay monthly bribes and buy votes during
the Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva presidency. Additional scandals are
described in “Major Incidences of Convicted Officials Returning to
Politics in Recent Years” on page 44.
Context and Background 
| 
43

7 http://www.transparency.org/country#BRA
Major Incidences of Convicted Officials Returning to
Politics in Recent Years
Rio de Janeiro’s governor Anthony Garotinho was convicted in
2010 for corruption and establishing a criminal organization. He
was said to head a gang of militias consisting of former police offi‐
cers who extort protection money and organized parallel systems of
justice. In spite of conviction, his prison sentence was reduced to a
community service order and in 2014 he was back in the guberna‐
torial race, briefly enjoying high ratings in the polls before losing.
In São Paulo, former governor Paul Maluf was appointed as mem‐
ber of the Brazilian parliament, despite being known to his fellow
countrymen as “Corrupto, mas faz,” which translates as “Corrupt,
but hands-on.” He is said to have embezzled hundreds of millions
of euros, and, as of 2014, Interpol still had an international warrant
out for his arrest. His name Maluf is also the inspiration for the
newly minted verb “Malufar” which means “to steal from the state.”
Open Data in Brazil
Brazil is a co-founder of the Open Government Partnership, along
with Indonesia, Mexico, Norway, Philippines, South Africa, the Uni‐
ted Kingdom and the United States. The government has committed
itself to actively developing initiatives that encourage citizen partici‐
pation in government, and to using technology to create and pro‐
mote openness. These efforts are led by the National Infrastructure
Open Data (INDA), which aims to establish open data technical
standards (i.e., common formats and machine-readable metadata,
etc.), promote training, and support and encourage government
publication of open data.7
Some of the open data efforts undertaken by the government
include:
• The implementation of Brazil’s Access to Information Law in
2011. This law regulates citizens’ access to federal, state, provin‐
44 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

8 “Brazil: New Access to Information Law becomes effective today.” Article 19. May 16,
2012. https://www.article19.org/resources.php/resource/3208/en/brazil:-new-access-to-
information-law-becomes-effective-today.
9 “New Brazilian Data Portal Dados.Gov.Br—Powered by CKAN.” Open Knowledge Blog.
May 10, 2012. http://blog.okfn.org/2012/05/10/new-brazilian-portal-dados-gov-br-made-
by-citizens/.
10 http://15iacc.org/agenda/agenda-day-4/the-consocial-in-brazil-empowerment-and-
governmental-agenda/
11 Barbassa, Juliana. “Brazil Freedom of Information Law Passed.” The World Post. May
17, 2012. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/05/17/brazil-freedom-of-
information_n_1525131.html.
cial and municipal public documents, as formally guaranteed by
the 1988 Constitution.8
• The Open Data Portal (described further below) was launched
in 2012 to provide citizens with a tool to find and use public
information.9
• A nationwide conference on transparency (CONSOCIAL) was
organized in 2012, involving more than 100,000 Brazilians and
providing for a national platform to debate issues relating to
transparency, citizen participation in public administration, and
the fight against corruption.10
• A Freedom of Information Law was passed in 2012. While the
law has notable advantages—like its applicability to all levels of
government, unlike freedom of information laws in other coun‐
tries—“there is still no set of regulations detailing how citizens
can ask for data, and what municipal, state or federal officials
must do to comply.”11
In fact, the legal basis for these efforts can be dated back to 1988,
when the country’s constitution established the need for “publicity”
of administrative actions as one of its five core principles. The con‐
stitution also provides for direct citizen participation in overseeing
public policies on health, social security and welfare; and freedom of
speech and freedom of the press. A 2000 law on fiscal responsibility
solidified the government’s commitment to openness, mandating
the public availability of key budget documents.
Nonetheless, despite these legal mechanisms to ensure openness,
public access to government data was patchy (at best), and scope for
citizen participation in government oversight was somewhat limited
Context and Background 
| 
45

12 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
for much of Brazil’s recent history. The launch of Brazil’s Transpar‐
ency Portal in 2004 marked the country’s first concrete steps toward
true openness and hopefully, true government accountability.12
Project Description and Inception
Over the course of the 2002 presidential campaign, Luiz Inácio Lula
da Silva (known as “Lula”) ran as an outsider to the political system
and made a number of promises to fight corruption and improve
transparency. Almost immediately after he took office, civil society
groups (and other organizations and even some government agen‐
cies) began putting pressure on him to fulfill those promises.
In 2003, the post of the Comptroller General of Brazil
(Controladoria-Geral da União—CGU) was established; the CGU
was an office close to the presidency and was mandated to be in
charge of transparency. CGU Chief Minister Walder Pires (also
known as the Minister of Control and Transparency) began pushing
for several anti-corruption measures, including one to provide
transparency on federal government spending. His team, headed by
Jorge Hage, was assigned the responsibility for implementing this
last initiative.
One of Hage’s first suggestions was to open data that was already
being compiled by the Ministry of Finance and kept in an Integrated
System of Financial Administration (SIAFI). This system, which was
not accessible to the public, contained fiscal information related to
federal transfers to states and municipalities as well as information
on funds directly received from public resources (for example, pay‐
ments from entities with government contracts). However, the Head
of Treasury at the time, Joaquim Levy, opposed the idea of opening
SIAFI data, arguing that the information was stored in a format and
manner that would be too technical for citizens to properly use or
understand. According to Leodelma de Marilac Felix, then head of
the General Auditing Coordination at the Ministry of Finance,
which was in charge of the SIAFI data, Hage’s desire to open up the
data was otherwise received enthusiastically, and the key issue was
finding a way to make it more accessible and usable for citizens.
46 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

13 GovLab interview with Leodelma de Marilac Felix, Finance and Control Analyst,
Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corruption Prevention and Transpar‐
ency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General, Brazil, August 18, 2015.
14 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
15 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
16 http://www.portaltransparencia.gov.br/noticias/DetalheNoticia.asp?noticia=1 Translated
from Portuguese by Google.
“Most of us involved were very excited. We thought, ‘Great idea,’”
said Felix.13
It was from this need for a more accessible platform that the seeds of
the Transparency Portal were planted. At the time, the CGU did not
have the technical capacity to create such a portal, so it collaborated
with Serpro, a public company linked to the Ministry of Finance, to
develop the platform, which would then be maintained by the CGU.
According to Izabela Corrêa, CGU Head of Transparency
2007-2012, opening up the data and making it publicly available was
a complex process. The data was stored in a wide variety of formats,
and was generally quite inaccessible (even many members of Con‐
gress had not been allowed to access it). In general, its readability
was very poor, and the technical team faced serious challenges in
understanding how the system stored the data.
In June 2003, the CGU set up a working group to study how to
extract and combine the data. This working group, which consisted
of officials from the CGU, the Secretariat of National Treasury, and
the Federal Service of Data Processing, began making some head‐
way, and the result was the Transparency Portal, launched in
November 2004.14 Suggestions provided by citizens via the portal’s
“contact us” link and at subsequent portal events were also adopted.
15 The launch of the portal represented a major milestone in Brazil’s
move toward openness and transparency. As Waldir Pires, former
Minister of Defence, remarked at the time: “With this government
project we take an important step toward full transparency of
accounts, contributing in effect to societal control over the use of
public resources.”16
Project Description and Inception 
| 
47

17 http://www.cgu.gov.br/assuntos/transparencia-publica/portal-da-transparencia Trans‐
lated from Portuguese by Google.
18 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
19 Hage Sobrinh, Jorge. “Brazil’s Transparency Portal Freely Delivers Information to Citi‐
zens.” Transparency & Accountability Initiative. September 19, 2011. http://
www.transparency-initiative.org/news/brazils-transparency-portal-freely-delivers-
information-to-citizens.
Portal Description
According to the CGU website, today the portal is “a channel
through which citizens can monitor the financial implementation of
government programs at the federal level.” The goal is “to increase
the transparency of public management, enabling citizens to track
and monitor how public money is being used.”17 Care has been
taken to make sure the information contained on the portal is easily
accessible to the public, for example without requiring a username
or password. In addition, specialized financial information like
budgets is presented in a way that is easy for laypeople to analyze
and understand. “Many legal and budget-related terms, in particu‐
lar, are very complicated,” says portal coordinator Otávio Moreira de
Castro Neves. “We try to present them in a language and format that
the user will understand.”18
The portal’s organizers have also taken numerous steps to engage
users and spread awareness about the site and how to use it. The site
launch was complemented by TV campaigns and workshops
designed to train citizens, reporters and public officials to use the
portal. In addition, regular workshops and activities were held,
including drawing and essay competitions for adults and children.19
These outreach activities continue to be well attended, and form an
important part of the government’s strategy to engage and involve
users in the portal.
When initially launched, the portal contained a limited amount of
information: data on federal transfers to states and municipalities,
payments to the government, information on public servants. Over
the years, more information has been added, and today five broad
categories of data are published: 1) direct spending by federal gov‐
ernment agencies through contracts and tender processes; 2) all
48 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

financial transfers to states, municipalities and the federal district; 3)
financial transfers to social program benefactors; 4) administrative
spending, including staff salaries, staff travel expenses and per diems
and office expenditures; and 5) information on all government offi‐
cial credit card spending. The final decision on what information to
upload rests with the CGU.
One important component of the portal is a National Debarment
List, which highlights contractors to avoid. The list consolidates in
one place all companies and individual suppliers that have been
sanctioned for acts of corruption or committing fraud, allowing
public officials to exercise some discretion before hiring or granting
public tenders. As of September 2011, the Debarment List held
5,018 debarred entities. While this tool was designed primarily to be
used by public officials, it has also proved useful for private sector
entities. However, this component is not without its flaws. As there
is no public register of beneficial ownership, it does not prevent cor‐
rupt business owners from launching and registering businesses
under new names.
Figure 2-1. The National Debarment List
As of 2010, the portal also includes two new sections dedicated to
information on a couple of major sporting events hosted by Brazil:
the 2014 football World Cup and the 2016 Olympic Games. Given
the large investments in public infrastructure and services involved
in these events, the government opted to make all budgetary infor‐
Project Description and Inception 
| 
49

20 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
21 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
22 Cruz, Marcos and Alexandra Lazarow. “Innovation in government: Brazil.” McKinsey &
Company Insights & Publications. September 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
public_sector/innovation_in_government_brazil.
23 http://www.portaltransparencia.gov.br/noticias/
mation available on each project. Information is organized by host
city and by interest area, such as arenas, airports and security.
The CGU has taken care to include feedback channels to involve
citizens and allow them to help improve the site’s contents. Every
section on the portal includes a survey form or contact link, and
there are various ways for whistleblowers to report misconduct or
crimes (their identities remain protected). Citizens have used these
feedback loops to make suggestions about content on numerous
occasions. For instance, citizens and reporters suggested in 2008
that the portal should allow downloads of raw data on administra‐
tive agreements between governments and contracted private enti‐
ties.20 Similarly, various civil society groups suggested in 2006 that
users should be able to search by nonprofit organizations receiving
government funds. Both these suggestions were later implemented.21
Today, data on the portal is updated daily or monthly.22
Impact
Brazil’s Transparency Portal has been widely hailed as a successful
example of using open data to reduce corruption and control public
spending. Over the years, it has received numerous awards and
forms of recognition, including the 2007 Brazilian IT and Govern‐
ment award (e-Democracy category). In addition, it was presented
as a Best Practice case study at the 2008 Meeting of the UN Conven‐
tion against Corruption in Bali; the 2009 Transparency Initiative
Conference on International Aid in the Netherlands; and the 2009
Third European Meeting on Anti-Corruption in Brussels.23
The portal’s impact can be measured in several ways:
50 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

24 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
25 “OECD Integrity Review of Brazil: Managing Risks for a Cleaner Public Service.”
OECD Publishing. 2012. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/gover
nance/brazil-oecd-integrity-review_9789264119321-en.
26 “Credit happy Brazilian minister admits mistake and resigns.” Merco Press. February 3,
2008. http://en.mercopress.com/2008/02/03/credit-happy-brazilian-minister-admits-
mistake-and-resigns.
Traffic
Immediately after its inception, in 2004, the portal registered an
average of 410,000 monthly visits from around 10,000 unique visi‐
tors. By 2012, the number of unique monthly users rose to 336,512;
today, the site receives over 900,000 unique visitors per month.24,25
The dramatic rise in traffic is a clear indication of the site’s relevance
and importance in Brazilian public life.
Policy Changes: Official Credit Card Usage
Several changes in the way government operates have directly resul‐
ted from information contained on the portal. For example, after the
CGU began publishing data on government credit card use, the
media began publishing articles on questionable transactions, and
this led to a series of scandals. In one instance, the reports led to the
resignation of Matilde Ribeiro, Minister of Promotion of Racial
Equality.26
Perhaps most importantly, the publication of credit card data led
almost immediately to a 25 percent reduction in spending by offi‐
cials on government cards. In addition, the scandals and rising pub‐
lic awareness led to several changes in credit card policy, including
legislation banning the use of cards for payment of travel or per
diems; and restrictions on cash withdrawals using official cards
(except in very particular situations, for example when an official
Impact 
| 
51

27 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
28 “In 2008, corporate cards yielded CPI’s.” Acervo. January 5, 2013. http://acervo.esta
dao.com.br/noticias/acervo,em-2008-cartoes-corporativos-renderam-cpis,8813,0.htm.
29 Cruz, Marcos and Alexandra Lazarow. “Innovation in government: Brazil.” McKinsey &
Company Insights & Publications. September 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
public_sector/innovation_in_government_brazil.
30 Cruz, Marcos and Alexandra Lazarow. “Innovation in government: Brazil.” McKinsey &
Company Insights & Publications. September 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
public_sector/innovation_in_government_brazil.
31 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
was located deep in the Amazon, where credit cards are not often
accepted).27,28
The Transparency Portal has become a tremendous resource for
journalists and media, as well as activist groups investigating cor‐
ruption. These developments further expand the portal’s impact. For
example, citizen-group São Paulo Perl Mongers created “Where did
my money go?”—a website that presents the portal’s data on govern‐
ment spending in a simplified, heavily visual format.29 Meanwhile,
the group Open Accounts has been providing Brazilian media with
training on how to use the portal, helping them publish stories that
“often generate public outrage and a swift official response,” such as
in 2011, when a story on some government officials’ improper credit
card use led to an internal investigation. A government minister
eventually was forced to repay $30,000 for “inappropriately charging
personal expenses, including vacation travel, to the government.”30
Local and Cross-Border Dissemination
As with many of the case studies in this report, the success of Brazil’s
federal portal has a spillover effect on other governments. In Brazil
itself, pressure grew for other levels of government to publish budg‐
etary data, and in 2009, a law was passed requiring that local gov‐
ernments have their own versions of the portal. Today, a large part
of CGU’s work consists of helping local governments (smaller towns
and cities in particular) implement this directive.31
52 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

32 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
33 Cruz, Marcos and Alexandra Lazarow. “Innovation in government: Brazil.” McKinsey &
Company Insights & Publications. September 2012. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
public_sector/innovation_in_government_brazil.
Brazil’s portal has also had reverberations across Latin America.
Many countries expressed interest in the portal early on, and since
its inception, at least three—Mexico, Chile and El Salvador—have
implemented similar projects, often with assistance from Brazil’s
CGU.32 Mexico’s open data portal (www.catalogo.datos.gob.mx) was
launched in October 2013. El Salvador created a similar Fiscal
Transparency website (www.transparenciafiscal.gob.sv), and Chile
has pushed for greater transparency and openness through its own
portal (http://datos.gob.cl/). Overall, Brazil’s model—and in particu‐
lar its success—has had a broad impact on Latin America, providing
powerful evidence of open data’s ability to effect real social, eco‐
nomic and political change.
Changing Climate for Corruption
The Transparency Portal’s launch and evolution have taken place
within a broader trend of rising intolerance for corruption in Brazil.
The 2012 convictions in the country’s Mensalao scandal, and prose‐
cutors’ willingness to target top officials in the Petrobras scandal,
both indicate a possible end to a climate of impunity for corrupt
officials. This welcome trend cannot, of course, be directly attrib‐
uted to the Transparency Portal; it is the result of a number of
changes in Brazilian society and politics. But the launch and wide‐
spread use of the portal can be considered both a result of Brazil’s
movement toward greater transparency, as well as one of the
dynamic forces continuing to nudge the movement forward today.
The portal also enables internal corruption monitoring that may not
have been possible, or as swift, as before. In 2008 CGU created a
team of analysts, The Public Spending Observatory, to proactively
comb through the portal (and other government databases) to iden‐
tify “suspicious patterns.”33 By creating a team dedicated to identify‐
ing corruption, the CGU has ensured that the information housed
Impact 
| 
53

34 “The cost of corruption in Brazil.” Transparency International. March 13, 2015. http://
www.transparency.org/news/feature/the_cost_of_corruption_in_brazil
35 “Combating corruption in Brazil depends on agility in ritual procedure, says Brazilian
General Comptroller Jorge Hage in interview with UNODC.” United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. February 9, 2011. https://www.unodc.org/lpo-brazil/en/imprensa/
entrevistas/2011/02/09-combate-a-corrupcao-no-brasil-depende-de-maior-agilidade-no-
rito-processual-afirma-jorge-hage-em-entrevista-ao-unodc.html
on the portal will be put to use, whether or not the general public
maintains their current level of interest in accessing the portal’s data.
In March of 2015, Transparency International stated that Brazil “has
made good progress in the past three years passing key anti-
corruption laws” (while noting that enforcement of these laws have
been limited and that corruption is still a problem).34 Or, as CGU
Chief Minister Jorge Hage put it in an interview four years earlier,
“Here in Brazil, despite much that has been done in recent years,
much remains to be done.”35
Figure 2-2. The Brazilian Transparency Portal’s Section Dedicated to
the 2014 World Cup
Challenges
Despite its generally positive reaction and relative success, the
Transparency Portal, like many projects included in this report, has
and continues to face some hurdles to further growth. Three chal‐
lenges, in particular, are worth examining more closely:
54 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

36 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
37 GovLab interview with Leodelma de Marilac Felix, Finance and Control Analyst,
Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corruption Prevention and Transpar‐
ency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General, Brazil, August 18, 2015.
Interoperability and Data Standards
As with any new platform, the Transparency Portal deals with sev‐
eral “legacy” issues concerning the way information has historically
been collected, stored and disseminated in Brazil. One of its most
acute challenges has been to assemble data from various govern‐
ment agencies and present that data in a cohesive, unified manner.
This applies most acutely to legacy data, but even for more recent
information, CGU officials have had to negotiate with officials and
agencies over the manner in which their data is collected and
shared. Dealing with such a variety of data formats and systems not
only slows down the process, it also increases the risk of introducing
errors. As Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open
Government and Transparency, puts it: “As we put data up online
we are constantly under the risk of human error, or under the risk of
delays. So we have to keep a tight grip on this.”36
Leodelma de Marilac Felix, Finance and Control Analyst at the
Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, provides some
examples of the types of errors CGU must work to prevent. He cites
the (hypothetical) example of a bank deciding to change a particular
data field (e.g., the way a date is stored) in its data sets, but doing so
without informing CGU. According to Felix, it can take CGU up to
four months to identify the problem.37
Such issues are not insurmountable, nor are they unique to the
Transparency Portal. For example, CGU is now looking into chang‐
ing its application rules for how information is received; this could
help standardize data. Still, CGU is unlikely to be able to ever fully
resolve the issue, and as with most data systems and projects, some
degree of error-checking and validation will always be required.
However, making the data accessible increases the likelihood that
data errors will be corrected, as more people will be using the data,
and using it more often, than before. “These are not huge chal‐
lenges. We can overcome them,” says Izabela Corrêa, former Coor‐
Challenges 
| 
55

38 GovLab Interview with Izabela Corrêa, former Coordinator for Promotion of Ethics,
Transparency and Integrity, at the Directorate for Corruption Prevention, 2007 to 2012.
Interview on August 21, 2015.
39 “Brazilian Supreme Court Upholds the Mandatory Disclosure of Salary Information
for Public Officials.” Transparency Audit Network. May 2015. http://www.transparen
cyaudit.net/news/2015-05/brazilian-supreme-court-upholds-mandatory-disclosure-
salary-information-public
dinator for the Promotion of Ethics, Transparency and Integrity, at
Brazil’s Directorate for Corruption Prevention. “But they are always
there. Always.”38
Privacy
The need to protect privacy has been a constant, and delicate, issue
for the portal. Portal officials report that a large number of the com‐
plaints they receive pertain to privacy issues. For instance, more
than 100 legal actions were placed against the portal for the publica‐
tion of public servant salaries; the issue made its way to Brazil’s
supreme court, which eventually ruled in favor of the portal.39 Portal
officials also receive a deluge of emails from public servants whose
data shows up on Google; even when such officials realize they can’t
be removed from the portal, they request portal staff to help them
remove their names from Google.
One major issue pertained to the publication of data sets related to
government real estate. This information was put up because public
servant occupation of real estate is subject to numerous rules—
related, for instance, to officials’ actual titles and posting—and the
portal wanted to provide citizens with information that would help
them oversee that the rules were being followed. However, the prob‐
lem was that publishing real estate data inadvertently revealed the
addresses of public officials, which not only violated their privacy
but also potentially threatened their security. CGU eventually dealt
with this issue by publishing two separate data sets—one with
names, and the other with addresses.
Scaling
A final challenge relates to the scaling and wider dissemination of
the platform. As mentioned previously, a 2009 law required various
regional governments in Brazil to implement a version of the portal.
There have been many hiccups in the implementation of this law. A
56 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

40 http://www.inesc.org.br/institutional/know-inesc
41 Beghin, Nathalie, Carmela Zigona, Gisele Craveiro, Marcelo Tavares. “Open Data in
Brazil: budget transparency and people’s rights.” Open Data Research Network. 2014.
http://www.opendataresearch.org/sites/default/files/publications/INESC%20-%20ODDC
%20Poster_Inesc_Brazil%20(1).pdf.
2011 study by the Instituto de Estudos Socioeconômicos (INESC), a
nonprofit focused on “strengthening civil society and enhancing
social participation in public policymaking,”40 looked at whether
local governments were actually opening up data in accordance with
the law and with open data principles. While the study found that
the data provided was mostly complete, it was often not primary
(meaning that the data was not directly sourced by the government)
and frequently not provided in a timely manner.
The study also found various accessibility problems, including the
fact that very few websites actually offered machine-readable data in
nonproprietary formats. The overall conclusion of the report was
that subnational governments need to work considerably to improve
the open data process and make more information available in a
citizen-friendly format.41
“These are not huge challenges. We can overcome them. But they
are always there. Always.”
—Izabela Corrêa, Brazil’s Directorate for Corruption Preven‐
tion
Looking Forward
Since its launch in 2004, the portal has been regularly updated and
improved. In general, new features have been added to the site at
least once a year. Since 2010, many of the most important data sets,
such as those on income and spending, are updated on a daily basis.
Other data—including that on money transfers between different
levels of government—is updated weekly.
As new data is added, the portal team has made design improve‐
ments to the user interface to make the data easier to interpret. At
the moment, CGU officials are working on an entirely new version
of the site. This updated version will not only have a fresh design,
but it will also have a new structure and be based on a more
advanced underlying technical framework that will, among other
things, provide for new ways of visualizing data. CGU is also build‐
Looking Forward 
| 
57

42 GovLab interview with Otávio Moreira de Castro Neves, Coordinator for Open Gov‐
ernment and Transparency, Transparency and Public Oversight Directorate, Corrup‐
tion Prevention and Transparency Secretariat, Office of the Comptroller General,
Brazil. August 6, 2015.
43 http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users/brazil/
ing a new data warehouse, which will be launched sometime in
2016.42
In order to surmount Brazil’s low Internet penetration rates, which
stand at around 53 percent43 and limit the portal’s accessibility, CGU
piloted a project to set up information kiosks run by state-owned
banks. However, since the costs of this project were deemed too
high, CGU is now focusing on overall strategies to bridge the digital
divide in Brazil, and is working with various government and non‐
governmental partners to achieve this goal.
These various changes and improvements are likely to enhance the
Transparency Portal’s offerings and reach in coming years, building
on its initial successes and playing a role in Brazil’s ongoing battle
against corruption. Of course the portal is but one of many tools in
Brazil’s civic toolbox. But it is an important example of the role that
open data—and, more generally, government transparency—can
play in transforming political, economic and social life.
58 
| 
Chapter 2: Brazil’s Open Budget Transparency Portal

CHAPTER 3
Openaid in Sweden
Enhanced Transparency and Accountability
in Development Cooperation
By Ali Clare, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew Young
Summary: Sweden has a long tradition of openness, democracy and
public access to information. In 2010, a reform agenda for Swedish
development cooperation (“Openaid”) was launched by the govern‐
ment to bring increased transparency to donor funding through
opportunities created by technological advances. Part of this reform
agenda included an Aid Transparency Guarantee that required pub‐
lic actors to make available all documentation and public informa‐
tion related to international development cooperation. This spurred
the development of the openaid.se site by the Swedish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the Swedish International Development Coop‐
eration Agency (Sida) in April 2011. The data hub, built on open
government data, visualizes when, to whom and why aid funding
was paid out and what the results were. The reforms are seen to be
an important force for enhanced transparency and accountability in
development cooperation at an international level and increased
cooperation and involvement of more actors in Swedish develop‐
ment policy.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Tackling Corrup‐
tion and Transparency
59

1 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
Key Takeaways:
• Open data can be used to increase the transparency and
accountability of distinct groups simultaneously. While tradi‐
tionally viewed as a means for holding government to account,
openaid.se demonstrates the capability of holding, for example,
both donors and recipients accountable for aid expenditures.
The openaid.se platform also illustrates how the Swedish princi‐
ple of open access to information can be updated in the age of
digitization.
• International standards—such as the International Aid Trans‐
parency Initiative (IATI)—can help governments and other
bodies releasing data do so in a manner that enables the highest
levels of comparability and broad use. Metadata—in this case,
project documentation and geocoding—can further improve
the usefulness of standardized data sets.
• A lack of clearly defined, high-level political commitments to
publishing open data and enabling reuse can create major, but
not insurmountable challenges. While Sweden now boasts such
high-level commitments, throughout much of openaid.se’s
development, no such policy existed.
Context and Background
Transparency and access to public information has a long-standing
tradition in Sweden. The government was the first country in the
world to enact a bill enforcing the principle of public access to infor‐
mation (“offentlighetsprincipen”) in 1776. This made it a require‐
ment for all authorities to publish documents unless ad hoc
legislation restricted their access.1 An unimpeded view by the public
and media into governmental activities is still prioritized today in
Bill 2009/10:175 on Public Administration for Democracy, Participa‐
60 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

2 “Open Government Partnership—Sweden’s 2012 National Action Plan—Self-
Assessment Report.” http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/OGP%20Swe
den’s%20Self-assessment%20Report%20-%20FINAL.pdf; “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan
2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/es/
files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
3 “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan 2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://
www.opengovpartnership.org/es/files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
4 Sweden is ranked sixth out of 68 aid donors by Publish What You Fund, third among
bilateral donors and in the top-performing group in the 2014 Aid Transparency Index.
“Sweden and Sida ranks high in aid transparency index.” Sida. October 16, 2014. http://
www.sida.se/English/press/current-topics-archive/2014/sweden-and-sida-ranks-high-in-
aid-transparency-index/
5 “A transparency guarantee in Swedish development assistance.” Regeringskansliet.
2010. http://www.regeringen.se/contentassets/38eb101044b640b6b25677b714ed302e/a-
transparency-guarantee-in-swedish-development-assistance
6 “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan 2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://
www.opengovpartnership.org/es/files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
7 “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan 2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://
www.opengovpartnership.org/es/files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
tion and Growth.2 Underlying this legislation is the belief that more
accessible information provides a better basis for decisions and lim‐
its the scope for corruption and misuse of resources.3 Sweden’s com‐
mitment to openness and public scrutiny often places it near the top
of transparency rankings.4
As part of its commitment to public access, Sweden launched an Aid
Transparency Guarantee in 2010. Pursuant to the guarantee, all pub‐
lic actors that are allocated funds under international development
cooperation are required to publish related information and docu‐
mentation in an open format online.5 This includes an explanation
of when, to whom and why money was made available, and what
results have been achieved.6 In theory, such information enables rel‐
evant stakeholders to follow the whole chain of aid from overall
decisions to implementation and monitoring.7
The manifestation of the Transparency Guarantee is the Openaid
website (www.openaid.se) jointly launched in April 2011 by the
Swedish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (Sida). The openaid.se data hub
has several policy objectives: to promote active transparency, pro‐
vide a better knowledge base for planning, steering and making
decisions about Swedish aid allocations and aid policy priorities,
increase participation in Swedish development cooperation,
Context and Background 
| 
61

8 GovLab interview with Hanna Hellquist, former State Secretary for International
Development, Sweden, September 30, 2015.
9 GovLab interview with Hanna Hellquist, former State Secretary for International
Development, Sweden, September 30, 2015.
10 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/sweden
11 “The Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation.” OECD. July 2012.
http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/Busan%20partnership.pdf
12 “The Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation.” OECD. http://
www.oecd.org/development/effectiveness/busanpartnership.htm
13 http://www.openaid.se/about/
strengthen the preconditions for true accountability, restrict the
space for corruption, duplication and inefficient use of resources
and promote innovative thinking across different sectors related to
development.8
The reform of aid development cooperation was inspired in part by
commitments that had been made in the international fora, includ‐
ing IATI and the Paris Declaration, Accra Agenda for Action.9 The
platform was also a core component of Sweden’s Open Government
Partnership (OGP) National Action Plan, signed in September 2011.
The Action Plan was focused on enabling the government to stay on
track with planned proposals, as well as increasing the amount of
input from civil society and committing to publish standardized
data in the IATI format.10 Sweden’s commitment to reform in this
sector also led the government to sign the Busan Partnership Agree‐
ment for Effective Development Cooperation, which sets time-
bound commitments to fully publish aid information to a common,
open standard.11 It also offers a framework for “continued dialogue
and efforts to enhance the effectiveness of development coopera‐
tion” through information access on aid flows and activities in both
donor and partner countries.12
Product Description and Inception
First launched in April 2011, openaid.se is a Web-based information
service about Swedish aid built on open government data.13 The site
enables the public, aid actors and other stakeholders to follow when,
to whom and for what purposes aid funds have been disbursed, and
62 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

14 http://www.openaid.se/about/
15 http://www.openaid.se/about/
16 http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/updates/by-country/sweden/making-openaid-se/
17 Peterson, Karl. “The making of Openaid.se.” Publish What You Fund. September 23,
2014. http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/updates/by-country/sweden/making-openaid-
se/
18 GovLab Interview with Carl Elmstam, Transparency Manager, Sida, October 8, 2015.
19 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
20 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
21 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
with what results.14 The interface of the platform is extremely simple
and intuitive, enabling anyone to use it.
The website is built using public data at the activity level of individ‐
ual aid contributions from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) and
other authorities and ministries that handle aid funds.15 The data is
visualized as treemaps and graphs showing how and where aid is
distributed by recipient type.16 Depending on the choice of filter,
users also have the option of viewing a list of all activities, ranging
from one to several thousand for each recipient.17 These activities
can then be downloaded in an Excel compatible comma separated
values (CSV) file and used to develop new applications.18
Other functionalities include visibility of the entire aid chain and
activity structure displaying the link between, for example, a policy
decision and a disbursement.19 A contact form is also available on
the site in Swedish and English, allowing for citizens to directly
share feedback and concerns with Sida. There is also an interface for
mobile devices with customized interaction and design and a mobile
app.20 One of the key features for this mobile app is a whistle-blower
function, enabling users to report suspicions of fraud directly.21
Product Description and Inception 
| 
63

22 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
23 GovLab interview with Karl Peterson, Project Manager, Aid Transparency, Sida, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
24 Peterson, Karl. “The making of Openaid.se.” Publish What You Fund. September 23,
2014. http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/updates/by-country/sweden/making-openaid-
se/
25 GovLab Interview with Carl Elmstam, Transparency Manager, Sida, October 8, 2015.
Underlying Data
The data available on the website is published according to the IATI
standard on a monthly basis, making it easier to analyze and com‐
pare data sets from various sources. This commitment to a common
standard of data is part of Sweden’s move toward implementing the
Busan Outcome Document, which aims to have the full range of
information publicly available in one open aid standard.22
Figure 3-1. Sweden’s Openaid.se
Over 80 percent of the data is currently available in a machine-
readable format, with fully automated data collection each night.23
This includes all data provided by the 16 CSOs that have framework
agreements with Sida.24 The first version of the site published over
100,000 documents at the activity level that could be sorted by dis‐
bursing agency or implementing partner.25 Since the launch, there
have been over 15 additional updates, and the government has con‐
stantly sought to improve the quality of the data—including a focus
64 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

26 GovLab Interview. Karl Peterson. September 23, 2015; IRM, Sweden: Östling, Alina.
“Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.” Open Govern‐
ment Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/sweden/progress-
report/report
27 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
28 “Open Government Partnership—Sweden’s 2012 National Action Plan—Self-
Assessment Report.” http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/OGP%20Swe
den’s%20Self-assessment%20Report%20-%20FINAL.pdf; “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan
2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/es/
files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
29 Peterson, Karl. “The making of Openaid.se.” Publish What You Fund. September 23,
2014. http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/updates/by-country/sweden/making-openaid-
se/
30 “Open Government Partnership—Sweden’s 2012 National Action Plan—Self-
Assessment Report.” http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/OGP%20Swe
den’s%20Self-assessment%20Report%20-%20FINAL.pdf; “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan
2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/es/
files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
on publishing results and evaluations data.26 There has also been a
focus on adding new types of data in a form that can be aggregated.
By the end of 2015, Sweden aimed to have 95 percent data compati‐
bility with the IATI standard.27 There is also an ongoing integration
between the CSO database and openaid.se that will eventually enable
the government to show more detailed data and results for CSO
activities funded by Sida.28
Open Format
Openaid.se is built as an open source WordPress site enabling other
aid donors and recipients to make their own aid tracker installations
using their own data and themes.29 This has huge potential value in
terms of spreading transparency across the aid ecosystem as a
whole. Sida has also enhanced the use of the openaid.se open format
(API) so that consumers are able to reuse the data for third-party
online API collections. Because of Sweden’s public access principles,
this data belongs to the public domain by default. However, some
restrictions are applied to sensitive or classified materials that are fil‐
tered out or materials where copyright is owned by someone else. In
the case of the latter, the data is still available on openaid.se; however,
it may not be republished without permission from the original
copyright holder.30
Product Description and Inception 
| 
65

31 “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan 2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://
www.opengovpartnership.org/es/files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
32 http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014
33 Sweden was ranked “Very Good” with an indicator score of 83.27 percent, a significant
increase over its 2013 ranking. http://ati.publishwhatyoufund.org/donor/sweden/Sweden
34 Faust, Jörg. “Donor Transparency and Aid Allocation.” German Development Institute
Discussion Paper. December 2011. http://edoc.vifapol.de/opus/volltexte/2012/3552/pdf/
DP_12.2011.pdf
35 Rådelius, Elias. “White paper, part 4: Keys to success and the road ahead.” Openaid.se
Blog. May 28, 2015. http://www.openaid.se/blog/part-4-keys-to-success-and-the-road-
ahead/
Impact
Transparency is crucial to drive improvements in the way develop‐
ment cooperation is delivered internationally, especially for gener‐
ous aid donors like Sweden who allocate 1 percent of their estimated
gross national income (GNI) toward development assistance.31 In
terms of impact, Sweden is playing a leading role among major
donors through its innovative openaid.se platform which has
received wide acclaim for publishing information that goes well
beyond traditional reporting to include project documentation, geo‐
coding and aid results data. These efforts have borne fruit—Sweden
is one of the highest-ranked countries in the Transparency Interna‐
tional’s 2014 Corruption Perception Index32 and is one of the
highest-ranked donors in the Publish What You Fund 2014 Aid
Transparency Index.33 Impact can be gauged according to increased
donor transparency and accountability with follow-on effects to data
quality as well as funding and management efficiencies:
Increased Transparency and Accountability
By opening access to the chain of aid delivery and expenditures, citi‐
zens and other key stakeholders have been able to hold the Swedish
government to account and aid processes have become more effi‐
cient through improved service delivery, reduced opportunities for
diversion and therefore corruption.34 The increased transparency
has also enabled donor recipients to plan and manage the resources
coming into their country more effectively in settings where multi‐
ple actors are active, thereby decreasing the incentive to provide
inferior services.35 As such, the openaid.se platform has received
66 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

36 Rådelius, Elias. “White paper, part 4: Keys to success and the road ahead.” Openaid.se
Blog. May 28, 2015. http://www.openaid.se/blog/part-4-keys-to-success-and-the-road-
ahead/
37 Rådelius, Elias. “White paper, part 4: Keys to success and the road ahead.” Openaid.se
Blog. May 28, 2015. http://www.openaid.se/blog/part-4-keys-to-success-and-the-road-
ahead/
38 GovLab interview with Hanna Hellquist, Former Secretary of State, Sweden, September
30, 2015.
39 Rådelius, Elias. “Implementing aid transparency in Sweden—white paper, part 1: Why
do we care about aid transparency and IATI?” Openaid.se Blog. May 25, 2015. http://
www.openaid.se/blog/implementing-aid-transparency-in-sweden-white-paper-part-1-
why-do-we-care-about-aid-transparency-and-iati/
40 GovLab interview with Hanna Hellquist, former State Secretary for International
Development, Sweden, September 30, 2015.
strong political and management support and organization involve‐
ment at all levels.36
By opening aid data to public scrutiny, the demand on the govern‐
ment to improve and maintain high-quality data has also increased.
According to Carl Elmstam, the transparency manager at Sida, “The
process of implementing transparency and the IATI standard drives
quality as it has forced us to take a hard look at our own data and
learn from it.”37 According to Hanna Hellquist, former State Secre‐
tary for International Development, opening the data also enabled
the government to fully understand the underlying problems and
challenges that were built into Swedish aid reporting and IT sys‐
tems.38 This understanding, coupled with external pressure, has
forced Sida to constantly improve reporting processes and amelio‐
rate any data flaws.39
This sort of transparency has the potential to radically decrease the
incentive structure for corruption by enabling external stakeholders
to pinpoint problems and support their demands for reform. It has
also enabled aid to be targeted more specifically and in some cases,
it has led to funds being earmarked for improving recipient-country
governance, including projects that combat corruption.40
This would not have been possible without active engagement and
strategic communication both internally with employees and exter‐
nally with the public and recipient countries. Internally, the MFA
and Sida started to design the site before any formal decisions had
been made. To push the decision through, they held regular meet‐
ings with different actors within the government to address objec‐
Impact 
| 
67

41 http://www.government.se/about-the-website/psi-data/
42 GovLab Interview. Carl Elmstam. September 23, 2015. http://www.openaid.se/blog/
part-4-keys-to-success-and-the-road-ahead/
43 Rådelius, Elias. “White paper, part 2: How to get started publishing using the IATI stan‐
dard as a bilateral donor agency” Openaid.se Blog. May 26, 2015. http://www.open
aid.se/blog/part-2-how-to-get-started-publishing-using-the-iati-standard-as-a-bilateral-
donor-agency/
44 Hanna Hellquist, GovLab interview with author. 30 September 2015.
tions and link the initiative to broader commitments made in other
parts of government, such as the PSI Directive, which calls for pub‐
lic authorities to release their data for reuse at no charge.41 In doing
so, staffs were reminded of the importance of good and reliable data,
not only for the organization but also for global development coop‐
eration and partner countries.42 Externally, Sida worked to increase
general awareness of the values of transparency, open data and data
quality through communication and facilitation of reporting and
data conversion for the CSOs they support.43 According to Hellquist,
the opening of data has facilitated a cultural and attitude shift in the
aid administration (MFA and Sida) regarding its relation to the pub‐
lic.44
Improved Management Efficiency
The openaid.se platform has also shown substantial impact in terms
of having more efficient reporting mechanisms, including improved
information management systems and reduced costs for duplicate
manual reporting of aid information, particularly at the country
office level. These improved reporting mechanisms, in part spurred
by the commitment to make their data available in the IATI stan‐
dard, have enabled the government to save around US$7 million
annually. It has also had follow-on benefits in terms of aid effective‐
ness, as the government has been able to analyze and compare data
sets from partner country budget classifications, enabling stakehold‐
ers to see where aid is supporting their own priorities and increasing
accountability. According to conservative estimates from IATI,
approximately US$18 billion in aid is lost annually through corrup‐
tion. Cost-benefit analyses show that greater aid transparency has
the potential to reduce such corruption and improve predictability
by US$1.6 billion annually.
68 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

45 “Guest blog from OpenAid—Sweden embraces the transparency agenda.” AidInfo. July,
21, 2010. http://www.aidinfo.org/guest-blog-from-openaid-sweden-embraces-the-
transparency-agenda.html
46 http://openaid.um.dk/en/
Enabling Collaboration with Beneficiaries
Making aid information open is just the start. For transparency to be
transformational, beneficiaries must actually use the aid data. One
impact of the newly freed data on the openaid.se platform has been
the ability of Sida to tap into the knowledge and creativity of a wide
variety of stakeholders in Swedish society to come up with new
ideas for tools, activities and functionalities for the site.45
It has also facilitated substantial and complex forms of collaboration
with CSOs including PWYF, in pursuit of increased aid transpar‐
ency. This has shifted the power dynamics between NGOs and the
government, bringing the practice of the organization nearer to its
principles of participation, accountability and empowerment. In this
respect, Sida’s efforts have also served to improve other donors’ and
partner countries’ development efforts by acting as a model for
countries like Denmark, which recently launched a similar platform
—Danida Open Aid.46 While it is difficult to assess whether the idea
was explicitly emulated, the fact that openaid.se uses an open source
Wordpress site removes the need for other countries to start from
scratch when building their own initiatives.
Challenges
Sweden has made huge strides toward more open, inclusive,
accountable and responsive development through the openaid.se
site, driving both political debate and opinion about aid priorities.
Development coordination and spending between donors and part‐
ner countries have also improved, enabling greater impact with
finite resources. Nonetheless, the government still faces numerous
challenges in making the data easily comprehensible with the right
tools to facilitate understanding, analysis and use by general audien‐
Challenges 
| 
69

47 Rådelius, Elias. “Implementing aid transparency in Sweden—white paper, part 1: Why
do we care about aid transparency and IATI?” Openaid.se Blog. May 25, 2015. http://
www.openaid.se/blog/implementing-aid-transparency-in-sweden-white-paper-part-1-
why-do-we-care-about-aid-transparency-and-iati/
48 Bjelkeman-Pettersson, Thomas. “OpenAid.se, Swedish Development Aid Transpar‐
ency.” Open for Change, April 4, 2011. http://openforchange.info/contant/openaidse-
swedish-development-aid-transparency.
49 GovLab Interview with Carl Elmstam, Transparency Manager, Sida, October 8, 2015.
50 Bjelkeman-Pettersson, Thomas. “OpenAid.se, Swedish Development Aid Transpar‐
ency.” Open for Change, April 4, 2011. http://openforchange.info/contant/openaidse-
swedish-development-aid-transparency.
51 Dietrich, Daniel. “Open Data in Development Aid.” European Public Sector Informa‐
tion Platform Topic Report No. 2012 / 02. March 2012. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/
sites/default/files/Final%20TR%20Open%20Aid%20Data.pdf
52 GovLab interview with Karl Peterson, Project Manager, Aid Transparency, Sida, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
ces.47 If Sweden is to continue along the path to aid transparency on
which it has set itself, several areas should be addressed:
Structural Challenges
Openaid.se is a proprietary system with a funder-centric view.48 This
means that there are often challenges in accessing and aggregating
information and activities from recipient systems, given the software
was tailor-made for Sweden.49 Accordingly, it is often difficult to get
a true understanding of the impact of development aid and much of
the data on the platform hasn’t been reused, for example, for build‐
ing applications.50 To overcome these structural problems, open‐
aid.se could create novel ways to combine data with other systems
through the integration of new tools. Easily comparable data would
lead to better impact analyses to understand the effects of aid, to
more targeted and efficient innovations, more openness and
accountability.51
Data Privacy
The active and instant nature of publishing aid data has exposed pri‐
vacy concerns among Sida staff, despite the fact that the information
was publicly available before the development of openaid.se.52 This
has raised the need to think about how transparent the site should
be and what tools could be implemented to mitigate apprehensions
about data privacy, including the use of unofficial notes and com‐
70 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

53 GovLab interview with Karl Peterson, Project Manager, Aid Transparency, Sida, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
54 Östling, Alina. “Independent Reporting Mechanism Sweden: Progress Report 2012-13.”
Open Government Partnership. 2014. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/
sweden/progress-report/report
55 Rådelius, Elias. “White paper, part 3: Challenges” Openaid.se Blog. May 27, 2015.
http://www.openaid.se/blog/part-3-challenges/
56 Månsson, Christer, et al. “From Bureaucracy to Innovation: An introduction to How to
Work with Open Data,” March 2013. http://luii.lu.se/new-report-on-open-data/
ments only available to staff.53 Staff buy-in is essential for the contin‐
ued growth of the site. As such, Sida should continue to prioritize
communication to staff about the values of transparency and
accountability while remaining responsive to their concerns for data
privacy.
Usability and Citizen Engagement
When Sida first launched openaid.se in 2011, user experience wasn’t
a key priority. As such, the site offers limited opportunities for citi‐
zen engagement or interaction. The only feedback channel is an
opinion button which people use for reporting bugs.54
Usability is also a concern, and project titles often contain cryptic
terms that are interpretable only to those who work internally on
projects, making them difficult to understand for a wider audience.55
As such, there is a need to raise awareness among staff to ensure the
accessibility of data with outside users.
Data Licensing
During the initial development and deployment of openaid.se, Swe‐
den’s data policy environment presented numerous challenges. Until
May 2015, there were no specific regulations regarding open data
and open data sources.56 The PSI Directive helped to fill this juridi‐
cal vacuum in relation to the reuse of data within Sweden. Prior to
the PSI Directive’s introduction, however, openaid.se had neither
high-level policy support nor clearly defined licensing guidelines or
standards. As Sweden continues to take steps to enshrine the legal
right to access and reuse public data, early challenges related to
clear, legal data licensing structures for openaid.se data should con‐
tinue to wane.
Challenges 
| 
71

57 Heacock, Rebekah and David Sasaki, “ICT4 Transparency in Sub-Saharan Africa. In
Increasing Transparency and Fighting Corruption through ICT Empowering People and
Communities,” The Swedish Program for ICT in Developing Regions (SPIDER) ICT4D
Series No. 3, 2010. Stockholm: Stockholm University. IRM, Sweden: Progress Report
2012-13. http://spidercenter.org/polopoly_fs/1.163640.1390315885!/menu/standard/file/
Spider%20ICT4D%20series%203%20Increasing%20transparency%20and%20fighting
%20corruption%20through%20ICT.pdf
58 FLOW is a “system to collect, manage, analyze, and display geographically-referenced
monitoring and evaluation data,” mainly used for water points to date. https://
www.waterforpeople.org/what-we-do
59 Akvo Really Simple Reporting is a “web and Android-based system that makes it easy
for development aid teams to bring complex networks of projects online and instantly
share progress with everyone involved and interested.” http://akvo.org/products/rsr/
60 Bjelkeman-Pettersson, Thomas. “OpenAid.se, Swedish Development Aid Transpar‐
ency.” Open for Change, April 4, 2011. http://openforchange.info/contant/openaidse-
swedish-development-aid-transparency.
Looking Forward
In order to address the above challenges and continue to expand
upon the success of the openaid.se hub in terms of meaningfully
increasing transparency, Sweden should consider implementation of
more forward-planning data and increase the functionality of the
site.
Usability and functionality
While Sweden has taken significant steps to improve the usability
and functionality of the openaid.se platform since its launch in 2011,
much of the information is still too complex for lay citizens to digest
in a meaningful way. Furthermore, given the funder-centric nature
of the site, the opportunities for citizens to engage and interact are
limited. To continue to improve upon the functionality, more intu‐
itive data visualization and storytelling should be employed to
present the large amounts of information available in a way that
illustrates the impact of aid funding for the public.57 Tools developed
by other organizations could be integrated into the current system
to enable better field monitoring and evaluation. For example, tools
like Water for People’s Field Level Observations Watch (FLOW)58 or
distributed publishing tools like Akvo Really Simple Reporting
(RSR)59 could be extremely effective.60
72 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

61 GovLab Interview with Carl Elmstam, Transparency Manager, Sida, October 8, 2015.
62 GovLab Interview with Carl Elmstam, Transparency Manager, Sida, October 8, 2015.
63 http://ati.publishwhatyoufund.org/donor/sweden/
64 “Sweden’s OGP Action Plan 2014-2016.” Open Government Partnership. http://
www.opengovpartnership.org/es/files/swedens-ogp-action-plan-2014-2016-pdf/download
65 “Why Transparency Matters Part 5: Where Do We Go Next?” InterAction. January 10,
2014. http://www.interaction.org/blog/why-transparency-matters-part-5-where-do-we-go-
next
66 GovLab interview with Karl Peterson, Project Manager, Aid Transparency, Sida, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
In terms of the distributed publishing and feedback functions, Sida
should ensure they remain responsive to the data privacy concerns
of staff and potentially launch functionalities to relieve tensions
such as unofficial comments and notes that are only internally avail‐
able.61
Forward-Planning Data
The publication of more and more detailed forward-planning data
by Sweden would have a huge impact on recipient countries.62 This
could include links to project documents as well as results and con‐
ditions data for all planned activities in IATI files to promote access
and use by others.63 This would enable greater local ownership over
development results and have follow-on effects for increased
accountability and governance. In its Open Government Partner‐
ship Action Plan, Sweden posits that this aid transparency will also
enable full use of the available financial resources for poverty eradi‐
cation and facilitate better division of labor.64 According to Saman‐
tha Custer of AidData, “Equipping CSOs and government ministries
to use this in program planning, advocacy and research is also
essential to sustaining practice.”65
Openaid.se should also improve the publication and use of monitor‐
ing and performance data. Currently this data is only available in
PDF format. In the future, having this data available in the IATI
standard would enable the information to be integrated into an eco‐
system of tools for field monitoring and evaluation, leading to a
more streamlined flow.66
Looking Forward 
| 
73

67 Heacock, Rebekah and David Sasaki, “ICT4 Transparency in Sub-Saharan Africa. In
Increasing Transparency and Fighting Corruption through ICT Empowering People and
Communities,” The Swedish Program for ICT in Developing Regions (SPIDER) ICT4D
Series No. 3, 2010. Stockholm: Stockholm University. IRM, Sweden: Progress Report
2012-13. http://spidercenter.org/polopoly_fs/1.163640.1390315885!/menu/standard/file/
Spider%20ICT4D%20series%203%20Increasing%20transparency%20and%20fighting
%20corruption%20through%20ICT.pdf
68 Dietrich, Daniel. “Open Data in Development Aid.” European Public Sector Informa‐
tion Platform Topic Report No. 2012 / 02. March 2012. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/
sites/default/files/Final%20TR%20Open%20Aid%20Data.pdf
69 Dietrich, Daniel. “Open Data in Development Aid.” European Public Sector Informa‐
tion Platform Topic Report No. 2012 / 02. March 2012. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/
sites/default/files/Final%20TR%20Open%20Aid%20Data.pdf
Collaboration with Other Partners
Greater collaboration with other donors and local partnerships in
recipient countries for the development and rollout of the openaid.se
platform would be hugely beneficial and overcome some of the
structural challenges the site currently faces. To that end, Sweden
could work with organizations in developing countries to combine
with other recipient systems for contextualized applications to
enhance transparency and accountability—i.e., applications to
increase citizen access to governmental aid budgets and recipients.67
The Swedish legal barriers to reuse the data must also be addressed
to create greater impacts. Reuse has the potential to enable interes‐
ted citizens to create innovative new means of combining, display‐
ing and otherwise reusing data, which has a huge potential for
rethinking and reconfiguring the way aid is currently implemented.
68 Efforts at various levels must harmonize their efforts in order to
avoid fragmentation.69 In order to avoid fragmentation, though, it is
necessary for actors at various levels—from grassroots to ministries
—to harmonize their efforts while not cutting off creative potential.
Sweden’s efforts to open aid data to the public have made major
strides toward increasing transparency and accountability in the
field. Given the fact that much of this effort occurred during a time
when Sweden lacked the type of high-level policy commitments
toward enabling the reuse of open data such as those found in many
other countries is particularly notable. By focusing on the usability
of the aid data hub, deploying more forward-thinking data and bet‐
ter collaborating with partnering stakeholders, openaid.se’s impacts
should continue to grow and broaden in the coming years.
74 
| 
Chapter 3: Openaid in Sweden

CHAPTER 4
Open Contracting and
Procurement in Slovakia
Establishing Trust in Government
Through Open Data
By Ali Clare, David Sangokoya, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: Corruption has been a long-standing problem in Slova‐
kia, especially in the area of public procurement. In January 2011,
Slovakia introduced a regime of unprecedented openness, requiring
that all documents related to public procurement (including receipts
and contracts) be published online, and making the validity of pub‐
lic contracts contingent on their publication. These reforms appear
to have had a dramatic effect on corruption and, equally important
for the business climate, perceptions of corruption. More generally,
they are among the chief pillars of an effort—within Slovakia and
the European Union at large—to reform governance and make it
more responsive, transparent and efficient.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Tackling Corrup‐
tion and Transparency
Key Takeaways:
• Slovakia’s 2011 legislation to enforce greater transparency in
public procurement stands as one of “the most dramatic trans‐
75

1 Sipos, Gabriel. “Once Riddled with Corruption, Slovakia Sets a New Standard for
Transparency.” Open Society Foundations. June 2, 2015. http://www.opensocietyfounda
tions.org/voices/once-riddled-corruption-slovakia-sets-new-standard-transparency.
2 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
parency reforms in the world.”1 It improves on an earlier Free‐
dom of Information (FOI) law and builds on successful
transparency efforts at the local level, in particular in two
municipalities. The success of the national law suggests the
extent to which national and regional policies can be positively
influenced by small-scale, local efforts.
• Among the most important aspects of Slovakia’s law is a move
away from transparency by demand to transparency by default.
Earlier FOI policies required citizens to actively request infor‐
mation related to procurement. Under the current law, all infor‐
mation is required to be made open by default, making it far
easier for citizens and watchdog groups to identify suspicious
patterns or other indications of corruption.
• Over 2 million contracts have now been posted online in Slova‐
kia. Because these contracts are available by default to anyone
with an Internet connection (approximately 83 percent of the
population), procurement and more generally corruption over‐
sight is subject to a more “diffuse knowledge”2 base. Earlier, a
select group of highly motivated activists, journalists or politi‐
cians were generally involved in identifying instances of corrup‐
tion.
• For all the citizenry’s newfound ability to identify corruption,
Slovakia still lags when it comes to punishing corruption and
enforcing accountability. This is a powerful reminder that more
information and greater transparency on their own are not suf‐
ficient to change societies and political cultures. Greater open‐
ness of data and information must be accompanied by
institutional reform and political motivation.
• Despite the impact of the legislation on making information on
contracts public, this information must still be converted into
“real” open data (e.g., made machine readable and accessible) in
order to increase access and engage citizens, journalists and civil
society. Efforts from civil society groups (particularly Transpar‐
76 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

3 Sipos, Gabriel. “Once Riddled with Corruption, Slovakia Sets a New Standard for
Transparency.” Open Society Foundations. June 2, 2015. http://www.opensocietyfounda
tions.org/voices/once-riddled-corruption-slovakia-sets-new-standard-transparency.
4 Kicina qtd. in Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in
the Slovak Republic.” Sunlight Foundation. Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013.
http://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-
slovak-republic/.
5 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
6 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
ency International Slovakia and Fair Play Alliance) are still
emerging to standardize, scrape and add functionality to the
existing government data to make it truly open. This, too, points
to the importance of collaboration between the government and
civil society.
Context and Background
Slovakia has long suffered from a problem with corruption. For
years it was consistently ranked by Transparency International as
one of the most corrupt countries in the European Union.3 Accord‐
ing to a 2010 survey conducted by the Slovakian Business Alliance
(SBA), corruption was identified by businesspeople and entrepre‐
neurs as the number one barrier to doing business in the country.4
Corruption in public procurement was one of the areas identified as
most problematic. Robert Kičina, executive director of the SBA, put
it this way: “Public procurement didn’t have a sound name in Slova‐
kia. Many people and enterprises think it is a very corrupt area.
Maybe these suspicions make many entrepreneurs refuse to partici‐
pate in tenders.”5
Early efforts to address corruption included a Freedom of Informa‐
tion Act (FOIA) adopted in 2000. According to the Transparency
International Slovakia, this act “became the cornerstone of ... gov‐
ernment transparency.”6 However, despite its good intentions, the
act had several shortcomings. Most prominent among these was the
fact that the act sought to create transparency by demand. Citizens
Context and Background 
| 
77

7 Cienski, Jan. “Slovaks Protest over Corruption Claims” Financial Times. February 10,
2012. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
0/6fc1858c-48cd-11e1-954a-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3flczWk​uI.
8 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
could access information related to government contracts and
projects, but that information was not made public by default—citi‐
zens had to proactively request it. Among other problems, this con‐
cept of transparency by demand made it difficult for public
watchdogs and journalists to identify or notice conflicts of interest
and other indications of corruption; in general, corruption could
only be identified when individuals or groups already had an inkling
of its existence and therefore actively request related information. In
this respect, the 2011 reforms represented a clear paradigm shift,
toward a notion of transparency by default.
The following list includes a narrative description of some promi‐
nent cases that highlighted the nation’s corruption problem, despite
the FOIA Act of 2000 and other measures. While many of these
were focused on corruption in public procurement, they were in
many ways symptomatic of a more general crisis of governance in
Slovakia. Indeed, in late 2011 and early 2012, the country was engul‐
fed by large-scale street demonstrations against the government. In
an article on these protests from February 2012, The Financial Times
described Slovaks as “angered” and “discontent with official crony‐
ism and corruption.”7
Contract Type: Construction8
Scandal: In 2007 the Slovakian Ministry of Construction and
Regional Development published a tender request for construc‐
tion services totaling €119.5 million, by only posting a hard
copy on a small notice board in the hallway inside the Ministry
building. As this was the inside of the Ministry building, which
is not open to the public, only enterprises with pre-existing rela‐
tionships with the Ministry were able to see the tender request.
A firm that was known to have close ties to Ján Slota, the head
of the ruling Slovak National Party, ultimately won the contract.
Response: More than a year after the fact, the procedure came
to light and was invalidated by the Slovak Office of Public Pro‐
curement.
78 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

9 Furnas, Alexander. “In Slovakia, Government Contracts Are Published Online.” Sun‐
light Foundation. http://www.opengovguide.com/country-examples/in-slovakia-
government-contracts-are-published-online/.
Contract Type: Legal and PR Services9
Scandal: Also in 2007, the Ministry of Construction and
Regional Development used a notice board to obtain legal and
PR services. Only one consortium consisting of companies
clearly connected to one of the government parties joined the
tender. As a result, the state was contracted to pay €120 million
over the course of nine years. A single agency logo’s price of
€85,000 is especially indicative of the level of government over‐
payment.
Response: After the contract was signed, nearly a year passed
before a media outlet discovered and reported the corruption.
At that point, Fair Play Alliance worked with media partners to
request and analyze not only the contract but individual pay‐
ments, invoices and other relevant documents. Given the
transparency-by-demand ethos of the time, watchdogs had to
rely on the courts to honor such FOI requests.
In the end, public pressure stoked by media and NGOs, and an
investigative report prepared by Fair Play Alliance for the Euro‐
pean Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the European Commission
forced the Minister of Development to cancel the contract in
2009.
Up to €12 million was already paid but more than €100 million
could be saved thanks to those efforts. The case has also been
investigated by the police and will be tried in Slovak court
(though no one involved has been punished as of late 2015).
Product Description and Inception
The genesis of the national legislation under examination here came
in response to developments at the European and regional level.
First, within Slovakia, two municipalities provided important inspi‐
ration for national transparency efforts. In 2005, a group of politi‐
cians in the southwestern town of Šaľa grew frustrated by what they
perceived as a lack of transparency in the mayor’s office. In
response, they began publishing public contracts related to munici‐
pal business on their website. When the group gained power in city
Product Description and Inception 
| 
79

10 Mečiar qtd. in Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until
Published Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts
Achieved in Slovakia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transpar
ency.sk/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
11 Transparency International Slovakia: Draft of anti-corruption reforms for the city of Mar‐
tin qtd. in Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Pub‐
lished Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in
Slovakia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
12 Furnas, Alexander. “In Slovakia, Government Contracts Are Published Online.” Sun‐
light Foundation. http://www.opengovguide.com/country-examples/in-slovakia-
government-contracts-are-published-online/.
council elections a year later, they expanded these efforts, and Šaľa
became the first municipality in Slovakia to publish all public con‐
tracts and receipts online.10 At around the same time, in the north‐
ern city of Martin, Mayor Andrej Hrnčiar, citing Šaľa as inspiration,
similarly began publishing contracts and receipts online.
These efforts proved tremendously popular, and both mayors were
subsequently re-elected. They provided an indication to the nation
at large of what was possible through proactive transparency efforts.
In late 2010, when the Slovakian justice minister spoke to Parlia‐
ment as it debated the proposed new transparency rules, she paid
tribute to the groundwork laid by these two municipalities: “I think
it is important to remind us that we are drawing inspiration from
municipalities, who showed us that having contracts, orders and
receipts published online does not cause any problems; on the con‐
trary, it raises the trustworthiness of town leadership and also
ensures effectiveness and accountability when dealing with munici‐
pality resources.”11
The legislation, known as Act No. 546/2010 Coll. supplementing Act
No. 40/1964, came into effect on January 1, 2011, following an
update to the EU Procurement Directives that included reforms
such as reverse auction mechanisms for procurement and guidelines
for centralized contract repositories.12 Unlike the existing Slovak
FOI law, it was focused on increasing active government transpar‐
ency and openness. Under the new law, the government was
required to publish almost all contracts, receipts and orders online,
regardless of whether a citizen had made an active request for infor‐
mation. Importantly, government contracts were not considered
80 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

13 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
14 GovLab interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August
4, 2015.
15 GovLab interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August
4, 2015.
16 GovLab interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August
4, 2015.
valid unless they were published within three months of being
signed.13
“[T]his country needs the public sector and those in power [to] be
checked by 5 million citizens of Slovakia.”
—Miroslav Beblavy, Slovak National Council
Inevitably, there was some pushback and opposition to the law.
Some of the most vocal complaints came from mayors at the munic‐
ipal level who were worried about meeting the law’s various require‐
ments, especially with their often quite limited technical and
financial resources.14 Mayors were particularly concerned that the
law required all receipts and orders in their municipalities to be
made available on the Central Registry, a requirement which they
saw as especially onerous. In January 2012, this requirement was
repealed and now only metadata needs to be posted on the registry.15
Following the enactment of the law, a wide variety of documents was
made available online. These were published both at the national
level, at Central Register of Contracts (or CRZ: https://
www.crz.gov.sk/) and at the municipal level. The documents pub‐
lished included virtually all procurement information, including
judicial verdicts, contracts and receipts related to public entities like
village schools, prisons, ministries and various other entities. Per‐
haps surprisingly, the technical and financial issues were minor and
the entire process was completed within two months.16
Nonetheless, concerns do remain about the scope of documents
included on the portal. For example, some 20 exemptions exist to
the documents that need to be posted, and these include documents
related to employment contracts, national security, family life, and
unemployment benefits. In addition, in response to concerns raised
Product Description and Inception 
| 
81

17 Kenny, Charles. “Learning from Slovakia’s Experience of Contract Publication.” Center
for Global Development. May 21, 2015, http://www.cgdev.org/blog/learning-slovakias-
experience-contract-publication.
by state companies about the need to protect commercial interests
(for example, pricing in contract documents), the exemptions also
cover certain commercial information. According to Charles Kenny,
the exemptions to publication have mushroomed since the portal’s
launch. In addition, a study by Transparency International found
that out of 1,100 state-owned enterprise and municipality contracts
included in the study, almost one-fifth weren’t published in their
entirety.17
In addition, one major limitation of the register is that it only pub‐
lishes data but does not include the tools necessary to analyze that
data. In response to this shortcoming, Slovak, a consortium of civil
society groups, launched a new site (http://www.otvorenezmluvy.sk),
built on the Central Register data that was searchable and offered a
range of analytical tools. Contracts are now analyzed and uploaded
each night.
Figure 4-1. Screenshot of Central Register
Despite these (and other) shortcomings, Slovakia’s law is now recog‐
nized as one of the most ambitious and proactive approaches to
transparency legislation in existence. Gabriel Šipoš of Transparency
International Slovakia has, for example, included it among “the
82 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

18 Sipos, Gabriel. “Once Riddled with Corruption, Slovakia Sets a New Standard for
Transparency.” Open Society Foundations. June 2, 2015. Accessed July 14, 2015. http://
www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/once-riddled-corruption-slovakia-sets-new-
standard-transparency.
19 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
20 To arrive at this number, a professional polling company was employed to undertake
personal surveys with at least 1,000 people in 2012 (out of a country of 5 million) and
their demographics were recorded (age, education and region). A follow up survey was
undertaken early this year which showed that annual use is around 8 percent. GovLab
interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August 4,
tan2015.
most dramatic transparency reforms in the world.”18 Despite initial
hesitations among some businessmen (concerned about publishing
sensitive commercial information) and politicians (who feared a
new, digital bureaucracy), support has grown since the law’s incep‐
tion. As Miroslav Beblavý, a leading politician, has argued:
“Unfortunately, this country needs the public sector and those in
power [to] be checked by 5 million citizens of Slovakia.”19
Impact
The results of Slovakia’s transparency legislation have been striking,
affecting a wide range of beneficiaries. Impact can be gauged
according to four categories: engagement and use, corruption and
perceptions of corruption, citizen awareness and oversight, and
regional diffusion.
Intended Beneficiaries
Average Citizens
• Legal framework for more efficient and transparent use of tax‐
payer money
• Annual use of the platform is at 8 percent of the population, fol‐
lowing a reported 11 percent in the first year.20
Impact 
| 
83

21 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
22 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
23 “Doing Business in Slovak Republic.” Doing Business - World Bank Group. 2015.
Accessed July 14, 2015. http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/
slovakia#dealing-with-construction-permits.
24 Kicina qtd. in Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in
the Slovak Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfounda
tion.com/blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
• 90,000 “heavy users,” who have checked at least five public
documents21
Business Community and Entrepreneurs
• Business associations (including the U.S. Chamber of Com‐
merce in Slovakia) were largely supportive of the new legisla‐
tion.22
• Legislation is aimed at addressing Slovakia’s difficult business
climate: the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business list places Slo‐
vakia in the bottom 100 for four key indicators.23 Prior to the
law’s enactment, corruption was identified by businesspeople as
the number one barrier to doing business in the country.24
Media and Watchdog Groups
• Media seen as among biggest supporters and beneficiaries of
new law
• 25 percent increase in stories on procurement in mainstream
media
• Increase in variety and source of “tips” received by journalists as
average citizens can now identify instances of possible corrup‐
tion
• Overall increase in number of NGOs and scope of work under‐
taken by watchdog groups as a result of the legislation
84 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

25 GovLab interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August
4, 2015.
26 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
27 Transparency International Slovakia. Face-to-face omnibus poll. February 3, 2015. Raw
data.
Engagement and Use
Several indicators point to significant use by citizens, journalists and
others of both the central register (CRZ) and documents posted at
the municipal level. These include:
• Contracts Published: Between 2011 and 2014, over 780,000
contracts were published in an open, machine-readable format
on the CRZ.25 A further 1.2 million were published by munici‐
pal authorities. The largest number of contracts was published
by Všeobecná zdravotná poisťovňa, the main state health
insurer, followed by RTVS, the national broadcaster, and Nár‐
odná diaľničná spoločnosť, the state highway operator.26 About
one-quarter of the contracts were for amounts higher than
1,000 euros, while 3 percent were for contracts over 100,000
euros.
Citizen Use and Access of Portal: In the years preceding the pas‐
sage of the new transparency legislation, fewer than 5 percent of citi‐
zens used FOI laws to request information from public agencies.
According to surveys conducted by Transparency International Slo‐
vakia, 11 percent of the population accessed the portal in its first
year of existence, followed by an average of 8 percent of the popula‐
tion in the following years.27 Together with otvorenezmluvy.sk, an
unofficial open contracts portal run by Transparency International
Slovakia and the Fair Play Alliance, the official CRZ portal attracts
approximately 54,000 visits a month. Significantly, this figure has
increased by a third since 2012, which suggests that citizen aware‐
ness and use of the portal data is gaining momentum.
Impact 
| 
85

28 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
29 Peer review input from Maria Zuffova, Slovak Governance Institute, November 29,
2015.
Figure 4-2. otvorenezmluvy.sk main page
A fuller picture of citizen use can be determined from Google Ana‐
lytics data, provided by Transparency International Slovakia.28
Although the average visitor to the site spends under two minutes
on the site (1m44s), 2 percent of sessions (or 170,000 visitors) spend
more than 10 minutes. In addition, 20 percent of visitors are return‐
ing ones, indicating the possible existence of a committed group of
transparency watchdog groups and individuals. However, Maria
Zuffova, a researcher at the Slovak Governance Institute argues that
the high level of returning visitors each month could actually point
to a high number of individuals working in public institutions visit‐
ing the site in an official capacity, such as to upload the contracts
and receipts each month.29
Corruption and Perceptions of Corruption
Corruption is notoriously difficult to measure. By its very nature, it
is hidden, and so challenging to capture. Nonetheless, a few indica‐
tors point to the positive impact of the law. These include:
• In the 2014 Corruption Perceptions Index published by Trans‐
parency International, Slovakia increased its ranking by six
86 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

30 GovLab interview with Gabriel Sipos, Director of Transparency International, August
4, 2015.
31 “Transparency in Public Procurement Boosts Anti-Corruption Monitoring in Slova‐
kia.” European Research Centre for Anti-Corruption and State-Building. September 2,
2013. http://www.againstcorruption.eu/articles/transparency-in-public-procurement-
boosts-anti-corruption-monitoring-in-slovakia/.
places, to 54. This represented a jump of 12 places since 2011,
making Slovakia one of the most improved countries over that
period.
• Transparency International’s index relies on perceptions of cor‐
ruption. But some more objective indicators also suggest the
law’s impact. For example, while only 2 percent of tenders were
conducted electronically prior to the law, almost half are now
done that way. In addition to increasing transparency, this has
also led to more competitive bidding—an average of one addi‐
tional bidder per contract, which in turn decreases the contract
price by around 2-3 percent.30
• The competitiveness of bidding on public contracts can be con‐
sidered a proxy for corruption. Between 2010 and 2014, the
average number of bidders on public procurement contracts
more than doubled in Slovakia—from 1.6 companies to 3.7
companies.
• The European Research Centre for Anti-Corruption and State
Building (ERCAS), citing studies conducted by the Sunlight
Foundation, concluded in 2013 that “overall, the Slovakian case
supports the idea that transparency may be necessary, but not
sufficient, to fight corruption effectively.” The ERCAS identifies
areas of progress as a result of the new legislation, but also cites
compliance and implementation (subjects we discuss below) as
areas of remaining concern.31
Citizen Awareness and Oversight
Making available information on procurement is only a first—if
important—step. The impact of Slovakia’s reforms will ultimately be
determined by the extent to which citizen and civil society groups
use that information to enforce accountability on their leaders. In
this regard, early indications are encouraging. Media reporting on
procurement has increased substantially since the passage of
Impact 
| 
87

32 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
33 GovLab Interview with Eva Vozárová, Web & IT Lead, Fair-Play Alliance, June 23,
2015.
34 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
reforms (by 25 percent over the last four years, according to one
report32), and Slovakia has also witnessed a noticeable increase in
activity by watchdog groups and NGOs that work to limit corrup‐
tion. As Eva Vozárová from the Fair Play Alliance notes: “Accessing
contracts has become a normal source for journalists and civil soci‐
ety groups.”33
The transition away from a transparency-by-demand approach to
transparency by default has had a particularly powerful effect on the
way citizens and watchdog groups identify instances of corruption.
Previously, corruption had to be proactively identified through FOI
requests, often by individuals or groups who had a certain amount
of pre-existing knowledge. Under the new system, however, corrup‐
tion can be more “passively” identified, for example by citizens who
happen to notice apparent irregularities while perusing contracts
online. This has led to a far greater number of tips, often passed on
by ordinary citizens to journalists, who in turn investigate and call
for accountability.
Overall, there has been a move toward what one report calls a more
“diffuse knowledge”34—a greater number of actors, from a greater
diversity of backgrounds, is involved in policing corruption. This
diffusion of oversight, away from a select group of corruption fight‐
ers to the citizenry at large, is perhaps one of the most important
impacts of Slovakia’s 2011 transparency reforms.
Regional Diffusion
As with many of the case studies examined in this series, the success
of this particular open data effort is also indicated by its regional
impact. Slovakia’s transparency reforms have been widely hailed as
models for Europe and beyond. While it is difficult to assess
whether an idea is being explicitly emulated, or if an idea’s time has
88 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

35 “Supervizor.” Supervizor - Commission for the Prevention of Corruption. 2011.
Accessed July 14, 2015. https://www.kpk-rs.si/en/project-transparency/supervizor-73.
36 Del Monte, Davide, Ernesto Belisario, Andrea Menapace, Guido Romeo, and Lorenzo
Segato. “Impact of Open Government on Public Sector Modernization Policies.” Trans‐
parency International Italia. 2014. http://www.eupan.eu/files/repository/
20141215142852_RomeDG_-_14_-
_Impact_of_Open_Government_on_PS_modernization_policies.pdf
37 Coldewey, Devin. “Slovenia Launches Supervizor, An Official Public Web App For
Monitoring Public Spending.” TechCrunch. August 23, 2011. http://techcrunch.com/
2011/08/23/slovenia-launches-supervizor-an-official-public-web-app-for-monitoring-
public-spending/.
simply arrived, many of the specific steps included in those reforms
are occurring in neighboring states:
• In August 2011, Slovenia passed legislation making it manda‐
tory to publish certain types of procurement contracts. Accord‐
ing to the Slovenian Government Commission for Prevention
of Corruption, this legislation was, as in Slovakia, a direct result
of political frustration with corruption, particularly at the level
of government contracts and tenders. Moreover, such frustra‐
tion had been legitimized in 2010 by a government analysis of
Public Payments Administration data that revealed high levels
of corruption.
The outcome of this legislation was a portal called Supervizor,
which provides information on the business transactions of
public sector bodies, including legislative, judicial and executive
entities; community-level agencies; public institutes and more.
The project was developed by the Commission for the Preven‐
tion of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia and partners in
the Slovenian Ministry of Finance, the Public Payments Admin‐
istration of the Republic of Slovenia and the Agency of the
Republic of Slovenia for Public Legal Records and Related Serv‐
ices.35 The portal at present contains data going back to 2003
(just prior to Slovenia’s joining the EU) and indicates various
types of information, including that on contracting parties and
larger recipients of funds. Data is available in graph or printout
form for specified time periods.36 Its content has been described
by one reporter as “a breath of fresh air.”37
Impact 
| 
89

38 “Úvodem.” Informační Systémo Veřejných Zakázkách. 2013. Accessed July 14, 2015.
http://www.isvz.cz/ISVZ/Podpora/ISVZ.aspx.
39 “Policy Statement of The Government of The Czech Republic.” Government of The
Czech Republic. February 14, 2014. http://www.vlada.cz/en/media-centrum/dulezite-
dokumenty/policy-statement-of-the-government-of-the-czech-republic-116171/.
Figure 4-3. Supervizor main page
• In 2015, the Czech Republic passed a similar amendment to its
Act on Public Contracts, as well as a Decree on Publication of
Notifications, which is believed to be based, at least in part, on
the Slovak law. These laws define new guidelines for state con‐
tract tender auctions, and all signed contracts for a certain por‐
tion of responsible subcontractors must be released to the
public. Contract information is now required to be published
on the nation’s procurement data portal, Věstník Veřejných
Zakázek.38 The Government of the Czech Republic has identi‐
fied “the computerization of invoices in the state sector and the
transparent disclosure of expenditure paid from taxpayers’
money, including small-scale contracts” as among its key priori‐
ties. 39
Challenges
Slovakia has travelled a great distance in its efforts to increase trans‐
parency, reduce corruption and improve governance. The reforms it
has undertaken are a striking example of how more open and acces‐
sible information can have powerful societal, economic and political
effects.
90 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

40 Sipos, Gabriel. “Once Riddled with Corruption, Slovakia Sets a New Standard for
Transparency.” Open Society Foundations. June 2, 2015. Accessed July 14, 2015. http://
www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/once-riddled-corruption-slovakia-sets-new-
standard-transparency.
41 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
42 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
Nonetheless, the nation’s transition to a more open and transparent
society is still underway, the reforms themselves remain a work in
progress, and much work remains to be done. If Slovakia is to con‐
tinue along the path it has set itself, several challenges need to be
overcome. The following three are among the most important:
Data Quality
For all the amount of information on public procurement available
(over 2 million contracts have now been published), the quality of
that information remains a concern. According to a survey, approxi‐
mately 10 percent of published contracts in Slovakia have at least
one piece of key information missing.40 Another study found that a
quarter of contracts had a “subject” missing, 12 percent were miss‐
ing price-related information, and in 4 percent of contracts the
name of the counterparty was redacted.41 Civil society groups in Slo‐
vakia complain that they spend an inordinate amount of time and
resources cleaning data, often posting it on their own sites or unoffi‐
cial portals; the public’s interests would be better served by directing
those efforts at analyzing documents and identifying questionable
transactions.
The public’s ability to search and analyze contracts is also limited by
an absence of metadata and inter-linking between different data‐
bases (for example, databases containing tender notices and invoices
and receipts related to that tender). Furthermore, amendments to
contracts are often published in isolation, without linkages to the
original contract, making it difficult to understand the full context
or history of a particular procurement process.42
Challenges 
| 
91

43 GovLab Interview with Eva Vozárová, Web & IT Lead, Fair-Play Alliance, June 23,
2015.
44 GovLab Interview with Eva Vozárová, Web & IT Lead, Fair-Play Alliance, June 23,
2015.
45 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
46 Sipos, Gabriel. “Once Riddled with Corruption, Slovakia Sets a New Standard for
Transparency.” Open Society Foundations. June 2, 2015. Accessed July 14, 2015. http://
www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/once-riddled-corruption-slovakia-sets-new-
standard-transparency.
Civil society has played a vital role in transforming public data on
procurement into open data that is machine readable and accessible
for public consumption. As Eva Vozárová and many journalists
involved in open data during the past decade have noted, even when
government data is published, it often is not available in usable for‐
mats. In other words, the data is still not fully open: It is dispersed
across various websites, not available for download, and limited in
searchability or standardization (that would enable, for instance,
cross-database comparisons).43
The otvorenezmluvy.sk portal mentioned above, run by Transpar‐
ency International and the Fair Play Alliance, plays a vital role in
supplementing this government data. Its administrators scrape data
from government registers and add functionality, including full-text
search, basic analytics and the ability to red-flag possible errors or
problematic contracts.44 Transparency International Slovakia’s Open
Procurement Portal similarly builds on the available public procure‐
ment data and “visualizes procurement expenditures by procurers,
suppliers, sectors and regions, as well as provides downloadable
structured procurement data in bulk.”45 These added functionalities
allow for both organizations to conduct broader analyses of govern‐
ment data across key variables.
Cost (and Perceptions of Cost)
When the legislation was being debated, one of the chief concerns
was the potential cost of the reforms. Smaller municipalities in par‐
ticular were afraid of what some termed a new “digital bureauc‐
racy.”46 The concerns were primarily related to human costs, as the
financial costs of building and maintaining the contracts portal (and
92 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

47 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
48 Sipos, Gabriel, Samuel Spac, and Martin Kollarik. “Not in Force Until Published
Online: What the Radical Transparency Regime of Public Contracts Achieved in Slova‐
kia.” Transparency International Slovakia. 2015. http://transparency.sk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/05/Open-Contracts.pdf.
other associated sites and technology) have been negligible: a mere
EUR 20,000 to set it up and an additional EUR 3,000 to maintain it,
according to the estimation of one involved technician (another
EUR 4,500 were spent to update the portal over the first four years).
47
In fact, according to a study conducted by Transparency Interna‐
tional Slovakia, the human and administrative costs have not proven
unduly burdensome for most municipalities.48 Admittedly, in some
cases, particularly in those regions with outdated software or hard‐
ware, it has been something of a challenge to upload and maintain
records of all contracts. In addition, certain institutions (e.g., ceme‐
teries, dormitories and organizations involved in the supply of
water) have, for various reasons, found it harder to comply with the
legislation. The authorities have responded in many cases by
increasing the number of exemptions under the law, allowing those
for whom compliance has proven particularly burdensome to avoid
uploading certain records.
In some cases, exemptions have been and should continue to be
granted to certain types of organizations. However, these should be
granted cautiously and judiciously, since, as described above, there is
concern about an excess of exemptions having been granted since
the law’s inception.
Enforcement and Accountability (The Human Factor)
Slovakia’s law has in many respects been exemplary in the way it
emphasizes transparency. Repeatedly, journalists and civil society
groups have been able to use the law to shine light on cases of cor‐
ruption that would probably have remained hidden before the new
legislation.
Challenges 
| 
93

49 Furnas, Alexander. “Transparency Case Study: Public Procurement in the Slovak
Republic.” Sunlight Foundation Blog. August 12, 2013. http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/08/12/case-study-public-procurement-in-the-slovak-republic/.
50 HES Data Quality Team. “The HES Processing Cycle and Data Quality.” Health and
Social Care Information Centre, 2013. http://www.hscic.gov.uk​/article/1825/The-
processing-cycle-and-HES-data-quality
Yet paradoxically, Slovakia is also illustrative of another key princi‐
ple: that transparency on its own is not enough. Media organizations
and watchdog groups have consistently made the point that, even
when instances of corruption are brought to public attention, they
often go unpunished. The strengthening of transparency has not
been accompanied by a similar increase in enforcement or institu‐
tional capacity to enforce accountability. As Peter Kunder, from the
Slovakian Fair Play Alliance, notes:
One lesson that we learned from publishing data ... is that it is criti‐
cal and totally important to have the state publish the data but it is
only one part of the success. The second part is that other institu‐
tions in the society and other aspects in the society need to work—
judiciary, police and public pressure—and that is nowadays a big‐
ger problem in Slovakia than the publishing of information.49
Looking Forward
In order to address the above challenges and maintain momentum
brought about by legislation and access to data toward meaningfully
reducing corruption, Slovakia should consider a number of path‐
ways.
Cross-Sectoral Collaboration Around Data Quality
Greater collaboration among civil society groups and government is
vital to improvements in data quality and making public data more
open. Ongoing quality checks through such a collaboration could
help ensure that published data is complete and usable. Additionally,
such collaborative portals would allow citizens to participate in
scrutinizing the data and reporting errors.
Additionally, the development of automated data quality checks
could help mitigate issues surrounding the data. The UK Health &
Social Care Information Center, for example, uses an automated
process to clean a variety of hospital episode statistics.50
94 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

51 “Nations in Transit 2015—Slovakia.” RefWorld. June 26, 2015. http://www.refworld.org/
topic,50ffbce582,50ffbce5be,55929ef315,0,,,SVK.html.
Training and Identification of Best Practices
With much of the required technical infrastructure already in place,
attention should be paid to the “human factor”—training staff,
ensuring they are supplied with the right equipment, and facilitating
exchanges of knowledge between different municipalities to estab‐
lish best practices and other guidelines for using the contracts por‐
tal.
Monitoring Compliance
To help ensure ongoing accountability, Slovakia could consider cre‐
ating an agency within the government focused on monitoring com‐
pliance in contracting, perhaps in collaboration with NGOs like the
Fair Play Alliance and Transparency International. Such an agency
should be empowered to impose punitive (and criminal) sanctions
where warranted.
The solution cannot, however, simply lie with new institutions.
Existing institutions like the police and judiciary need to be mod‐
ernized and trained to enforce the letter and spirit of the country’s
transparency legislation. All arms of the state need to work together.
Until now, public pressure has often stood in for the state and
enforced accountability when formal institutions have refused to
take action. The public (including citizens, NGOs, watchdog groups
and media organizations) will remain critical in ensuring accounta‐
bility, and must thus receive support and encouragement. In part,
this means maintaining a broader ecosystem of free expression, dis‐
sent and the right to demonstrate, a goal toward which Slovakia
continues to make progress, though challenges remain—such as the
wide use of defamation suits by the powerful to silence dissent and
whistle-blowing.51 Robust protections for such civil liberties are a
vital part of ensuring political accountability in any society.
Looking Forward 
| 
95

Slovakia has unquestionably taken significant steps toward combat‐
ing corruption through a dual-pronged approach built around legis‐
lation and technology. While the actions taken to date have shown
great promise and, indeed, appear to be having an impact on cor‐
ruption in the country, they should be seen as first steps along a
much longer path of openness, accountability and citizen involve‐
ment.
96 
| 
Chapter 4: Open Contracting and Procurement in Slovakia

CHAPTER 5
Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu
Elections: Free, Fair, and Open Data
By Auralice Graft, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew Young
Summary: Kawal Pemilu (“guard the election,” in Indonesian) was
launched in the immediate aftermath of the 2014 presidential elec‐
tions, as the country was riven by political polarization and the two
leading contenders for the presidency traded allegations of vote rig‐
ging. Faced with this delicate moment in Indonesia’s ongoing pro‐
cess of democratization, a globally dispersed group of technologists,
activists and volunteers came together to create a website that would
allow citizens to compare official vote tallies with the original tabu‐
lations from polling stations. These tabulations were already made
public as part of the Elections General Commission’s (KPU) com‐
mitment to openness and transparency. However, Kawal Pemilu’s
organizers played a critical role in assembling a team of over 700
volunteers to digitize the often handwritten forms and make the
data more legible and accessible. The site was assembled in a mere
two days, with a total budget of just $54. Its overall impact was to
enable citizen participation in monitoring the election results,
increase public trust in official tallies, and more generally, help ease
an important democratic transition.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Tackling Corrup‐
tion and Transparency
Key Takeaways:
• Successful open data projects rely and often build on a pre-
existing government commitment to openness and transpar‐
97

1 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/indonesia
2 https://www.transparency.org/country/#IDN
3 http://www.worldaudit.org/corruption.htm
ency. But open data enthusiasts and activists can play a critical
role in taking already-released information and making it more
accessible.
• When given the opportunity, citizens are willing and able to
play a role in digitizing and analyzing data in order to ensure
that government is working properly. Kawal Pemilu demon‐
strates the importance of crowdsourcing, in its various forms.
• Successful open data projects do not require huge budgets or a
centralized team. They can be built on a shoestring budget, by
dispersed and nonhierarchical teams that may largely consist of
volunteers.
• Open data projects that threaten the status quo must guard
against hacking and other security attacks. This is an especially
important consideration given the rapid and ad hoc nature of
many of these projects, which naturally increases their vulnera‐
bility.
Context and Background
Corruption in Indonesia
Public demand for transparency, accountability and better govern‐
ment in Indonesia has been growing rapidly since the “Reformasi,” a
movement for political reformation that began in the 90s.1 In spite
of this, corruption remains a problem in the country. According to
Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, Indone‐
sia ranked 107 out of 175 countries in 2014. Its Bribe Payers Index
ranked Indonesia 25 out of 28 countries in 2011.2 According to the
World Democracy Audit, Indonesia ranked 88 out of 150 countries
in terms of corruption in 2014.3
Corruption has also been evident in the electoral process, and both
the 2004 and 2009 elections were characterized by alleged irregulari‐
ties. Perludem (www.perludem.org), a nongovernmental association
for election and democracy in Indonesia, reported instances of
98 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

4 GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015.
5 Brajawidagda, Uuf and Akemi Takeoka Chatfield. “Roles of Social Media in Open Data
Environments: A Case Study of the 2014 Indonesian Presidential Election Voting
Results.” 25th Australasian Conference on Information Systems. December 8-10, 2014.
http://aut.researchgateway.ac.nz/bitstream/handle/10292/8170/acis20140_submis
sion_176.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
6 GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015.
7 “2014, Indonesia’s commitment to Open Data.” Open Government Indonesia. March 2,
2014. http://opengovindonesia.org/uncategorized-en/2014-indonesia-commitment-open-
data/
money politics, manipulation of vote counts, intimidation and offi‐
cials taking advantage of government positions to add candidates or
campaigns. As Diah Setiawaty, Perludem program manager for elec‐
tion application programming interface, puts it: “Candidates used to
routinely bribe voters. They bribed them with money, with rice and
with other food products.”4 Observers also note that Indonesia’s elec‐
toral process is particularly prone to vote manipulation, due in large
part to its size and complexity.5 “Our election system is one of the
most complex in the world,” says Setiawaty. “It has to accommodate
over 100,000,000 registered voters and a complicated geography that
includes over 17,000 different islands. It is huge and it all happens in
one day.”6
Open Data and Indonesian Elections
In 2011, Indonesia joined the Open Government Partnership
(OGP), emphasizing a national commitment to budget transparency
and more efficient public service delivery. In 2014, Mardianto Jatna,
Assistant to the Head of the Presidential Delivery Unit for Develop‐
ment Monitoring and Oversight (UKP4), declared a “Year of Open
Data.”7 Several initiatives were undertaken as part of this Year of
Open Data. One was the launch of the Indonesia Data Portal, which
publishes approximately 700 sets of data from 23 government insti‐
tutions.
Another particularly significant open data effort was the Elections
General Commission (KPU)’s move to begin sharing all election-
related data on the Internet. The KPU is a quasi-governmental body
whose mandate is to ensure transparent and fair elections. In April
2014, amid urgent calls from citizens and political parties on all
Context and Background 
| 
99

8 Lukman, Enricko. “Indonesian voters are crowdsourcing ballot counts to protect
against election fraud.” Tech in Asia. July 14, 2014. https://www.techinasia.com/kawal-
suara-indonesia-voters-crowdsourcing-ballot-counts-protect-election-fraud/
9 “Top 10 Countries with most Facebook users 2014.” Addictive Lists. April 22, 2014.
http://addictivelists.com/top-10-countries-with-most-facebook-users-2014/
10 Lipman, Victor. “The World’s Most Active Twitter City? You Won’t Guess It. Forbes.
December 30, 2012. http://www.forbes.com/sites/victorlipman/2012/12/30/the-worlds-
most-active-twitter-city-you-wont-guess-it/
sides to improve transparency and safeguard the presidential elec‐
tions due later that year, it announced its decision to share election
data on its official website (www.kpu.go.id/).8
The political mood during that year was particularly polarized. It
was the first time in Indonesia’s history that just two candidates were
running (typically, three or more run). In addition, the candidates’
backgrounds and profiles were dramatically different: Probowo Sub‐
ainto had a military background and was associated with the former
Suharto regime, while Joko Widodo (Jokowi) belonged to a more
recent generation and came from a more civilian background.
According to Perludem’s Diah Setiawaty, the polarization of voters
was magnified by their increasing presence on social media. Indone‐
sia had the fourth-largest number of Facebook users in the world in
2014,9 and Jakarta was the most active city in the world in terms of
Twitter participation in 2012.10
It was against this background that the KPU made its decision to
publish the voter tabulation forms from various levels of the Indo‐
nesian voting process. Voting in Indonesia is manual; citizens vote
at one of more than about 470,000 polling stations. The results are
then tabulated at six different levels: the polling station, the subdis‐
trict, the district, the city regency, the province and the national.
Each level uses a different form, and the time between actual voting
and national tabulation can be very long. The potential for fraud—
for example, by manipulating results along the way—is huge. Ini‐
tially, in April 2014, the KPU announced that it would open up and
make accessible the results tabulation forms for levels 2-6. However,
this left out the all-important polling place tabulation form (the so-
called C1 form) from the first level (i.e., the actual location of vot‐
ing). After further pressure from civil society groups and some
100 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

11 GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015. And Lukman, Enricko. “Indone‐
sian voters are crowdsourcing ballot counts to protect against election fraud.” Tech in
Asia. July 14, 2014. https://www.techinasia.com/kawal-suara-indonesia-voters-
crowdsourcing-ballot-counts-protect-election-fraud/
12 GovLab interview with Ainun Najib, Co-Founder Kawal Pemilu, August 5, 2015.
13 Rakhmani, Inaya. “Technology for Transparency.” New Mandala. July 21, 2014. http://
asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2014/07/21/technology-for-transparency/
political leaders,11 the KPU announced in July 2014 that it would
also make the C1 forms available. These forms were then scanned
and published on the KPU’s website, offering citizens and the media
an unprecedented level of scrutiny over election results.
The KPU’s initiatives have been widely praised. Ainun Najib, one of
the founders of Kawal Pemilu, says: “I really have to commend the
KPU for this move. It was a huge step toward improving transpar‐
ency in Indonesia’s election system.”12 Nonetheless, the KPU’s initial
efforts were in some respects incomplete, and have since been sup‐
plemented by citizen efforts. For example, the scanned C1 forms
were filled out by hand and published in a non-machine-readable
format (usually JPEG or PDF); often, these forms were hard to deci‐
pher, and sometimes published upside down.
To address these (and other) problems, a number of independent,
citizen-launched applications and websites emerged around and
since the 2014 presidential elections. The first such application
appeared almost immediately after the July 11 election, when a Twit‐
ter user with 7,000 followers began posting the scanned C1 forms.13
Other applications followed, each monitoring different portions of
KPU-opened data: Some filled the gap in machine-readability by
digitizing the scanned C1 forms and making them more accessible;
other applications dealt with district, city/regency and province-
level scanned forms, monitoring results at those voting levels; and
yet another category of citizen-led applications examined scanned
C1 forms for problems or anomalies. Kawal Pemilu, the application
under study here, was among the most successful initiatives in this
surge of citizen-led voting applications.
Context and Background 
| 
101

14 Bland, Ben. “Indonesian techies crowdsource election results.” Financial Times. July 18,
2014. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/
0/6c62a8b6-0e33-11e4-85ab-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3x2yImI1u.
Project Description and Inception
During the summer of 2014, Ainun Najib, who would later go on to
co-found Kawal Pemilu, was living and working in Singapore. It was
the middle of Ramadan, and he was down with the flu. Still, he was
following the elections closely in his native Indonesia, and watched
with growing concern as the extreme polarization that had charac‐
terized the campaign spilled over into the post-election period, and
as the results were contested by both the Jokowi and Probowo
camps.
Amid allegations of fraud and vote rigging, Najib began looking at
ways he could add more transparency to the electoral process. “We
[had to do something] to prevent the nation [from] being ripped
apart because of two claims to victory that nobody can verify,” he
told The Financial Times.14 Around this time, he messaged a friend,
Andrian Kurniady, a Google employee based in Sydney; Najib had
met Kurniady in 2007 at a Mathematics Olympiad Champions com‐
petition, and though they were not close friends, they were connec‐
ted on Facebook. The two quickly decided to work together to help
safeguard Indonesia’s vote count. Later, they were joined by three
other friends, who worked with them to get the application off the
ground.
In its early days, Kawal Pemilu tried to fill machine readability gaps
in KPU data by digitizing scanned C1 forms and using handwriting
recognition to extract the polling data. They quickly ran into obsta‐
cles with this approach, however, and soon decided to turn to a form
of crowdsourcing. Specifically, they decided to recruit volunteers to
manually digitize the almost 500,000 scanned C1 forms on the KPU
site. This was the genesis of Kawal Pemilu (“guard the election,” in
Indonesian), which was launched on July 12, 2014, with the intent of
providing a platform for public participation in guarding the 2014
general election results. As Andrian Kurniady, Najib’s co-founder,
put it at the time: “We hope this system can reduce the uncertainty,
fear of election fraud, and restore public confidence in one of the
102 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

15 Yusuf, Oik. “Siapakah “Pandawa” di Balik Kawal Pemilu?” Kompas.com. August 13,
2014. http://tekno.kompas.com/read/2014/08/13/09050057/Siapa
kah.Pandawa.di.Balik.Kawal.Pemilu.?utm_source=WP&utm_medium=box&utm_cam
paign=Khlwp. Translated into English by Google.
16 GovLab interview with Ainun Najib, Co-Founder Kawal Pemilu, August 5, 2015.
most important points in Indonesian democracy [while it] is still
young.”15
The Kawal Pemilu application consists of two main components. At
the back-end, it includes a private, walled-off website, where volun‐
teers and site administrators can enter polling data based on scan‐
ned forms (Figure 5-1). In addition, there is a public-facing site that
allows citizens to view the data, broken down by polling station and
candidate (Figure 5-2). Visitors can choose to view results for differ‐
ent levels of the tabulation process. For example, a visitor can
choose to examine just C1 results. Results can also be viewed by
region.
The underlying data for the site was generated from KPU data
through a network of volunteers spread across the globe. Volunteers
were recruited through a closed, secret Facebook group, which
ensured that only trusted people were included. To start the process
of recruiting volunteers, each founder chose 10 trustworthy friends,
each of whom was asked to recruit 10 more, and each of those was
also asked to recruit another 10 friends—and so on. Over 700 vol‐
unteers were recruited in this way in just three days. Volunteer
names and identities were initially kept hidden, to prevent any
efforts at bribing or intimidation.
Each recruit received a secret link to the nonpublic component of
the website, where scanned C1 forms were presented with an
accompanying form for the volunteer to fill in with extracted data.16
The form also allowed for the reporting of errors. The results of this
work were posted every 10 minutes to the public-facing website,
which was read-only. In addition to allowing citizens to monitor
election results in near real-time, this data also allowed them to
compare vote tallies listed on the site to official numbers released by
polling stations.
Project Description and Inception 
| 
103

Figure 5-1. Screen used by volunteers to digitize scanned C1 forms
(translated into English by Google)
Figure 5-2. Screenshot of the public-facing Kawal Pemilu website
(translated into English by Google)
The entire process of building the site and gathering all the data was
performed with remarkable efficiency. Because the co-founders were
spread around the world (California, Sydney, Singapore, Indonesia,
Netherlands, Germany), they were able to work round-the-clock,
taking maximum advantage of different time zones. This enabled
them to create the website and counting system in just two days. In
addition, all the recruited volunteers and founders worked without
pay. The total capital investment for the setup was, as a result, just
$54; these funds were used to purchase the website’s domain and
104 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

17 “The Five Pandawa Behind Kawal Pemilu.” Global Indonesian Voices. August 13, 2014.
http://www.globalindonesianvoices.com/14988/the-five-pandawa-behind-k​awal-pemilu/
18 Lukman, Enricko. “Indonesian voters are crowdsourcing ballot counts to protect
against election fraud.” Tech in Asia. July 14, 2014. https://www.techinasia.com/kawal-
suara-indonesia-voters-crowdsourcing-ballot-counts-protect-election-fraud/
19 Lukman, Enricko. “5 things you need to know about Indonesia’s election tech fighters.”
Tech in Asia. July 18, 2014. https://www.techinasia.com/k​awal-pemilu-indonesia-
presidential-election-fighters/
20 http://theconversation.com/indonesias-democratic-masses-brought-victory-to-
jokowi-29569
21 Lukman, Enricko. “5 things you need to know about Indonesia’s election tech fighters.”
Tech in Asia. July 18, 2014. https://www.techinasia.com/k​awal-pemilu-indonesia-
presidential-election-fighters/
space on a hosting server.17 Overall, Kawal Pemilu is an impressive
example of a “public-service startup”: Despite never benefiting from
seed capital or a Silicon Valley-style business ecosystem, it was put
together with all the agility and speed that are the hallmarks of far
more lavishly funded business ventures.
Impact
Kawal Pemilu was one of many crowdsourced vote count initiatives
launched around the time of the 2014 elections, and built on KPU
data. Others included Kawal Suara (“guard the votes”),18 Real Count
and a Tumblr site called C1 Yang Aneh. However, Kawal Pemilu
stands out as one of the most efficiently built and managed, and one
of the most effective initiatives. In an article on “Indonesia’s election
tech fighters,” one Indonesian reporter described the site as “the
most professionally run” among various efforts.19 Kawal Pemilu has
also been described as a “leading spearhead in monitoring and legit‐
imizing the [2014 electoral] vote count outside the state apparatus.”20
The impact of Kawal Pemilu can be measured in several ways:
Settling the 2014 Election Results
By the fifth day after the 2014 elections (four days after the site’s
launch), Kawal Pemilu volunteers had digitized 470,000 or 97 per‐
cent of all scanned C1 forms.21 In fact, volunteers had competed
against each other to scan the highest number of forms, spurring the
Impact 
| 
105

22 After 460,000 forms, recruitment was stopped because Kawal Pemilu founders believed
they had achieved their goals. In addition, the site had received considerable media
coverage by this time, and the founders decided to stop recruiting because they feared
that recruits might not be trustworthy anymore. 
GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015.
23 GovLab interview with Uuf Brajawidagda, Lecturer of Indonesian Politics, University
of Wollongong, Australia, September 3, 2015.
rapid and efficient process described above.22 Based on these num‐
bers, Kawal Pemilu (and citizens accessing the site) was able to
establish that the vote count was in fact very similar to the official
KPU result (53.15 percent for Joko Widodo and 46.85 percent for
Prabowo Subianto), which was at the time being contested by the
Prabowo camp.
A month after the elections, the vote tallies were still being contes‐
ted, and the results were taken to court. Kawal Pemilu played an
important role in the court hearings, and its testimony—along with
that provided by KPU officials and other expert witnesses—helped
influence the court’s decision to award the elections to Jokowi. In
this way, the crowdsourced election results helped settle the elec‐
tions, legitimize the winner and, more generally, ensure a peaceful
transfer of power in Indonesia.
Increased Trust and Greater Public Participation
Beyond its direct impact on the 2014 elections, Kawal Pemilu has
also had an overall effect on Indonesia’s electoral process and politi‐
cal climate, helping to increase transparency and public trust. As
Uuf Brajawidagda, a lecturer of Indonesian politics at the University
of Wollongong in Australia, who studied Kawal Pemilu and similar
Indonesian open data initiatives, puts it: “Projects like Kawal Pemilu
catalyzed the level of trust among citizens. The KPU move [to open
election related data] increased trust, but Kawal Pemilu and others
like it transformed the trust into something bigger. Their actions
amplified the level of trust.”23
The greater public trust has, in many ways, translated into a new
sense of citizen involvement and stakeholdership in Indonesia’s
political process. The sense of involvement is most evident in the
more than 700 volunteers who helped crowdsource the KPU data.
But observers also note a more general sense of empowerment and
106 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

24 GovLab interview with Uuf Brajawidagda, Lecturer of Indonesian Politics, University
of Wollongong, Australia, September 3, 2015.
25 GovLab interview with Uuf Brajawidagda, Lecturer of Indonesian Politics, University
of Wollongong, Australia, September 3, 2015.
26 GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015.
new expectations of transparency. As Perludem program manager
for election application programming interface at Perludem Diah
Setiawaty, put it: “Kawal Pemilu created a movement—a movement
toward increasing open data and transparency in Indonesia. It set
the bar really high.”24 As evidence, Setiawaty cited the numerous
open data initiatives that have followed Kawal Pemilu (see below for
details), and the energy she experiences around these initiatives.
“Indonesians are definitely more eager and willing to participate in
crowdsourced applications now,” Setiwaty says. “They want to par‐
ticipate in the political process.”
Reduced Polarization
Kawal Pemilu emerged at a time of intense polarization in Indone‐
sia. One of its most important (and perhaps long-term) effects may
be to reduce the climate of partisanship and political division.
Observers note that, because it presented an independent, verifiable
and nonpartisan snapshot of the election results, it helped heal some
of the mistrust and mutual suspicion among rival political camps. “I
think it closed the gap between the two groups,” said Brajawidagda.
“It made people feel better about official results, even if those results
contradicted their personal outcome preferences.”25 As evidence,
Brajawidagda cites some of the comments he saw posted on social
media—comments that point to people’s faith in the final results,
regardless of their political leanings. One example he cites is the fol‐
lowing comment: “Unbelievable, kawalpemilu (final count) deviates
only 0.01 percent. Great. ... This is the real count.” Overall, Brajawi‐
dagda feels that, in helping validate the election results, Kawal
Pemilu played an important role in fostering a more civil political
climate in Indonesia.
Perludem’s Setiawaty agrees. “Politics were still very polarized after
Kawal Pemilu,” she says. “But the mood was less negative. People
could see things from a more objective perspective.”26
Impact 
| 
107

27 Lukman, Enricko. “As Indonesia’s democracy is on the verge of crisis, hackers and fak‐
ers attack crowdsourced vote counts.” Tech in Asia. July 18, 2014. https://www.techina
sia.com/indonesia-democracy-crisis-hackers-fakers-attack/
Challenges
What happens next for Kawal Pemilu and, more generally, for Indo‐
nesia’s political climate? Despite the early successes of initiatives like
Kawal Pemilu, corruption remains a serious problem in Indonesia,
and ample scope exists for improvement in the electoral process. In
order to truly change conditions, Kawal Pemilu (and other similar
projects) will not only need to scale significantly but also prove that
they can grow and last beyond a single election. If that is to happen,
a few challenges will need to be overcome.
Legal Changes
In fact, the KPU’s move to open up election data in 2014 was just a
temporary measure, without any lasting legal foundations. Follow‐
ing the success of Kawal Pemilu and similar applications, there has
been a general clamor calling for legislation to require opening of
election data for all future elections. The organization Perludem has
played a key role in pushing for new legislation and in drafting ver‐
sions of the proposed law. Setiawaty of Perludem says: “Kawal
Pemilu was a definite success, and in addition it has increased the
probability of new election laws in Indonesia that emphasize trans‐
parency.” So the prospects for new, more-encompassing legislation
are bright—but until it is passed, the cause of greater transparency
in Indonesian politics, and more specifically applications like Kawal
Pemilu, will continue to face challenges.
Security
As with any anticorruption project, Kawal Pemilu has come up
against some powerful vested interests. Soon after it was launched,
some of those vested interests appeared to strike back. Four days
into its existence, the site was attacked by what administrators called
“hundreds of hackers.”27 As a consequence, the site was brought
down for a few hours, until the project’s administrators returned a
“logic bomb” to their attackers. In addition, administrators ran a
108 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

28 Rakhmani, Inaya. “Technology for Transparency.” New Mandala. July 21, 2014. http://
asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2014/07/21/technology-for-transparency/
29 GovLab interview with Ainun Najib, Co-Founder Kawal Pemilu, August 5, 2015.
mirrored version of the public site, to limit the potential damage
from hacking.
The identity of the hackers remains unknown, but they were mostly
believed to be located within Indonesia, and they were widely con‐
sidered to be responding to the website’s growing legitimacy and
popularity. In this sense, the hacking attempts were just a particular
instance of a more general effort to hijack the project or weaken its
credibility.28 For example, in the early days of the Kawal Pemilu, the
project’s founders went to great lengths to hide their identities (and
those of their volunteers), in an effort to thwart attempts at bribery
or intimidation. Such threats are only likely to grow as Kawal
Pemilu and other popular initiatives seek to take on the establish‐
ment and increase transparency in Indonesia.
Reliability of Information
In its early days, Kawal Pemilu experienced some skepticism about
the reliability of its data. This skepticism was heightened by the ano‐
nymity of its volunteers—ironically, because the anonymity was in
fact designed to decrease their susceptibility to untoward influence
and was thus a way of ensuring reliability. Ainun Najib says organiz‐
ers regularly fielded questions from the public about accountability
and verification of inputs. He and the rest of the team always took
the time to explain their methodology, and to point out that all the
data was verifiable within the site itself. Indeed, visitors to the site
can click on any piece of information and find the underlying, origi‐
nal scanned form, all the way down to the C1 form from the initial
polling station, as proof. In that sense, Kawal Pemilu contains an
internal process of legitimization—which helps overcome (if not
entirely do away with) public skepticism or doubts.29
Lasting Political Impact
Any issue- or event-focused project faces questions about its surviv‐
ability and sustainability over time. For Kawal Pemilu, the question
is not only whether the project can survive, but what form it can
take in the long term. The same factors that permit such initiatives
Challenges 
| 
109

30 Rakhmani, Inaya. “Technology for Transparency.” New Mandala. July 21, 2014. http://
asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2014/07/21/technology-for-transparency/
31 “Lihat sendiri perbedaan APDB versi Pemprov dan DPRD di KawalAPBD.org.” Rap‐
pler. March 10, 2015. http://www.rappler.com/world/regions/asia-pacific/indonesia/
86371-lihat-perbedaan-apbd-versi-pemprov-dan-dprd&prev=search. Translated by
Google.
to emerge quickly and rapidly—their decentralized, ad hoc nature—
often make it difficult to grow into larger organizations. The found‐
ers of Kawal Pemilu are well aware of these challenges. They say they
don’t have answers yet, but are exploring strategies to ensure the
long-term sustainability of Kawal Pemilu.30
Looking Forward
The example offered by Kawal Pemilu has inspired several other
open data initiatives that aim to increase transparency and reduce
corruption in Indonesia. In some ways, we are witnessing the emer‐
gence of a new, citizen-driven open data ecosystem in the country,
one whose aims can broadly be defined as improving governance
and enhancing democracy.
This ecosystem is likely to grow more vibrant in coming years, and
several new applications and websites are already starting to make
their presence felt. Here, we highlight three of the most promising.
Kawal APBD
Following his involvement with open data and elections, Kawal
Pemilu co-founder Ainun Najib has launched a new site that aims to
improve budget transparency and open it up to citizen involvement.
His new project, Kawal APBD (www.kawalapbd.org) places different
versions of government budgets side by side and allows citizens to
find and comment on discrepancies. For example, in one case, the
site helped find a discrepancy between the South Jakarta department
of education and the education section of the city budget.31 In addi‐
tion to commenting on discrepancies, citizens can also “like” or
“dislike” budget allocations, and visualize data, thus helping them
better understand the budget process.
The goal of Kawal APBD “is to make more government data accessi‐
ble and presentable for people,” said Mr. Najib. “We already knew
110 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

32 http://blogs.wsj.com/indonesiarealtime/2015/03/11/ouch-jakartans-compare-dueling-
spending-plans/
33 Rakhmani, Inaya. “Technology for Transparency.” New Mandala. July 21, 2014. http://
asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newmandala/2014/07/21/technology-for-transparency/
34 Naing, Saw Yan. “Smartphone-Wielding Indonesians Tasked With Ensuring Fair Elec‐
tions.” The Irrawaddy. April 7, 2014. http://www.irrawaddy.org/asia/smartphone-
wielding-indonesians-tasked-ensuring-fair-elections.html
35 Ruslan, Heri. “Kawal Pilkada Publikasikan Real Count Pilkada Serentak.” Repub‐
lika.co.id. December 20, 2015. http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/pilkada/
15/12/20/nzn40m372-kawal-pilkada-publikasikan-real-count-pilkada-serentak. Trans‐
lated by Google.
through Kawal Pemilu that people would participate. We hope more
and more government data is going to be exposed to the public.”32
Mata Massa (“Eye of the Masses”)
Mata Massa was in fact launched before Kawal Pemilu, in the run-
up to the 2014 elections. It allows citizens to report campaign-
related and other violations through their smartphones to the
General Elections Monitoring Body (Bawaslu). For example, citizens
have reported instances of vote buying, as well as other administra‐
tive violations. Overall, some 1,500 violations have been reported
(though reports indicate that little follow-up action has in fact been
taken).33 Originally launched to monitor the trustworthiness of jour‐
nalists, the app was created and is run by the Alliance of Independ‐
ent Journalists in Indonesia.34
Kawal Pilkada
Kawal Pilkada sought to replicate Kawal Pemilu’s effort to crowd‐
source digitizing of KPU C1 forms for regional elections in Decem‐
ber 2015.35 The project is built around the same concept as Kawal
Pemilu, but under different leadership. There are several challenges
here. One is in terms of recruitment. While citizens are eager to par‐
ticipate, crowdsourcing is more challenging than it was in the Kawal
Pemilu experience. Diah Setiawaty, whose team provides technical
assistance to the Kawal Pilkada team, says there is less intrigue over‐
all in these regional elections, and voters know and care less about
leaders in other regions. Kawal Pilkada also faces a time constraint.
The KPU only recently announced it would publish related tabula‐
tions online, so the Kawal Pilkada team has little time to prepare.
Looking Forward 
| 
111

36 GovLab interview with Diah Setiawaty, Program Manager for Election Application Pro‐
gramming Interface, Perludem, September 10, 2015.
Another constraint going forward is the frequency of regional elec‐
tions, which occur every two years. “For each election, there is a lot
to monitor at the same time. The political situation in every region
is different. We face different challenges in every place,” says Setia‐
waty.36
Taken together, these and many other existing and emerging appli‐
cations make up a new landscape for open data, transparency and
accountability in Indonesia. They demonstrate that data can be used
by ordinary citizens to hold government accountable, and, although
many of them remain modest, more proof of concept than full-
blown national platforms, they suggest that a citizenry empowered
with information can indeed effect genuine political transformation.
112 
| 
Chapter 5: Indonesia’s Kawal Pemilu

CHAPTER 6
Denmark’s Open Address Data Set
Consolidating and Freeing-up Address Data
By Juliet McMurren, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew
Young
Summary: A broad variety of services depend on accurate, up-to-
date address data, including emergency services; the police; postal
and transport services; and GPS systems. In 2005, the Building and
Dwelling Register of Denmark started to release its address data to
the public free of charge. Prior to that date, each municipality
charged a separate fee for access, rendering the data practically inac‐
cessible. Other entities, such as the Cadastre, the Land Registry, the
Central Business Register and the utilities sector, collected their own
address information, leading to significant discrepancies between
the content held across different databases. A follow-up study com‐
missioned by the Danish government estimated the direct financial
benefits alone for the period 2005-2009 at EUR 62 million, at a cost
of only EUR 2 million.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Improving Serv‐
ices
Key Takeaways:
• In highly open, transparent societies, the opening of govern‐
ment data can be successfully justified and driven by expected
economic benefits from increased efficiency and innovation
within government, without the need for political arguments for
transparency.
113

1 http://data.worldbank.org/country/denmark
2 http://denmark.dk/en/quick-facts/facts/
3 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/DNK.pdf
4 http://index.okfn.org/place/denmark/
5 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
6 http://worldjusticeproject.org/open-government-index/open-government-around-world
7 https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/freedom-press-2015#.Vf29Nt9Viko
8 http://index.rsf.org/#!/
9 http://transparency.dk/?page_id=1258
• Relatedly, efforts to collect and open data can uncover major
gaps and deficiencies in official government data sources, creat‐
ing benefits to internal efficiency and recordkeeping, often with
little to do with improving transparency or accountability.
• There is a need to establish robust and carefully planned gover‐
nance models for data collection systems, and skills for data col‐
lection among those charged with collecting it, to ensure the
resulting data set is clean, accurate, usable and widely used.
Context and Background
Denmark is a high-income1 constitutional monarchy in northern
Europe with a population of 5.6 million in 2015.2 It is ranked 10th
on the United Nations Human Development Index.3 Locally, the
country is divided into five regions, which are further subdivided
into 98 municipalities, reduced from 270 in 2007.
Denmark is considered, both nationally and internationally, among
the most highly open and free countries in the world. The country
was ranked second on the 2014 Global Open Data Index by the
Open Knowledge Foundation,4 ninth on the 2015 Open Data Bar‐
ometer5 and fourth on the World Justice Project’s Open Government
Index.6 The Danish media is considered free by Freedom House,7
and the country is ranked third in the World Press Freedom Index
by Reporters Without Borders.8 Consequently, corruption is not
widely considered a problem in Denmark.9
Denmark is a signatory to the Open Government Partnership. It
began the process to join in September 2011, and, as of late 2015, is
implementing its first Action Plan and developing its second, which
114 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

10 The Danish Government, “Open Government National Action Plan 2013-2014.” Octo‐
ber 2013. http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/Denmark​_Open%20Gov
ernment%20Action%20Plan%202013-2014_ENG_1-sided_print.pdf, pp 14-15; “Open
Data Innovation Strategy (ODIS).” Digitaliseringsstyrelsen. April 22, 2013. http://
www.digst.dk/Servicemenu/English/Policy-and-Strategy/Open-Data-Innovation-Strategy-
ODIS
11 “Tax reforms in EU Member States 2012: tax policy challenges for economic growth
and fiscal stability.” Taxation Papers 34 and European Economy 6. http://ec.europa.eu/
europe2020/pdf/themes/02_taxation.pdf
12 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
13 http://www.oecd.org/social/expenditure.htm
14 “Human Resources Management Country Profiles: Denmark.” OECD. December 6,
2012. http://www.oecd.org/gov/pem/OECD%20HRM%20Profile%20-%20Denmark​.pdf
15 Jetzek, Thorhildur. “Managing complexity across multiple dimensions of open data: the
case of the Danish Basic Data Program.” Government Information Quarterly. November
24, 2015. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X15300186
has open data as one of its four themes. The Action Plan expresses
the government’s intention to develop an Open Data Innovation
Strategy (ODIS), to draw attention to the potential of public data
and make it accessible. ODIS will also operate the public data cata‐
logue and facilitate communication between public sector and pri‐
vate reusers of data.10
Despite its wealth, Denmark has found itself under increasing pres‐
sure to find ways to control government spending. Danish citizens
are among the most highly taxed in Europe,11 but there is little pub‐
lic appetite for government program cuts.12 Nonetheless, according
to OECD data from 2011, the Danish government spent over a
quarter of its GDP (26.1 percent) on social spending, compared to
an average of 21.7 percent across OECD member countries.13 The
OECD also found that 26.8 percent of the labor force was employed
in the government sector (excluding public corporations) in 2012,
and compensation for these employees consumed 19 percent of
GDP, the highest percentage in the OECD.14 Faced with an aging
population and fewer taxpayers, a real prospect of government
spending reaching unsustainable levels, and a population reluctant
to embrace budget cuts, the Danish government has had no option
but to look for ways to improve government efficiency.15
Context and Background 
| 
115

16 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
17 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
18 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
Project Description and Inception
Before 1996, address data was registered and collected individually
by the 270 Danish municipalities. Although public data was avail‐
able, organizations wanting to access the data had to make separate
access and pricing agreements with each municipality, rendering the
data practically inaccessible. The lack of an accessible, unified public
data set resulted in the development of several private databases of
varying quality.16 Furthermore, there was no consensus on the defi‐
nition of an address, or who (if anyone) held the reference address
file, with users such as Post Danmark and the emergency services
each holding rival data sets.17
Appreciating that there would be considerable practical benefit to a
single standardized address system, with each address datum
attached to a unique geographic point, officials at the Danish
National Survey and Cadastre (now the Danish Geodata Agency)
began a pilot program coordinating this already-collected data into a
single body. Morten Lind, business manager of the Danish Address
Program at the Danish Geodata Agency, describes the origins of the
program: “We started as a pilot project in 1996, where we said,
there’s a potential in having good address data, and in taking
addresses and giving them a geographic coordinate so that we know
where each address is. If every government agency has its own sepa‐
rate address database, we are not sure that we can actually compare
things. So we had this idea of making a common reference data set
where we could say: These are the addresses that exist. [And] it was
clear that the only party that could create this reference file of
addresses was the local authorities.”18
In order to do this, the Danish National Survey and Cadastre deci‐
ded to adapt the existing building and dwelling register, with minor
adjustments, as the primary address register. The local authorities
116 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

19 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
20 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
21 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
22 Jetzek, Thorhildur. “Managing complexity across multiple dimensions of open data: the
case of the Danish Basic Data Program.” Government Information Quarterly. November
24, 2015. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X15300186
would collect the data, assign and register addresses and street
names, and would have responsibility for and ownership of the data,
while the Danish Survey and Cadastre would coordinate the project.
19 At this point, the submission of data was voluntary, and munici‐
palities could not be compelled to supply address data, but some
financial support was offered to help municipalities with compli‐
ance.20 Lind and a colleague from the Danish organization of local
authorities also met with local authorities throughout the country to
promote the project.21
The potential interest and utility of the data set quickly became
apparent to those working with it. A project manager at the Minis‐
try of Housing, Urban and Rural Affairs commented: “It did not
take many years after starting to work with the public data in
around 1993 to realize that these data could be used for many inter‐
esting things. And we felt it was a shame ... that the data weren’t
used more.”22
By 2001, the data had been collected in a single register owned by
the local authorities. Potential users such as the police, emergency
services, public health agencies, public transportation companies
and agencies like the Danish Ministry of the Environment and
county administration were aware of and eager to use the data to
provide their services armed with a more accurate understanding of
the locations of homes, businesses and other entities, but, as Lind
explained, the next hurdle was finding an agreement on how it
could be accessed and used. “The police want[ed] to use it, the Min‐
istry of the Environment want[ed] to use it, but ... we had almost
300 local authorities that could decide their own pricing models on
a completely individual basis. We couldn’t foresee that an agreement
could be reached [on] a price [for] address data. So we were in a
Project Description and Inception 
| 
117

23 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
24 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
25 Jetzek, Thorhildur. “Managing complexity across multiple dimensions of open data: the
case of the Danish Basic Data Program.” Government Information Quarterly. November
24, 2015. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X15300186
26 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
27 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015; and GovLab Interview with Thorhildur Jetzek,
Department of IT Management, Copenhagen Business School, September 21 2015.
deadlock. ... We had a lot of very good data but nobody used it.”23
Some government agencies tried to access the data via individual
agreements with each local authority: “a very cumbersome process
even for a large organization.”24
The deadlock was eventually broken through the intervention of the
Minister of Finance. Analysis by the Ministry of Finance’s eGovern‐
ment Taskforce had identified address data as one of the data sets
with the most potential use, leading the Minister of Finance to
broker an agreement on access and use with municipalities. This
agreement, officially called the Better Access to Public Data, but
more widely known as the “free of charge agreement,” would make
available data from the Cadastre and municipal property and dwell‐
ing registers, which comprised address data and their associated
geographic coordinates, free of charge through a government portal,
with those accessing it paying only the cost of distribution.25
Although the Danish National Survey and Cadastre had advocated
this solution, the outcome was, Lind concedes, surprising, since the
government was at that stage committed, by policy and legislation,
to selling its data.26
The efforts and influence of Lind were crucial in advancing the
cause of opening the data.27 He had succeeded in convincing his
superiors at the Danish National Survey and Cadastre of the neces‐
sity of opening the data without charge, since an agreement on pric‐
ing seemed elusive, and this became the agency’s position. He and
his colleagues had involved potential users and stakeholders in
pressing for the release of the data through a series of meetings and
conferences at which the benefits and opportunities of the data set
were explained. “It was very important for us to do that because we
118 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

28 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
29 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
30 Morten Lind “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
31 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
32 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
had to put ourselves on the agenda for the Minister of Finance,
[who] has many important issues to solve, and this one was only a
little one.”28 Post Danmark was also, according to Lind, a major
driver behind the decision to open, having declared early on that
they wanted to rely on public data. Significant users such as Post
Danmark and the emergency services have subsequently provided
important feedback on how the data set could be improved.29
The agreement came into effect on January 1, 2003, but legal issues
delayed its full implementation until 2005, when an amendment to
the law governing the Public Data Server removed the legal restric‐
tions on the distribution of address data to third parties, as well as
the fee for distribution.30 The release was not conceived of as an
open data project, according to Lind: “‘Open data’ ... was not a term
we used then. We used the term ‘data free of charge’ ... [but] really it
lives up to almost all of the definitions of open data today.”31 There
would be no restrictions placed on the use or redistribution of the
data beyond those required to satisfy the requirements of the law,
particularly in regard to personal data or product marketing. Steps
should continue to be taken, however, to ensure that such restricted,
privacy-eroding activities are not being undertaken by internal or
external users of the address data.
The municipalities were compensated EUR 1.3 million for loss of
income from sales of data for the three years after the agreement was
reached. At that point, the agreement offered them the opportunity
to renegotiate for further compensation, but no further negotiations
were sought by the municipalities.32 The compensation did not fully
recompense the municipalities for the costs of data collection, but,
as Lind notes, the data already had to be collected for their own use.
Project Description and Inception 
| 
119

33 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
34 Morten Lind “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
35 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
36 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
“Our position was that the data was there, and of course we needed
to have an assurance that the data will be updated, and of course
there would be costs associated with this updating ... but this is
something that the local authority has to do, agreement or not.”33
The money offered was, instead, a compensation for no longer being
able to sell the data. In addition, Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority (DECA), the agency responsible for road names and
addresses in Denmark, calculated that the municipalities would real‐
ize savings from no longer having to negotiate data purchase agree‐
ments, deliver data or enforce licenses.34
Beyond the local authorities themselves, which were the biggest
users of the address data, the primary intended users of the data set
were the public sector. Emergency services, public health disease
prevention programs, national and county environmental agencies,
public transport companies and Post Danmark were all expected to
make use of the data set. Journey Planner, a then groundbreaking
Web app allowing people to plan journeys using public transporta‐
tion from one address to another, also relied on the address data set.
35 Input from intended users was sought through nationwide confer‐
ences and informal meetings between the Danish Survey and Cadas‐
tre and potential user groups such as the police.36
Although the developers were aware of the potential benefits of the
address data set for the private sector, Lind maintains that this bene‐
fit was always secondary to the desire to improve public sector effi‐
ciency and services. “We were of course aware that [this data] could
have large benefits for the private sector in geomarketing, logistics,
transport planning, route planning, and analysis of where to locate a
new store, and so forth ... but that was not our selling argument. Our
argument was the public sector. We have data that enables the public
120 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

37 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
38 https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/products/address-point.html
39 Hogge, Becky. “Open Data: Six Stories About Impact in the UK.” Omidyar Network.
November 2015. https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/files/file_archive/insights/Open
%20Data_Six%20Stories%20About%20Impact%20in%20the%20UK/OpenData_CaseStu
dies_Report_complete_DIGITAL_102715.pdf
40 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
sector to be more efficient and to provide better services for citizens
and for business, and it’s stupid that we don’t use that data.”37
As far as its developers were aware, the Danish address data set was
the first of its kind to be compiled and opened free of charge. Lind
reports that they were influenced by a similar data set, Address-
Point, compiled in the United Kingdom by the Ordnance Survey.
Address-Point took the Royal Mail’s Postcode Address File (PAF),
and attached geographic coordinates, creating a unique geolocated
identifier for each address. Address-Point was, however, a commer‐
cial data set owned by the Ordnance Survey, and was not open.38
Moreover, the PAF which enabled the development of Address-
Point was controversially sold at the time of the privatization of the
Royal Mail. In March 2014, the chairman of Parliament’s Public
Administration Committee argued that, “The sale of the PAF with
the Royal Mail was a mistake. Public access to public sector data
must never be sold or given away again.”39 Lind recalls, “I think we
were totally on our own in deciding that the only possible model
could be opening the data free of charge. I’m proud of that situa‐
tion.”40
Impact
The opening of the address data set was, almost universally, enthusi‐
astically received, and the data set widely used. According to DECA,
in 2009 address data was delivered to a total of 1,236 public and pri‐
vate parties, including 286 full, nationwide address sets. This
response was based on feedback from only 14 of the 22 data distrib‐
utors, and therefore underrepresents the total number of deliveries.
Of these deliveries, about 70 percent were to the private sector, 20
percent to central and regional government, and 10 percent to the
Impact 
| 
121

41 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
42 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
43 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
44 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
municipalities. Of the 286 nationwide address sets delivered, 12
were for IT products with more than 1 million end users.41
We have data that enables the public sector to be more efficient and
to provide better services for citizens and for business, and it’s stu‐
pid that we don’t use that data.”
—Morten Lind, Danish Geodata Agency
The exceptions to this warm response were a small number of pri‐
vate vendors with agreements to supply competing address data to
municipalities, who were unhappy with the decision to open the
public data, since it cut off a source of revenue. The majority,
according to Lind, embraced the opportunity to get out of data col‐
lection. “The more future-minded of these companies said, we are
happy not to use our efforts in collecting these data. We want to use
our efforts in making applications [and] value adding onto the
data, ... and making something more intelligent.”42 GPS and naviga‐
tion companies were likewise happy to abandon data collection and
adopt the open address data set, according to Lind.43
Direct Financial Benefits
According to a 2010 study commissioned by the DECA, the direct
financial benefits to society of the open address data for the period
2005-2009 totaled EUR 62 million through especially improved gov‐
ernment back-end capabilities and more efficient service delivery.
The total cost for the program over the same period was EUR 2 mil‐
lion, comprised of EUR 1.3 million in compensation to municipali‐
ties and the balance in costs to distribute the data through the Public
Data Server (PDS).44 The benefits of the agreement in 2010 were
122 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

45 Lind, Morten. “Addresses and Address Data—Experiences from Denmark.” August 11,
2014. http://www.slideshare.net/Mortlin/addresses-and-address-data-experiences-from-
denmark-37872471
46 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
47 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
48 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
expected to be EUR 14 million, while total costs would be EUR 0.2
million for distribution of the data through the PDS. Approximately
30 percent of the benefit was to the public sector, with the remainder
to the private sector—including, notably the nongovernment Post
Danmark, which saw major efficiency increases based on access to
the data.45 The study only measured direct financial benefit to those
receiving address data via one of the PDS’s 22 distributors, and did
not attempt to place a value on the supplementary benefits derived
further down the distribution chain through secondary and subse‐
quent reuse, except to suggest that they are “very considerable.”46
To illustrate these subsequent benefits, Lind points to the ubiquity of
GPS technologies, used by nearly half of all Danish households, and
reliant on the open address data set.47 According to Lind, GPS com‐
panies interviewed by the Danish Geodata Agency report that they
consider address data in Denmark the best in Europe. “We were able
to improve the precision of car navigation systems in Denmark, and
this has second-level impact on competitiveness and not using too
much petrol.”48
Nonfinancial Benefits
The Danish emergency services, who were among the early users of
the open address data set, introduced a system built on standard car
GPS navigation systems into 1,200 emergency vehicles, in prefer‐
ence to more expensive mobile devices for alarm reception and
tracking, with resulting significant reductions in cost, response
Impact 
| 
123

49 “112 in Denmark—a short overview of the Danish model.” 112 Roundtable in Bulgaria,
March 6, 2009. http://www.eena.org/ressource/static/files/
2009_03_10_112_in_Denmark​.pdf, p 9.
50 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
51 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
times and fleet efficiency.49 The opening of the address data also
improved response accuracy for the emergency services within Den‐
mark. Lind notes that the increased precision of the geocoded
address set improved the capacity of emergency services to find the
right address. “The public could be more confident that 1-1-2
[emergency] services would be able to find them, and ... we had a
really great impact on that.”50
Not all anticipated benefits of the free-of-charge agreement were
realized, however, although often these reflect a failure to embrace
the data, rather than deficiencies within it. For example, the DECA
analysis of the benefits of the address data set reported that adoption
of the official address data set by the Central Business Register had
been slow, and that in 2010 companies employing approximately 15
percent of the Danish workforce were registered at an address that
was not in the official data set. As a result, DECA reports users
found that it could take months or years for a new or changed com‐
mercial address to appear in their GPS. Given that emergency serv‐
ices as well as clients and suppliers rely on GPS to find commercial
locations, the implications of such delays are potentially very costly.
51
Benefits to Developer Community
The number of applications using national address data went from
two or three in 2005 to over 500 by 2009, according to Lind.
“The multiplication of use was astonishing. There has been a lot of
development ... in geomarketing and digitization, and each devel‐
opment shows new use cases for the address data. I think that’s the
purpose of open data. Originally you collect it with a purpose—
hopefully!—but when you put it out into the open, you will experi‐
ence new usefulness of the data that you haven’t foreseen. Perhaps
you will find that there are purposes that you haven’t even thought
124 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

52 “Fact sheet—basic data.” Denmark Ministry of Finance. October 8, 2014. http://
uk.fm.dk/~/media/files/nyheder/press-releases/2012/10/basic-data/fact_sheet_basic
data.ashx?la=da
53 “Fact sheet—basic data.” Denmark Ministry of Finance. October 8, 2014. http://
uk.fm.dk/~/media/files/nyheder/press-releases/2012/10/basic-data/fact_sheet_basic
data.ashx?la=da
54 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
of, that have an even better business case [with] more benefit than
you have estimated from your original [case]. By going into the
open data agenda, you have to say to yourself: I don’t have the faint‐
est idea what this can be used for! It’s not up to me to decide ... or to
control.”
The Danish Basic Data Program
One of the most significant impacts of the release of the Danish
address data was the impetus it gave to open other public data sets.
Given the documented benefits of opening Danish address data, the
Danish eGovernment strategy from 2011-2015 expanded the pro‐
gram with Good Basic Data for All,52 commonly known as the Dan‐
ish Basic Data Program.
Basic data is essential information used repeatedly by the public sec‐
tor in case processing, such as personal and company registration
numbers, addresses, cadastral data and physical and political map‐
ping data.53 The Basic Data Program consists of a set of seven suba‐
greements between multiple ministries and agencies, involving a
total of nine registers, including business registers, the Cadastre, the
Building and Dwelling Register, administrative and geographical
boundaries, map and elevation data, place name and information
register, and the register of property owners. A final subagreement
covered the implementation of a common platform to disseminate
the data from the other subprograms.54
While personal data is protected by Denmark’s Act on Processing of
Personal Data (2000), all other data within these registers was
opened for access and reuse by individuals, the public sector and
private companies as of January 1, 2013. Between 2013 and 2015, the
agencies involved improved and expanded the nine official registers
supplying basic data, with the aim of developing a “high quality
common administrative foundation ... efficiently updated at (a) sin‐
Impact 
| 
125

55 “Fact sheet—basic data.” Denmark Ministry of Finance. October 8, 2014. http://
uk.fm.dk/~/media/files/nyheder/press-releases/2012/10/basic-data/fact_sheet_basic
data.ashx?la=da
56 Jetzek, Thorhildur (2015) Managing complexity across multiple dimensions of open
data: the case of the Danish Basic Data Program. In press, pp 19-20.
57 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
58 See, for example, Sawyer, Geoff and Marc de Vries. “About GMEs and Data: Geese and
Golden Eggs.” European Association of Remote Sensing Companies. December 2012.
http://earsc.org/file_download/134/Open+Data+study+Final+report.pdf
gle site.” Implementing the Basic Data required the harmonization
and conversion to a common format of all existing registers that
would supply data; the addition of extra information to the basic
data registers to better support public administration, and the devel‐
opment of a common infrastructure to distribute the data, the Data
Distributor.55
The Basic Data Program did not come about as a result of public
pressure, demand from potential users or a desire for transparency.
A project manager at the Danish Agency for Digitization inter‐
viewed by Thorhildur Jetzek in 2012 noted: “We believed in [trans‐
parency] but it was not going to open any doors in Denmark.
Because in Denmark we didn’t really have the feeling that our gov‐
ernment wasn’t transparent enough. We never really seemed to
regard that as a serious issue for Denmark.”56
Instead, the Basic Data Program was developed as a result of a busi‐
ness decision to improve public sector efficiency and data quality,
influenced by New Public Management reforms over the last two
decades in which improving efficiency became the focus of efforts to
control spending without increasing taxation.57 Jetzek reports that
initially there was resistance in some quarters to the idea of fully
opening the data, rather than simply finding ways to improve the
efficiency of its collection, management and use, while continuing
with the prevailing model of offering data for sale, as mandated in
Danish law. The decision-makers involved were ultimately persua‐
ded to open the data by the experience of open data projects in the
Netherlands, and by the work of Dutch analyst Marc de Vries, who
argued that the income from data sales was typically a fraction of the
actual costs of collection,58 while the economic benefits of opening
126 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

59 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
60 de Vries, Mark, et al. “Pricing of Public Sector Information Study (POPSIS) Summary
Report.” European Commission Information Society and Media Directorate-General.
October 2011. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/sites/default/files/summary.pdf
61 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Danish Geodata Agency, September 15.
62 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
the data could be up to 17 times that cost.59 The Pricing of Public
Sector Information Study carried out by de Vries and others in 2011
for the European Commission concluded that only reducing charges
to zero or cost-recovery increased data reuse by 1,000 to 10,000 per‐
cent, attracted new users such as small and medium enterprises, and
increased economic activity, market dynamism, innovation,
employment and efficiency, with little impact on cost.60
The advent of Denmark’s Basic Data Program also coincided with a
new government in 2012 that responded to the worldwide economic
crisis with a focus on job creation and innovation. Although open‐
ing the data was a means to improve efficiency, rather than an end
in itself, there was no conflict between efficiency, innovation, and
open data ideals. Lind notes, “We could align the purpose of the
Basic Data Program to make government more efficient with open
data ideas [of] making the basic data open for the private sector and
citizens to make smart things.”61
As intended, the Basic Data Program has provided opportunities for
the private sector. Septima, a geodata startup, was founded around
the same time as the Basic Data Program in 2013. It offers a range of
products and services using the data, including data enhancement,
such as calculating the distance between schools and houses; Web-
based map components and search tools for public data; consulting
to organizations like the Geodata Agency; and subcontracting to the
large IT company involved in developing the distribution platform
for the Basic Data Program.62
Bo Overgaard and Christian Fischer of Septima note that some of
the company’s work would have been possible without the Basic
Data Program, but that the Program opened up possibilities for
products and services that had not previously existed.
Impact 
| 
127

63 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
64 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
65 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
66 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
“[The Basic Data release] was part of the basis of us establishing our
company, that now we [could] do some interesting things with all
the new open data sets.” These new opportunities included the pos‐
sibility of speculative development, without the need for a cus‐
tomer. “[The Basic Data Program] has been a great help to us.
Before, our clients had to have the rights [to the data]. Now we can
develop our products without having a customer. We can get the
data, [make] some nice products and show them to potential cus‐
tomers. It also [enables us] to do different business models. Before,
the license was connected to a user, and if you wanted to make a
mobile application, you had to buy a site license, which could be
very expensive.”63
Since the establishment of the Basic Data Program, the private sec‐
tor market for this data has grown. More companies like Septima
have been established, and existing companies that had not previ‐
ously worked with geodata have moved into the sector. According to
Overgaard and Fischer, this development has spawned a lot of inter‐
esting solutions. It has become standard for insurance companies,
for example, to use elevation data to assess risks of flooding where
they would previously have had to rely on aggregated risk by region.
Municipalities are also using this data to model and plan for flood‐
ing risk as sea levels rise.64
Jetzek observes that the impact on the private sector is harder to
quantify. “There are a few companies in Denmark that you can say
were founded on the basis of the Basic Data Program, but I think
most of the use is, and will continue to be, companies that are using
the data and a thousand other things in their daily processes. For
most companies, it’s hard to say exactly what effect it would have if
the data were not available, or if [they] were more expensive.”65 She
reports that the Danish Geodata has been attempting to track the
impact of its data releases over time, with a baseline survey conduc‐
ted in the year the Basic Data Program began, and follow-up surveys
planned for future years.66
128 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

67 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
68 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
The frequency with which data sets are updated varies according to
the register. Some elevation data relies on aerial surveys that might
be a decade old. Data in the address data set, by contrast, is continu‐
ously updated as new addresses are added by local authorities. It
takes seconds after addresses are locally created for the information
to become available as part of the national data set. “Fifteen seconds
after an address is recorded [by] a local authority, it is available in
our service, and that’s very important if you are making e-
government for GPS. A delay of one to two weeks would be a prob‐
lem. For e-government, if you go to one part of government and
make an address it should be available instantly for the next pur‐
pose.”67
Challenges
Data Quality
Once the decision to open data for the Danish Data Program was
made, the challenges became those of data quality and governance
across the range of agencies and registers. Jetzek notes that the
nature of the data collection has created significant variability in
quality.
“In Denmark, data collection is very distributed, and in most cases
the data is just a part of what they do: a necessary part, but not the
main part. Making some standards or blueprints for the organiza‐
tions to follow when they’re going to model or open the data is very
important. Some agencies like the Geodata Agency are very profes‐
sional data custodians: They’ve done it for a long time, and there
are standards across Europe, and there’s a lot of knowledge and
professionalism. ... Whereas others ... don’t even know what the
data model is. The data is just something that someone is keying in
somewhere, and then they have this register. It’s very important to
have some common understanding and some common skills about
how ... we handle all this data ... [but] this skill [isn’t] common in
the public sector. .... We haven’t really focused on data as a key
resource.”68
Challenges 
| 
129

69 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
70 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
71 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
72 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
Overgaard and Fischer observe that accuracy appears to be higher in
areas where data collection is directly connected with government
revenue by comparison with areas in which data is an incidental by-
product of another activity. “If money is directly involved, the qual‐
ity tends to be good. The building and dwelling register, for
example, is involved in taxation, and it’s pretty precise.”69 The busi‐
ness registers, by contrast, which are not directly involved in reve‐
nue collection, are much more error-prone. Both Jetzek and
Overgaard and Fischer cite weaknesses in the register of companies
where the nature of the business is described: The company itself is
listed, but the nature of its commercial activity is wrong. “In the
business register, the businesses are supposed to say what they do, to
classify the business, but you can look at the register and see that a
pizza shop is classified as a shoemaker because the house used to
belong to a shoemaker, and then it changed ... and nobody [correc‐
ted] the data.”70 Some uses that Septima had hoped to make of the
data from the business register, for example, turned out not to be
possible because of deficiencies in the quality of the data.71
Having been open longer, the address data set has had longer to
address these quality concerns. The aim of the address data subpro‐
gram was “to further improve the quality and accessibility of address
data, and enrich ... the infrastructure behind the distribution of
address data.”72 The Geodata Agency has also collaborated with
OpenStreetMap to identify and correct address errors in the data set.
One of the greatest boons to accuracy, however, is simply opening
the data and having it used, which provides opportunities for scru‐
tiny and correction—what de Vries calls a partial outsourcing of
130 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

73 de Vries, Mark, et al. “Pricing of Public Sector Information Study (POPSIS) Summary
Report.” European Commission Information Society and Media Directorate-General.
October 2011. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/sites/default/files/summary.pdf
74 de Vries, Mark, et al. “Pricing of Public Sector Information Study (POPSIS) Summary
Report.” European Commission Information Society and Media Directorate-General.
October 2011. http://www.epsiplatform.eu/sites/default/files/summary.pdf
75 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
76 Lind, Morten. “The value of Danish address data: social benefits from the 2002 agree‐
ment on procuring address data etc. free of charge.” Danish Enterprise and Construc‐
tion Authority. July 7, 2010. http://www.adresse-info.dk​/Portals/2/Benefit/
Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-07-07b.pdf
77 GovLab interview with Bo Overgaard, Director, Septima, and Christian Fischer, Senior
Advisor, Septima, September 22, 2015.
78 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
quality control73—and raises the quality of the data set.74 “Address
data is very good in Denmark, and that’s because so many are using
them. If no one uses the data, then no one finds the errors,” note
Overgaard and Fischer.75 Centralization of registration also allows
for easier and faster correction, since users only have to report
errors and omissions once,76 through a portal that connects users
with the responsible municipality.77 With the Basic Data Program,
the address data set also “took an extra step toward the open,”
according to Lind, by removing the earlier distribution costs and
making the data easier and cheaper to access and use. “Every citizen
can now download a data set of every address free of charge, or
access our services for a Web application.”78
Governance of the Data Project
Project management issues also arose over the governance of the
program, which was initially similarly distributed and collaborative.
The number of entities involved in the governance of the project
created major complexities and management challenges. Delays
occurred when the development and implementation of the Data
Distributor was much more complicated than originally expected,
overran its timeline and began to impede progress elsewhere. “This
kind of project needs to be handled like infrastructure,” says Jetzek.
“If you want to have an initiative that covers a lot of different data
sets, it [is] really important to think about how you govern this. It’s
hard to do it top-down; it’s also almost impossible to do it bottom-
Challenges 
| 
131

79 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
80 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, Department of IT Management, Copenha‐
gen Business School, September 21, 2015.
81 “Fact sheet—basic data.” Denmark Ministry of Finance. October 8, 2014. http://
uk.fm.dk/~/media/files/nyheder/press-releases/2012/10/basic-data/fact_sheet_basic
data.ashx?la=da
82 GovLab interview with Morten Lind, Senior Advisor, Danish Geodata Agency, Septem‐
ber 15.
up. There has to be a middle way.”79 Jetzek notes that, in response to
the difficulties encountered, the governance structure of the Basic
Data Program was altered to make it “less democratic.”80
Looking Forward
Expected Benefits of the Basic Data Program
At launch, the expected benefits of the Basic Data Program were
efficiencies to government of about EUR 34.8 million from 2020
through decreased administrative costs, of which two-thirds of the
benefit (EUR 23.5 million) would be to municipalities. The release
of the data was also expected to generate returns in the private sec‐
tor of up to EUR 67 million, through the encouragement of new
digital services and products, and the removal of bureaucratic barri‐
ers and data costs. Finally, individuals would benefit from increas‐
ingly improved and integrated public services.81
Addressing Capacity Issues
Lind identifies secure funding as the main future challenge of the
Basic Data Program and projects like it. “One of the issues with
open data is that you have to have a stable, sustainable source of
funding ... to be able to update, and to ensure the long-term quality
of the open data. We [were] lucky that the Danish Basic Data Pro‐
gram came at a time when we needed funding of this kind. If we
could have done anything differently or better, we should have
focused on getting better [long-term] funding. This reorganization
of government process we have just been through shows how easily
things can change, and suddenly you can be without any source of
funding.”82
132 
| 
Chapter 6: Denmark’s Open Address Data Set

83 GovLab interview with Thorhildur Jetzek, September 21, 2015.
For Jetzek, the major future challenge is developing skills in data
collection among public servants. “Getting the data to be really clear
and easy to use, so that it’s used widely across the public and private
sectors and in business-critical processes, is a huge accomplishment
on its own. If you want the data to be really used across the public
and private sectors for more than just creating an interesting visuali‐
zation or one-off something, I think you really need to focus on
[data collection].”83
The Danish effort to consolidate and share address data has already
had major impacts on the country, particularly in inspiring a much
larger effort to open and consolidate all types of public data. To
enable ongoing impacts, though, work must be done to engender
readiness—in the form of adequate funding and employee training
—within the public service, a common theme across global efforts
to create impacts through the opening of data.
Looking Forward 
| 
133


CHAPTER 7
Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity
Information Return Data
Accountability of Charities through Open Data
By Juliet McMurren, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: Charitable data from the Canada Revenue Agency’s
information return has been available to the public since 1975. In
2000, the Charities Directorate of the Canada Revenue Agency
(CRA) began making information from the T3010 Registered Char‐
ity Information Return from organizations with charitable status
available online and by CD-ROM on request, and, in 2013, all data
sets since 2000 were transcribed and made available online via the
government’s data portal under a commercial open data license. The
resulting data set has been used on its own and in combination with
other data by sector groups and academic researchers to explore the
state of the nonprofit sector, improve advocacy by creating a com‐
mon understanding between regulators and charities, and create
intelligence products for donors, fundraisers and grant-makers.
Dimension of Impact: Improving Government—Improving Serv‐
ices
Key Takeaways:
• Government is not the only sector about which open data can
create broad impacts related to transparency and accountability.
There is broad interest in and appetite for giving the public a
135

1 http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/150929/dq150929b-eng.htm
2 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD
3 http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/01/weodata/weorept
4 http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table-1-human-development-index-and-its-components
5 http://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/GDP.pdf
greater understanding of the traditionally obscured financial
dealings of nonprofits.
• Open data—even in situations that are largely focused on trans‐
parency and accountability—could stand to provide benefits to
organizations releasing the data. In the nonprofit sector, for
example, actors whose financial activities place them in higher
standing in the public eye—particularly in comparison to
demonstrated bad actors—stand to benefit from increased citi‐
zen trust and, likely, more donations and volunteerism as a
result.
• Bringing more people to the table in tracking the activities of
large organizations—particularly when that tracking can be
done through large-scale data analysis—can uncover major
instances of corruption or fraud. Not only can openness lead to
more eyes on relevant data, but it can also lead to the right eyes
on the data—i.e., making the data accessible to the people with
the specific knowledge needed to recognize troubling discrep‐
ancies.
Context and Background
Canada is a developed, high-income North American nation with a
population of 35.8 million in July 2015.1 It is a federal parliamentary
democracy and a constitutional monarchy, and is officially bilingual
(English and French). Canada had the world’s 15th highest nominal
per capita income in 2014, according to the World Bank2 and Inter‐
national Monetary Fund.3 Canada was ranked eighth globally in the
2014 UN Human Development Index.4 Its economy is the 11th larg‐
est in the world.5
Canada is ranked highly on measures of government openness and
transparency, civil liberties and press freedom. It is ranked eighth on
the 2015 World Press Freedom Index by Reporters without Borders,
136 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

6 http://index.rsf.org/#!/
7 https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/freedom-press-2015#.VgvwTflVik​o
8 http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results
9 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/canada
10 “Canada: Open Government License.” Open Government Partnership. http://www.open
govpartnership.org/sites/default/files/Inspiring%20Story%20-%20Canada.pdf
11 “G8 Open Data Charter.” Global Affairs Canada. September 19, 2009. http://www.inter
national.gc.ca/g8/open_data_charter-charte_du_g8_sur_les_donnees_ouvertes.aspx?
lang=eng&_ga=1.182752998.1958574156.1442858339
12 http://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset
6 and its press was considered free in 2015.7 In 2014, it was ranked
10th worldwide in the Corruption Perception Index by Transpar‐
ency International.8
Canada signed the Open Government Partnership in 2011, and, as
of late 2015, is implementing its second action plan, which envisages
advances in three streams of activity: open data, open information,
and open dialogue.9 As part of its April 2012 action plan, the Gov‐
ernment of Canada committed itself to the development of an Open
Government Licence to replace existing licenses on open govern‐
ment data and remove restrictions on the reuse of Government of
Canada data. The Open Government Licence has been adopted by
the governments of Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario, as well
as by the federal government.10 Canada is also a signatory to the G8
Open Data Charter, which commits countries to a policy of open by
default.11 The government of Canada releases data sets on its data
portal, open.canada.ca, which had 244,640 data sets available for
download in late 2015.12
Recent Canadian federal budgets have also contained commitments
to advancing open data. The 2014 Canadian federal budget pledged
CDN$3 million over three years for the creation of an Open Data
Institute to be based in Waterloo, Ontario. Once established, the
Institute will be charged with aggregating large data sets, helping
with the development of standards for interoperability and encour‐
aging the development of new data-driven apps. This initiative is
being driven by the Canadian Digital Media Network, a federally
funded Centre of Excellence for Commercialization and Research
responsible for supporting Canadian ICT companies and entrepre‐
Context and Background 
| 
137

13 “Chapter 3.2: Fostering Job Creation, Innovation and Trade.” Canadian Budget 2014.
http://www.budget.gc.ca/2014/docs/plan/ch3-2-eng.html
14 “Key Facts About Canada’s Charities.” Imagine Canada. http://www.imaginecanada.ca/
resources-and-tools/research-and-facts/key-facts-about-canada%E2%80%99s-charities
15 “Chapter 3.4: Supporting Families and Communities.” Canadian Budget 2014. http://
www.budget.gc.ca/2014/docs/plan/ch3-4-eng.html
16 “Satellite Account of Non-profit Institutions and Volunteering.” Statistics Canada. 2007.
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/13-015-x/13-015-x2009000-eng.pdf
17 http://www.ifrc.org/docs/idrl/635EN.pdf
18 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/E/pbg/tf/t3010/t3010-15e.pdf
neurs, and encouraging their collaboration with research institutes,
governments and other organizations.13
Canada has the second-largest nonprofit sector per capita in the
world after the Netherlands.14 The 2014 Canadian federal budget
states that there are over 86,000 registered charities in Canada.15 As
of 2009, core nonprofits (those other than hospitals, colleges and
universities) accounted for 2.5 percent of Canada’s annual GDP, and
growth in this sector outpaced the Canadian economy for six of the
11 years between 1997 and 2007. The nonprofit sector generated
nearly six times more value than the automotive industry, and
employed 1.3 million people.16
Project Description and Inception
Section 149.1(15) of Canada’s Income Tax Act obliges the govern‐
ment to make information contained in a public information return
available to the public, although the form in which this information
is released is left to the discretion of the Minister.17 Organizations
with registered charitable status in Canada are currently required to
file an annual T3010, or Registered Charity Information Return,
within six months of the end of the fiscal year. The 10-page form,
which is similar in content to the US 990 tax return, asks the charity
to disclose its domestic and international charitable activities, reve‐
nue totals per type of source (e.g. government, foundations, donors),
expenditures, charitable gifts, and non-partisan political activities.18
Since 1967, Canadian charities have been required to make applica‐
tion to a central registry and file annual financial and operational
138 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

19 “Report on the Law of Charities.” Ontario Law Reform Commission. 1996. http://
www.mtroyal.ca/cs/groups/public/documents/pdf/npr03_lawcharities.pdf
20 Brouard, François. “T3010 Challenges for Research.” Sprott School of Business Discus‐
sion Paper. May 16, 2014. http://http-server.carleton.ca/~fbrouard/documents/
PaperT3010ChallengesFB201405.pdf
21 “Satellite Account of Nonprofit Institutions and Volunteering Final Report.” Voluntary
Sector Initiative. January 2003. http://www.vsi-isbc.org/eng/knowledge/pdf/satel
lite_final_report.pdf
22 Broder, Pete.” 2012 Federal Budget Features Tighter Reporting on Charities’ Political
Activities.” LawNow. May 1, 2012. http://www.lawnow.org/2012-federal-budget-features-
tighter-reporting-on-charities-political-activities/
23 “Report on the Law of Charities.” Ontario Law Reform Commission. 1996. http://
www.mtroyal.ca/cs/groups/public/documents/pdf/npr03_lawcharities.pdf
24 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
25 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
reports with CRA.19 The T3010 itself was introduced to replace ear‐
lier returns in 1997, and substantially revised in 1999, and again in
2009,20 after consultation with the third sector through the Volun‐
tary Sector Initiative.21 Another revision in 2012 increased reporting
requirements for charities involved in political activities.22
Most of the data collected have been made public since 1976, when
an amendment to the Income Tax Act required all registered chari‐
ties to file an annual public information return outlining their
income, donations received, gifts made, costs of fundraising, over‐
head expenses, and salaries.23 According to David Lasby, Director of
Research at Imagine Canada, an umbrella group that supports and
advocates for Canada’s charities, as the form has been expanded over
time, more information has become open, thanks to an implicit
“open by default” position. “Back all those many years ago when
they wrote the legislation, they built in the public information
return component. The initial return was not terribly detailed, but
as the return has become more and more detailed, [the additional
material] has in the main been considered to be part of the informa‐
tion return and is publicly available. This was open data before open
data ever existed.”24 The minority of data not made public touches
on personal confidentiality: Lasby notes, for example, that the open
data set includes the total amount of cross-border funding received
by an organization, but that names of individuals and organizations
providing that funding are withheld.25
Project Description and Inception 
| 
139

26 GovLab interview with Peter Elson, Community Development Researcher, Mount
Royal University and University of Victoria, October 21, 2015.
27 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
28 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
29 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
30 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
31 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
The information was originally made available upon request on
paper,26 and then on data tape during the 1990s.27 In 2000, the Can‐
ada Revenue Agency (CRA) began making data from T3010 avail‐
able to the public online through the Charities Internet Display
System (CIDS), and by CD-ROM upon request, in comma-
separated value (CSV) format. Those requesting the data were able
to reuse it with CRA permission, but the data available online was
only updated twice annually, limiting its commercial usefulness.28
In 2013, T3010 data for 2012 was transcribed into machine-readable
format and released with a commercially friendly license on the gov‐
ernment’s open data portal, open.canada.ca. The 2013 data were
released the following year, and 2014 data were expected to be
released in early 2016. In addition, the released data included digi‐
tized records of all gifts from charities and foundations, instead of
only the first 10 such gifts on each T3010, as had previously been the
case.29 More frequent updates, issued about once a month, are still
available on CD-ROM by request from CRA.30
Although Canada’s T3010 resembles the US 990 in many respects,
the digitization of the Canadian dataset renders it much more com‐
mercially useful than the US dataset, which is only available in
image PDF format. The T3010 data set contains a digitized,
machine-readable record of all gifts from charities and foundations,
something no other country provides.31
140 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

32 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
33 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
Impact
Benefits to Charities
Outside of government, probably the heaviest users of the T3010
data set have been charities themselves. One of the earliest nonprofit
users of the data set, Imagine Canada, has been working with the
data since the early 1990s.32 In the beginning, the data was used as a
population count of charitable organizations, and an indicator of the
key areas covered by the T3010, such as the charitable activities, rev‐
enues, expenditure, size, location and distribution—enabling a
macro-level view of the philanthropic sector that still provides value
today. Over time, Imagine Canada’s use of the data has become both
heavier and more complex. “I use [the T3010 data] for everything
from a sampling frame for survey work, to ... a data source for
answering policy-relevant questions, to being able to tell people
what’s going on in the charitable sector in a given province. It looms
large in every data-driven thing we do. You’re essentially talking
about the vital statistics of every organization that’s in our key stake‐
holder area. ... We use it in our business processes; we use it to
understand what’s going on in organizations we don’t have direct
contact with, but are actually responsible for ... as a charity that
seeks to serve the interests of other charities. Basically, almost every
person in the organization on a daily basis touches the data,
[although] a lot of the time they don’t realize it. ... I have the T3010
database open probably nine days out of 10.”33
A typical research project involving the data set for Imagine Canada
was an examination of charity financing and its variability according
to the size, subsector and activity type, and region. The project pro‐
vided a benchmark for the organizations themselves, and allowed
them to describe their particular situation to stakeholders and poli‐
cymakers.
“Policymakers look at the charitable sector and they see the data in
the aggregate: where all of the money comes from and where it goes
to. Organization leaders see it more from the perspective of where
Impact 
| 
141

34 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
35 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
36 http://www.imaginecanada.ca/grant-connect
37 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
their specific organization gets its funding, and what the norms are.
So policymakers look at the sector and say, wow, government fund‐
ing plays a huge role. Charitable leaders look at the sector and say ...
well, most of that funding actually goes to a relatively small number
of organizations: most of us are highly dependent on earned
income and gifts and donations.”34
Imagine Canada has also combined the T3010 data set with other
data, including IRS 990s, foundation annual reports, social media
and data mined from websites, to create a by-subscription Canadian
directory to foundations and corporations, now called Grant Con‐
nect.35
Grant Connect offers searchable information on grant prospects
available to Canadian organizations, with detailed descriptions, giv‐
ing histories and biographies of decision-makers. The data is veri‐
fied by Imagine Canada with the grant-makers to ensure accuracy.
According to Imagine Canada, the service had over 1,000 subscrib‐
ers in late 2015.36
Philanthropic Foundations of Canada (PFC) is also a heavy user of
the data set. A member association of nearly 130 charitable grant-
makers, almost of all of whom are charities themselves, PFC has two
mandates: to support the growth of effective grant-making philan‐
thropy through services such as professional development, publica‐
tions and conferences for members and nonmembers; and to
advocate for the field, and for the growth of philanthropy in Can‐
ada. In support of these aims, PFC carries out research and collects
data, both independently and in collaboration with organizations
like Imagine Canada, with whom it recently produced a report on
the top 150 grant-making bodies in Canada.37 PFC also relies on the
basic biographical data from the T3010—dates of establishment and
registration, membership of the board of directors, and financials—
in its business processes, using it to develop an overview of organi‐
zation applying for membership, ascertain the eligibility of appli‐
142 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

38 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
39 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
40 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
41 http://stepupbc.ca/discover-stepup-bc-sector-information/stepup-open-
data#.VgwEqPlViko
42 GovLab interview with Peter Elson, Community Development Researcher, Mount
Royal University and University of Victoria, October 21, 2015.
43 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/chrts-gvng/lstngs/menu-eng.html
44 http://www.charityfocus.ca/EN/Pages/Home.aspx
cants for membership, and verify members’ reported assets and
grants in fee calculations.38
Lasby notes that one of the benefits of the T3010 data set has been
the creation of a common set of facts in discussions between the
charitable sector and government. “Because so much of the [T3010]
data is public, when we’re having policy discussions with govern‐
ment, we are, in the main ... talking about the same data that we can
both have access to and both parties can see. ... What this [data set]
is tremendously useful for is getting all of the stakeholders on the
same page ... without multiple competing realities.”39 The data set
also allows advocates to demonstrate the impact of the charitable
sector to legislators, through the number of employees and reve‐
nues.40 The data also allows the presence of the sector to be repre‐
sented spatially: StepUpBC has used the data, for example, to map
nonprofit organizations in British Columbia.41
Both Imagine Canada and CRA have employed the T3010 data to
assist the public in finding, researching and giving to charities. CRA
encourages potential donors to search for and investigate charities
before donating through its Charities Listing search tool,42,43 which
uses the T3010 data set. Working in partnership with CRA, Imagine
Canada has built on the data set to offer Charity Focus, a tool that
provides in-depth, year-to-year financial information about chari‐
ties for potential givers. Charities can also augment the information
available on Charity Focus by uploading their annual reports, pro‐
gram information, and mission and financial statements.44
Impact 
| 
143

45 GovLab interview with Peter Elson, Community Development Researcher, Mount
Royal University and University of Victoria, October 21, 2015.
46 http://http-server.carleton.ca/~fbrouard/T3010group
47 Brouard, François. “Small Charities: An analysis of change in fundraising activities.”
Sprott School of Business. http://www.mtroyal.ca/cs/groups/public/documents/pdf/
brouardpro.pdf
48 Neilson, Leighann, François Brouard and Anahit Armenakyan. “Fundraising Methods:
Past, Present, Future.” SCSE-CSES Research Report. October 2012. http://
www.mtroyal.ca/cs/groups/public/documents/pdf/ins-brouardrpt2.pdf
49 Spyker, Clifford L. “There Is No Accounting for Landscape: Capturing the Demograph‐
ics of Canadian Registered Charities (2000—2008).” Institute for Nonprofit Studies
Working Paper # 3. 2011. http://www.mtroyal.ca/cs/groups/public/documents/pdf/wkgpa
per3.pdf
Enabling New Streams of Research
Despite the relatively small number of Canadian researchers
engaged in studying the charitable sector, the academic community
has also made use of the data to examine charity financing and other
econometric questions.
Peter Elson, a researcher in community development at Mount
Royal University and the University of Victoria, has used the data to
map the location of charities and compare it to socioeconomic data
on prevalence and extent of poverty in those areas. He has also
examined the ways in which T3010 data captures policy implemen‐
tation and charities’ engagement in public policy, and the changes in
patterns of giving brought about by the introduction of donations of
shares. Elson has also used the data set to examine the rate and pat‐
terns of voluntary deregistration, largely among faith-based charities
as churchgoing declines.45 He was also the founding coordinator of
the T3010 user group, a group of academic and other users who
consult with the CRA on changes and improvements to the form.46
François Brouard of Carleton University is the current T3010 user
group coordinator and has used the data to conduct research on the
fundraising activities of small charities47 and on changes in fundrais‐
ing behavior over time.48 Other academics have used the archival
data from the T3010 data set to depict the changing demographic of
Canadian charities.49
144 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

50 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
51 Lenczner, Michael. “Canada—a World Leader in Non-profit Data.” Government of
Canada. July 4, 2014. http://open.canada.ca/en/blog/ajah-and-fundtracker
52 http://ajah.ca/
53 Lenczner, Michael and Susan Phillips. “From Stories to Evidence: How Mining Data
Can Promote Innovation in the Nonprofit Sector.” Technology Innovation Management
Review. July 2012. http://timreview.ca/article/575
54 http://poweredbydata.org/
55 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
Creating a New Business Asset
The open availability of the data set has encouraged startups interes‐
ted in developing intelligence products for charities. Ajah, a
Montreal-based data company used T3010 data to develop Fund‐
tracker, an online research tool that assists nonprofits to identify,
research and approach potential funders. Ajah began scraping the
data from the CRA website in 2010. “The CRA didn’t know what to
make of it,” Ajah CEO Michael Lenczner reports. “Initially they had
a statement on the website saying they didn’t support scraping
instead of accessing the data by CD-ROM.”50
Emboldened by Treasury Board support for open data projects like
theirs, Ajah continued. In 2011, it launched Fundtracker. In addition
to the T3010, Fundtracker drew on multiple open sources of gov‐
ernment and charitable data—federal and provincial government
spending; charity financial and grant records and annual reports;
and corporate social responsibility reports51—to provide a compre‐
hensive and searchable database of potential funders.52 By cross-
referencing the T3010 with other data, Ajah has been able to amass
an unparalleled database on the nonprofit sector,53 which it used to
build Fundtracker, but also as a survey frame for other inquiry
through its nonprofit consultancy arm, PoweredByData.54
Within Canada, the availability of the data set has resulted in more
companies competing to help the nonprofit sector use the informa‐
tion than in the US. “In the US, there are two companies,” says
Lenczner, “In Canada there are five.”55 Experience gained working
with the T3010 data set has enabled some of these Canadian compa‐
nies to enter and compete in markets where the data has not been
Impact 
| 
145

56 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
57 Eaves, David. “Case Study: How Open data saved Canada $3.2 Billion.” Eaves.ca. April
14, 2010. http://eaves.ca/2010/04/14/case-study-open-data-and-the-public-purse/
58 Eaves, David. “Case Study: How Open data saved Canada $3.2 Billion.” Eaves.ca. April
14, 2010. http://eaves.ca/2010/04/14/case-study-open-data-and-the-public-purse/
opened, and is not as easy to access. A British Columbia company,
Metasoft, has entered the U.S. market and competes with the Foun‐
dation Center to provide fundraising intelligence to the nonprofit
market there. According to Lenczner, the opportunity to hone their
skills, and their software, on a freely accessible and reusable data set
gives Canadian companies a competitive advantage. Having devel‐
oped the software and an understanding of what is possible using
this data, they are able to go into markets where the data is not open,
and scrape the data from annual reports and other sources to pro‐
vide the same service. Lenczner notes, “There’s not a lot of ... little
plucky startups [in the US] doing this, because there’s a lot of
upfront costs. I would not be doing this in the U.S. at all.”56
Financial Benefits for Government and Identification of
Tax Evasion
Although the intended benefits to government of the T3010 were
administrative, the opening of the data has yielded some unexpected
financial benefits. A contractor using T3010 data from 2005 to ana‐
lyze charitable foundations in greater Toronto uncovered evidence
of massive tax fraud, in which illegally operating charities in the
Toronto area sheltered CAN$500 million in 2005 alone. A later
newspaper investigation suggested that the fraudulent donations
amounted to almost CAN$1 billion per year, with $3.2 billion ille‐
gally sheltered, a sum equivalent to 12 percent of annual charitable
giving in Canada. The exposure of the fraud led to systematic clo‐
sure of charity tax shelters.57 Writing about the impact of open data
on the tax evasion scandal, nonprofit researcher and open data
advocate David Eaves comments, “When data is made readily avail‐
able in machine readable formats, more eyes can look at it. This
means that someone on the ground, in the community ... who
knows the sector, is more likely to spot something a public servant
in another city might not see because they don’t have the right con‐
text or bandwidth.”58
146 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

59 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
60 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
61 Beeby, Dean. “Academics call for moratorium on CRA political audit of think-tank.”
The Globe and Mail. September 14, 2014. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/poli
tics/academics-calls-for-moratorium-on-cra-political-audit-of-think-tank/arti
cle20593498/
62 http://cponline.thecanadianpress.com/graphics/2014/cra-audit-charities/index.html
63 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/chrts-gvng/chrts/plcy/cps/cps-022-eng.html#N1039E
Lasby notes that the experience has enabled those working with the
data to develop signatures for potential tax evasion, but at the time
the tax evasion was missed because those overseeing the data simply
were not looking for it. In addition, the community of T3010 data
users was too small and technologically unsophisticated at the time
to provide additional oversight or analysis. “This data is so variable
that it’s hard to spot behavior that looks aberrant. It looked com‐
pletely aberrant in the rear view mirror, once you know to look for it
[but] at the time, I wasn’t constructing a lot of longitudinal data sets.
Now it’s completely the norm for me to put together a ten-year slice.
[We] didn’t have the capability back then, [or] the statistical or
informational horsepower.”59 He notes that those working with the
data would be more likely to pick up anomalies now, but that the
pool of analysts is still small, and not well integrated. Comparing it
to the massed debugging capacity of the open source movement,
Lasby notes, “What we have right now ... is a lot of parallel play. We
all build data sets, we all work with it in our isolated rural splendor.
We do talk to each other, and share information both formally and
informally, but it’s not systematic. We tend not to share data sets.”60
More controversially, information from the T3010 was also used by
the former Conservative Government to target certain organiza‐
tions, notably environmental and human rights charities and left-
leaning think tanks,61 for lengthy and costly tax audits of their
political activities. Regulations since 2003 prohibit charitable organ‐
izations from spending more than 10 percent of all expenses on
political activities.62,63 The 2012 revision of the T3010 added a new
question and schedule requiring charities to disclose whether they
had participated in political activities, including making gifts
intended for use for political activities, and whether they had
Impact 
| 
147

64 http://www.cba.org/CBA/sections_charities/newsletters2013/cra.aspx
65 Blumberg, Mark. “Political Activity Audits and the CRA Program Update 2015.” Glob‐
alPhilanthropy.ca. April 24, 2015. http://www.globalphilanthropy.ca/blog/
cra_program_update_2015_and_political_activity_audits
66 Beeby, Dean. “Timeline | Canada Revenue Agency’s political activity audits of charities.”
CBC News. August 5, 2014. http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/canada-revenue-agency-s-
political-activity-audits-of-charities-1.2728023
67 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/chrts-gvng/chrts/bt/chrtsprgrm_pdt-2015-eng.html
68 “’Preventing poverty’ not a valid goal for tax purposes, CRA tells Oxfam Canada.” CBC
News. July 25, 2014. http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/preventing-poverty-not-a-valid-
goal-for-tax-purposes-cra-tells-oxfam-canada-1.2717774
69 “Study cites ’chill’ from tax agency audits of charities’ political activities.” CBC News.
July 10, 2014. http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/study-cites-chill-from-tax-agency-audits-
of-charities-political-activities-1.2703182
received funds from outside Canada for political activities. It also
asked them to describe their political activities and how these
related to their charitable purpose.64
Between 2012 and 2016, the CRA, with $13.4 million in special
funding, was charged with reviewing political activities of charitable
organizations that reported that they engaged in political activities
or recorded expenses for political activities on their T3010.65 In 2014
the CRA was auditing the political activities of 52 groups, many of
whom had been critical of the Conservative Government’s environ‐
mental and aid policies.66 As of March 31, 2015, 21 audits had been
completed, another 28 were in process, and a further 11 were
expected to be carried out before the end of the review in 2016.
These audits had resulted in six education letters, eight compliance
agreements, five notices of intention to revoke charitable status, one
voluntary revocation and one annulment.67 Revocation of charitable
status carried crippling consequences for organizations, stripping
them of their power to issue tax receipts, and therefore cutting them
off from an important source of funding. Charities complained that
those audited were being drained of resources through the demands
of compliance with the audit, while the threat of audits had created
an “advocacy chill,” where charities self-censored in order to avoid
being audited.68,69 Furthermore, organizations making grants to
other charities for political activity were required to report that as
148 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

70 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
71 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
72 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
73 Tsao, Dora, et al. “Tax Audits of Environmental Groups: The Pressing Need for Law
Reform.” Environmental Law Centre, University of Victoria. March 2015. http://
www.elc.uvic.ca/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Tax-Audits-of-Environmental-
Groups_2015Mar25.pdf
74 Lenczner, Michael and Susan Phillips. “From Stories to Evidence: How Mining Data
Can Promote Innovation in the Nonprofit Sector.” Technology Innovation Management
Review. July 2012. http://timreview.ca/article/575
political activity on their own T3010, leading to a pronounced reluc‐
tance to make grants for political activity.70
Lasby acknowledges that opening the data does make it available to
people wanting to use it for political capital.71 Those responsible for
instigating the audit process would, however, have had access to the
data whether it was open or not. “I don’t know how you avoid [the
political use of the data], and frankly I don’t know that you want to
avoid that. You would hope that people are informed ... and that
they make fair points, and that there are lots of voices out there. The
challenge there is not, I think, about the data being open or closed,
because all that it means is that that contradiction gets played out in
a somewhat more public way.”72 As other commentators have also
noted, the audits illustrate that the definitions of political activity
may not be clear in practice, or even in law.73
Challenges
Mismatch Between Expectations and Reality
Without exception, those interviewed about their work with the
T3010 data set describe a gap between the apparent promise of the
data and what it can actually deliver. Because the T3010 is intended
primarily for compliance and administration rather than research, it
does not provide all of the information that users would like. It can
help give a better high-level view of the financial and human resour‐
ces of the sector, but has little to say about the clients, networks and
funders of charities.74 Hilary Pearson, President of PFC, notes, in
Challenges 
| 
149

75 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
76 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
77 “Cornerstones of Community: Highlights of the National Survey of Nonprofit and Vol‐
untary Organisations 2003 Revised.” Statistics Canada. 2005. http://www.imagineca
nada.ca/sites/default/files/www/en/library/nsnvo/nsnvo_report_english.pdf
78 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
79 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
addition, that the T3010 shows where grants came from, but not
what they were used for.75
Significantly, the T3010 also says nothing at all about nonprofits
without charitable status, which make up nearly half of the sector.
Because nonprofit organizations without charitable status are cov‐
ered by different legislation and legal requirements, they are not
required to file an annual return.76 As a result, relatively little is
known about Canadian nonprofits, although they make up at least
44 percent of the nonprofit sector, according to the National Survey
of Non-profit and Voluntary Organisations (NSNVO).77 Brouard
notes the absence of a directorate devoted to nonprofits without
charitable status: “CRA isn’t interested in nonprofits [without chari‐
table status] because they don’t pay tax.”78
Noting that many of those using the T3010 data set tend to fall in
love with its possibilities, and then out of love with it as they
encounter its limitations, Lasby cautions that it needs to be treated
as a foundation, rather than as a complete source. “If you treat it as a
found, high-quality data set you’re pretty much inevitably going to
be disappointed. The number of research questions you can answer
[without gathering more data] is actually pretty limited. People
[think], ‘Oh, there’s this tremendously rich source of data that’s
going to answer all my questions!’ Well, no: You’ve got a tremen‐
dously rich source of data that can provide you with a framework to
work from in going out and gathering more data to answer your
questions.”79
150 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

80 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
81 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
82 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
83 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
84 “Chapter 3.4: Supporting Families and Communities.” Canadian Budget 2014. http://
www.budget.gc.ca/2014/docs/plan/ch3-4-eng.html
85 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
86 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
Data Quality: Transcription and Reporting Errors
One of the common complaints about the T3010 data is that it is
currently manually entered from paper returns without double-
keying, increasing the likelihood that transcription errors will occur
and not be caught.80,81,82 Because data is submitted and keyed de
novo each year, rather than being prepopulated, consistency of even
the most basic data, such as an organization’s name, is limited,
according to Brouard.83 The 2014 Canadian federal budget commit‐
ted the government to reducing the administrative burden on chari‐
ties by introducing electronic filing of T3010s and online
applications for registrations for charitable status, at a cost of $1 mil‐
lion in 2014–15 and $0.5 million in 2015–16.84 Users hope that this
will increase the speed and accuracy of the data release.
Lasby believes reporting errors are a far more significant problem
than transcription errors.85 During the 1990s, it was discovered that
some organizations were reporting their financials in thousands of
dollars, without indicating the last three zeroes, rather than submit‐
ting exact figures. As a result, financial reporting on the T3010 for
these organizations was out by three orders of magnitude.86 Returns
from 30 percent of universities studied were affected, resulting in a
significant understatement of the size and wealth of the sector. The
mistake was able to be identified by comparing the T3010 data
against data published by the Association of Universities and Col‐
Challenges 
| 
151

87 “Working Together: A Government of Canada/Voluntary Sector Joint Initiative -
Report of the Joint Tables.” Voluntary Sector Initiative. July 28, 1999. http://www.vsi-
isbc.org/eng/knowledge/working_together/reports_wt_suppd.cfm
88 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
89 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
90 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
91 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
leges of Canada, but similar mistakes in reporting by other charities
may well have gone uncorrected.87
Furthermore, little is done by CRA to verify the data supplied by
charities, making it hard for users to assess data quality.88 Brouard
questions whether some of the data collected is used, or even moni‐
tored, by government. “As a charity, you will be penalized if you
don’t file your T3010—but if you file it with garbage, no one seems
to really care.”89 Lasby points out that the T3010 does not have to be
audited before filing. “You’ve got something that looks like a finan‐
cial statement [based on] generally accepted accounting principles ...
but’s that’s not what it is. It’s not a balance sheet, it’s a self-reported
compliance document.”90
The quality of the data set is also affected by the fact that the data is
reported by the executive directors and board members of the
organizations themselves, who may not have financial or legal
expertise. Lasby reports that there have been considerable efforts to
train those responsible for completing T3010s—“you name it, it’s
been done”—and the form comes with a general guide and accom‐
panying resources on the CRA website, but that ensuring the accu‐
racy of data collection nonetheless remains a challenge. “The stark
reality for the sector is that half of the organizations out there are
100 percent volunteer run. In a lot of cases, you’re asking someone
who doesn’t necessarily have financial training to fill out a document
that looks a lot like a financial document, and a lot of the time they
don’t have legal training ... and they don’t fully understand ... the
legal framework around charities.”91 This is complicated by what
Phillips and Lenczner refer to as the lack of a “capacity for numer‐
152 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

92 Lenczner, Michael and Susan Phillips. “From Stories to Evidence: How Mining Data
Can Promote Innovation in the Nonprofit Sector.” Technology Innovation Management
Review. July 2012. http://timreview.ca/article/575
93 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015; See also Brouard, Francois, Leigh‐
ann Neilson and Anahit Armenakyan. “Small Charities: An Analysis of Change in
Fundraising Activities.” SCSE-CSES Research Report. October 2012. http://sprott.carle
ton.ca/research/wp-content/files/Paper2charitiesfundraisinganalysisFBL
NAA20121031.pdf
94 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
95 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
96 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
acy”92 within the sector. Brouard reports that research units at Carle‐
ton had been contracted for projects to help improve compliance
among smaller charities, whom CRA had recognized had particular
difficulty filling in the T3010 correctly, and who lacked the financial
resources to retain accountants to help them.93
Definitional Challenges
Definitional problems are also common, creating confusion for
charities and data users alike. Users note that terms used in the form
—for fundraising methods94 and categories of revenue sources,95 to
give two examples—are often different from those in common or
academic use, and are not well understood by even the largest and
most sophisticated of charitable organizations completing the docu‐
ment, or indeed by government departments. This leads to organi‐
zations with similar funding mixes having radically different T3010
reporting, according to Lasby.96
Sometimes the problem is not the definition, but the absence of a
definition. Pearson notes that the T3010 does not specify whether
assets reported should be book or market value. “For us, that mat‐
ters a lot. Market value ... can be much higher than book, and if we
calculate our membership fee as a percentage of assets, if it’s book
value then it’s going to be a lot less. But it’s also misleading in report‐
ing in aggregate ways on the value of foundations. Are we underre‐
Challenges 
| 
153

97 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
98 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
99 GovLab interview with Hilary Pearson, President, Philanthropic Foundations Canada,
October 20, 2015.
100 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
porting the whole field?”97 These technical issues have made Pearson
wary about depending on T3010 data in making statements about or
assessments of the grant-making sector. “The only number that I
can say, yes, I am certain that this is a correct number is the number
of registered foundations, public and private, because CRA counts
them and reports them. [But] even that misses how many of them
are active and how many are just sitting on the books.”98
Definitional confusion has implications not just for the quality of
data collection, but also for organizational behavior. “The T3010
attempts to ask every charity what percentage of your budget, item‐
ized, goes into administration [and] what percent goes into charita‐
ble activity, and an awful lot of charities out there are confused
about that. In spite of CRA’s attempts to explain what is administra‐
tive and what is charitable, it’s not clear. Just about the only thing
that does seem to be clear is that the fee you pay to your auditor for
auditing your financial statements is an administrative expense. An
awful lot of foundations still think that they have to put all their sal‐
aries into the administrative expense box, and therefore they don’t
hire people ... because they don’t want to have any overhead.”99
Shifting Government Priorities
The T3010 has also changed over time in response to changes in
government priorities. Having requested archival data since 2000,
Brouard found himself frustrated by the frequent changes in the
form to reflect changes in tax policy, which made it difficult, and in
some cases impossible, to compare data over time. Some of the
changes seem arbitrary and designed to confuse rather than
enlighten. Brouard cites a change in the wording of a question that
asked one year whether an organization was active, and whether the
organization was inactive in the following year’s form. “So a yes one
year means a no in another year.”100 Changes to the form are also
154 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

101 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
102 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
103 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
104 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
105 GovLab interview with François Brouard, Founding Director, Sprott Centre for Social
Enterprises, Carleton University, October 15, 2015.
accompanied by a temporary drop in data quality, according to
Lasby: “Every single time we change the form, data quality suffers,
and then as that section of the form becomes more and more famil‐
iar ... data quality gets better.”101 Brouard suggests that assistance
from Statistics Canada could help to improve the design of the
T3010, but that communication between Statistics Canada and the
Canada Revenue Agency is poor, although efforts have been made to
improve them.102
Those seeking to use the data must therefore either accept its imper‐
fections or find ways to eliminate erroneous or questionable data.
Lasby notes that academic and research use requires substantial time
and effort to clean the data and ensure data from the subset of chari‐
ties under study is coherent, free from obvious error, and meets nec‐
essary criteria.103 Imagine Canada and Ajah have found ways to
circumvent these problems, at least in part, by combining the T3010
data set with data from other sources. According to Lasby, however,
there are few tools to assist those attempting to work with the T3010
data, and becoming conversant with it and skilled in its use is a
time- and labor-intensive exercise in self-teaching. “The principal
[question is], whether you have the systems in place to work with
the data? Do you have the technological infrastructure to make use
of it? ... Only a minority of people have the skills required to work
with it directly, and the technology does not yet exist, or is not yet
widespread, to allow folks who lack those technical skills to work
with it.”104 Brouard puts it more succinctly: “It’s one thing to have the
data; it’s another to be able to work with it easily.”105
Challenges 
| 
155

106 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
107 GovLab interview with Peter Elson, Community Development Researcher, Mount
Royal University and University of Victoria, October 21, 2015.
108 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
109 GovLab interview with Michael Lenczner, Chief Executive Officer, Ajah, September 23,
2015.
110 GovLab interview with David Lasby, Director of Research, Imagine Canada, October
14, 2015.
Looking Forward
Improving the Usability of the Data
Users are equivocal about the usefulness of the current T3010 data
release on the government’s open data portal. Lasby says that some
of the ways the data has been processed for release on the open data
portal do not make sense to him, and make the data harder to work
with. He prefers to get data updates on CD-ROM, which are more
frequent, with disc releases taking place roughly once a month, and
containing a couple of years’ worth of both newly released data and
updates and corrections to previously released data.106 CRA has
expressed interest in creating an official research database, which
Elson believes would be a boon for the comparability of research,107
but Lasby is concerned that accuracy would suffer without the con‐
tinual updating of the CD-ROM releases.108
Some parts of the data set remain largely unexplored territory.
Lenczner notes that no one has made much use of the newly com‐
plete records of charitable gifts, since the entire list of gifts has only
been made available since 2013. Overall, he believes that there is still
a lot of value to be extracted from the entire data set. “It takes time
for innovation to happen. It takes the market knowing what’s avail‐
able and people knowing how to exploit what’s available.”109 Lasby
believes the use of the data is increasing as its availability has
become better known. “One of the changes I’ve observed over the
past couple of years is more and more journalists working with it, as
a completely standard thing ... and they work with it as a data set,
not [by] going in and looking at a single organization.”110
156 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

111 Lenczner, Michael. “Canada—a World Leader in Non-profit Data.” Government of
Canada. July 4, 2014. http://open.canada.ca/en/blog/ajah-and-fundtracker
112 http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/tx/nnprft/nprp-eng.html
113 Lenczner, Michael. “Canada—a World Leader in Non-profit Data.” Government of
Canada. July 4, 2014. http://open.canada.ca/en/blog/ajah-and-fundtracker
Both Pearson and Brouard believe that separating the regulation of
charities from tax collection would improve data quality and cover‐
age. Pearson suggests that the solution may ultimately lie in separat‐
ing the collection of charities data from CRA. “I think the
fundamental issue ... is one that the U.K. tackled some time ago:
Should the regulation of the sector be handled out of the [tax]
department? The U.K. created the Charities Commission for very
good reason. An independent organization is able to regulate and
collect data on charities outside of the requirements of revenue col‐
lection. I think that’s really fundamental, but that’s not an issue for
CRA: It’s a political issue, and a policy issue.”
IT Support for Nonprofits
There are several indications that Canada will be furthering its lead‐
ership in this space.111 The already launched Non-Profit Organiza‐
tion Risk Identification Project Report should increase public
knowledge about the significant number of nonprofits that do not
have charitable status.112 Additionally, the announced IT Moderniza‐
tion Charities project—which is aimed at modernizing the CRA’s IT
systems so that it can provide new electronic service options for
charities—contains several measures to improve the quality and
availability of that data. Those initiatives, as well as civil initiatives
such as the Community Knowledge Exchange and Ajah’s own Pow‐
eredbyData, give Canada the opportunity to continue to develop its
expertise in this area.113
Nonprofit Data Collaboratives
As openness in the Canadian nonprofit sector continues to take
hold, actors in the field should look to not only move toward com‐
pliance and transparency, but consider how data can enable greater
collaboration among organizations. As David Eaves argued prior to
the release of nonprofit data in 2013:
Looking Forward 
| 
157

114 Eaves, David. “Nonprofits Should Share Their Data, Too.” TechPresident. January 24,
2013. http://techpresident.com/news/23412/nonprofits-should-share-their-data-too
115 Rose, Lee. “Reflections on CKX—The Community Knowledge Exchange Summit.” Tor‐
onto Foundation. December 2, 2014. https://torontofoundation.ca/news/reflections-ck​x-
%E2%80%93-community-k​nowledge-exchange-summit
“[T]here is a tremendous opportunity in the nonprofit space
around not just using data, but also sharing data, to better under‐
stand some of the world’s toughest challenges. I’m also left
acknowledging that even where data usage is strong—such as in the
environmental community—few stakeholders in these sectors see
open data as something relevant or meaningful to their organiza‐
tions and their strategies. I’m not sure how to change that, but it
seems like a huge opportunity.”114
The Community Knowledge Exchange Summit, for instance, dem‐
onstrates the interest in and potential impacts of greater coordina‐
tion between actors in the Canadian nonprofit space. One of the key
aspects of the summit was field building: “Creating and holding a
space for community organizations, academic and research institu‐
tions, governments, funders and grant-makers, and engaged citizens
to come together in the spirit of collaboration and openness.”115
It has been evident in many cases examined in this report that data
collaboratives bringing together actors within and across sectors can
amplify the impacts of open data. Now that the proverbial cat is out
of the bag, and open data is the default in the nonprofit sector,
organizations can start to consider how they can turn this openness
into new ways to solve problems together.
158 
| 
Chapter 7: Opening Canada’s T3010 Charity Information Return Data

PART III
Case Studies: Empowering
Citizens
In a number of cases, open data is empowering citizens to take con‐
trol of their lives and demand change. The new ways of communi‐
cating and accessing information exemplified by open data are
enabling more informed decision making and new forms of social
mobilization.
The case studies in this section examine:
• An improved capacity to track school performance and demand
improvements in Mexico and Tanzania.
• More informed decision-making regarding health care by citi‐
zens in Uruguay;
• Crowdsourced confirmation of election results in Indonesia,
leading to greater faith and confidence in the political system;
and
• Potential citizen-driven improvements to transparency and
accountability among public- and private-sector entities in
Kenya.


CHAPTER 8
Open Education Information
in Tanzania
A Tale of Two Dashboards
By Juliet McMurren, Stefaan Verhulst, Andrew Young
and David Sangokoya
Summary: Low national examination pass rates in 2012 caused a
public outcry in Tanzania, but the public’s understanding of the
broader context (and thus ability to demand accountability) was
limited by a lack of information about the country’s education sec‐
tor. Two recently established portals are trying to remedy that situa‐
tion, providing the public with more data on examination pass rates
and other information related to schools. The first, the Education
Open Data Dashboard (educationdashboard.org), is a project estab‐
lished by the Tanzania Open Data Initiative, a government program
supported by the World Bank and the United Kingdom Department
for International Development (DFID) to support open data publi‐
cation, accessibility and use. The second, Shule (shule.info), was
spearheaded by Arnold Minde, a programmer, entrepreneur and
open data enthusiast who has developed a number of technologies
and businesses focused on catalyzing social change in Tanzania.
Despite the challenges posed by Tanzania’s low Internet penetration
rates, these sites are slowly changing the way citizens access infor‐
mation and make decisions. More generally, these projects are
encouraging citizens to demand greater accountability from their
school system and public officials.
Dimension of Impact: Empowering Citizens—Social Mobilization
161

Key Takeaways:
• Dashboards like Shule and the Education Open Data Dashboard
are cheaply repurposable tools that can be quickly and readily
implemented by local programmers. Both dashboards were
built and launched in two to three weeks, although the data set
used to build Shule had been scraped in increments over several
years.
• In countries with low Internet penetration, raising awareness
among infomediaries, particularly in the media, about the avail‐
ability and use of open data can be critical in bridging the access
gap and successfully engaging the public. Civil society organiza‐
tions, both local and international, can play a vital role in spur‐
ring the use of open data by raising awareness among
infomediaries.
• Shule and the Education Open Data Dashboard illustrate the
benefits of coordination and collaboration between government
open data initiatives and those developed by civil society and
private organizations. Shule was developed by a single dedicated
programmer with little outside help; the Education Open Data
Dashboard was developed by a local developer in coordination
with government data practitioners, NGOs and programmers
(including the man behind Shule). Taken together, the informa‐
tion these sites provide about Tanzanian education is richer and
more interesting than either site alone.
• The collaboration between open data champions like Arnold
Minde and civil society organizations such as Twaweza can rad‐
ically increase the value and impact of open data initiatives.
Context and Background
Since 2012, education in Tanzania has become the subject of signifi‐
cant public discontent and controversy. That year, six out of every 10
Tanzanian students failed the standardized national secondary-level
examination, resulting in significant public discontent and demand
162 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

1 Kimboy, Frank. “High pass rate greeted as good as well as bad news.” The Citizen. July
23, 2014. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/magazine/political-reforms/High-pass-rate-greeted-
as-good/-/1843776/2394162/-/umh9xl/-/index.html
2 “World Data on Education (Revised Version).” UNESCO. August 2010. http://
www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/WDE/2010/pdf-versions/
United_Republic_of_Tanzania.pdf
3 “Tanzania: World Bank Development Indicators.” Accessed August 28, 2015. http://data
bank.worldbank.org/data//reports.aspx?source=2&country=TZA&series=&period=
4 Magolanga, Elisha. “No more Div. Zero as govt guts national grading system.” The Citi‐
zen. November 1, 2013. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Govt-in-major-change-of-
national-exam-grading/-/1840392/2055404/-/3kae76z/-/index.html
5 Kimboy, Frank. “High pass rate greeted as good as well as bad news.” The Citizen. July
23, 2014. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/magazine/political-reforms/High-pass-rate-greeted-
as-good/-/1843776/2394162/-/umh9xl/-/index.html
6 The Citizen Reporter. “Teachers shortage hurting Tanzania.” The Citizen. October 14,
2014. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Teachers-shortage-hurting-Tanzania/-/
1840340/2485582/-/tpeqyi/-/index.html
7 Qorro, Edward. “Education Policy: What lies ahead for teachers.” The Citizen. February
24, 2015. http://www.thecitizen.co.tz/magazine/success/-/1843788/2633842/-/item/3/-/
7gk0yk/-/index.html
for reforms.1 The poor results were in many ways the outcome of
recent changes to the Tanzanian education system. In 2002, tuition
fees for government primary schools were eliminated in an effort to
raise school enrolment and literacy rates. The move triggered rapid
growth in net primary enrollment, from 66 percent in 2001 to 90
percent in 2004,2 but this growth was not matched by a proportional
increase in school funding, hence the education sector’s problems a
few years later.
As the Tanzanian school system strained under the burden of the
additional enrollments, examination pass rates among the 30 per‐
cent of secondary-aged children enrolled in school3 began to
decline. After the particularly bad set of results in 2012, the govern‐
ment introduced changes to the grading system4 that appeared to
raise the pass rate in 2013 and 2014.5 However, the root causes of the
nation’s education problems—inadequately funded and supplied
schools, a shortage of trained teachers,6 limited teacher training and
professional development, delays in the payment of teachers’ salar‐
ies,7 and stubborn regional, economic and social inequalities—
remained unaddressed.
At the same time, information about the state of public education
was not easy to come by, making it hard for citizens to understand
Context and Background 
| 
163

8 https://freedomhouse.org/country/tanzania#.VaQZFvlViko
9 http://index.rsf.org/#!/index-details/TZA
10 In 2010, the African Media Barometer did report, however, that the state-run Radio
Tanzania has demonstrated more balanced views within recent years
11 Tanzania Country Report—Freedom of the Press 2011. Freedom House. Accessed
August 28, 2015. https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/2011/tanza
nia#.VaARQ_lVikp
12 http://www.africaopendata.net
13 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/analysis/index.html
the true state of the education sector and demand accountability
from government officials. The Tanzanian media is considered only
partly free by Freedom House,8 and the country was ranked 75th out
of 180 countries in the 2015 World Press Freedom Index.9 Although
several Access to Information bills have gone before the Tanzanian
Parliament, none has yet been enacted, while other legislation,
including the country’s defamation law, constrains the media’s
capacity to function critically and independently.
In addition, there exists a noticeable lack of independent voices in
the Tanzanian media. While media ownership is transparent, it
remains concentrated among a few proprietors. All four radio sta‐
tions with national reach are regarded as favoring the ruling party.10
Media outlets favorable to the opposition reportedly have govern‐
ment advertising contracts withheld.11 Consequently, when stories
about the state of education do make it to press, they tend to favor
the official version of events, and often lack balance or context.
Citizens were for the most part unable to turn to the Internet or
open data as substitutes for the information they needed. Open data
use in Tanzania is still in its infancy, although recent initiatives such
as the Africa Open Data Conference, convened by the president of
Tanzania, are encouraging development.12 The Open Data Barome‐
ter places Tanzania in the “capacity constrained” cluster of countries
whose open data initiatives are challenged by limits in government,
civil society or private sector capacity, Internet penetration, and data
collection and management.13 Tanzania joined the Open Govern‐
ment Partnership (OGP) Initiative in September 2011. The second
phase of its OGP action plan commits the government to establish‐
ing an open data portal (http://www.opendata.go.tz) that would
release key data sets in the education, health and water sectors in
164 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

14 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/tanzania/action-plan
15 http://opendata.go.tz/dataset
16 Available at http://www.necta.go.tz/opendata/, and subsequently updated at http://
www.necta.go.tz/opendata/brn/
17 http://theEducationOpenDataDashboard.org/#/
machine-readable form.14 Publicly launched in September 2015, the
portal at that date had 81 data sets available for download.15
“Data is frightening for many people, so raw data is going to appeal
to a vanishing few. Open data needs to be open plus curated plus
chewed plus digested to appeal to most people, including policy‐
makers.”
—– Aidan Eyakuze, Twaweza
Product Description and Inception
In 2013, the National Examinations Council of Tanzania (NECTA)
rolled out a dashboard16 offering data downloads, searches, and vis‐
ualizations of primary and secondary examination results by dis‐
trict, with statistics on annual and average pass rates, national
ranking and changes in pass rates since 2011.
The launch of its Big Results Now (BRN) program in 2012 commit‐
ted the Government of Tanzania to publishing key data sets, pow‐
ered by its parallel open data and OGP agendas, for public
consumption. To support this, Tanzania Open Data Initiative
launched the prototype Education Open Data Dashboard in 2015
(available at educationdashboard.org).17
The Education Open Data Dashboard offers indicators such as
pupil-teacher ratios, regional and district rankings, and improve‐
ment rankings over time, all of which are navigated via a clickable
map and drop-down menu of schools. Although the site represents a
significant advance by bringing together data from several sources,
the dashboard’s remit limits its scope to BRN data, which does not
include pass rates before 2012, average pass rates over time, or pass
rates by gender or region. The Education Open Data Dashboard also
offers no analysis of its data visualizations.
Product Description and Inception 
| 
165

18 http://www.shule.info/about
19 http://www.shule.info/about
Figure 8-1. Mapping of school performance on the educationdash‐
board.org
Many of these gaps have been filled in recent years by a pioneering
project named Shule (shule.info). Shule is the brainchild of the Tan‐
zanian programmer Arnold Minde. It was released shortly after
NECTA’s own original dashboard, and was conceived when Minde,
an entrepreneur and open data enthusiast, became aware that
NECTA had been publishing individual exam results online since
2004. Although this data was available in isolated reports and web‐
sites, usually intended for individual students, it had never been
made fully open in searchable and machine-readable format for citi‐
zens at large.18
Intrigued by the possibilities, Minde began scraping, cleaning and
consolidating this data from the examination results as they were
released each year. It wasn’t until 2012, however, when poor exami‐
nation pass rates prompted nationwide soul-searching, that Minde
began working on the project in earnest. At that point, he realized
the potential value of a single, readily usable source of national
examination data.19 Such data needed to be online, he concluded, so
that citizens could see that the low pass rate of 2012 was not a new
phenomenon, but part of a trend of worsening results over the past
166 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

20 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule, July 9, 2015.
21 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule, July 9, 2015.
six to seven years. Minde had previously been involved in data visu‐
alization through his work for the Tanzanian development policy
think tank REPOA (formerly Research on Poverty Alleviation); that
work convinced him of the power of data visualization to communi‐
cate data trends and linkages, and helped shape the development of
Shule.20
Figure 8-2. Education results by region on Shule.info
Minde states that his aim in developing Shule was to make informa‐
tion available to everyone with a potential interest in it: parents
choosing schools for their children; students looking up examina‐
tion results; policymakers seeking to track educational trends and
progress; and journalists wanting to improve their educational cov‐
erage. The original pilot of the site was ready in three weeks, but was
revised and improved after Twaweza, a Tanzanian civil society orga‐
nization promoting effective and transparent governance, became
interested in Minde’s project. Twaweza’s advice prompted Minde to
modify the design of his site for increased appeal and usability, and
to double the number of indicators.21
As of late 2015, the site presents data for Form 4 examination results
from 2004 to 2013 at candidate, school, regional and national levels,
and offers data visualizations of results by regions and gender, aver‐
Product Description and Inception 
| 
167

22 ICT Statistics. ITU. Accessed August 28, 2015. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/
Pages/stat/default.aspx
age performance over time, the number of candidates in each grad‐
ing division over time, and the impact of the government’s
controversial revision of the 2012 results. All data used to build the
site is available for download. In addition, and in contrast to NEC‐
TA’s dashboards, Shule offers commentary on its data visualizations,
making it easier for users to understand the significance of the data
they are accessing.
Impact
Tanzania is a country with low Internet penetration rates (4.9 per‐
cent in 2014, according to ITU, the United Nations specialized
agency for information and communication technologies22), and a
general lack of familiarity with the concept and potential of open
data. As such, the impact of Shule and the Education Open Data
Dashboard has been more modest and difficult to assess than it
might have been in another country. Nonetheless, early signs of
impact by these two education data dashboards are discernible.
Impact can be gauged in three ways: engagement and use by both
citizens and infomediaries; data quality and diversity; and spillover
effects on other open data projects.
Intended Beneficiaries
Parents
• Able to visualize and compare school performance before
choosing a school for their children
• Able to hold schools to account for performance
Students
• Can access examination results using candidate number and
examination center
Policymakers and planners
• Data archives and visualizations allow the tracking of trends in
education over time and by region
• Data visualization encourages better allocation of resources
according to need
168 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

23 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
24 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
25 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
Journalists
• Data visualizations and analysis offer context and prompt
questions to improve depth of coverage of education stories
• Able to translate and digest data for general public, improving
penetration
Engagement and use
Since Shule went live in June 2013, the site has averaged around
1,500 visits per month, according to Arnold Minde.23 Feedback
directly on the site and through Twaweza suggests that visitors fall
into two categories. The first consists of data sophisticates, typically
programmers or employees of civil society organizations, who are
already aware of the potential of open data to inform decision-
making, and visit the site to research education in Tanzania and bet‐
ter understand the overall educational context. These visitors may
have become aware of the site through Twaweza, REPOA’s network
of civil society partners, or the emerging open data community in
Dar es Salaam.
The second category of site visitors consists of former students mak‐
ing use of the site’s archive of examination results to look up their
scores.24 These students may not initially be interested in or even
aware of open data, but they are nonetheless exposed to Shule’s visu‐
alizations and other tools when they access the site.
Engaging the ordinary Tanzanian families Minde had originally
hoped to reach has been more challenging. Low rates of Internet
penetration and a lack of experience using the Internet have sup‐
pressed the amount of casual traffic received through search
engines. Minde says he fears that average Tanzanians don’t have
much interest yet in looking at data visualizations, preferring to get
their information predigested by the media. “I don’t see people ask‐
ing the real questions,” says Minde. “I don’t see discussions around
the issues, even among people I know.”25 Aidan Eyakuze, Executive
Director of Twaweza, believes both the public and policymakers are
looking for the insight contained in the data, not the data itself.
“Data is frightening for many people, so raw data is going to appeal
Impact 
| 
169

26 GovLab Interview with Aidan Eyakuze, Executive Director, Twaweza. July 14, 2015.
27 Bauer, Michael. “The Data Bootcamp in Tanzania.” Open Knowledge Blog. October 25,
2012. http://blog.okfn.org/2012/10/25/the-data-bootcamp-in-tanzania/
28 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
to a vanishing few. Open data needs to be open plus curated plus
chewed plus digested to appeal to most people, including policy‐
makers.”26 Few in the media, however, have the knowledge and skills
to digest Shule’s data offerings, despite initiatives like the Data Boot‐
camp, which was designed to introduce members of the Tanzanian
media to open data.27
The Education Open Data Dashboard’s use is similarly constrained
by Tanzania’s low rate of Internet use. Nonetheless, the site’s devel‐
opers point out that Tanzanians don’t necessarily need Internet
access to benefit from the information stored on the site. Members
of civil society organizations, for example, including Tanzania’s
active parent-teacher organizations, can potentially act as infome‐
diaries, printing out information about school performance to share
on a community notice board or at meetings.28 For its part, the gov‐
ernment of Tanzania has recognized the potential impact of this
tool. Using the open-source code of educationdashboard.org, a sec‐
ond iteration of the Education Open Data Dashboard—elimu.tak‐
wimu.org—will soon be integrated directly into the Tanzanian open
data portal to help build demand for additional data set availability
and use.
Data Quality and Diversity
The combination of the Education Open Data Dashboard and Shule
increases the diversity and thus the usefulness of available data on
education in Tanzania. Taken together, the information they provide
is richer and more interesting than either site would be on its own.
The Education Open Data Dashboard offers indicators such as
pupil-teacher ratios, regional and district rankings, and improve‐
ment rankings over time, all of which are navigated via a clickable
map and drop-down menu of schools. Shule captures a much longer
span of data, with examination results going back to 2004. In addi‐
tion to results by gender, Shule offers average performance over
time, and looks at the breakdown of candidate numbers per grading
170 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

29 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
30 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
division over time. It also models the effect of the 2012 grading revi‐
sion to examine how it changed candidate pass rates.
Although based on government data, the data set used to build
Shule is not completely identical to that used for the government
dashboard because of differences in their methods of data collection.
Perhaps as a result, Shule’s figures can depart in significant ways
from the government version. For example, NECTA has tradition‐
ally published an annual list of the 10 government and secondary
schools with the highest examination results. In 2012, Minde reports
that NECTA’s official list contained a number of government
schools, but Shule’s analysis showed that all 10 of the top-
performing schools were private.
For the developers of the Education Open Data Dashboard, one of
the more surprising discoveries was the dashboard itself became a
potent tool for teaching and understanding data management, pub‐
lication, cleaning and licensing. Regional officials and head teachers
were excited by finding their school or region in the dashboard, and
by seeing what the data they submitted was creating, and this excite‐
ment encouraged increased understanding of data management.
This suggests that the novelty of open data and data visualization, as
manifested in a dashboard, can be a valuable entry point in building
data management capacity.29
Impact on Other Data Projects
As the developers of the latest version of the Education Open Data
Dashboard have indicated, Shule forms part of a nascent data eco‐
system of which they were very much aware during the develop‐
ment and refinement of their own site. The existence of such
independent projects validated both the demand for the kinds of
open data portal they were building and provided evidence that the
local technical and other capacity existed to build it.30 Their own
dashboard was, in turn, a powerful tool in demonstrating the poten‐
tial and uses of open data to a nontechnical audience, particularly
among policymakers. In addition, the data visualizations and link‐
Impact 
| 
171

31 “Social Justice.” Open Data for Tanzania. Accessed August 28, 2015. http://tanza
nia.opendataforafrica.org/igcpumb/social-justice
32 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
33 “Tanzania: Old Media, New Media.” AfricaFocus. April 5, 2011. http://www.africafo
cus.org/docs11/tan1104.php
ages it made possible ignited interest in, and impetus for, the devel‐
opment of dashboards in other sectors, such as water and health,
both priorities for the BRN initiative.31
Outside Tanzania, Shule has been used as an example of the poten‐
tial and use of open data in education. Both it and the Education
Open Data Dashboard illustrate the power of a deceptively simple
tool, one that can be cheaply and easily produced in a matter of a
few weeks by local programmers, then refined through user feed‐
back. As one of the developers of the Education Open Data Dash‐
board put it: “Get a minimum viable product out there ... and
provoke a response.”32
Challenges
Shule and the Education Open Data Dashboard are both young
projects, launched into a society and country that is only beginning
to grasp the potential of open data. Their most influential years
could well lie ahead. However, if they are to grow and disseminate
further among the population, they will need to overcome some
challenges. This section examines two of the most important chal‐
lenges they are likely to face.
Lack of Internet Penetration and Use
Perhaps the most important challenge stems from Tanzania’s low
Internet penetration and usage rates. The two dashboards take as a
given that providing information to target audiences will lead to
improved conditions on the ground. It will be difficult to prove this,
particularly in rural areas, where Internet penetration rates are esti‐
mated to be about a quarter of those in urban areas.33 This clearly
limits the reach of education-related data, and open data more
broadly. Furthermore, of the 4.9 percent of Tanzanians who used the
Internet in 2014, the great majority do so only by mobile phone;
172 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

34 ICT Statistics. ITU. Accessed August 28, 2015. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/
Pages/stat/default.aspx
35 GovLab Interview with Aidan Eyakuze, Executive Director, Twaweza. July 14, 2015.
36 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
37 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
only 0.2 percent of Tanzanians had a fixed broadband subscription.34
In order to appeal more widely, any open data site clearly needs to
consider launching a mobile application to appeal to “the retail user
of data sitting in a bus shelter with a mobile phone.”35
The barriers may be even higher, in fact, when it comes to using data
and technology as instruments of change. Minde notes that, in gen‐
eral, the Tanzanian public is deeply unfamiliar with the potential of
the Internet, and perhaps not yet inclined to trust it. He adds that
Tanzanians have yet to embrace or commit to digital solutions for
the problems of everyday life, whether complex or mundane. As an
example, he cites the difficulty he experienced in convincing bus
operators to adopt an earlier application he developed that allowed
passengers to purchase tickets by phone. “It will only take one [com‐
pany], and then people will see the benefit,” he says. “But first you
have to convince the one.”36
Meanwhile, as Internet penetration slowly expands, civil society
organizations like parent-teacher organizations or NGOs have an
important role to play as infomediaries who can share information
with parents directly or through low-tech solutions like community
notice boards. A recent study notes, for instance, that ultra low-tech
solutions like posting printouts of information drawn from open
data dashboards on school or community noticeboards can be effec‐
tive in getting information to the people who can use it.37
Fragmentation
Given low Internet penetration rates, the existence of two separate
dashboards for education information could also prove confusing to
parents, and limit the effectiveness of both platforms. Indeed, the
greatest impact on education in Tanzania could very well come from
integrating the two platforms and cooperatively advancing a single
project, rather than providing a limited user base with two separate
entry points for accessing essentially the same information. Moves
Challenges 
| 
173

38 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
39 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
40 http://www.shule.info/about
toward greater coordination have been made, however, including
notably Minde’s involvement in development strategy workshops for
the Education Open Data Dashboard,38 where government educa‐
tion specialists worked with Minde and with their own data to better
understand opportunities and techniques to prepare and publish
open data.
Looking Forward
Both the platforms under study here have begun a process of trans‐
formation that is likely to be slow and gradual. Ultimately, if they are
successful in overcoming their various challenges and scaling up
usage, their impact is likely to be felt far beyond the education sec‐
tor.
In the near term, the individuals and groups behind the platforms
have two main strategies for extending their reach.
Improving User Engagement through Expanded
Functionality
One of the key goals in coming years, according to Minde, is to
engage more average families and schools as users. Ordinary citi‐
zens want to know how schools are performing, he argues; they have
a stake in the education data. Schools, especially private ones, also
have a stake—they want to understand how their competitors are
doing, and the data provided on Shule can help benchmark their
own performance.39
In order to expand his user base, Minde plans to include a wider
variety of data and new services. For example, he hopes to expand
the site in the future to include Form 4 examination results, as well
as the Form 2 and 6 results already included.40 In addition, he would
also like to increase the range of information about schools, for
example mapping their locations and showing contact details, per‐
formance over time and sample student profiles. He is also consider‐
ing offering an online application system that would give schools a
174 
| 
Chapter 8: Open Education Information in Tanzania

41 GovLab Interview with Arnold Minde, Founder, Shule. July 9, 2015.
42 It is worth noting, however, that even among such groups, awareness of the potential of
open data remains at best nascent. Like the public at large, civil society groups also
need to be trained to analyze and visualize data.
43 Bauer, Michael. “The Data Bootcamp in Tanzania.” Open Knowledge Blog. October 25,
2012. http://blog.okfn.org/2012/10/25/the-data-bootcamp-in-tanzania/
44 Interview with Samhir Vasdev, ICT Sector Unit, World Bank Group and Verena Luise
Knippel, Senior Governance Specialist, World Bank June 30, 2015.
better and more efficient way of connecting with potential students.
41
Education of Infomediaries
As noted, infomediaries and civil society groups have a key role to
play in overcoming the challenge posed by low Internet usage. Such
groups can help disseminate insights gleaned from open data among
citizens who would otherwise not have access to the data.42
Some efforts have already taken place to involve civil society. For
instance, in 2012, in an effort to encourage interest and build skills
among coders and the media, the World Bank Institute and the
Africa Media Initiative combined to offer the Data Bootcamp in Dar
es Salaam.43 A similar initiative was offered by Twaweza in 2013, and
community groups such as the Open Knowledge Foundation Net‐
work TZ have attempted to promote open data meetups in Dar es
Salaam. In 2015, the Africa Open Data Conference was organized by
a group that included both civil society organizations such as Code
for Africa and the Open Knowledge Foundation, and the World
Bank. These collaborations, and smaller informal meetups, provide
an opportunity to bring together atypical combinations of stake‐
holders to meet and work with data.44
Such efforts are likely to become more frequent in the coming years
—and, as they do, the impact of open data on education and many
other sectors will begin to be felt more widely. Greater impact will
also increase awareness, thus creating a virtuous cycle of change and
empowerment. For the moment, significant challenges remain. But
the two projects studied here indicate the clear potential of open
data to, application by application, sector by sector, chip away at
those challenges.
Looking Forward 
| 
175


CHAPTER 9
Kenya’s Open Duka
Open Data for Transactional Transparency
By Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: Open Duka is a platform developed by the civil society
organization the Open Institute that aims to address issues of opac‐
ity in governance in the private and public sectors, promoting cor‐
porate accountability and transparency. As a case study, it
exemplifies the challenge for open data initiatives to generate suffi‐
cient awareness and use necessary to achieve impact. Open Duka
provides citizens, journalists and civic activists with a tool that gives
insight into the relationships, connections (and, to some extent, the
dynamics) of those in and around the public arena. The platform
has the ability to create and visualize relationships between different
entities ranging from organizations, individuals, tenders and con‐
tracts awarded. While a diversity of setbacks have led to limited
impacts to date, the platform seeks to act as a core data set to enable
these stakeholders to build third-party public transparency and pub‐
lic accountability apps or services, by allowing them to cross refer‐
ence the Open Duka data against other data sets. Some of the data
that can be found on Open Duka includes information published in
the Kenya Gazette, a weekly publication released by the Kenyan gov‐
ernment that publishes notices of new legislation, notices required
to be published by law or policy and announcements for general
public information.
Dimension of Impact: Empowering Citizens—Informed Decision-
making
177

1 https://www.transparency.org/country/#KEN
2 http://www.businessinsider.com/afp-corruption-in-kenya-worse-than-ever-says-veteran-
campaigner-2015-8?IR=T
3 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dpu-projects/drivers_urb_change/urb_governance/
pdf_trans_corrupt/TI_Corruption_kenya.pdf, p. 7.
4 Loeb, Saul. “Barack Obama urges Kenya to fight corruption in government.” Daily
Nation. July 26, 2015. http://www.nation.co.ke/news/Fight-corruption-from-the-top-
Obama/-/1056/2809526/-/2y8ovu/-/index.html
Key Takeaways:
• Open data initiatives can be resource- and time-intensive.
Cleaning data, building partnerships, tech development and
other important steps can require more effort than originally
planned, leading to long stretches of time before any real
impacts are felt.
• Opening data is not always sufficient. Citizen engagement, out‐
reach and training efforts—regardless of the tech capacity or
data literacy of the targeted community of users—can be impor‐
tant drivers of use for open data platforms.
• Political and cultural changes can throw open data initiatives
into upheaval, even if they do not, on the surface, seem to
directly affect the project at hand. Developing an open data plat‐
form, application or service often requires a supportive open
data ecosystem to reach its full potential.
Context and Background
Corruption in Kenya
Corruption in Kenya is a major and by many indications worsening
problem. In 2014, Transparency International ranked the country
145 (out of 175) in its annual Corruption Perceptions Index, down
from 136 two years earlier.1 Recently, an official audit found that just
1 percent of government spending was properly accounted for.2 The
average urban Kenyan pays 16 bribes a month.3 When Barack
Obama visited the country in mid-2015, he warned of a “cancer of
corruption” that was blighting the nation.4
178 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

5 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats1.htm
6 Gilpin, Lyndsey. “The world’s unlikely leader in mobile payments: Kenya.” TechRepub‐
lic. March 20, 2014.
http://www.techrepublic.com/article/the-worlds-unlikely-leader-in-mobile-payments-
kenya/
7 Mutuku, Leonida and Christine M. Mahihu. “Open Data in Developing Countries—
Understanding the Impacts of Kenya Open Data Applications and Services.” iHub
Research. 2014. http://www.opendataresearch.org/sites/default/files/publications/ODDC
%20Report%20iHub.pdf
8 GovLab Interview with Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Chairman Open Institute. September 9,
2015.
Open Data and Technology in Kenya
Can open data—and technology more generally—offer a solution?
Kenya is generally considered one of the most technologically
advanced countries in Africa. As of 2014, Kenya had the fourth-
highest Internet penetration rate in Africa with 21.3 million users,
trailing only Nigeria, Egypt and South Africa.5 Also as of 2014,
almost 80 percent of Kenyans who owned cell phones (around
three-quarters of the population) used them for mobile payments
and banking.6
The country had an early taste of open data’s potential in combating
corruption in 2005. Dr. Bitange Ndemo, a lecturer on entrepreneur‐
ship and research methods at the University of Nairobi’s Business
School, worked with then-President Mwai Kibaki’s government to
uncover illicit allocation of government funds by mapping distribu‐
tions of the Constituency Development Funds (CDF). CDFs were
supposed to spur grassroots development and distribute resources
equitably across the nation. The mapping exercise, built on previ‐
ously closed data, showed that funds were heavily allocated to rich
areas of the country over more deserving areas. Despite its promis‐
ing results, however, this initial effort to use open data met with
political opposition and was soon shut down.7 “[The politicians]
were very angry with me,” Ndemo recalls, “and within a very short
time, we pulled down the website.”8
In 2011, Ndemo, by then the Permanent Secretary of Information
and Communications in the government, worked with a volunteer
task force of technical personnel and World Bank officials to launch
a new project—the Kenyan Open Data Initiative. The centerpiece of
the initiative was the Kenyan Open Data Portal (https://open
Context and Background 
| 
179

9 Mutegi, Lilian. “Kenya Open Data Portal Hits 44 Million Page VIews.” All Africa.
August 18, 2015. http://allafrica.com/stories/201508190752.html.
10 Mutuki, Leonida, Christine M. Mahihu, Dr. Raed Sharif. “Exploratory Study on the
Role and Impact of Kenyan Open Data Technology Intermediaries.” iHub Research.
April 30, 2014. http://www.opendataresearch.org/sites/default/files/publications/
ODDC_Event_Handout%20.pdf.
11 Ochieng, Lilian. “Kenya: State Agencies Hold Firmly to Their Data.” AllAfrica. August
19, 2015. http://allafrica.com/stories/201508200439.html.
data.go.ke/), the first comprehensive open data platform in sub-
Saharan Africa (and the second in Africa, after Morocco’s). As of late
2015, the portal hosts over 400 data sets from across the govern‐
ment, including data from the national census, data pertaining to
national and regional expenditure, and information on key public
services such as education, health and agriculture.
Determining whether the broad Kenyan Open Data Initiative, and
the Data Portal in particular, had any impact is difficult given con‐
flicting signals. On the one hand, the portal’s 44 million page views
as of August 2015, for example, point to a widely used, impactful
platform. Even more important than the number of page views,
Linet Kwamboka, the Open Data project coordinator, announced
that users have interacted with the data found on the portal—
through downloads and embeds—2.6 million times.9
That being said, prior to these milestones, critics questioned how
well the information available on the platform was targeted to the
needs of users. For example, a 2014 survey of relevant users found
that approximately 50 percent of desired education data does not
exist on the portal.10 The lack of many types of potentially useful
data is not surprising when considering the number of government
departments that have not yet opened their data. As of 2015, four
years after the portal’s official launch, the site has only received data
from 26 of over 83 government departments.11
180 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

12 H.E. President Uhuru Kenyatta. “The Harmonised Jubilee Coalition Manifesto.” http://
www.scribd.com/doc/123569244/The-Harmonised-Jubilee-Coalition-Manifesto#scribd.
13 H.E. President Uhuru Kenyatta. “The Harmonised Jubilee Coalition Manifesto.” http://
www.scribd.com/doc/123569244/The-Harmonised-Jubilee-Coalition-Manifesto#scribd.
Figure 9-1. Kenya’s Open Data Portal
The political and legal climate in Kenya also remains somewhat
ambiguous when it comes to open data. In 2013, President Uhuru
Kenyatta was elected as the fourth president of Kenya. His Jubilee
Party’s election manifesto had “pledged to increase transparency in
government as well as promote information-sharing within public
institutions.”12 The manifesto also highlighted the importance of
improved digitization of government, including “cleaning up and
managing databases that will be stored in a secure and centralized
location and which can be accessed and used by all ministries and
branches of government ... to make government more efficient.”13
All of this led to hopes among open data and government transpar‐
ency activists. Immediately following that initial optimism, hopes
began to deflate. In 2013, the Sunlight Foundation published an arti‐
cle on “why Kenya’s open data portal is failing.” Many of the reasons
cited—like government’s reluctance to open all potentially useful
data and challenges related to the country’s constitutional devolu‐
tion—created similar issues for Open Duka, as discussed below. It is
worth noting, however, that much has changed for the portal since
Context and Background 
| 
181

14 Brown, Greg. “Why Kenya’s open data portal is failing—and why it can still succeed.”
Sunlight Foundation. September 23, 2013. https://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/
2013/09/23/why-kenyas-open-data-portal-is-failing-and-why-it-can-still-succeed/.
15 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
2013, and even at the time, the piece’s author still expressed reasons
for longer-term optimism.14 The situation surrounding the open
data portal isn’t helped by the absence of a legal framework to
enforce a constitutionally guaranteed freedom of information.
Although the Bill of Rights includes this freedom, in fact there are
no clear guidelines to guide how public bodies should make infor‐
mation available, what types of information should be released, and
what remedies exist for violations. With that said, the surge in use of
the portal—culminating in the milestones in site visits and data
downloads witnessed in 2015—is a lesson in the need for both itera‐
tion and persistence in order for open data efforts to take hold.
Project Description and Inception
Even as the government has launched its open data initiatives, civil
society in Kenya has become increasingly active in the field. Accord‐
ing to Jay Bhalla, director of the Open Institute, a civil society orga‐
nization that works “to open up government to the citizens,” the
government’s own open data initiative “acted as a catalyst for organi‐
zations [like the Open Institute] to begin working around open
data.”15 He cites the example of Code4Kenya, which works to cata‐
lyze demand for open data by embedding fellows with data skills
into African newsrooms and civic organizations, as an example, stat‐
ing that it was at least in part “spun out of the fact that there was the
Kenya Open Data Initiative.”
Open Duka (“duka” means “shop” in Swahili) grew out of this civil
society interest in open data. Launched in 2014, it contains data per‐
taining to the relationships among Kenyan institutions, individuals
and other entities with an impact on public life. The project is
driven by the Open Institute in partnership with the National Coun‐
cil of Law Reporting, with funding from the African Technology &
Transparency Initiative.
Open Duka is built on a simple principle: Its founders believe that
giving citizens information that enables them to draw connections
182 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

16 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
17 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
18 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
among individuals and organizations can uncover and possibly
remedy many instances of corruption. Al Kags, a founding trustee of
the Open Institute, notes that every time a new corruption scandal
hits Kenya, citizens begin asking questions about connections. Who
is connected to whom? Who owns the companies involved, and how
do those individuals relate to government entities or other power
players? Prior to Open Duka, he says, there was no way to uncover
this type of “relational data,” which can “enable citizens to make
connections between people, issues, companies and public organiza‐
tions.”16
Open Duka’s Mission Statement:
“Providing citizens, journalists, and civic activists with a practical
and easy-to-use tool to understand the ownership structure of the
world they live in, demonstrating the practical applications of open
information for normal citizens.”
The platform does not itself seek to draw any connection; it just
posts data, relying on its users’ investigative skills (and serendipity)
to draw out the links that underlie public life in Kenya, and that
often drive corruption. As Bhalla puts it: “We’re just getting all the
data that is out there ... and we’re putting it up there for people to
make their decisions. ... We’re just getting the data, scraping it,
putting it up, and seeing what connections come up ... and what sto‐
ries can then be taught.”17
Kags cites the following hypothetical example of how Open Duka
might be used. Using the platform, a citizen could discover that
Individual A is the director of two companies; she could then
uncover the fact that Individual A’s brother directs a third company,
and also happens to work with a government agency; in addition,
the citizen might determine that both brothers went to school with
Judge C.18 In this way, the citizen-user of Open Duka could possibly
determine whether Individual A has used his connections (via the
Project Description and Inception 
| 
183

19 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
20 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
21 http://www.openduka.org/
brother or the judge) to improperly benefit from government con‐
tracting, or engage in any other form of corruption.19
At its core, Open Duka is a platform that enables citizens to peer
behind the veil of previously unknown (and unknowable) relation‐
ships that drive a variety of economic and political activities, includ‐
ing land purchases, tendering contracts and other regulatory
decisions. When selecting a person, organization, tender, contract,
court case or piece of land on the site, Open Duka provides a simple
visualization of how that entity connects with others found on the
platform, with additional categorized data about each entity found
in the visualization displayed below. These relationships, adds Kags,
“have an impact on the integrity of a country.”20
Figure 9-2. Visualization of an Organization’s Connections found on
Open Duka
Data Sources
As of late 2015, Open Duka includes information on 30,955 people,
3,832 organizations, 1,800 tenders, 226 contracts, 22,011 court cases
and 4,418 pieces of land.21 The user can search across each of these
six areas from a simple search bar on the main page, or enter into
184 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

22 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
the platform by clicking on one of the six categories of content, at
which point she is presented with a long, searchable, alphabetical list
of relevant entities.
Figure 9-3. Land Use Information Hub on Open Duka
Increased transparency around land records is seen as a particularly
important piece of Open Duka’s value proposition. The goal is to
allow individuals to draw connections between land parcels (where
illicit funds are often parked) and entities or individuals who might
not be direct owners but nonetheless have connections to the own‐
ers of the land. In addition, Open Duka’s organizers have also taken
steps to include information not just on governmental stakeholders,
but also private corporations. This data is often harder to access, but
it is essential to drawing the necessary connections. Thus, Open
Duka comprises data related, for example, to contract information,
tender information and company directors (including whether the
directors are involved in any court cases and whether they own
land). Kags notes that Open Duka’s focus expands beyond govern‐
ment because “if you don’t know what a company, civil society orga‐
nization, school, etc. is doing, you don’t know what they’re doing
wrong and you have no way to add value.”22
Project Description and Inception 
| 
185

23 “G20 High-Level Principles on Beneficial Ownership Transparency.” G20.org. Decem‐
ber 2014. https://g20.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/g20_high-
level_principles_beneficial_ownership_transparency.pdf
24 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
While some of this information originates from publicly available
government databases, Open Duka’s organizers also employ a num‐
ber of additional measures to supplement the information and make
their databases more comprehensive. In particular, Open Duka
scrapes a considerable amount of information from the media, par‐
ticularly from the Kenyan Gazette (which contains near-
comprehensive information on land transfers and purchases). Prior
to Open Duka’s launch, the Gazette had partnered with Google to
digitize all its editions; however, while the information was accessi‐
ble in digital format, it was not categorized or searchable in any
meaningful way. So Open Duka’s organizers approached the govern‐
ment and asked them for access to the digital archives of the Gaz‐
ette, which was then imported into the platform.
Despite Open Duka’s ingenuity in sourcing data from nonobvious
sources, the project has in general struggled to cope with the insuffi‐
ciency of available data. This lack of data is not unique to Kenya,
however. Improvements to transparency regarding the beneficial
ownership of legal entities—i.e., business owners, shareholders and
senior managing officials—was a high-level principle arising from
the 2014 G20 Summit in Australia, in the interest of “preventing the
misuse of these entities for illicit purposes such as corruption, tax
evasion and money laundering.”23 Despite official governmental
enthusiasm for releasing data, its organizers say, the reality is often
quite different. Bhalla cites the case of the Ministry of Lands, where
much information still remains inaccessible due to stonewalling or
vested interests, even though it is more or less completely digitized.
The same is true of many other departments. As he puts it: “When
you’re doing anything around government transparency and
accountability, the doors often get shut to people trying to get the
data.”24
186 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

25 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
Impact
Intended Beneficiaries
Average Citizens
• Provides citizens with the ability to recognize and avoid potentially
corrupt dealings in areas like contracts, land purchases.
Media and
Research
Community
• Uncovers connections between stakeholders and power players in the
country to help in the identification of corruption or conflicts of interest.
• Enables large-scale analyses of data found on the platform to uncover
high-level insights.
Developers and
Civic Activists and
Researchers
• An API enables interested parties to incorporate Open Duka’s data into
other applications focused on transparency and accountability in the
public and private sectors.
Despite considerable promise and excitement about the potential of
Open Duka, its impact has in fact been quite limited to date. No sys‐
tematic study has been done of the project’s impact, and the success
stories that do exist have been largely anecdotal (Bhalla, for instance,
refers to the “the odd success story” where “some person managed
to figure out that someone was trying to con him with selling a piece
of land, for example, and he managed to use Open Duka as the plat‐
form to find out that this guy is the fraudster”25). Bhalla also notes
that the media has benefitted from the platform, but establishing
direct ties between news pieces on corruption and journalists’ use of
Open Duka is a challenge (and, as of 2015, the site does not offer
any illustrative examples of such uses). Ndemo believes that more
effort needs to be expended to improve the media’s data literacy and
capacity to create impacts as infomediaries for the public. Rather
than focusing on providing sensationalistic headlines, there should
be a greater focus in the media on, “[doing] the analysis that can
help people understand to make decisions. ... The media does not
just have to look at headlines, they must synthesize the data and
Impact 
| 
187

26 GovLab Interview with Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Chairman Open Institute. September 9,
2015.
27 Walker, Emily. “And the Honesty Oscars go to...” One.org. February 23, 2015. http://
www.one.org/us/2015/02/23/and-the-honesty-oscars-go-to/.
make it much simpler, and to do that, we need to do a lot of
capacity-building on data science, data visualization.”26
Open Duka’s limited success can in large part be attributed to the
many challenges the project has encountered since its launch, nota‐
bly the difficulty of sourcing data and the obstacles raised by a
recent move to devolve governmental authority (explained further
below).
Seeding the Notion of Openness
As it stands, much of Open Duka’s impact has been less related to its
specific purpose, and more general—i.e., spreading the idea of open‐
ness and accountability across sectors. For instance, ONE and the
Accountability Lab, civil society organizations focused on combat‐
ting poverty and corruption, present Honesty Oscars that honor
“the creative work of activists and organizations that fight global
corruption.” In 2015, Open Duka won the “Best Special Effects
Oscar” based on how it “provides citizens, journalists and civic acti‐
vists with a practical and easy-to-use tool to help them understand
the ownership structure of the world they live in.” The awards cita‐
tion went on to say that Open Duka “helps demonstrate the practi‐
cal application of open information for citizens around the world.”27
Challenges
As noted, Open Duka has faced considerable hurdles in its efforts to
use data to draw connections and reduce corruption. This section
discusses some of the most important challenges.
Government Devolution
In 2010, the Kenyan government devolved a number of powers
(including key financial authority) to its 47 counties. While this dev‐
olution was championed as a way to empower local communities
and spur grassroots development, it also created a number of diffi‐
culties for open data advocates. Bhalla, for instance, notes the com‐
188 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

28 GovLab Interview with Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Chairman Open Institute. September 9,
2015.
plexity of now having to convince government representatives about
the benefits of transparency not just in one jurisdiction (i.e., at the
federal level), but in 47. And while the Open Institute is trying to
work with each of these counties, he also notes that many of the
regional governors (and other officials) are struggling to cope with
the responsibilities of their new authority. Perhaps not surprisingly,
when faced with essentially building a local government from
scratch, open data simply isn’t a high priority. However, as described
below, though the government devolution process created signifi‐
cant hurdles for Open Duka and open data projects more generally,
it is also providing new opportunities for building counties’ data
capacity to internal and public benefit.
Data Quality and Availability
As noted, the broader political and legal climate around open data
in Kenya is not fully encouraging or supportive. Many government
departments have yet to fully release their data, and even when they
do, the quality of the data can be subpar. When browsing Open
Duka’s database, the data quality challenge can be evident—with
some entries having two-letter or confusing titles scraped from the
Kenyan Gazette.
In addition, Ndemo points out that many government officers resist
releasing data in a timely manner, thus reducing the timeliness and
relevance of the information. He cites the case of government’s
national statistic officers, who “tend to think that they need to col‐
lect the data, [and] curate it before they can give it.” He goes on:
“The statisticians have not come to terms that there are other people
who can handle data. They just think this is our data, and these are
computer geeks [in the open data community] who are interfering
with the processes.”28 Such “data hoarding” by government officers
makes it very difficult for a project like Open Duka to achieve the
scale it requires.
Public Trust and Expectations
A final challenge is posed by a general lack of public interest in open
data, and even a sense of disenchantment. Over the years, Kenya has
Challenges 
| 
189

29 GovLab Interview with Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Chairman Open Institute. September 9,
2015.
30 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
seen no shortage of attempts to improve public life and the quality
of governance. There have also been several anti-corruption efforts
before Open Duka. Many of these efforts have been sponsored by
foreign donor entities, and have been accompanied by considerable
hype. Few of them have made much of a dent.
According to Bhalla, this creates a sense of disenchantment and dis‐
trust among the population. “It’s gotten to a stage where even if
there is something useful that works, there’s a lot of distrust,” he
says. So Open Duka’s task—and challenge—is not only to prove that
it is useful on its own terms, but also to distance itself from previ‐
ous, failed attempts to improve public life.
More generally, there is concern that the lack of public confidence in
open data could lower the pressure on governments to release data,
thus creating a vicious cycle and undermining the sector as a whole.
Ndemo speaks about the dangers of public disenchantment and a
lack of demand for open data. “We must create interest,” he
says. ”We must create the demand for data. If we can’t create that
demand, even if government were to release it, it would make no
sense at all.”29 He goes on to speak about the need to increase public
awareness and educate the public about the potential of open data.
Looking Forward
Overall, Open Duka’s organizers say that the project has been far
more resource-intensive and time-consuming than they had origi‐
nally anticipated. Among other things, organizers underestimated
the difficulty of sourcing data, of government resistance, and of con‐
vincing a somewhat disenchanted population to use it. While the
project was initiated in 2013, Bhalla notes that it was not until early
2015 that, on the technical side, “we got the platform to where we
wanted it to be.”30
Today, the project’s organizers are focused on the future, with a
number of streams of activity in the works that are focused on turn‐
ing optimism and initial excitement into the type of real-world
190 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

31 http://www.openduka.org/
32 Mutegi, Lilian. “Kenya Open Data Portal Hits 44 Million Page Views.” All Africa.
August 18, 2015. http://allafrica.com/stories/201508190752.html.
33 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
34 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
impacts that have eluded the platform to date. The task at hand for
the team behind the project is to learn from the challenges men‐
tioned above and iterate quickly and strategically—despite contin‐
ued outside challenges and resource strains. Thankfully, the Open
Duka team recognizes this need, noting on the site that, “Open
Duka is a work in progress (and a labour of love) for us and we shall
continue to add new features and data.”31
One encouraging development for the Kenyan open data ecosystem
more broadly is the planned launch of Version 2.0 of the Kenyan
Open Data Portal, which, among other things, is designed to help
users “find the location of donor- and government-funded projects
in their community as well as the stage of execution.”32
Open County Program
The central expansion of Open Duka currently under development
is the Open County Program. Under this program, designed to ease
some of the challenges that have arisen from devolution, the team is
working with new county governments to build their data capacity
and push forward citizen engagement opportunities. Overall, the
team is seeking to create new areas for coordination between county
governments, NGOs, community media and community stakehold‐
ers.33
This effort will not only give counties the capacity to govern better,
but will also, in theory, directly benefit Open Duka. By building
technical capacity for counties, Open Duka will gain access to con‐
stantly updated and uploaded supply-side data of sound quality. On
the demand side, engaging with outside stakeholders will help the
Open Institute gain a diversity of feedback to guide future develop‐
ment. This marriage of supply and demand represents a promising
next step. But, Bhalla notes: “[It is] very resource-intensive.”34
Looking Forward 
| 
191

35 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
36 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
37 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
38 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
There are currently a few counties in which Open Duka is piloting
this new project. So far results have been encouraging. Bhalla notes
that through the Open County Project, “Data gets released and now
we’re able to embed that data in Open Duka at a very granular level.
And at a level that now impacts people on that ground.”35 Moreover,
given Open Duka’s relatively simple underlying code, counties will
be able to host individual iterations of the platform, meaning that
county-level data will feed into the central Open Duka platform, but
could also provide the backbone of more granular, regional versions
of the tool. Bhalla believes that once Open Duka reaches this level of
granularity, “the chance of impact will be much, much higher.”36
Tracking Metrics of Success
While there has been little evidence of impact to date around Open
Duka, the development and implementation of concrete metrics is
in the works. Bhalla notes that, “we don’t look at page views as a
metric.”37 Rather, the Open Institute is focusing on three types of
metrics built around three different user groups:
1. By tracking application programming interface (API) calls, the
Open Institute will be able to ascertain whether developers and
civic activists are actually making use of the data on the site to
build applications, or if researchers or other parties are accessing
the data in bulk to perform targeted analyses.38
2. Focusing on the number of embeds of visualizations created
through Open Duka, on the other hand, will help to assess the
site’s usefulness to the media. Since it is unlikely that each and
every instance of a journalist using Open Duka to find informa‐
tion for a story will be credited, tracking the number of direct
192 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

39 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
40 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
41 GovLab Interview with Jay Bhalla, Executive Director of the Open Institute Trust.
August 12, 2015.
42 GovLab Interview with Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Chairman Open Institute. September 9,
2015.
embeds of visualizations created on the site will help to gain a
better understanding of its use in the media.39
3. Finally, the Open Duka team will begin tracking the number of
external requests for additional data to be added to the plat‐
form. This can provide an indication of citizen use and engage‐
ment. Such requests, says Bhalla, will show “people have used
the platform and they’re not finding what they’re looking for.”40
Making the Platform More Accessible
While Kenya is generally considered a leader in Internet penetration
in Africa, many citizens may nonetheless remain excluded from
platforms like Open Duka. In particular, citizens in rural areas, and
those from otherwise underprivileged backgrounds, generally
remain on the wrong side of the digital divide.
Recognizing that the usefulness of its tool is directly related to the
extent it is used, the Open Institute is working on a number of
measures to improve access. For example, an SMS-based solution is
in the works, and Bhalla speaks of the potential of a version of Open
Duka that would allow, for instance, a citizen considering a real
estate purchase to quickly send a text message to the platform to
gain access to all legal proceedings against the seller.41 Ndemo, too,
speaks of the potential of a mobile-based solution. “You cannot
underestimate the ubiquity of the mobile,” he says. “I think every‐
thing is going to be on the mobile platform. ... We need to focus, that
we leverage on the mobile platform on many services to the citi‐
zens.”42
Looking Forward 
| 
193

43 GovLab Interview with Al Kags, Founder Open Institute. March 4, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYfovn5TQpI.
Expansion to Other Countries
Finally, although there is much work to be done in order to make
Open Duka as useful as possible in Kenya, the Open Institute still
has an eye on broader regional expansion. Kags notes that a bigger
goal for the project is to bring Open Duka to Uganda, Tanzania,
Nigeria and beyond. This goal is not only based on the belief that a
good idea should spread to other contexts, but also on a recognition
that a Kenyan might look to buy land in Tanzania, or a Nigerian
might be interested in opening a business in Uganda. Developing a
cross-border means for citizens to assess the relational factors and
potential areas of corruption before making major decisions could
result in major benefits across the region.43 Of course, optimizing
the platform for Kenya and increasing the on-the-ground impacts of
Open Duka there will be essential for the idea to take hold in other
countries.
Open Duka represents a first step toward addressing a real and com‐
plex problem in Kenya. While the platform has had relatively limi‐
ted impact to date, in many ways this is the result of unexpected
political and administrative hurdles (combined, perhaps, with an
underestimation of the time and resources required to build such an
ambitious platform). Ultimately, the founders of Open Duka are
coming up against the reality that creating an open data platform
requires a supportive open data ecosystem. Ultimately, this may
prove to be the largest (or at least the very first) impact and contri‐
bution of Open Duka: In pushing against the limits and challenges
of open data in Kenya, it is laying the foundations for future success,
both for itself and for others.
194 
| 
Chapter 9: Kenya’s Open Duka

CHAPTER 10
Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela
Empowering Citizens to Make Data-Driven
Decisions About Education
By Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: Founded by the Mexican Institute for Competitiveness
(IMCO), with support from Omidyar Network and others, Mejora
Tu Escuela (http://mejoratuescuela.org) is an online platform that
provides citizens with information about school performance. It
helps parents choose the best option for their children, empowers
them to demand higher-quality education, and gives them tools to
get involved in their children’s schooling. It also provides school
administrators, policymakers and NGOs with data to identify areas
requiring improvement and hotbeds of corruption, in the process
raising the overall quality of education in Mexico.
Dimension of Impact: Empowering Citizens—Informed Decision-
making
Key Takeaways:
• Making previously inaccessible information available to the
public is a major public service, but a necessary next step
involves giving citizens a means to meaningfully act on that
information.
• Platforms to reduce corruption run up against powerful vested
interests. Open data advocates need to develop strategies not
only to source and disseminate information, but also to push
195

1 http://www.sep.gob.mx/wb/sep1/sep1_Estadisticas
2 Villagran, Lauren. “Test the teacher? Educators balk at Mexico’s reforms.” The Christian
Science Monitor. March 1, 2013. http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Americas/2013/0301/
Test-the-teacher-Educators-balk-at-Mexico-s-reforms
3 Villagran, Lauren. “Test the teacher? Educators balk at Mexico’s reforms.” The Christian
Science Monitor. March 1, 2013. http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Americas/2013/0301/
Test-the-teacher-Educators-balk-at-Mexico-s-reforms
back against these interests. The challenges are as much social
and political as they are technical.
• In cases where governments are reluctant to release potentially
damaging information to the public, civil society can play an
important role in finding creative ways to obtain, clean and
publish that information.
• In countries with major societal problems like rampant corrup‐
tion, it is easy to lose sight of the potentially impactful uses of
open data to improve the everyday lives of citizens.
Context and Background
Education in Mexico
For years, education in Mexico has been substandard and generally
lagged behind standards in other, comparable countries. This poor
performance cannot be attributed to a lack of budgetary resources—
Mexico spends a larger portion of its budget on education than any
other member of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). It is important to note, though, that, at least
in part, this is due to the higher number of Mexican children who
pass through the public school system than other OECD countries.1
But while that money has led to nearly universal basic education,
outcomes remain stubbornly poor. Mexico’s graduation rates are
near the bottom of OECD countries, with fewer than half of stu‐
dents earning a high school diploma.2 In addition, Mexican students
perform poorly in international comparative tests of math, science
and reading skills,3 and, according to a recent study, 80 percent of
196 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

4 Villagran, Lauren. “Test the teacher? Educators balk at Mexico’s reforms.” The Christian
Science Monitor. March 1, 2013. http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Americas/2013/0301/
Test-the-teacher-Educators-balk-at-Mexico-s-reforms
5 Cave, Damien. “Billboard Drives Home Extent of Corruption as Schools Suffer.” The
New York Times. September 1, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/02/world/ameri
cas/billboard-drives-home-extent-of-corruption-as-schools-suffer.html.
6 Cave, Damien. “Billboard Drives Home Extent of Corruption as Schools Suffer.” The
New York Times. September 1, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/02/world/ameri
cas/billboard-drives-home-extent-of-corruption-as-schools-suffer.html.
7 Transparency International, ‘Corruption in the Education Sector’, Working Paper no.
04/2009 (Berlin: TI, 2009), p. 6.
8 http://gateway.transparency.org/tools/detail/331
teachers failed an evaluation exam designed to test their competen‐
cies.4
While Mexico’s education system has been generously funded, it has
suffered over the years from endemic corruption. The scale of cor‐
ruption is difficult to calculate, but it is by all accounts massive. In
2014, an “abuse meter”—a giant electronic signboard erected in the
capital by activists that tries to update in real time the amount of
waste—estimated that at least $2.8 billion are lost to corruption
every year in the education sector. The year the billboard was erec‐
ted, it showed more than $33 million lost in just the first week of the
school year.5
The corruption takes many forms: ghost teachers on payrolls, pre‐
selling of exam results, officials with lavish lifestyles, teachers
demanding bribes to give good grades and candidate teachers brib‐
ing to pass training tests. The rot is widespread and, increasingly,
widely recognized. One activist recently referred to corruption in
the education system as “the robbery of the century.”6 A 2009 report
from Transparency International found that the average household
paid an additional $30 per year for their children’s education, despite
that education being “constitutionally free.”7 In 2010, Transparencia
Mexicana’s National Index on Corruption and Governance found
that parents paid a bribe 3.5 percent of the time when seeking an
enrollment form for a public school.8
Information and Open Data in Mexico
In Mexico, as in much of the world, information has increasingly
been seen as a tool to combat corruption. As Gavin Starks argues in
Context and Background 
| 
197

9 Starks, Gavin. “Why open data should be central to Fifa reform.” The Guardian. June
12, 2015. http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jun/12/open-data-central-
fifa-reform.
10 Zabludovsky, Karla. “Data Dive Finds 100-Year-Old Teachers and Phantom Schools in
Mexico.” Newsweek. May 30, 2014. http://www.newsweek​.com/data-dive-finds-hundred-
year-old-teachers-and-phantom-schools-mexico-252871.
11 http://barometer.opendataresearch.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
12 Interview with Ania Calderón, Director General of Open Data, Mexican Government.
March 9, 2014. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j9L5Wo0LEpY.
The Guardian: “Allowing citizens to freely access data related to the
institutions that govern them is essential to a well-functioning dem‐
ocratic society. It is the first step toward holding leaders to account
for failures and wrongdoing.”9
Mexico has tried to apply these principles to its education sector. In
2008, the Mexican Congress passed a law requiring all states to pro‐
vide the federal government with information about the condition
of schools, payrolls and other expenditures. At the time, this push
for greater transparency was seen as a vital component of the effort
to combat corruption in education. However, the law has proven
largely toothless: Four out of 32 states did not hand over payroll
databases for the last trimester of 2013, and eight states handed over
empty or incomplete databases.10
It is in this context that Mexico’s open data initiatives must be con‐
sidered—both as part of a strategy to combat corruption in educa‐
tion, and also to fight corruption in general. Currently, the country
is ranked 24th in the Open Data Barometer, having moved up one
spot since 2013.11 The government maintains a federal open data
portal, which contains information from federal, state and munici‐
pal governments, as autonomous government entities (which are
not subject to administrative and technical control from the central
government), like the Instituto Federal de Telecomunicaciones. The
open data portal is part of a broader National Digital Strategy
championed by Ania Calderón, the director general of open data for
the Mexican government, who is pushing to transition the way open
data is treated from “a passive resource to actionable intelligence
that can give us concrete results.”12
198 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

13 Bustos Arellano, Paulina, Ricardo Daniel Alanis Tamez, William Gerry and Codeando
Mexico. “Open data in Mexico: how Data Squads jump-started national publishing.”
Open Data Institute. https://theodi.org/case-studies/mexico-case-study-using-data-
squads-to-jump-start-government-open-data-publishing
14 Translated by Google. http://codeandomexico.org/
15 GovLab Interview with Oscar Montiel, Codeando México. August 19, 2015.
16 GovLab Interview with Oscar Montiel, Codeando México. August 19, 2015.
17 GovLab Interview with Rafael García Aceves, Transparencia Mexicana. September 1,
2015.
The portal has achieved some early wins, such as the release of 100
government data sets in 42 days soon after its launch.13 However,
while such accomplishments are laudable, and may even have made
some inroads, corruption remains a formidable challenge, and it is
important to recognize the limitations of Mexico’s open data efforts
thus far. Oscar Montiel, director of community engagement at
Codeando México, an organization that seeks to “bring together the
best talent and organizations to create a new generation of civic
technology,”14 notes that while “on a policy level everything sounds
fantastic,” the government’s open data plans are at times poorly exe‐
cuted.15 He also points out that while there does exist a federal open
data portal, questions remain (as they do in all countries) over “who
decides what should be open and when.” Finally, he adds that
because Mexico’s open data ecosystem is largely built around (often
multi-year) contracts and licenses, changes can take months or even
years, and there is a general lack of agility when it comes to releasing
open government data.16
Others are more positive. Rafael García Aceves of Transparencia
Mexicana describes a “really vibrant community”17 of open data
users in the country. He argues that it is up to the open data com‐
munity “to identify and demand which data is needed and to work
more on the analytical models,” and to come up with new “solu‐
tions” that can help “link data with problems.” In other words, as the
government continues to make data available, the task facing Mexi‐
can open data community, both inside and outside government, is
to find new, innovative ways of using that data, and to connect the
data to real-world problems.
Context and Background 
| 
199

18 Disclosure: Omidyar Network also funded this case study.
19 http://www.mejoratuescuela.org/quienes-somos
20 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
21 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
22 http://datos.gob.mx/historias/educacion/mejora-tu-escuela.html
Product Description and Inception
It is within this context of formidable challenges and limited suc‐
cesses—as well as a deeply entrenched and widely prevalent culture
of corruption—that the success, however provisional, of Mejora Tu
Escuela must be considered. Launched in 2013, Mejora Tu Escuela
(“Improve Your School,” in Spanish) is a public, independent, non‐
profit initiative with a team comprising members of the Mexican
Institute for Competitiveness (IMCO) and with support from Omi‐
dyar Network.18 The stated goal of the platform is to “promote citi‐
zen participation to improve education in Mexico.” The project is
premised on the belief that “education in [Mexico] will improve only
with the active commitment of all members of the educational com‐
munity, including parents.”19
In an interview, Alexandra Zapata Hojel, the coordinator of educa‐
tional projects at IMCO, explained that “Mejora Tu Escuela was
born as an effort to really get parents involved in their child’s educa‐
tion.”20 At IMCO, there was a growing frustration that parent’s lack
of ability to engage with the education system in Mexico created an
enabling environment for special interests to influence the delivery
of education.21 The parental disengagement is evident in what
Zapata Hojel calls “a singular dissonance” in Mexican education:
While the country performs quite poorly on various global meas‐
urements of education quality, citizen satisfaction in fact remains
quite high. A survey conducted in 2013, for example, found that 78
percent of Mexican parents were satisfied or very satisfied with their
children’s education (meanwhile, the country scored last in Pro‐
gramme for International Student Assessment (PISA) tests among
OECD countries).22 Unlike other examples in this series of case stud‐
ies, therefore, the effort to use open data to improve Mexican educa‐
tion did not originate in or draw strength from public discontent—
in fact, it began as an attempt to address public complacency.
200 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

23 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
For Zapata Hojel, parental complacency is indicative of a wider
problem: a lack of information. Historically, citizens have found it
difficult to access or comprehend data that would point to the poor
state of Mexican education. In addition, Mexico faces some chal‐
lenges specific to a rapidly developing nation where levels of educa‐
tional attainment and social mobility have increased dramatically
across recent generations. As Zapata Hojel explained: “[For many]
families where the parents graduated from 6th grade, if they see their
children in middle school they automatically think that things are
better than when they were growing up. So the first challenge we
had to face was to kind of shake up the system and share with all of
these parents the fact that education in Mexico was of an extremely
poor quality and that we were on the bottom of the totem pole in
terms of results on a worldwide scale. To do that, we had to access
information on all of the schools in the country.”23
Project Description
Currently, the Mejora Tu Escuela project comprises two key parts.
The first is the public-facing platform, targeted at parents and other
citizens with a role in the education community. The second is
focused on the public-policy side and includes reports on problems
with transparency, corruption, teacher payrolls and the like. This
aspect of the project also enables media to uncover problems—espe‐
cially problems related to corruption—in the education sector.
Although both aspects of the project are important (and in many
ways mutually reinforcing) the case study here is primarily con‐
cerned with the public-facing side.
The platform side of Mejora Tu Escuela has four components:
• Get to Know Your School—the central information provision
aspect of the project focuses on giving parents and other stake‐
holders access to a diversity of information on schools.
• Compare Your School—allows parents to compare their child’s
school to others in the same area, complete with an assigned
Product Description and Inception 
| 
201

24 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
25 Hasan, Munyema. “Mexico: Encouraging Parents’ Engagement in Public Education
Reform.” Open Government Partnership. October 2013. http://www.opengovpartner
ship.org/sites/default/files/Mexico_0.pdf
26 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
school grade. The hope is that this piece of the platform will “get
competition going between public schools.”24
• Grade Your School—asks parents and other members of the
school community to rate different aspects of a school on a scale
of one-to-ten, and leave comments. This information is then fed
into the Get to Know Your School stream of information.
• Improve Your School—in its current form, Improve Your
School provides “concrete tools and suggestions to parents on
how to participate in addressing problems in their child’s
school.”25 In the future, this section will also be able to suggest
concrete actions to parents or teachers based on the hyper-local
needs identified (through crowdsourced reporting and/or exist‐
ing data) for a given school.26
Figure 10-1. Mejora Tu Escuela
202 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

27 GovLab Interview with Pablo Clark, Analyst, IMCO. August 17, 2015.
28 http://www.mejoratuescuela.org/metodologia
29 http://www.mejoratuescuela.org/metodologia
Get to Know Your School and Compare Your School
Currently, Mejora Tu Escuela is populated by around 25 databases,
with new databases being added as they are made available by the
Ministry of Education. Pablo Clark, a content developer at IMCO,
notes that likely the most important database is the 2013 census,
which includes information about school infrastructure, the number
of students in schools, the number of teachers, the names of princi‐
pals, school locations and contact details (including phone number
and email address, if they have one).27 Additional information is
drawn from standardized test results, teacher assessments and other
data focused on the educational proficiency of schools.
School Grades
In addition to providing—often previously inaccessible—data to
parents on Mexican schools, Mejora Tu Escuela, as part of the Com‐
pare Your School stream, provides graded assessments of schools to
enable parents to make better decisions about their children’s
schooling and to push back against underachieving schools.
Grades for schools are calculated through student result data, with a
focus on results in mathematics and Spanish.28 Schools are then
ranked according to four levels of education quality: “Excellent,”
“Good,” “Panzazo”—an expression that roughly translates to “getting
through by the skin of one’s teeth”—and “Failed.” While represent‐
ing broad and perhaps somewhat crude measurements of school
quality, these grades do allow parents to make informed decisions
about school selection—and, equally important, empower citizens to
demand results from school officials.29
Impact
The impact of Mejora Tu Escuela is evident in the amount of traffic
the site receives—between 40,000-45,000 unique visits a day. As
Zapata Hojel notes, these numbers are all-the-more remarkable
given that IMCO has not invested heavily on dedicated marketing
Impact 
| 
203

30 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
31 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
32 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
efforts at this point, instead relying on community engagement and
word-of-mouth.30
“We remain optimistic that things will slowly start to change. Our
hope is that more monitoring of these information sources will
begin to change how money is spent in this sector in Mexico.”
—Alexandra Zapata Hojel, IMCO
Who are these visitors and the site’s users? As with the other case
studies in this report, Mejora Tu Escuela’s impact has been diverse
and diffuse, and can be measured by considering various demo‐
graphic groups and dimensions of impact. We consider impact by
taking into account two key beneficiaries (parents and officials) and
discussing the site’s overall effect on two dimensions of impact
(accountability and corruption).
Impact on Beneficiaries
Parents have been the chief beneficiaries of the site. Prior to the
site’s launch, it was virtually impossible for parents to access infor‐
mation about their children’s school. Zapata Hojel notes that this
inaccessibility extended not just to test results or information about
school facilities; even basic information like school addresses and
phone numbers was difficult to access.31
The lack of information led to a feeling of disempowerment and dis‐
engagement on the part of parents. When launching the site, IMCO
heard many stories about parents feeling intimidated by teachers,
unwilling or unable to challenge them and demand accountability.
Teachers were regarded as “untouchable people that can never be
fired, that have so much power, and that can take your son or
daughter out of school if they don’t like you.”32
Slowly, but undeniably, the information available on the site is
changing the balance of power. IMCO has collected a number of
anecdotes demonstrating the impact on parents. They include the
204 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

33 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
34 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
35 GovLab Interview with Pablo Clark, Analyst, IMCO. August 17, 2015.
story of a woman who was able to combat teacher absenteeism at
her child’s school using the platform. Teacher absenteeism is a com‐
mon problem in the Mexican education system, but teachers are
rarely fired despite a law that dictates that teachers must be dis‐
missed after three consecutive days of unjustified absences. In this
case, the mother was able to use information from Mejora Tu
Escuela, and sue the state for failing to fire the teachers in question.33
Now with the help of IMCO her story is being shared with other
parent-teacher groups across the country.
While parents have been the major beneficiaries of the site, the proj‐
ect’s sponsors have been surprised by the unintended impact on pol‐
icymakers and school officials. For example, IMCO members and
others involved with the site report that they get as many phone calls
and emails from principals and local government officials as they do
from parents: “We get governors, and people working for the gover‐
nor’s office that call us up and say, ‘We’re using your data because
your data is more reliable than that of the Ministry of Education.’”34
Clark notes that the number of emails and phone calls IMCO
receives from teachers and school principals show “they needed this
data. It shows that they have a great interest in having an active par‐
ticipation in their school.”35 In this way, Mejora Tu Escuela is not
only empowering parents, but also gradually changing the attitude
of government officials toward education and schools.
Increased Accountability
The impact of Mejora Tu Escuela can also be measured by consider‐
ing its important role in increasing accountability. This is partly a
result of greater parent involvement and empowerment; today,
parents are demanding more from schools and school officials. The
media, too, has played a role: Using information from the site, jour‐
Impact 
| 
205

36 “IMCO denuncia que SEP manipuló anomalías sobre maestros.” Televisa. May 15, 2014.
http://noticieros.televisa.com/mexico/1405/imco-denuncia-sep-desaparecio-anomalias-
maestros/.
37 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
38 GovLab Interview with Rafael García-Aceves, Open Data Project Coordinator, Trans‐
parencia Mexicana. September 1, 2015.
39 GovLab Interview with Felipe Estefan, Associate, Investments, Omidyar Network. Jan‐
uary 6, 2016.
nalists have been able to unearth corruption and shine a spotlight on
abuse.36
Government administrators and school officials have also played an
important role in enforcing accountability. Like teachers, well-
intentioned administrators who have long struggled to reform the
education system have themselves been empowered by the site; they,
too, have been using information to better monitor schools, teachers
and the education system in general. IMCO staff note, for example,
that it is only through the site that certain school officials find out
they have been enrolled in certain federally funded programs. One
official reportedly said: “I’ve never seen a cent of this money.”
Through the information available on the site, school officials are
able to identify corruption in the system, tracking down missing
funds and pinpointing the places in the bureaucracy where money is
being stolen.37
Despite such anecdotal evidence, the broader impact on accounta‐
bility in Mexican education remains to be seen, however. García
Aceves of Transparencia Mexicana notes that transparency does not
always translate automatically to impact. “Mexico is just starting to
realize that this link between transparency and accountability is not
something that is linear or direct,” he says. “If you have more trans‐
parency, that doesn’t mean that you have more accountability. It
could actually be the opposite.”38 Felipe Estefan of Omidyar Network
agrees while arguing that, although the link between transparency
accountability is not always direct, transparency is a “necessary
ingredient for increased accountability,” the ultimate goal of Mejora
Tu Escuela.39
206 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

40 http://imco.org.mx/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/20140514_MapaMagisterioMex
ico_Presentacion.pdf
41 Zabludovsky, Karla. “Data Dive Finds 100-Year-Old Teachers and Phantom Schools in
Mexico.” Newsweek. May 30, 2014. http://www.newsweek​.com/data-dive-finds-hundred-
year-old-teachers-and-phantom-schools-mexico-252871.
42 Zabludovsky, Karla. “Data Dive Finds 100-Year-Old Teachers and Phantom Schools in
Mexico.” Newsweek. May 30, 2014. http://www.newsweek​.com/data-dive-finds-hundred-
year-old-teachers-and-phantom-schools-mexico-252871.
Corruption Report
Finally, the website’s impact is evident in the way it has highlighted
corruption within the education system and pushed the topic to the
forefront of public discussion. In 2014, IMCO used Ministry of Edu‐
cation data available on the site to publish a report on the state of
corruption in Mexico’s education system.40 The report’s findings
were backed by the National Audit Agency and stirred national out‐
rage.
Among the report’s findings:
• 1,442 teachers on government payroll were between the ages of
100 and 105. Of these, 1,441 were registered in the state of
Hidalgo, and all but one was born on December 12, 1912 (i.e.,
12/12/12).
• 70 teachers earned more than President Enrique Peña Nieto
(who made around $15,000 per month). Of these, 19 worked at
schools that had failed or barely passed the national standar‐
dized test.41
• The report also found that the average monthly national salary
for Mexican teachers was $1,954, and that the teacher with the
highest salary lived in Oaxaca state and earned $46,849 a
month. In the state of Guerrero, there was a school with a single
student, but six employees whose payroll added up to $6,644 per
month.42
• The report uncovered 536 telesecundarias, or secondary and
high school programs available in rural areas via satellite, that
apparently operated without electricity. The report also showed
that there existed a large number of “phantom schools” that
Impact 
| 
207

43 Zabludovsky, Karla. “Data Dive Finds 100-Year-Old Teachers and Phantom Schools in
Mexico.” Newsweek. May 30, 2014. http://www.newsweek​.com/data-dive-finds-hundred-
year-old-teachers-and-phantom-schools-mexico-252871.
44 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
were unregistered (and thus possibly nonexistent), yet that had
several teachers on payroll.43
Prior to the report’s public release, 10 states initiated audits, and
teacher payrolls are now being funded by the federal government
instead of state governments. Zapata Hojel hopes to see more “very
clear policy results.” She adds: “We remain optimistic that things will
slowly start to change. Our hope is that more monitoring of these
information sources will begin to change how money is spent in this
sector in Mexico.”44
Figure 10-2. A parent thanks Mejora Tu Escuela for granting access to
school information
Challenges
In seeking to change Mexican education, Mejora Tu Escuela is work‐
ing against powerful forces and vested interests. Inevitably, it has
faced, and continues to face, a series of challenges to its operations
and growth plans. As we have seen so often in this report, open data
programs and activists frequently encounter these types of chal‐
208 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

45 Zabludovsky, Karla. “Data Dive Finds 100-Year-Old Teachers and Phantom Schools in
Mexico.” Newsweek. May 30, 2014. http://www.newsweek​.com/data-dive-finds-hundred-
year-old-teachers-and-phantom-schools-mexico-252871.
46 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015. August 7, 2015.
47 GovLab Interview with Pablo Clark, Analyst, IMCO. August 17, 2015.
lenges—they are part of the process of social change, and of chang‐
ing the way information is consumed and disseminated.
Standardized Test Cancellation
Revelations of corruption can have unintended effects, especially
when they come up against such vested interests. In 2014, IMCO’s
corruption report uncovered the fact that 19 of the 70 teachers who
make more than the Mexican president work at schools that “failed
or barely passed the national standardized test.”45 That year, under
pressure from the teachers’ union and others embarrassed by the
results, as well as public pressure led by NGOs like Mexicanos Pri‐
mero, the national standardized testing program was canceled. “As
soon as we put standardized test results on the website, and as soon
as parents were able to, for the first time ever, compare results
amongst schools at the national level including private and public
schools, four months later the federal government announced that
the standardized tests were being cancelled,” laments Zapata Hojel.46
The cancellation of the tests led to a major gap in usable data to
assess the effectiveness of teachers and schools. Thankfully, the test‐
ing has recently been reimplemented (albeit in a new form), and
once the data is made public, IMCO will once again import the new
data into Mejora Tu Escuela. Still, the cancellation has caused lasting
difficulties. In addition to the challenge of a yearlong gap in data,
IMCO will have to “find some way to make [the new results] com‐
parable with the results from the last test, which had a different sys‐
tem.”47
Data Accessibility
While national census data in many ways forms the backbone of
Mejora Tu Escuela, it took considerable effort to gain access to that
data. For example, only 16 percent of the nonpersonally identifiable
information from the census was originally released. The govern‐
Challenges 
| 
209

48 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
49 GovLab Interview with Oscar Montiel, Codeando México. August 19, 2015.
50 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
ment’s initial reluctance to release more information was, in part,
due to apprehensions about the extent of corruption that would be
revealed. Ultimately, much of the remaining data was leaked to
IMCO (and other Mexican NGOs), and this data was posted online.
Zapata Hojel notes that much of the data on the website cannot,
therefore, be properly called “open data.”48 The information is,
rather, a combination of open data, leaked data and information
gleaned through scraping and citizen input. This holds potentially
valuable lessons: Sometimes data activists must be creative in the
ways they source information, combining a variety of inputs to cre‐
ate a genuinely useful tool.
Data Quality
In addition to problems with accessibility, IMCO has also faced con‐
siderable problems with data quality. Oscar Montiel of Codeando
México, believes that the problem stems in part from the lower lev‐
els of quality required by government itself to do its job. He says:
“Their standards are so low, even for themselves, for their own work
that when you try to push a bit higher then they don’t respond that
well.”49
Whatever the source of the problem, IMCO has from the onset been
faced with making accessible error-ridden and outdated data, often
stored in inconsistent formats. The IMCO experience points to the
significant difference between data being public and data being truly
open—i.e., available in standardized, machine-readable technical
formats. In many ways, in fact, IMCO has played a major role in
cleaning the data, for example through citizen inputs that have cor‐
rected errors and updated information. Zapata Hojel notes that,
going forward, much of the success of Mejora Tu Escuela will rely
on whether or not IMCO and others will be able to push the govern‐
ment “to keep the platform up to date, to keep the platform current,
to be able to provide parents and school communities with informa‐
tion that is valuable.”50
210 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

51 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
52 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
Looking Forward
Mejora Tu Escuela’s early years have provided valuable proof of con‐
cept, and its organizers are pushing ahead with new features and
steps to grow the service. The coming months and years will witness
a number of enhancements. Some of the additions or steps under
consideration are described here.
Connecting Needs with Actions
Under its “Improve Your School” initiative, Mejora Tu Escuela is
working to create concrete opportunities that would allow parents
(and others) to take actions to address problems they identify. For
example, one of the most common forms of cheating in Mexico
involves teachers simply dictating answers to their students. Parents
who identify this problem now have no way to solve it. Mejora Tu
Escuela is looking to include a mechanism that would suggest to
such parents that they donate one day per year of their own time to
supervise a test.51 In this way, the gap between information and
action can be narrowed.
Publishing a School Budget
Although the site includes a decent amount of information, it still
does not clearly link school performance and infrastructure to
budgets. This means, for example, that the federal government has
no real idea how much it costs to educate a child across the country
in various regions and localities. Zapata Hojel states that, in the
future, Mejora Tu Escuela will work to add more specific and granu‐
lar expenditure information—which will be a challenge considering
that three levels of government are involved in public school budg‐
eting—so that parents can not only see how schools are performing,
but how they are performing relative to funds received. This, Zapata
Hojel believes, will take the notion of accountability to a whole new
level.52
Looking Forward 
| 
211

53 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
54 GovLab Interview with Alexandra Zapata Hojel, Coordinator of Education Projects,
IMCO. August 7, 2015.
55 GovLab Interview with Rafael García-Aceves, Open Data Project Coordinator, Trans‐
parencia Mexicana. September 1, 2015.
Developing a Report Pipeline
As it stands, when a parent has a problem related to their child’s
school, the pathway to addressing that problem is intimidatingly
opaque since different types of problems require different routes
toward addressing them. “If it’s a problem related to bullying, it’s
one route they need to take, and if the problem is in school infra‐
structure or sexual abuse, the trail they have to take is completely
different.”53 Zapata Hojel believes that the pathways are intentionally
obscured by the Ministry of Education, leading to not only parents,
but also principals being unable to determine a school’s supervisor,
for example.
Upon gaining access to databases containing information on who
key decision-makers are for different schools, IMCO is developing a
new “Report Pipeline” to enable parents to report problems and gain
step-by-step instructions for how to get that information to the rele‐
vant person. Zapata Hojel sees this as a way to “put pressure on
some of these government systems and also ... really be able to give
parents help in resolving this.”54
Translating Information into Action
For the people and organizations behind Mejora Tu Escuela, the
larger ambition is not simply to provide an information portal, but
to create a platform for action. García Aceves notes that, as it stands,
“people may be more informed but probably they do not have the
tools for activating the institutional mechanisms that they need to
solve a problem.”55 While Mejora Tu Escuela provides tools that
could be valuable for certain users, García-Aceves argues that every
organization (including his own) should work toward developing
tools with a clear eye toward impact. Estefan of Omidyar Network
states that for Mejora Tu Escuela to achieve the greatest impact pos‐
sible in the future, it should find ways to draw pathways between
complaints (and complainers) and policy responses (and policymak‐
212 
| 
Chapter 10: Mexico’s Mejora Tu Escuela

56 GovLab Interview with Felipe Estefan, Associate, Investments, Omidyar Network.
August 20, 2015.
ers). Considering the difficulty of simply identifying relevant institu‐
tional decision-makers in the education system, Zapata Hojel and
the team at IMCO will likely face significant challenges in finding
ways to incentivize those decision-makers to actually respond to and
address citizen complaints.56
Looking Forward 
| 
213


CHAPTER 11
Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio
Empowering Citizens to Make Data-Driven
Decisions on Health Care
By David Sangokoya, Ali Clare, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: Every February, Uruguayan citizens are given the oppor‐
tunity to choose whether to change or stay with their existing health
care provider. In the country’s mixed public-private health care sys‐
tem, several factors come into play when making this decision: the
location of the health provider, number of doctors and pediatricians
available, hours open, etc. How can Uruguayan citizens make data-
driven, informed decisions on choosing health care providers?
Datos Abiertos, Transparencia y Acceso a la Inform (DATA) Uru‐
guay, an open data civil society organization, partnered with the
Uruguayan Ministry of Health to create A Tu Servicio (http://atuser
vicio.uy), a website providing easily digestible, searchable and visual‐
ized infographics based on open government health data. The Web
platform allows users to select their location and then to compare
local health care providers based on a wide range of parameters and
indicators, such as facility type, medical specialty, care goals, wait
times and patient rights. A Tu Servicio has introduced a new para‐
digm of patient choice into Uruguay’s health care sector, enabling
citizens not only to navigate through a range of options but also
generating a healthy and informed debate on how more generally to
improve the country’s health care sector.
Dimension of Impact: Empowering Citizens—Informed Decision-
making
215

1 http://www.internetworldstats.com/sa/uy.htm (2014).
2 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/about/index.html.
3 http://global.census.okfn.org/.
4 Keserű, Júlia and James Kin-sing Chan. “The Social Impact of Open Data.” Sunlight
Foundation. 2015. http://www.opendataresearch.org/dl/symposium2015/odrs2015-
paper20.pdf
Key Takeaways:
• Open data initiatives, including but not limited to those focused
in health care, stand to benefit greatly from collaboration
between intermediaries—including civil society, the media and,
in this case, health care data providers—and government.
• While increasing access to information is an important first step
in efforts to unlock the value of open data, simply making infor‐
mation available is not sufficient: information needs to be
standardized, machine-readable and visualizable to be truly use‐
ful to citizens.
• Successful open data projects have viral potential and can
quickly spread to other sectors and applications, or be replicated
in other countries.
Context and Background
With an Internet penetration rate of 60.5 percent,1 Uruguay is con‐
sidered an “emerging and advancing” country, according to the
Open Data Barometer.2 Uruguay has been a member of the Open
Government Partnership (OGP) since 2011, and is ranked 12th on
the Open Knowledge Foundation’s Global Open Data Index, making
it one of the more advanced open data countries in Latin America.3
National data from a variety of units and agencies is made available
for reuse through the national open data portal (http://
www.agesic.gub.uy/), led by AGESIC, the national agency for eGo‐
vernment. While recognizing the “great potential” for Uruguay to
innovate around open data, the Sunlight Foundation noted recently
that many challenges lie ahead for the country as it seeks to trans‐
form open data efforts into a mainstream, sustainable government
practice.4 Despite these challenges, the case study below illustrates
the emerging impact of Uruguay’s opening up of government data.
216 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

5 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
6 GovLab interview with Daniel Carranza, Co-Founder, Data Uruguay, June 8, 2015.
Health care in Uruguay is delivered through a mixed public-private
framework, with private insurers and hospitals working alongside a
public health care infrastructure. Citizens can choose their health
care service providers. Once an individual has been with a service
provider for three years, they are eligible to change their provider at
the beginning of the following February. Fabrizio Scrollini, chair‐
man of DATA Uruguay, noted that, as a result, the month of Febru‐
ary is typically marked by public debate and discussion over the
factors that influence citizens to choose (or leave) a provider. He
adds that February is also typically marked by heavy advertising on
the part of providers, many of whom “encourage citizens to join
them and leave others, and even potentially pay” users to switch
providers.5
At the time A Tu Servicio (“At Your Service”) was launched in Feb‐
ruary 2015, the Ministry of Health was starting to experiment with
open data, collecting raw data on service quality from every service
provider and publishing these and other health data annually. Data
management was generally poor, however, with data frequently out
of date, and data sharing hampered by incompatible information
management systems. Health care data wasn’t available in a format
that would allow citizens to make informed decisions. Additionally,
according to Daniel Carranza, cofounder of DATA Uruguay, the
pressures from competing health providers led citizens to “rely on
marketing and advertising campaigns based on opinion rather than
actual data.”6
Context and Background 
| 
217

7 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
Product Description and Inception
Figure 11-1. A Tu Servicio home page
First launched as a pilot program in February 2015 by DATA Uru‐
guay and the Ministry of Health, A Tu Servicio is a Web application
based on open government data that provides easily digestible,
searchable and visualized infographics of key performance indica‐
tors such as facility type, available medical specialties, procedures
performed, wait times, goals of care, patient rights and human
resources. This platform allows users to compare these indicators
across all health care providers in the country, enabling users to
make well-informed decisions about their health care providers
through machine-readable, interoperable and accessible data that
was previously unavailable. For example, users can search across
public health care providers (such as Medica Uruguaya and CAM‐
CEL) and private providers (such as Blue Cross Blue Shield) in
Montevideo and compare data on the cost of birth control, average
wait times and patient satisfaction. Such comparisons can allow a
citizen to decide whether to stick with his or her current provider or
switch to a new one. Enabling this type of comparison was not
always easy, however, since, as Scrollini notes, “private providers
were the worst in terms of compliance when sending the data to the
Ministry.”7
218 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

8 http://mutualistas.datauy.org/
9 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
10 GovLab interview with Daniel Carranza, Co-Founder, Data Uruguay, June 8, 2015.
Figure 11-2. A Tu Servicio health service comparisons
The project emerged from a public consultation between the gov‐
ernment and DATA Uruguay, a volunteer-based civil society organi‐
zation committed to promoting open data, transparency, and access
to information (http://datauy.org/). In 2013, DATA Uruguay had
begun working with 180 Ciencia, a journalism portal, to create the
application “Temporada de pases”8 (“Transfer season”) as part of a
public service project to inform and empower citizens considering
changing health care providers. The application relied on existing
data published by the Ministry of Health; however, that data was
generally of poor quality, often available only in closed formats, and
included little metadata. The need for more open health care data
quickly became apparent.9
Spurred by the evident shortcomings of the “Temporada de pases”
application, the Ministry of Health initiated a discussion with Data
Uruguay about ways to make more data available to citizens. This
discussion, held under the auspices of the ongoing Open Govern‐
ment Partnership (OGP) roundtable discussions about the Alliance
for Open Government, soon resulted in a modest government grant
(about $13,000) to create a pilot application that later became A Tu
Servicio.10 DATA Uruguay also won additional funding from Avina
Product Description and Inception 
| 
219

11 http://www.avinaamericas.org/
12 http://idatosabiertos.org/at-your-service-open-data-for-health-service-delivery/
13 GovLab Interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
14 GovLab interview with Diego Soria, Ministry of Health Uruguay, August 18, 2015.
Americas, an organization promoting sustainable development,11
and the Iniciativa Latinoamericana por los Datos Abiertos (“Latin
American Open Data Initiative,” ILDA), a network of organizations
seeking to promote research on and use of open data in the region.12
The key role played by DATA Uruguay is one of the most interesting
and important aspects of the A Tu Servicio story. It shows the vital
function of intermediaries and civil society in promoting open data,
facilitating discussions with the state, and nudging government
agencies to release more and higher quality data.
At the same time, the role of the state itself cannot be underestima‐
ted. A Tu Servicio was supported from the outset by the Ministry of
Health, whose encouragement and input (including in product
design) was deemed critical to the success of the project.13 Even after
the website was launched, DATA Uruguay and the state acted
together in collecting user feedback and instituting improvements.
This included working directly with health institutions to defuse
their resistance to opening up data for comparison with other pro‐
viders.14 Ultimately, the success and impact of A Tu Servicio (see
next section for a discussion of impact) is testament to the impor‐
tance of inter-sectoral partnership, and particularly collaboration
between the state and civil society.
Impact
In this section, we consider some indicators of impact to determine
the success of A Tu Servicio. Since the project—initiated in 2015 and
scheduled to run until 2020—is still in its infancy, any measure‐
ments of impact should be considered highly preliminary.
In measuring impact within and across these targeted beneficiaries,
we consider three categories:
220 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

15 GovLab Interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
16 GovLab Interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
Intended Beneficiaries
Average Citizens
• Enabling the people of Uruguay to make better-informed health decisions as
a result of actionable information.
• Equipping citizens with data-driven evidence and tools to make better
decisions on health care choice.
• Catalyzing citizens to act as agents of monitoring and evaluation around the
health services they receive.
Health
Providers
• Making clear to citizens which health options are best suited to their needs.
• Improving the quality and responsiveness of service based on data-driven
demand from citizens.
Government
Agencies
• Improving the public health system through greater efficiency, transparency
and accountability.
Media
• Encouraging better data journalism efforts and data driven arguments for
public debate on health care.
Civil Society and
Unions
• Enabling better informed argumentation and advocacy around the status of
the health care system.
Use and Awareness:
In 2014, before the launch of the application, health care provider
data made available by the Ministry of Public Health received fewer
than 500 downloads. This low uptake was probably due to limited
awareness of the availability of data as well as poor data quality.
Following its launch, the impact of A Tu Servicio was almost imme‐
diately apparent. In the first month alone, the site received approxi‐
mately 35,000 visits, a number equivalent to 1 percent of the total
population of Uruguay.15 The average time spent on the platform
was five minutes, and visitors accessed on average five pages per
visit.16
Impact 
| 
221

17 GovLab Interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
18 “No vas a comparar.” Montevideo Portal. February 2, 2015. http://www.montevi
deo.com.uy/auc.aspx?259222.
19 See, for example, “¿Cuánto es el tiempo de espera para especialistas en ASSE y mutua‐
listas?” El Observador. February 2, 2015; “Conozca el tiempo de espera de las mutualis‐
tas para ver un medico.” Subrayado. January 31, 2014. http://subrayado.com.uy/Site/
noticia/30503/conozca-el-tiempo-de-espera-de-las-mutualistas-para-ver-un-medico
20 Keserű, Júlia. “How open data is changing the way Uruguayans choose their health
care” Sunlight Foundation. May 13, 2015. https://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/
2015/05/13/how-open-data-is-changing-the-way-uruguayans-choose-their-health-care/
21 “Ministro de Salud Pública, Fondo Nacional de Recursos.” Uruguay Parliament Tran‐
script. August 11, 2015. http://www.parlamento.gub.uy/indexdb/Distribuidos/ListarDistri
buido.asp?URL=/distribuidos/contenido/camara/
D20150811-0218-0212.htm&TIPO=CON
The launch of A Tu Servicio also increased awareness among Uru‐
guayans regarding the availability of data, and its potential to
improve their health care. The application’s launch received wide‐
spread media coverage, thanks to a press conference held by DATA
Uruguay and the Ministry of Health in which the virtues of the ini‐
tiative were emphasized. Social media was also employed strategi‐
cally to disseminate information about the initiative and maintain
interest after the launch. Additionally, several unions, including a
doctors’ union, endorsed the website, stating the need for more
health care information to be made available and accessible.17
One aspect in particular of A Tu Servicio received considerable
press coverage.18 Shortly after the launch, journalists and citizens
began noticing and drawing attention to long wait times at public
hospitals, almost all of which were in contravention of maximum
wait times established by the government.19 The resulting public and
media furor resulted in several hospitals changing their practices,
and more generally, led to a vigorous public debate about wait times
and quality of care in Uruguay.20
A Tu Servicio has also played an important role in stimulating and
facilitating more informed debate within Uruguay’s Parliament
about the future of the nation’s health care system. For example, on
August 11, 2015, a nationalist deputy leader of Montevideo, Martin
Lema, spoke out against proposed reforms to the National Resour‐
ces Fund (FNR), which protects citizens against extraordinary
health care expenses in Uruguay.21 In making his case, Lema utilized
data from the A Tu Servicio platform to refute the government’s
222 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

22 “Lema: Basso “está desinformado o miente” sobre medicamentos de alto costo.” Espec‐
tador. August 13, 2015. http://www.espectador.com/salud/321257/lema-basso-esta-
desinformado-o-miente-sobre-medicamentos-de-alto-costo
23 https://twitter.com/MartinLema404/status/629645255286091776/photo/1
24 GovLab interview with Daniel Carranza, Co-Founder, Data Uruguay, June 8, 2015.
25 GovLab Interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, October 1, 2015.
claims that proposed health care reforms would benefit vulnerable
populations. He stated that the data showed anyone making this
claim was “lying or misinformed.”22 Lema also publicly criticized the
proposed reforms via social media23 and public interviews, where he
continued to cite data from the A Tu Servicio platform to back his
case.
Data Quality:
As noted earlier, health provider data previously made available by
the government was of poor quality, limiting its usability and citizen
interest. A Tu Servicio spurred vast improvements in data quality
through increased public scrutiny and demand for machine-
readable, interoperable and accessible information.
The tool’s user-friendly visualizations helped citizens understand the
data in new ways and led to greater public scrutiny and discovery of
erroneous data. For the first time, citizens were able to spot errors in
the data provided by health providers and, through feedback loops
built into the application, request corrections. Instances where
health providers had not provided sufficient information were
labeled as “not available”; in many cases, citizens could identify such
holes in the data and make public requests to the Ministry and pri‐
vate providers for the data to be updated. In addition, the Ministry
of Health was able to identify instances where provider data was
possibly misrepresented as well as instances where provider data did
not agree with crowdsourced user information.24 Providers made
aware of errors have also been able to submit revised and corrected
data. After the platform’s launch, Fabrizio Scrollini recalls, “Many
[providers] were willing to update their data and standardize it
according to our preferences.”25 Overall, the launch of the applica‐
tion led to a new commitment to data quality on the part of provid‐
ers, citizens and politicians.
Impact 
| 
223

26 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
27 http://www.rebeliondeenfermos.org/
28 http://awards.theodi.org/2015-finalists/
29 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, July 14, 2015.
Impact on Other Open Data Projects:
Success often breeds success, and the A Tu Servicio project is a good
example of how an effective project in one country and sector can
spur positive developments in open data elsewhere. The impact of A
Tu Servicio on open data progress can be seen in two ways: in other
regional projects encouraged by Uruguay’s example; and in other
open data projects within Uruguay itself.
Regional and global impact: The most direct evidence of A Tu Ser‐
vicio’s regional spillover is evident in the Mexican state of Sonora,
where DATA Uruguay and Codeando Mexico, another Mexican
NGO, have been collaborating with a civil society group on the
development of a health care data reporting website aiming to pro‐
mote a standard for health service delivery.26 This website, La Rebe‐
lion de los Enfermos,27 gives citizens the ability to report on hospital
incidents and provides them with essential information for filing
formal complaints. The focus is on creating data standards and
exploring further opportunities to open health care information to
the public. DATA Uruguay also presented the platform at the Pan
American Health Organization, which has used A Tu Servicio as an
example of good practice for other health systems in the region. Fol‐
lowing international recognition this project has received (for exam‐
ple, as a finalist in the Open Data Institute’s Open Data Awards),28
DATA Uruguay has received interest in creating similar platforms in
Europe and Africa.29
National impact: Within Uruguay, too, A Tu Servicio’s success has
opened up new possibilities for open data and citizen empowerment
through access to information. In the wake of the application’s
release, other government ministries and departments have either
initiated new open data projects or shown interest in doing so. The
impact of A Tu Servicio on other parts of the government is evident
at AGESIC, the national eGovernment agency, which is using A Tu
Servicio as a “best case” to present to various ministries and other
224 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

30 GovLab interview with Diego Soria, Ministry of Health Uruguay, August 18, 2015.
31 GovLab interview with Diego Soria, Ministry of Health Uruguay, August 18, 2015.
32 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini Chairman, Data Uruguay, October 1, 2015.
33 Open Data Day was an event for journalists, researchers, entrepreneurs, students and
technologists to learn about open data tools, data visualization, storytelling, and to dis‐
cuss the open data movement in Latin America and the Caribbean. http://blog.okfn.org/
category/events/open-data-day/
34 Garcia, Yas. “Open Data Day 2015 in Latin América and The Caribbean | Open Knowl‐
edge Argentina.” Open Knowledge Argentina. April 15, 2015. http://ar.okfn.org/
2015/04/15/open-data-day-2015-in-latin-america-and-the-caribbean/.
organizations to promote open government and open data.30 Addi‐
tionally, the Ministry of Health has been ramping up its own efforts
and commitment to open data, establishing new standards for open‐
ness and quality, and publishing new information about how data is
collected, stored and made available for reuse. In addition, several
new open projects are scheduled to be released between now and
2010.31 A Tu Servicio’s national impact is also evidenced by the fact
that it survived a change of administration—something that is, as
Scrollini puts it, “very unlikely in some polities (including Uru‐
guay).”32
In the months following the release of A Tu Servicio, the open data
movement has continued to pick up steam in Uruguay. At the Open
Data Day in Latin America and the Caribbean, a group of develop‐
ers analyzed open geographical data in order to analyze and visual‐
ize the number of streets in Montevideo named after notable
women.33 Upon coming to the unfortunate conclusion that only 100
out of 5,000 streets in the city are named for women, the group
developed an interactive website, Calles de Mujeres, providing citi‐
zens with more information on the important contributions these
women made to Uruguayan history.34 Additionally, the portal loca‐
ted at Datos.gub.uy continues to collect applications and platforms
created through the country’s open data, including apps focused on
transportation, culture and local history.
Challenges
A Tu Servicio has been remarkably successful, especially given the
limited time since its launch. A number of challenges, however, are
still acting as a barrier to greater impact. Two, in particular, are
worth examining in some detail.
Challenges 
| 
225

Timing constraints
A Tu Servicio’s period of peak usefulness is very short, limited to the
month of February (and the weeks immediately preceding), when
citizens can change their service providers. If the service is to scale
up and attract more users, it needs to overcome two hurdles:
a. Find a way of maximizing exposure and reach during its limited
period of peak usefulness. In particular, site administrators need
to ensure that the application contains all necessary data during
this time and that the application is widely disseminated
through media and other channels.
b. Find ways of engaging users outside the period of peak useful‐
ness. While citizens may only be able to change providers at a
certain time of the year, health concerns and the need for
health-related information are not time-bound. Ultimately, A
Tu Servicio may be able to establish itself as a more general-
purpose health-information portal, one that could be useful
throughout the year.
Outreach and communication
Despite a widely publicized press conference and several mentions
in the national media, the outreach campaign for A Tu Servicio was
in fact rather hasty and somewhat ad hoc. Future efforts should not
only be more sustained, but also focused on reaching under-served
and under-privileged populations. These populations may not only
lack access to health care; they are also least likely to be Internet
savvy, and thus A Tu Servicio must confront something of a double
challenge in reaching out to them.
In this regard, A Tu Servicio may find it useful to engage and collab‐
orate with intermediaries, both in the media and especially in civil
society. A Tu Servicio’s success is itself testament to the power of
inter-sectoral collaboration and the powerful part that can be played
by civil society. Several other examples included in this report also
offer testament to the ability of intermediaries and civil society
groups to spread awareness of new applications and websites, partic‐
ularly among traditionally underserved groups. A Tu Servicio could
apply some of those lessons, spreading its usefulness and expanding
the potential of open data beyond the 1 percent of Uruguayans who
currently use the application.
226 
| 
Chapter 11: Uruguay’s A Tu Servicio

35 GovLab interview with Daniel Carranza, Co-Founder, Data Uruguay, June 8, 2015.
36 GovLab interview with Fabrizio Scrollini, Chairman, Data Uruguay, October 1, 2015.
Looking Forward
Since the launch of A Tu Servicio, DATA Uruguay and the Ministry
of Health have worked on a number of initiatives and features to
improve the platform. These initiatives focus on increasing usability,
particularly through the development of a mobile application; creat‐
ing better feedback mechanisms for incorporating and crowdsourc‐
ing user data; and providing a kind of “TripAdvisor” for users to
describe and rate their experiences at specific hospitals. Overall, A
Tu Servicio is seen as the first step in a broader scheme of projects
within the Ministry of Health to disseminate open government
health data. For example, the government is also considering dis‐
seminating information related to vaccinations more widely.35
As we see the broad-based adoption of “wearables”, allowing for
devices such as smartphones to collect personal data and “quantify
oneself,” the possibility of adding a “small data” element to the appli‐
cation may be considered. Small data refers to the practice of collect‐
ing individual-level information and then providing that data back
to those individuals in a more readily understandable way to
improve personal health decision-making. For instance, the applica‐
tion could collect information on an individual’s heart health or glu‐
cose levels and then offer that information in a visualized, time-
charted way, allowing individuals to track their health and keep
chronic conditions under control. This feature is but one of the
potential avenues for achieving the broader goal of moving A Tu
Servicio towards more of a generalized health information portal.
Though, as Scrollini notes, “Uruguay has a very stringent personal
data protection law. As a result, the cost of developing [such a small
data effort] could be high for a lightweight initiative.”36
On initial planning, A Tu Servicio is scheduled to run until 2020.
Given its impact and general popularity, however, there is little
doubt that this specific platform, in its current form, represents just
the start of a much longer process of transformation and opening up
in Uruguay’s health care sector.
Looking Forward 
| 
227


PART IV
Case Studies: Creating
Opportunity
According to our research, open data is creating new opportunities
for citizens and organizations in many contexts. The ability to lever‐
age open data as an asset is promoting economic growth, job cre‐
ation and an improved capacity for innovation across regions and
sectors.
The case studies in this section examine:
• The creation of new industries built on open weather data
released by the United States National Oceanic and Atmos‐
pheric Administration (NOAA).
• The generation of billions of dollars of economic activity as a
result of the Global Positioning System (GPS) being opened to
the global public in the 1980s, and the United Kingdom’s Ord‐
nance Survey geospatial offerings.
• A more level playing field for small businesses in New York City
seeking market research data.


CHAPTER 12
Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey
A Clash of Business Models
By Christina Rogawski, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: Ordnance Survey (OS), Britain’s mapping agency, is con‐
sidered to be one of the best sources of geospatial data in Great Brit‐
ain. Its data supports essentially any industry or activity that uses a
map: urban planning, real estate development, environmental sci‐
ence, utilities, retail, and much more. Creating data that is not only
profoundly useful but technically impressive results in high demand
for OS data. However, despite the launch of its OS OpenData plat‐
form in 2010, and despite initiatives to spur innovation with the pri‐
vate sector, much of OS data is part of a fee-based licensing model.
OS is required to be self-financing, a goal it has historically achieved
by charging fees for its data. In recent years this model has come
into conflict with the U.K. government’s commitment to open data,
the broader open data community, and even elements of the private
sector. Today, OS uses a mixed-cost model, with some data open and
some data paid, but tensions between these two aspects (open and
closed data) persist.
Dimension of Impact: Creating Opportunity—Economic Growth
Key Takeaways:
• The impacts of a given open data set can span a vast array of
sectors and users—in the case of OS’ data, everything from
medicine to mapmaking.
231

1 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
• The relationship between public data providers and private
industry actors can create new value and opportunities from
open data, but also risk creating conflict and stifling innovation
if barriers such as fees are placed upon data sets. Such a system,
however, can allow public data providers to grow revenue from
the private sector, rather than from taxpayers or other govern‐
ment agencies.
• Some governments and institutions are still making efforts to
determine the best open data policies that balance financing
needs with open data principles.
• Whether government entities should be investing in research
and product development directly, rather than focusing efforts
on supporting private sector actors to innovate, remains a diffi‐
cult debate.
• Collaborating with users through directly crowdsourcing ideas,
formal stakeholder engagement or analyzing user behavior can
help increase understanding of how to best make use of open
data and can ensure that data owners build partnerships, prod‐
ucts, and/or release data in ways that can create maximum value
for end users.
Context and Background
OS Background
Ordnance Survey traces its roots to 1745, when the British govern‐
ment ordered its defense ministry at the time—the Board of Ord‐
nance—to map the Scottish Highlands in response to a rebellion,
and then to survey England’s southern coasts as the nearby French
Revolution broke out. The first Ordnance Survey maps were pub‐
lished in 1801, and over time, the design of OS maps came to focus
less on military users and more on a diverse set of general users,
particularly as the emergence of railroads, cycling and automobiles
increased public demand for accurate maps.1 These maps have long
232 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

2 Wainwright, Martin. “Ordnance Survey maps are worth paying for.” The Guardian.
April 3, 2010. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/03/ordnance-
survey-maps-online
3 This means that a distance of 1cm on the map represents 50,000cm (500m) in the real
world. “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/over
view/history.html
4 “Products and services FAQs.” Ordnance Survey. http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/
support/products-services.html
5 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
6 “Surveying for Mapping—Section 2, Surveying Methods.” ICSM. http://
www.icsm.gov.au/mapping/surveying2.html
7 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
been popular with the private and public sector alike, generally
admired for both their technical and artistic elements.2
Historically, OS has been proactive in integrating new technologies
—e.g., aerial photography—that have held potential to improve and
enhance the accuracy of maps. In 1971, computers and digital map‐
ping were introduced. In 1974, the traditional one-inch map was
replaced by a metric 1:50,000 map,3 one of the large-scale maps OS
continues to use today, which portray real-world features larger on
the map to provide a very high level of detail.4 Large areas of
1:25,000 scale mapping were also used to create a series of Outdoor
Leisure Maps, which remain popular among outdoor enthusiasts
and travelers.5
In 1990, now a fully civilian agency, Ordnance Survey began using
the National Global Positioning Network (i.e., British GPS) to
replace the triangulation network (a surveying method that relies on
the angles in a triangle formed by three control points).6 OS
launched its website in 1995 and digitized its remaining 230,000
maps, making Britain the “first country in the world to complete a
large-scale electronic mapping program.”7
By the end of the 1990s, advances in computing and the use of
hand-held pen computers by surveyors made OS data routinely
available to customers within 24 hours of surveys being completed.
With these capabilities, OS solidified its reputation as a leader in
producing highly detailed, technically impressive and accurate
maps. In 1999 the British government designated OS as a Trading
Context and Background 
| 
233

8 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
9 https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/products/mastermap-
products.html
10 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
11 Bailey, Trevor C. and Anthony C. Gatrell. Interactive Spatial Data Analysis. (New York:
Routledge), 1995.
Fund, requiring OS to cover its costs by charging for its products
and giving a portion of its profits to the U.K. Treasury (although OS
had always charged nongovernment users for maps and geospatial
data).8 The effects of this self-financing requirement continue to sig‐
nificantly affect the culture and approach to open data at OS today.
In 2001 OS launched its flagship product, OS MasterMap.9 OS Mas‐
terMap is “an intelligent geospatial database offering definitive, con‐
sistent, and maintained referencing to more than 460 million
manmade and natural landscape features in Britain.”10 OS Master‐
Map also allows external information to be integrated into the map
as separate layers directly on the map, or as links to other OS map
products, enabling the creation of detail-rich, interactive maps.
Importance of Geospatial Data
It is unlikely that the average citizen thinks about geospatial data
very often, despite using it daily. Perhaps the most obvious reason to
use spatial data is to locate a particular point of interest, yet even
that activity can range from the personal (e.g., How do I get to 123
Main St?) to national government planning (e.g., Which is the best
route along which to build a highway?). Other examples of use
include real estate developers surveying land for purchases and con‐
struction; seismologists, geologists and climatologists analyzing
environmental events and patterns; public health officials tracking
disease outbreaks and identifying correlating environmental vari‐
ables; local police analyzing crime patterns and statistics by neigh‐
borhood; and retailers or marketers planning a new campaign or
store launch.11
When asked to describe the importance of geospatial data, Alyssa
Wright, president of the U.S. Board for OpenStreetMap says, “That’s
like asking ‘What’s the purpose of a map?’ It’s so fundamental to
234 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

12 GovLab interview with Alyssa Wright, President of the U.S. Board for OpenStreetMap,
September 25, 2015.
13 Fischer, Alex. “Critical Role for Geospatial Data in Advancing Sustainable Develop‐
ment Goals.” State of the Planet Blog, Earth Institute, Columbia University. May 8,
2015. http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2015/05/08/sdg_geospatial_data2015/
14 Tennison, Jeni and Stuart Harrison. “Collaborative Geospatial Data.” Open Data Insti‐
tute. March 2014. http://www.w3.org/2014/03/lgd/papers/lgd14_submission_55
15 Cave, Andrew. “Why apps won’t be ousting maps any time soon as Ordnance Survey
chief charts a digital future.” The Telegraph. October 18, 2015. http://www.tele
graph.co.uk​/finance/11939740/Why-apps-wont-be-ousting-maps-any-time-soon-as-
Ordnance-Survey-chief-charts-a-digital-future.html
16 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
understanding who people are, how they relate, where they’re going
to go.” The potential impact of geospatial data is amplified when
made available on the Web, and exponentially so if it is made open.12
Citizens use spatial data on mobile devices constantly today, from
locating public transportation options, hailing an Uber or reading
Yelp reviews of the nearest Thai restaurant. For researchers and poli‐
cymakers, integrating geospatial data with demographic and health
surveys can enable analysis by spatial characteristics, such as prox‐
imity to roads, health clinics, public transportation or levels of
urban development, making their services more cost-efficient and
effective.13
As the Open Data Institute explains, geospatial data is “incredibly
valuable because it is the underlying data for so much information.
It’s the glue that can bind together multiple different data sets, and
make the dream of a truly linked web of data come true.”14 Nigel
Clifford, CEO of OS, highlights this concept, stating, “Everything
happens somewhere. We can tell you where that thing is and con‐
nect lots of different pieces of information.”15 OS understands that
the energy and infrastructure, land and property, financial services,
and retail categories are the largest users of their data. However, par‐
ticularly with the advent of open data, John Carpenter, OS director
of Strategy, notes that there are likely to be “new uses, new products
and industries that we hadn’t even thought of before,” illustrating the
enormous potential of geospatial data.16
Context and Background 
| 
235

17 http://www.freeourdata.org.uk/
18 Butcher, Mike. “Gordon Brown launches big shift to open gov data and broadband but
where’s the detail?” TechCrunch. March 22, 2010. http://techcrunch.com/2010/03/22/
gordon-brown-launches-big-shift-to-open-gov-data-and-broadband-but-wheres-the-
detail/
19 Anderson, Kevin. “Tim Berners-Lee launches UK public data website.” The Guardian.
January 21, 2010. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2010/jan/21/
timbernerslee-government-data
20 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/united-kingdom
21 http://barometer.opendataresearch.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
Open Data in the United Kingdom
Given that spatial data is used in so many contexts, it follows that
many actors, across industries, want access to the best data available.
Having always been a leader in spatial data, OS is now under tre‐
mendous pressure from its users, the broader open data community,
and in some ways the U.K. government, to release its data publicly.
Such pressure often occurs against the backdrop of a more general
push by the U.K. government toward more open and transparent
government. For example, in 2006, The Guardian began a “Free Our
Data” campaign, calling upon the U.K. government to make its data
open and free for download, noting that “government-funded and
approved agencies such as Ordnance Survey and UK Hydrographic
Office and Highways Agency are government-owned agencies; they
collect data on our behalf. So why can’t we get at that data as easily as
we can Google Maps or the Xtides program?”17
Open government momentum grew significantly under the Gordon
Brown administration (2007-2010), which launched several
acclaimed open government and open data initiatives.18 These
include the open data portal data.gov.uk, which was launched in
2010 by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.19
The U.K. portal offers almost three times the number of data sets
available on the comparable U.S. site (data.gov). This dedication to
being a global leader in open government continued under Prime
Minister David Cameron, who pledged to make the U.K. govern‐
ment “the most open and transparent in the world.”20 These efforts
are evidenced by the U.K. being ranked as first out of 86 countries in
the Open Data Barometer by the World Wide Web Foundation as of
2015,21 and by the U.K. being one of the eight founding members of
236 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

22 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/united-kingdom
23 Hogge, Becky. “Open Data: Six Stories About Impact in the UK.” Omidyar Network.
November 2015. https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/files/file_archive/insights/Open
%20Data_Six%20Stories%20About%20Impact%20in%20the%20UK/OpenData_CaseStu
dies_Report_complete_DIGITAL_102715.pdf
24 “Our public task.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/gover
nance/public-task.html
25 “Our public task.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/gover
nance/public-task.html
the global Open Government Partnership.22 In a related project also
commissioned by Omidyar Network, researcher Becky Hogge, who
studied six cases of open data in the U.K., finds that, “the theory of
change that drives government open data policy is working, and
makes a strong case for continuing to pursue the policy.”23
Project Description and Inception
OS Today
Today Ordnance Survey’s Public Task Statement includes:
To maintain and develop the underlying physical infrastructure
which is needed to support mapping applications; To create, main‐
tain and provide governance for the National Geographic Database
made up of geographic information datasets with coverage of all of
Great Britain to a consistent specification; To make the content of
the relevant datasets widely available as products which can be used
by customers of all types for a wide range of purposes; To provide
advice and support to the UK Government on all aspects of survey,
mapping and geographic information.24
To support this public task, OS collects and records: the topography
and topology of natural and manmade features of the landscape;
descriptive annotations and distinctive names/postal numbers of
buildings, places and features; the connectivity of water and com‐
munication networks including the routing attribution of roads,
tracks and paths; the alignment of administrative and electoral
boundaries; and the extent and classification of certain types of land
cover and use.25
Ordnance Survey invests significantly in collecting, maintaining,
and improving its geospatial data and mapping products, which
helps to uphold its status as a leader in geospatial data, even against
Project Description and Inception 
| 
237

26 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
27 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
28 “We’re all about location.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/
overview/what-we-do.html
29 “We’re all about location.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/
overview/what-we-do.html
30 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
the rise of other mapping entities developed by the private sector,
like Google Maps, and through crowdsourcing, such as OpenStreet‐
Map. As OS Commercial Director Andrew Loveless describes, “The
journey that we’ve been on, [as] an organization that’s been in exis‐
tence for 224 years, we have been through the complete transforma‐
tion from almost the calligraphy pen, to analog, to digital, and I
think that’s a journey that’s probably about 900 million pounds of
investment. We spend tens of millions of pounds in our refresh
capability in terms of capturing change.”26
Specifically, OS has a team of almost 300 field surveyors and seven
aircraft27 (two OS aircraft supported by five contracted aerial
imagery companies) surveying all 243,241 square kilometers of
Great Britain. OS’s team of surveyors produce 10,000 updates a day
into the database which supplies OS MasterMap, resulting in a vast
yet granular geospatial dataset.28 OS states on its website, “We’ve
mapped the location of every fixed physical object in Great Britain,
from the ground upwards, to within one metre accuracy.” In total,
OS has logged 460 million individual geographical features, includ‐
ing over 35 million buildings and over 27 million residential
addresses.29
OS OpenData
Following the broader shift toward open data across government
culture in the U.K., and to comply with a direct mandate from the
Brown administration, OS launched its first open data platform, OS
OpenData, in 2010, giving the public free access to more OS map‐
ping than ever before.30 The data, “made available via the website for
viewing, download or order, had almost 50,000 orders placed in
238 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

31 “Our history.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/overview/
history.html
32 Wainwright, Martin. “Ordnance Survey maps are worth paying for.” The Guardian.
April 3, 2010. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/03/ordnance-
survey-maps-online
33 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
34 https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/products/opendata-
products-grid.html
35 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
36 “OS OpenData.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-
government/products/opendata-products.html
37 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
2013 alone.”31 These data sets and open maps have scales as detailed
as 1:10,000 inches,32 which is usually adequate for the average citi‐
zen’s or mapping enthusiast’s needs.33 The OS OpenData platform
includes an open data map viewer, downloadable CSV files, the OS
OpenSpace API to embed and annotate maps, downloadable soft‐
ware to help users manipulate the data, along with an OS commu‐
nity forum and support center to provide guidance and answer
questions.34 As of 2015, OS OpenData has had over a million down‐
loads.35
The range of OS OpenData products includes 16 data sets covering
various spatial data: street-level and vector mapping; place names,
road numbers and postcodes; water networks; road networks; U.K.
administrative and electoral boundaries. In addition, OS OpenData
provides customizable vector, terrain and environmental data,
which allows users to layer multiple data sets onto maps and con‐
duct their own spatial analysis.36
However, not all OS data or mapping products are accessible as
open data products in OS OpenData. For instance, OS’ flagship
product, OS MasterMap, is conspicuously absent. The data sets pro‐
vided for free are less detailed than the data sets available for pur‐
chase or licensing. It is worth noting that, prior to OS OpenData, OS
did allow developers to access some data for free in order to create
or test new products, provided that they did not commercialize
them. Otherwise, users would have to pay for access and to license
the data.37 The reason for the disparity begins with OS’ roots as a
Project Description and Inception 
| 
239

38 GovLab interview with Neil Ackroyd, Chief Operating Officer, Ordnance Survey, Sep‐
tember 14, 2015.
39 “Governance and legal status.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/
about/governance/index.html
40 Cave, Andrew. “Why apps won’t be ousting maps any time soon as Ordnance Survey
chief charts a digital future.” The Telegraph. October 18, 2015. http://www.tele
graph.co.uk​/finance/11939740/Why-apps-wont-be-ousting-maps-any-time-soon-as-
Ordnance-Survey-chief-charts-a-digital-future.html
41 “Our public task.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/gover
nance/public-task.html
42 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
43 GovLab interview with Neil Ackroyd, Chief Operating Officer, Ordnance Survey, Sep‐
tember 14, 2015.
Trading Fund and OS’ self-financing requirement. Having histori‐
cally met this requirement by selling access to its cutting-edge geo‐
spatial data and products, Neil Ackroyd, the OS chief operating
officer, argues that it would be difficult to generate revenue if OS
made all its data truly open, especially given recent austerity meas‐
ures in the U.K.38
Beginning in April 2015, OS has operated as a government-owned
limited company. The Secretary of State for Business, Innovation
and Skills (BIS) fully owns OS, and OS must follow a Crown Rights
Agreement regarding copyright and licensing of OS data, in addi‐
tion to its previously established self-financing requirement.39 OS’
status as a government-owned company also requires OS to pay tax,
“as well as the annual dividend of about £20m that it returns to the
Government.”40 To help balance the opposing forces of an open data
mandate and a self-financing mandate, OS applies a “freemium
model” to its products. That is, any data or products included in the
OS OpenData portal are free to all users, but there is a fee to
“upgrade” access and license OS’ most accurate, advanced mapping
data and products.41
OS came to this model by working with government stakeholders,
who also helped identify which data would be the most valuable to
users based on user analytics such as downloads and page visits,42
with an understanding that the new data ecosystem would have to
be “quite sophisticated, driven by use cases and recognizing user
value.”43 OS was and remains strategic in determining which data to
open and in developing new products specifically for the open data
240 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

44 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
45 GovLab interview with Neil Ackroyd, Chief Operating Officer, Ordnance Survey, Sep‐
tember 14, 2015.
46 Ballard, Mark. “Ordnance Survey accused of stifling competition in open data row.”
ComputerWeekly. November 14, 2014. http://www.computerweek​ly.com/news/
2240234712/Ordnance-Survey-accused-of-stifling-competition-in-open-data-row; Gov‐
Lab interview with James Norris, Policy Analyst, Ordnance Survey, February 3, 2015.
47 It is worth noting, however, that academics and researchers usually have an OS use
contract for “almost free,” if not free. GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director
of Strategy and Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Sur‐
vey, September 16, 2015.
48 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
49 “Who can join the PSMA?” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/
business-and-government/public-sector/mapping-agreements/psma-who-can-join.html
platform—for instance, if a gap in the commercial market is identi‐
fied.44 OS also commissioned studies to assess the cost of releasing
these data sets to the public for free, and whether releasing the data
sets would still create value through other means, such as promoting
innovation (discussed further below).45 Based on these discussions
and assessments, the U.K. government agreed to a 10-year deal to
compensate OS for this data, which was estimated to be worth £20m
a year in lost sales and data management costs.46
While the advanced data in premium products such as OS Master‐
Map is not typically used by average citizens, it is used heavily by
many private sector entities (e.g., utilities, finance, real estate, etc.),
other government agencies and scientists.47 Therefore, since the
launch of OS OpenData and this mixed-cost model, OS has focused
on growing revenue from the private sector, rather than from tax‐
payers or other government agencies. At launch time, about 50 per‐
cent of revenue came from the private sector. Today, it is closer to 60
percent of revenue.48 For public sector customers in England and
Wales OS has a collective agreement called the Public Sector Map‐
ping Agreement (PSMA).49 On behalf of the nearly 4,000 members
of the PSMA, as of October 2015, the British government funds OS
(about £55m a year) to supply mapping data to nearly all England
Project Description and Inception 
| 
241

50 Ballard, Mark. “Ordnance Survey accused of stifling competition in open data row.”
ComputerWeekly. November 14, 2014. http://www.computerweek​ly.com/news/
2240234712/Ordnance-Survey-accused-of-stifling-competition-in-open-data-row; Gov‐
Lab interview with James Norris, Policy Analyst, Ordnance Survey, February 3, 2015.
51 “One Scotland Mapping Agreement: Licensing.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnan
cesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/public-sector/mapping-agreements/osma-
licensing.html
52 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
53 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
54 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
55 “Code-Point Open: Benefits and key features.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnance
survey.co.uk​/business-and-government/products/code-point-open.html#Benefits-and-
k​ey-features
56 “Code-Point Open: Benefits and key features.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnance
survey.co.uk​/business-and-government/products/code-point-open.html#Benefits-and-
k​ey-features
and Wales government agencies, national and local.50 A similar col‐
lective agreement, known as the One Scotland Mapping Agreement
is in place in Scotland.51
John Carpenter, OS director of Strategy, describes the policy ques‐
tion behind the mixed model: “Is there a happy medium where
those who have big pockets and will profit ... pay for it, but those
who won’t profit, or are just starting out, don’t have to pay, or pay
very little?”52 OS argues that since its fees are an “incidental cost for
most big businesses”53 and high volume users, such as a large utility
company, there is not a strong argument for providing such
advanced, highly maintained (and therefore costly) data for free.54
As an example of this model, one of the most popular open OS
products is Code-Point Open, which includes 1.7 million postcode
units with an average of 15 adjoining addresses.55 This enables users
to integrate postcode searches onto their own maps to add features
such as route-planning or simple “find my nearest” searches. How‐
ever, data sets providing a higher level of detail and additional fea‐
tures, such as PO Box indicators, are only available through the paid
version, Code Point.56 As described in following sections, this mixed
model arrangement helps OS meet its self-financing requirement,
but it creates significant tension between OS and the broader open
242 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

57 “Our customer service performance.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesur
vey.co.uk/about/governance/customer-service-performance.html
58 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
data community—tensions that OS hopes will be mitigated by
recent efforts outlined in detail below.
This tension with the open data community does not, however,
extend to the vast majority of OS customers and partners. Despite
customers having to pay to “upgrade” their data access, OS has over
350 business partners, and Loveless notes that OS consistently
scores “very, very highly in our customer surveys,” based on their
range of customer service analytics and evaluations, including scor‐
ing, random sampling or advisory groups and panels to learn
specifics about customer experiences, perceptions and areas for
improvement. For example, a March 2015 report finds that OS
meets or exceeds customer service target levels in areas such as
answering phone calls to Customer Services within 15 seconds (98.8
percent), responding to all written enquiries or responding to writ‐
ten complaints within 10 working days (99.9 percent and 99.7 per‐
cent), and fulfilling digital data orders from business partners within
five days (98.9 percent).57 Loveless further notes: “As an organiza‐
tion, [customer relationships and feedback] is something we are
continually improving and we’re pretty restless in thinking through
and improving at every opportunity we can.”58
Impact
Economic Impact
From March 2011 - March 2012, OS commissioned a study to assess
the broader economic impact of releasing OS data through the new
OS OpenData platform. The study, conducted by firms Consulting‐
Where and ACIL Tasman, uses the Computable General Equili‐
brium model, chosen because it “overcomes problems with simple
benefit/multiplier approaches” and allows “analysis of changes in
macroeconomic aggregates and in potential changes to government
Impact 
| 
243

59 Carpenter, John and Phil Watts. “Assessing the Value of OS OpenData to the Economy
of Great Britain—Synopsis.” 2013. https://www.gov.uk​/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/207692/bis-13-950-assessing-value-of-opendata-to-
economy-of-great-britain.pdf
60 Carpenter, John and Phil Watts. “Assessing the Value of OS OpenData to the Economy
of Great Britain—Synopsis.” 2013. https://www.gov.uk​/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/207692/bis-13-950-assessing-value-of-opendata-to-
economy-of-great-britain.pdf
61 Carpenter, John and Phil Watts. “Assessing the Value of OS OpenData to the Economy
of Great Britain—Synopsis.” 2013. https://www.gov.uk​/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/207692/bis-13-950-assessing-value-of-opendata-to-
economy-of-great-britain.pdf
revenues.”59 The report focuses on the costs and savings at Ordnance
Survey related to releasing and disseminating open data; costs and
benefits among users in accessing and using the products; and the
wider economic and social impacts resulting from the release of OS
OpenData. The report was independently reviewed by members of
the Advisory Panel on Public Sector Information to confirm its val‐
idity.60
The report concluded that making the nine OS OpenData products
available in 2012 free at the point of entry would directly improve
the level of productivity in the economy and higher overall levels of
output. Specific estimates calculated throughout the report include:
61
• OS OpenData will directly deliver a net £13 million - £28.5 mil‐
lion increase in GDP by 2016. The main components of this
increase are net productivity gains (£8.1 million - £18.2 million)
and additional tax revenues (£4.4 million - £8.3 million).
• The GDP increase is net of £3.7 million per year, applied as a
negative to U.K. exports to account for OS OpenData being
integrated into products of companies paying taxes abroad.
Despite this loss of export income, overall the value of exports
to the economy increases by £6.1 million - £10.3 million as
other sectors of the economy expand.
• The increased exports will enable U.K. residents to purchase
more foreign goods, increasing real imports by £3.6 million -
£7.1 million.
244 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

62 GovLab interview with Ed Parsons, Geospatial Technologist, Google, former CTO of
Ordnance Survey, September 25, 2015.
63 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
64 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
• Real national disposable income (real GNP) will increase £10.2
million - £24.1 million by 2016, indicating an increase in the
economic welfare for British society as a whole.
• Real consumption will increase £8.1 million - £20.3 million and
real investment will increase by £2.3 million - £5.1 million as
result of OS OpenData.
OS is currently determining how best to measure economic impacts
in more specific terms, for example based on each data set or prod‐
uct. However, quantifying the impact of open data, particularly geo‐
spatial data, is challenging because spatial data typically is embedded
within larger applications, products or business processes. As Ed
Parsons, geospatial technologist of Google and former CTO of OS
puts it, “I often characterize it as it’s being like a gene in the DNA
sequence. Lots of organisms might well have this gene and it might
well be quite important but it’s just facing all elements of lots of
other things. It often is quite hard to measure the incremental bene‐
fit of making this data openly accessible.”62 John Carpenter, OS
director of Strategy, echoes this sentiment by explaining, “We know
there are a lot of people using [our data]—we don’t know exactly
how, or how they are profiting from it—but they acknowledge that
they’re using it, and a lot are not paying for it.”63
OS Minecraft
In 2013, OS aimed to build excitement and promote learning tools
around OS OpenData by tapping into one of the most active and
popular video game communities around, Minecraft, a mapping
game set in custom-built worlds comprising blocks that can be
mined for raw materials.64 The OS Minecraft map of Great Britain,
made with 22 billion blocks representing all 224,000 square kilome‐
ters of the U.K., was downloaded over 100,000 times within months
Impact 
| 
245

65 Ward, Mark. “Minecraft map of the UK upgraded to include houses.” BBC News. Sep‐
tember 24, 2014. http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-29330265
66 “Largest real-world place created in Minecraft.” Guinness World Records. September
23, 2014. http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/117557-largest-real-
world-place-created-in-minecraft
67 GovLab interview with Neil Ackroyd, Chief Operating Officer, Ordnance Survey, Sep‐
tember 14, 2015.
68 https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/innovate/geovation/
69 https://theodi.org/blog/guest-post-five-years-and-1-million-downloads-the-os-opendata-
journey
70 http://www.arcarbon.co.uk/about-arcarbon/
71 “Page, Richard. “Using the GeoVation Hub as a GeoVation winner.” Geovation. July 20,
2015. https://www.geovation.org.uk/using-geovation-hub-geovation-winner/#more-11068
of release,65 going on to win a Guinness World Record as the largest
real-world place represented in Minecraft.66 Following the launch of
OS Minecraft, demand indicators for other OS data increased signif‐
icantly. OS views the surprising success of this initiative as a positive
indicator of the enthusiasm surrounding mapping and data among
the general public, and as a creative example of how it can continue
building interest in its products and services, particularly among
those who may be new to spatial data manipulation.67
GeoVation Program
To more directly support innovation, in 2010 OS launched its Geo‐
Vation program, which runs challenges to “address specific prob‐
lems within communities which may be satisfied, in part, through
the use of geography.”68 OS collaborates with the data and informa‐
tion innovation companies and organizations, Open Geospatial
Consortium, Springwise, Nominet and Esri, to run and promote the
GeoVation program. Since launching, GeoVation Challenges have
awarded £718,000 in funding 31 new ventures,69 and addressed var‐
ied social impact questions such as “How can Britain feed itself?
How can we improve transport in Britain? How can we help British
business improve environmental performance?” Winners include:
• Carbon Profit: which combines soil testing and OS mapping
data to enable farmers to monitor carbon levels in their soil.70
• The Green Alchemist: uses OS mapping to show the location of
businesses, local waste carrier services and reprocessing compa‐
nies to improve recycling and waste management.71
246 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

72 “Growing Routes for business.” GeoVation. July 22, 2014. https://www.geovation.org.uk/
growing-routes-for-business/
73 “Winners of the GeoVation Housing Challenge.” GeoVation. March 12, 2015. https://
www.geovation.org.uk/winners-of-the-geovation-housing-challenge/
74 “Winners of the GeoVation Housing Challenge.” GeoVation. March 12, 2015. https://
www.geovation.org.uk/winners-of-the-geovation-housing-challenge/
75 Henderson, David. “Guest post: Five years and 1 million downloads—Ordnance Sur‐
vey’s open data journey.” Open Data Institute. March 26, 2015. https://theodi.org/blog/
guest-post-five-years-and-1-million-downloads-the-os-opendata-journey
76 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
• Growing Routes: helps businesses map and identify opportuni‐
ties on the Wales Coast Path, bringing new jobs and opportuni‐
ties to local residents.72
• Democratising Development: uses OS and Land Registry data to
identify small-scale disused/unmanaged sites that can be
brought into the housing market.73
• MyHome Energy Planner: allows homeowners to measure cur‐
rent house energy usage and prescribe a set of costed retrofit
measures to reduce this usage.74
Other Impacts
Since launching, OS OpenData has received over a million down‐
loads.75 OS collects user analytics such as number of downloads, vol‐
ume of downloads, number of data sets accessed and number of
users on API downloads. This user behavior information, in addi‐
tion to its customer satisfaction analytics, drives future strategy and
product development.76
While more precise impact measures are under consideration, there
are broader, albeit less tangible, social, process or human indicators
of OS OpenData’s impact. Some examples, which indicate the wide
variety of uses (and impacts) resulting from OS’ using open data,
include:
• IDC Consulting, an environment and sustainable energy con‐
sulting firm, uses OS OpenData to identify optimal locations
and terrain for renewable energy sites such as wind and solar
Impact 
| 
247

77 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
78 “Open for Business?” IDC Consulting. March 24, 2015. http://idconsulting.net/2015/03/
open-for-business/
79 “OS mapping ‘makes huge impact’ on fire safety.” Ordnance Survey. 2015. https://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk​/business-and-government/case-studies/west-midlands-fire-
service-psma-os-opendata.html
80 “Unlocking the potential of open data in transport planning.” Ordnance Survey. 2015.
https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-studies/halcrow-
ch2mhill-unlocking-opendata-transport.html
81 “Visualising customer data to provide valuable insights.” Ordnance Survey. 2015.
https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-studies/citrus-
analytics-visualising-customer-data-valuable-insights.html
82 “OS OpenData mapping significantly improves cost and time efficiency.” Ordnance
Survey. 2015. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk​/business-and-government/case-studies/
rubicon-heritage-opendata-mapping-improves-efficiency.html
farms.77 For such energy sites, location is critical to success, and
by integrating OS data into its process, IDC can more quickly
and accurately identify potential sites at a wide scale.78
• Local fire department West Midlands Fire Service used OS
OpenData (and other OS mapping) to develop an integrated
open-source solution to manage all its mapping data holdings,
reducing the cost, and increasing the efficiency and ease of
mapping, to offer live-mapping capabilities to assist in decision-
making directly at an incident.79
• Engineering company CH2M HILL used OS OpenData to cre‐
ate a cost-effective automated tool to draw a multimodal bus
network from any part of Great Britain, reducing the time taken
to analyze an entire county bus network by 90 percent.80
• Citrus Analytics, a customer and marketing analytics firm, used
OS OpenData to improve its data, offering the ability to visual‐
ize customers on a map and to be used as the basis of qualitative
research groups, for example, accurately and efficiently identify‐
ing if there are geographic clusters of certain types of customers.
81
• Rubicon Heritage Services Ltd, an archeology firm, used OS
OpenData to enable background mapping in their survey
equipment, providing real-time verification that the primary
data is being collected correctly, consistently and accessibly.82
248 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

83 “UIA: Reducing poor risks and improving customer service.” Ordnance Survey. https://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-studies/uia-reducing-poor-
risks.html
84 “Putting the local into location-based advertising to target specific audiences.” Ord‐
nance Survey. 2015. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-
studies/t4-media-putting-the-local-into-location.html
85 “Warwickshire County Council’s new web GIS increases users with no extra cost.” Ord‐
nance Survey. 2015. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-
studies/warwickshire-county-council-new-web-gis.html
86 “Pinpointing patients and practice areas to improve services and efficiency.” Ordnance
Survey. 2015. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/business-and-government/case-studies/
nhs-swcs-pinpointing-patients-practice-areas.html
87 “Using OS OpenData to explore top Peak District photo spots.” Ordnance Survey Blog.
September 7, 2015. http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/blog/2015/09/using-os-opendata-
to-explore-top-peak-district-photo-spots/
• UIA, a mutual insurance company, used OS OpenData to set
more accurate prices, drilling down to individual buildings
rather than zip codes, making the underwriting process quicker
and more accurate, thereby saving the company money.83
• T4 Media, an advertising firm, used OS OpenData to automate
the process of identifying suitable outdoor advertising spaces,
allowing employees to analyze multiple points from their desks.
84
• Local county council for Warwickshire used OS OpenData and
other OS products to develop an open-source solution for inter‐
nal Web geographical information system (GIS), allowing the
GIS team to make department-specific projects, saving over 65
percent in license and maintenance costs, improving control
over data performance issues, and an up-front saving of £15 -
£20,000 by developing a custom in-house system.85
• Many health care providers use OS OpenData, with other OS
products, to better pinpoint patient locations and routes, ena‐
bling more accurate evidence-based analysis and decision-
making to deliver efficiency savings and improved services.86
• OS is celebrated for supporting outdoors enthusiasts by provid‐
ing accurate, detailed maps, for example, recently promoting an
OS Photo Contest for users to submit photos taken on their
adventures, helping others find some of the most beautiful
spots.87
Impact 
| 
249

88 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
89 GovLab interview with Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ord‐
nance Survey, October 28, 2015.
90 Cave, Andrew. “Why apps won’t be ousting maps any time soon as Ordnance Survey
chief charts a digital future.” The Telegraph. October 18, 2015. http://www.tele
graph.co.uk​/finance/11939740/Why-apps-wont-be-ousting-maps-any-time-soon-as-
Ordnance-Survey-chief-charts-a-digital-future.html
Challenges
Cost
The greatest challenge to scaling OS OpenData is cost. As Andrew
Loveless, OS commercial director, explains: “Someone has to pay for
data at some stage, and as we see in the marketplace, it’s not actually
the release of data, it’s the maintenance of data,” as in regularly
updating, cleaning and running quality assurance tests, particularly
at the high levels of OS’ current standards, that is costly. Since meas‐
uring the impact of open data is so difficult, “How does that value
get realized? Open knows no global boundaries—is the beneficiary,
from an OS perspective, is it a U.K. entrepreneur? Is it the U.K. sys‐
tem? Or is it international organizations? I think the concept of a
full open data model needs to be fully thought through and then
obviously fully funded.”88
OS views the current mixed model, as justified by the 2011 - 12 eco‐
nomic impact study, as the best option for balancing the conflicting
demands of opening data and self-financing. OS argues that the
freemium model offers a sustainable way of dealing with the eco‐
nomic realities it operates in, and that it is designed to “meet the
needs of various customer segments including the public, businesses
and government,” and that startup businesses in particular are sup‐
ported by their innovation activities.89 More stakeholder assessments
and impact studies should be conducted in order to continually
reassess whether this remains the best option, particularly as other
mapping services such as Google Maps and OpenStreetMap
(described below) continue to grow and offer a free or possibly less
expensive alternative to currently paying OS customers. Still, it is
important to note that Google Maps and some other mapping and
satellite navigation companies also use OS OpenData to some
extent.90
250 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

91 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
92 GovLab interview with Peter Rabley, Director, Investments, Omidyar Network, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
93 Arthur, Charles and Michael Cross. “Give us back our crown jewels.” The Guardian.
March 9, 2006. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2006/mar/09/education.epublic
94 GovLab interview with Andrew Loveless, Commercial Director, Ordnance Survey,
October 1, 2015.
OS would also have to assess whether it would be able to provide
such quality data in the first place if it lost such revenue. The U.S. for
example, historically has always offered geospatial data for free,
albeit with less funding. The quality and scope of that data, however,
may not realistically be up to par with OS, which updates a third of
the country, minimum, every year, in a highly detailed, near real-
time database—i.e., the factors that likely create such a high demand
for OS data in the first place.91
Addressing Open Data Principles
To many of those active in the geospatial and open data communi‐
ties, OS is claiming rights to “the ultimate public good” of where we
are by claiming copyright on spatial information. This raises the
question asked by Peter Rabley of Omidyar Network: “What is your
unique position here? How on earth can you copyright that, the
actual coordinates, which is the mathematical measurement from
the center of the earth?”92 [Disclosure: Omidyar Network funded
this case study.] The Guardian’s “Free Our Data Campaign” specifi‐
cally calls out OS for asking taxpayers to pay for access to data that
OS, being a government agency, already collected directly on their
behalf through taxes, arguing that besides being unfair, this “stifles
innovation, enterprise and the creativity that should be the lifeblood
of new business.”93 However, as discussed further below, the ongoing
fees for OS data go toward addressing needs like maintenance and
dissemination, not the actual geospatial data collection.94
Challenges 
| 
251

95 “History of OpenStreetMap.” OpenStreetMap. http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/
History_of_OpenStreetMap
96 Anderson, Mark. “Global Positioning Tech Inspires Do-It-Yourself Mapping Project.”
National Geographic News. October 18, 2006. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
2006/10/061018-street-maps.html
97 GovLab interview with Alyssa Wright, President of the U.S. Board for OpenStreetMap,
September 25, 2015.
98 GovLab interview with Alyssa Wright, President of the U.S. Board for OpenStreetMap,
September 25, 2015.
99 Anderson, Mark. “Global Positioning Tech Inspires Do-It-Yourself Mapping Project.”
National Geographic News. October 18, 2006. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
2006/10/061018-street-maps.html
One illustration of the community’s frustration with OS licensing
and copyright hurdles is the rise of OpenStreetMap (OSM), a
volunteer-driven, crowdsourced mapping initiative founded in the
U.K. in 2004 originally as a direct response to OS’ lack of open data.
95 According to a report from National Geographic, OSM adheres to
true open innovation and open data principles, being a “Web-based
project that aggregates hundreds of users’ personally collected GPS
data into master files that trace out thousands of streets and
byways.”96 The OpenStreetMap Foundation, founded in 2006, focu‐
ses its services on public sector, nonprofit and humanitarian uses
without profit.97 It is worth noting, again, that OSM incorporates OS
OpenData into its data sets in some instances.
OSM exemplifies the demand for freely available, accurate mapping
for all users, regardless of ability to pay. As Alyssa Wright of OSM
explains, location data represents “a shared experience” that is “so
fundamental to understanding who people are, how they relate,
where they’re going to go. ... Mapping is universal need.”98 Therefore,
many in the open data community believe that geospatial data
should be treated no differently than other government data. For
example, OSM and open innovation supporters argue that, “When
programmers can read, redistribute and modify the source code for
a piece of software, the software evolves. People improve it, people
adapt it, people fix bugs. And this can happen at a speed that, if one
is used to the slow pace of conventional software development,
seems astonishing.”99 OSM attempts to replicate this same kind of
open innovation process in geospatial data by freely offering its
252 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

100 https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Main_Page
101 Arthur, Charles and Michael Cross. “Give us back our crown jewels.” The Guardian.
March 9, 2006. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2006/mar/09/education.epublic
102 GovLab interview with Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ord‐
nance Survey, October 28, 2015.
103 “Case C-490/14, Verlag Esterbauer—a map is not a database.” EU Law Radar. July 8,
2015. http://eulawradar.com/case-c-49014-verlag-esterbauer-a-map-is-not-a-database/
104 GovLab interview with Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ord‐
nance Survey, October 28, 2015.
105 “Case C-490/14, Verlag Esterbauer—a map is not a database.” EU Law Radar. July 8,
2015. http://eulawradar.com/case-c-49014-verlag-esterbauer-a-map-is-not-a-database/
mapping data through an open license and encouraging users to add
and manipulate spatial data.100
Furthermore, Charles Arthur and Michael Cross of The Guardian
point to the U.S. as a positive example for always offering its spatial
data as free and open, noting that “It is no accident that it is also the
country that has seen the rise of multiple mapping services (such as
Google Maps, Microsoft’s MapPoint and Yahoo Maps) and other
services—mashups—that mesh government-generated data with
information created by the companies.”101 Given that OS’ own eco‐
nomic impact study found that releasing some data would be posi‐
tive for the economy, it naturally raises the question as to whether
releasing more data would be even more beneficial to the economy,
and to spurring innovation.
In response to these critiques, OS argues that the existence of intel‐
lectual property rights in OS geospatial data (via copyright and data‐
base rights in U.K. law), is “accepted by the HMSO [Her Majesty’s
Stationary Office] Controller from who we take delegation to licence
the data. The open data community also would appear to implicitly
accept this by promoting open licences.”102 Furthermore, in October
2015, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) supported
this position in a similar case between Verlag Esterbauer, an Aus‐
trian publishing company specializing in tour map books, concern‐
ing an application for a cease-and-desist order under the German
Law on copyright and related rights.103 The CJEU found that “geo‐
graphical information extracted from a topographic map, used by a
third party to produce and market another map, retains sufficient
informative value, which in turn constitutes ‘independent materials’
of a database.”104,105
Challenges 
| 
253

106 GovLab interview with Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ord‐
nance Survey, October 28, 2015.
107 GovLab interview with Ed Parsons, Geospatial Technologist, Google, former CTO of
Ordnance Survey, September 25, 2015.
108 GovLab interview with Peter Rabley, Director, Investments, Omidyar Network, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
109 GovLab interview with Ed Parsons, Geospatial Technologist, Google, former CTO of
Ordnance Survey, September 25, 2015.
OS also contends that these open data principles—i.e., public data
should be universally and readily accessed, used and redistributed
free of charge—apply to data sets, not organizations or business
models, and that OS’ open data (e.g., in OS OpenData) scores highly
against these principles. Furthermore, in the nine years since the
“Free Our Data” campaign launched, many of the campaign’s griev‐
ances have been addressed with the release of OS OpenData, licens‐
ing simplification and amendments to the GeoVation program.106
Private Sector Competition
The tension between OS and the open data community carries over
to the private sector, as many businesses believe that they could
reduce costs and grow even more quickly if the data in OS Master‐
Map, for example, and not just OS OpenData were free. Although
OS OpenData offers data on a scale of 1:10,000, Ed Parsons of Goo‐
gle says that the “real juice is in the 1:5,000, 1:2,500, 1:1,000 or 1:500
[scales]. The larger the scale gets, the smaller the area, and the more
valuable the data sets.”107 Critics describe OS as a monopoly, as there
is no competitor to offer larger scales, lower pricing or greater effi‐
ciency, which allows OS to set their own prices while making it eas‐
ier to claim they only charge exactly what their services cost.108 They
complain that, currently, trying to access certain OS data sets and
embed OS products within your own programs can mean entering
into a very bureaucratic process, with a lot of forms to fill, followed
by licensing fees.109 However, it is important to note that as a public
sector body, all OS accounts are fully audited.
Some businesses also accuse OS of stifling innovation and actively
trying to prevent private sector competitors from succeeding. Exem‐
plifying this sentiment is a 2014 complaint filed by aerial photogra‐
phy and mapping company Getmapping. The complaint argues that
through its contracts with the U.K. government (the Public Sector
254 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

110 Milmo, Cahal. “Has the Ordnance Survey lost its moral compass?” The Independent.
November 28, 2014. http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/has-the-
ordnance-survey-lost-its-moral-compass-9891770.html
111 Milmo, Cahal. “Has the Ordnance Survey lost its moral compass?” The Independent.
November 28, 2014. http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/has-the-
ordnance-survey-lost-its-moral-compass-9891770.html
112 Milmo, Cahal. “Has the Ordnance Survey lost its moral compass?” The Independent.
November 28, 2014. http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/has-the-
ordnance-survey-lost-its-moral-compass-9891770.html
113 GovLab interview with Robert Andrews, Head of Corporate Communications, Ord‐
nance Survey, October 28, 2015.
114 “Tristam Cary of Getmapping responds on the OS consultation: ‘British mapping is
fundamentally flawed.’” The Guardian Free Our Data Blog. March 2013. http://www.free
ourdata.org.uk​/blog/2010/03/tristram-cary-of-getmapping-responds-on-the-os-
consultation-british-mapping-is-fundamentally-flawed/
Mapping Agreement and the compensation agreement at initial
release), OS illegally uses £800m of government contracts to stifle
competition.110 Getmapping chairman Tristram Cary has called
these contracts a “national scandal” because “Ordnance Survey has
been granted these contracts, which has made it highly profitable—
much more profitable than most industry companies. It is using its
state aid to compete with the rest of the partner network. Ordnance
Survey is a serial abuser of its partners. And the government knows
it.”111 Cary, who has seen previous legal complaints against OS rejec‐
ted, still argues that by investing in its own research and develop‐
ment, OS has become “far too big and is competing with British
technology companies instead of, as they are supposed to do, pro‐
moting them. It is also hopelessly inefficient.”112 OS refutes Cary’s
claims and, as of November 2015, there has been no judgment in
this case. Also, as noted above, the CJEU recently ruled that there
can be intellectual property rights in geospatial data.113
In The Guardian’s “Free Our Data” campaign, Cary argues that OS
being an “almost monopoly” in the provision of large-scale maps
allows OS to aggressively enforce copyright fees, even on derived
products.114 For example, if a utility uses an OS map to draw its pipe‐
line map, OS will indefinitely enforce a fee unless the utility re-
creates their own data. This “acts as an effective barrier to the
creation of a truly competitive market” because customers, such as
the utility in this case, are locked in, and because other map suppli‐
Challenges 
| 
255

115 “Tristam Cary of Getmapping responds on the OS consultation: ‘British mapping is
fundamentally flawed.’” The Guardian Free Our Data Blog. March 2013. http://www.free
ourdata.org.uk​/blog/2010/03/tristram-cary-of-getmapping-responds-on-the-os-
consultation-british-mapping-is-fundamentally-flawed/
116 GovLab interview with Peter Rabley, Director, Investments, Omidyar Network, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
117 GovLab interview with Peter Rabley, Director, Investments, Omidyar Network, Sep‐
tember 23, 2015.
118 GovLab interview with Ed Parsons, Geospatial Technologist, Google, former CTO of
Ordnance Survey, September 25, 2015.
ers cannot obtain any derived data without also paying OS a fee and
negotiating licensing terms.115
Critics also argue that being an effective monopoly inherently dis‐
courages OS from investing in new research and development, new
technologies or in new processes with the same vigor as private
businesses. Although OS invests in research and development, by
being a closed organization, it can be argued that these efforts do
not match the kind of innovation that occurs through more compet‐
itive or crowdsourced models. They argue that this disadvantage will
only increase, as advances in geospatial technology give rise to other
sources of equally accurate and timely spatial data, at a lower cost
than OS. Rabley offers that OS needs to be careful and ask, “What’s
our core value to the U.K. taxpayer?”116 That is, OS shouldn’t be try‐
ing to own a market and compete with businesses with new prod‐
ucts and services, but rather OS should focus on how it enables
businesses to be innovative, which is through its impressive geospa‐
tial data. Therefore, Rabley argues, more data should be opened, and
then businesses will be their “biggest support in ensuring that Ord‐
nance Survey continues, whereas right now, the complete opposite is
the case. The businesses want to get rid of and shut down Ordnance
Survey.”117
These challenges of cost, adhering to open data principles and navi‐
gating private sector competition highlight the larger policy issue as
to whether or not taxpayers should be funding government agencies
to build developer resources, or if OS should focus more on sup‐
porting outside experts to build their own products, using OS data,
as needed.118 OS therefore, should consider what its relationship
should be with the open data community and with the private sec‐
tor, particularly as potential competitors continue to emerge with
256 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

119 GovLab interview with Clare Hadley, Policy and Engagement Manager, and James Nor‐
ris, Policy Analyst, Ordnance Survey, October 23, 2015.
120 GovLab interview with James Norris, Policy Analyst, Ordnance Survey, February 3,
2015; “IFTS members.” The National Archives. http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk​/
information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/ifts-and-regulation/ifts-
members/
121 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
122 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
rivaling technology, and whether aggressively enforcing licensing
fees is worth the risk to its relationships, and whether its actions do
in fact stifle innovation and competition. In response, OS argues
that it does prioritize these considerations, and that as a member of
the Open Data Institute (ODI), OS regularly engages with the open
data community on policy issues.119 Moreover, OS has been accredi‐
ted to the Information Fair Traders Scheme since 2003.120
Measuring Impact and User Demands
As described, OS is working toward developing more precise impact
and use indicators in the future, in addition to its current sophistica‐
ted user surveys and analytics. Through these efforts, John Carpen‐
ter, OS director of Strategy, described two key learning points: 1) it
is challenging for some users to discover what data is available in the
first place; and 2) simply publishing the data is not enough. As Car‐
penter puts it: “It has to be discoverable, usable, and in our case,
mapping data is not terribly easy to use. We’ve had to put a lot of
effort to make it easier to use, and have to invest to get people to use
it.”121
The future priorities of OS are “going to be much more about get‐
ting what’s out there now used vs. getting more data out there to be
used” as OS continues to progress beyond the mindset of “if you put
it out there, they will come.”122 While customer service teams and
user forums help address these issues, OS has also launched several
larger initiatives to not only help users learn more about using and
navigating the data, but also to spur engagement among existing and
new users, including open data classes, blogs, wikis and the develop‐
ment of open standards, among others. For example, OS also spon‐
sored an Open Data Camp in February 2015 for 200 developers,
Challenges 
| 
257

123 Scott, Anna. “X marks the spot: Ordnance Survey and Esri open up more geospatial
data.” Open Data Institute. February 21, 2015. https://theodi.org/blog/broadening-
horizons-ordnance-survey-esri-put-open-data-on-their-maps
124 GovLab interview with John Carpenter, Director of Strategy and Robert Andrews,
Head of Corporate Communications, Ordnance Survey, September 16, 2015.
125 “Ordnance Survey to open hub dedicated to innovation.” Ordnance Survey. February
27, 2015. http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/news/2015/geospatial-innovation-hub-
announced.html
126 “Britain leads the way as Ordnance Survey helps to drive economic growth and digital
innovation through open data.” Ordnance Survey. February 21, 2015. http://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/news/2015/os-drives-economic-growth-and-digital-
innovation-through-open-data.html
innovators and entrepreneurs to test new OS data to create fresh
insights and innovative products and services.123 Carpenter describes
the approach to promoting innovation as, “This is for life, not just
Christmas. [We] have to go big or don’t bother; a half-hearted
approach is a waste of time for everybody.”124
Looking Forward
Evolving GeoVation Hub
To continue scaling excitement and impact of the GeoVation pro‐
gram, in March 2015, OS opened a new GeoVation Hub in London.
Cathrine Armour of OS’ Innovation Programme, described, “One of
the biggest challenges facing the geospatial industry and all those
operating in it is: Innovating. ... To increase the relevance of our
industry we need to expose ourselves to new thinking, to undertake
thought leadership and share this in a way that as an industry we lift
our gaze. The Hub will enable OS and its partners to work collabo‐
ratively with fringe industries, new media, digital and emerging
technologies.”125
OS OpenData Additions
In 2015, OS also announced additions to its OS OpenData platform,
including:
• OS OpenMap: “a ‘street level’ vector dataset designed to be the
most detailed open data mapping product available, providing a
backdrop for integrating and visualising analytical data.”126
258 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

127 “Britain leads the way as Ordnance Survey helps to drive economic growth and digital
innovation through open data.” Ordnance Survey. February 21, 2015. http://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/news/2015/os-drives-economic-growth-and-digital-
innovation-through-open-data.html
128 “Britain leads the way as Ordnance Survey helps to drive economic growth and digital
innovation through open data.” Ordnance Survey. February 21, 2015. http://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/news/2015/os-drives-economic-growth-and-digital-
innovation-through-open-data.html
129 “About OS International.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/interna
tional/about/index.html
130 “Creating a 3D data model for the Kingdom of Bahrain.” Ordnance Survey. https://
www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/international/case-studies/creating-3d-data-model.html
131 “Using geospatial support to safeguard the environment for future generations.” Ord‐
nance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/international/case-studies/using-
geospatial-support-to-safeguard-environment.html
• A new Open Water Network: “a generalised network product
covering Great Britain’s rivers which will deliver a national view
of our watercourses.”127
• A new and improved Gazetteer: for use by people who need the
most up-to-date place names, road names, road numbers and
postcodes for use in location searches for both mobile and
online uses.”128
Looking Beyond the U.K.
OS has been expanding the marketplace for its data services outside
of the U.K. For example, in 2013, OS International LLP, a subsidiary
of Ordnance Survey, provided geospatial services and strategy con‐
sulting to the Kingdom of Bahrain.129 OS created the first 3D-
enabled national spatial data model of the Kingdom of Bahrain to
provide government and industry stakeholders with consistent,
intelligent and reliable 2D and 3D data to support “data sharing,
analysis and decision-making” using “intelligent geospatial data.”130
In April 2015, OS developed a GIS Roadmap Framework for The
Environment Agency of Abu Dhabi to help the agency establish and
manage a “single source of accurate, reliable environmental infor‐
mation,” share geospatial information with stakeholders, set goals
and improve the “consistency and quality of geospatial data capture,
processing, analysis and dissemination” of its environmental and
spatial data.131
Looking Forward 
| 
259

132 “Smart Cities.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/thinking/
smart-cities/
133 “Smart Cities.” Ordnance Survey. https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/about/thinking/
smart-cities/
134 “Greenwich Smart City Strategy.” Digital Greenwich. 2014.
Supporting Smart Cities
With the rise of smart cities—cities that use innovative technology
(i.e., sensors, meters, applications) to create more efficient and inter‐
active infrastructure and information systems—OS is examining the
role of geospatial data and products in driving the continued devel‐
opment of smart cities, including: providing connectivity between
assets, networks and sensor data; sharing and integrating data serv‐
ices; data analytics in smart energy, water and transport manage‐
ment; and data visualizations and public engagement.132 Recently,
OS has been working with Glasgow to deliver a new trial license so
that data produced using OS’ maps will be made available through a
new open data portal for Glasgow’s “Future City/Glasgow” initiative.
In particular, OS is focusing on opportunities in smart grids, health/
assisted living, intelligent transport, smart water management and
smart water management for Future City/Glasgow.133
Additionally, OS is supporting the Digital Greenwich initiative by,
among other things, enabling the borough’s greater use of predictive
analytics and “providing support for machine-to-machine data serv‐
ices” to allow Internet of Things (IoT) devices to more efficiently
connect to each other.134
These recent efforts illustrate that OS values innovation, and sug‐
gests that in addition to maintaining high-quality data and impres‐
sive service levels for its current customers and government
partners, OS may be able to mitigate concerns voiced by members of
the open data community by focusing more on supporting outside
actors in their own development and growth. However, the chal‐
lenges to scaling, particularly the self-funding requirement, and the
strong criticisms of its mixed model and its fierce copyright protec‐
tions, will need to be reassessed, particularly if OS, as an organiza‐
tion, hopes someday to embody the principles of open data fully.
260 
| 
Chapter 12: Great Britain’s Ordnance Survey

CHAPTER 13
United States’ New York City
Business Atlas
Leveling the Playing Field
By Andrew Young, David Sangokoya and
Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: While retail entrepreneurs are experts in their respective
trades, they often lack access to high-quality information about eco‐
nomic conditions in the neighborhoods where they operate or are
considering operating. The NYC Business Atlas is designed to allevi‐
ate that information gap by providing a public tool that gives small
businesses access to high-quality data to help them decide where to
establish a new business or expand an existing one. The tool brings
together a diversity of data, including business-filing data from the
Department of Consumer Affairs, sales tax data from the Depart‐
ment of Finance, demographic data from the census and traffic data
from Placemeter, a New York City startup focusing on real-time
traffic information.
Dimension of Impact: Creating Opportunity—Economic Growth
Key Takeaways:
• The impact of open data can be amplified when government
works directly with private business on targeted initiatives. Such
“data collaboratives” represent a new form of collaboration,
beyond the public-private partnership model, in which partici‐
pants from different sectors—including private companies,
261

1 Verhulst, Stefaan and David Sangokoya. “Data Collaboratives: Exchanging Data to
Improve People’s Lives,” Medium, April 22, 2015. https://medium.com/@sverhulst/data-
collaboratives-exchanging-data-to-improve-people-s-lives-d0fcfc1bdd9a.
2 “Open-air Computers,” The Economist, October 27, 2012. Accessed July 14, 2015. http://
www.economist.com/news/special-report/21564998-cities-are-turning-vast-data-factories-
open-air-computers.
research institutions and government agencies — can exchange
data to help solve public problems.1
• Although a large number of early stage open data projects
around the world focus on simply pushing information out, the
next stage should revolve around targeted, user-centered
release. In the example discussed here, the user-centered work
done by the Department of Small Business Services helped
ensure that the Business Atlas was designed in a way that made
it particularly useful for the New York small business commu‐
nity.
• New York City’s Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics (MODA) pro‐
vides an example of how governments can go beyond providing
data in raw formats to the public by also performing the analyti‐
cal work needed for those within and outside government to
gain new insights from the data.
Context and Background
In recent years there has been growing recognition that urban life is
being transformed by data. From Chicago to London to Singapore,
city administrators and planners are turning to data to help plan the
future and address mundane, everyday issues like potholes and
waste collection. Underlying such trends is an awareness of the vast
amounts of data being generated (often passively) in urban centers,
through devices like smartphones and sensors. In the words of The
Economist magazine, cities today are “open air computers” and “data
factories.”2
In 2002, Michael Bloomberg assumed office as the 108th mayor of
New York City. Bloomberg had made his fortune providing data and
sophisticated analytics to financial traders. It was probably inevita‐
ble that, under his administration, New York would join the many
262 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

3 Exec. Order No. 306, 3 C.F.R. (2013), http://www.nyc.gov/html/om/pdf/eo/eo_306.pdf.
4 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
5 Yasin, Rutrell. “How analytics is making NYC’s streets and buildings safer.” GCN, Octo‐
ber 4, 2013. http://gcn.com/articles/2013/10/04/gcn-award-nyc-databridge.aspx.
6 “Open Data for All” New York City Government. 2015. http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/
home/downloads/pdf/reports/2015/NYC-Open-Data-Plan-2015.pdf
cities around the world seeking to extract greater value from the ter‐
abytes of data being created every day by their citizens.
In 2013, through Executive Order No. 306, New York City created
the Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics (MODA).3 The stated goal of
the office was “leveraging City data for more effective, efficient, and
transparent government.”4 Today the office comprises a team of ana‐
lysts, based in City Hall, who collect and analyze data from a wide
variety of sources. Among other areas, MODA works on crime pre‐
vention, disaster response, improving public services, and economic
development. MODA also played a key role in setting up New York’s
Open Data Portal (https://nycopendata.socrata.com), which, as of
early 2016, houses over 12,000 data sets related to health, business,
public safety and much more. In addition, MODA helped establish
DataBridge, a single, unified repository of information that aims to
enhance data sharing and interoperability among various NYC
organizations.5 In July 2015, the city released its updated “Open
Data for All” strategy document, which focuses on two central
“beliefs”: that every New Yorker can benefit from open data; and
that open data can benefit from every New Yorker.6
Context and Background 
| 
263

7 http://barometer.opendataresearch.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
8 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
Figure 13-1. New York City’s Open Data Portal
Because of these and other efforts, New York City is generally con‐
sidered a leader in open data initiatives in the United States (itself
the second-ranked country on the Open Data Barometer).7 MODA,
in particular, is a pioneering and increasingly emulated entity in the
open data ecosystem. It has played an important role not only in
releasing open data to increase accountability and innovation, but
also in doing analytical work on that data. This work includes meas‐
uring the efficiency of city services, providing data-driven predic‐
tions and, as with the Business Atlas, combining high-value data sets
from a diversity of sources to provide new insights and visualiza‐
tions to government agencies and the public.
MODA’s analytics efforts, led at the time of writing by New York
City’s Chief Analytics Officer, Dr. Amen Ra Mashariki, are deployed
to aid disaster response and recovery, improve delivery of city agen‐
cies and services, enable data sharing among city agencies, crystal‐
lize best practices in data analysis and, as evidenced in the case
described here, spur economic development.8 Within these domains
of focus and types of analytical work, MODA subscribes to four cen‐
264 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

9 “NYC MODA Presentation Federal Summit.” New York City: NYC Analytics, February
2015. http://lnwprogram.org/sites/default/files/NYC_MODA_Presenta
tion_Federal_Summit.pdf
10 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
11 GovLab interview with Lindsay Mollineaux, Director of Analytics, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, July 2, 2015.
12 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
tral, overarching goals: improving awareness, measuring success,
maximizing impact and increasing engagement.9
Mike Flowers, Mashariki’s predecessor and the first New York City
chief analytics officer, described the integral role played by MODA
in the city’s data operations in an annual report released after
MODA’s first year of operations: “Over the last three terms, our
agencies have developed information systems that they use to make
our streets safer, our businesses vibrant, and our parks cleaner.
Through a blend of statistical analysis, engineering skills, and deep
investigation of the missions and organizational structure of the
agencies—the why, what and how of city government—MODA ties
these systems together, enabling the City to tap into our collective
knowledge and experience to tackle our thorniest challenges.”10
According to MODA officials, its mission and projects are focused
on the “thorny” challenges at hand for New Yorkers while its efforts
are using new analytical capabilities. Lindsay Mollineaux, director of
analytics at MODA, for instance, notes that, “[Addressing real need]
is very much how we think about things at MODA—every project is
addressing need. We want to make sure what we’re doing is useful.”11
Project Description and Inception
The New York City Business Atlas, initiated in 2013, is part of a
broader effort by MODA aimed at “driving small business growth
with analytics.”12 This broader effort also includes the Comprehen‐
sive Business Census, which arose in the aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy, when the city struggled to assess the storm’s full impact on
businesses and the economy. Before MODA began working in this
area, there existed no comprehensive record of businesses in the
Project Description and Inception 
| 
265

13 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
14 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
city. MODA sought to fill this information gap by working with
PLUTO, a database of land use and geographic data, to assemble a
more “complete picture” of businesses and business activity in New
York City.
Figure 13-2. New York City Business Atlas with Business Conditions
Sidebar
The New York City Business Atlas grew out of a recognition among
city officials that, when it comes to data, large businesses often have
an edge over smaller ones. While large businesses can afford to hire
expensive consultants and commission data-driven research, smaller
businesses must rely on “gut feeling” to make important business
decisions, such as where to open a new location or how to navigate
regulatory challenges. Mike Flowers explains the advantages held by
large businesses as follows: “In many parts of Manhattan, you can’t
swing a dead cat without hitting a Starbucks. Those guys have
robust infrastructure, capacity to help them figure out two things: a)
where to open up in the first place; and b) the piece of this about
navigating the regulatory challenges of opening a place.”13 He adds
that, for small businesses in particular, data paucity is a “chronic”
problem, and “probably [has] been chronic since Emperor Augustus
was trying incentivize small business in Rome.”14
266 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

15 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
16 In a separate initiative, MODA is collaborating with the New York City Small Business
Services “to reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses in New York City” by
sending “trained client managers to neighborhoods across the five boroughs to provide
business owners with targeted education informed by data showing the specific needs
in a given neighborhood—including top violations, areas of noncompliance, new busi‐
ness growth data, 311 complaints, and more.”
“Small Business Services Launches Proactive Education and Outreach Efforts to Help
Ease Regulatory Burden on New York City Small Businesses.” New York City Small
Business Services. May 27, 2015. http://www.nyc.gov/html/sbs/html/pr/
2015_05_27_SB1.shtml
17 Schweidel, D. A. Profiting from the data economy: Understanding the roles of consumers,
innovators, and regulators in a data-driven world (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Edu‐
cation).
Though followed by a number of twists and turns, work on the Busi‐
ness Atlas began following a discussion within MODA on how small
business owners often feel under siege from the city government,
rather than supported by it. Flowers noted that the city restaurant
rating system, which assigns letter grades to restaurants based on
their compliance with health regulations, tends to benefit large
chains and restaurants, which typically have “the wherewithal and
institutional experience and institutional resources to bake into
their infrastructure code compliance.”15 The Business Atlas repre‐
sents a pivot away from the specific inspiration regarding code com‐
pliance, but remains in line with the focus on arming small business
owners with new tools to compete with bigger chains.16
In the words of John Feinblatt, chief policy adviser to Mayor Bloom‐
berg, the Business Atlas “democratizes” information, “putting qual‐
ity research into the hands of small business owners.”17 It is
important to note that much (but not all) of the data included in the
Business Atlas already existed—for example, through the city’s open
data portal—and was theoretically at least available to small business
owners. As noted, however, it was often in fragmentary form, and
without the sophisticated analytics and visualization layer contained
within the Business Atlas, both of which make the data far more
accessible and useful for entrepreneurs. To use the tool, business‐
people visit maps.nyc.gov/businessatlas, and select a neighborhood.
The data pulled up by the app includes population, population dis‐
tribution by age, median household income, how many households
have children, homeowners vs. renters, and much more specific to
Project Description and Inception 
| 
267

18 Furman, Phyllis. “Map this! New city tech tool lets small businesses compete with the
big guys by dishing data.” New York Daily News. December 16, 2013. http://www.nydaily
news.com/new-york/map-new-city-tech-tool-lets-small-businesses-compete-big-guys-
dishing-data-article-1.1559044
19 GovLab interview with Florent Peyre, Chief Operating Officer and Co-Founder, Place‐
meter, August 19, 2015.
20 GovLab interview with Florent Peyre, Chief Operating Officer and Co-Founder, Place‐
meter, August 19, 2015.
21 “Platform - How It Works.” Placemeter. https://www.placemeter.com/platform
22 “Privacy by Design.” Placemeter. http://www.placemeter.com/privacy
that neighborhood. Not only is the Business Atlas itself free to use,
but users can also sign up for free training sessions, held in city
business centers, that will help them derive the most from the tool.18
One of the platform’s most important pieces of data is the foot traffic
in various neighborhoods. To collect this information, New York
partnered with a local startup, Placemeter, a self-styled “urban intel‐
ligence platform.”19 Placemeter uses cameras (including existing
municipal street traffic cameras and sensor-laden IP cameras) to
assess population movement through neighborhoods. The resulting
information includes both pedestrian and vehicular traffic data.
While much of the analytical work is done algorithmically, Placeme‐
ter also relies on humans to analyze videos and perform random
quality checks of the work being done by the algorithms.20 The
resulting data gives businesspeople an indication of prospective cus‐
tomer numbers, thus helping guide location-relevant business deci‐
sions.21 The city also has plans to supplement the data using
crowdsourced information. Although an important piece of the
Business Atlas, Placemeter’s work on quantifying public spaces
could lead to privacy concerns directed at the city down the road.
That said, Placemeter has taken concrete steps to mitigate those
concerns by: a) processing video in real time so that less than 0.01
percent of all video is recorded or stored—and only for processing
and quality assurance purposes; and b) only providing anonymized
counts of pedestrians, with no specific identities attached. Former
U.S. Deputy Chief Technology Officer Nicole Wong also acts as a
privacy adviser to the company.22
In addition to Placemeter data, the Atlas includes data pulled from a
variety of government departments and agencies. These include the
Department of Consumer Affairs, the Department of Finance (e.g.,
268 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

23 “NYC MODA Presentation Federal Summit.” New York City: NYC Analytics, February
2015. http://lnwprogram.org/sites/default/files/NYC_MODA_Presenta
tion_Federal_Summit.pdf
24 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
25 GovLab interview with Lindsay Mollineaux, Director of Analytics, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, July 2, 2015.
sales tax information), and demographic data from census results.
The Atlas supplements this data with information shared from the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH), Business
Integrity Commission (BIC), Department of Environmental Protec‐
tion (DEP), Department of City Planning (DCP) and Department of
Buildings (DOB) in New York City, as well as state and national
open data.23 In many cases, MODA’s task involved combining and
analyzing data sets that were already open and accessible to the pub‐
lic. In other cases, additional effort was required from MODA in
order to secure the release of data. Sales tax data from the Depart‐
ment of Finance, for example, is protected due to the inclusion of
personally identifiable information. In order to include the data in
the Atlas, MODA first had to strip away personal information
through an anonymization process.24
“Some of the needed data in designing the Atlas was obvious to us,
but the question was what is useful to entrepreneurs versus infor‐
mation overload?”
—Lindsay Mollineaux, Mayor’s Office of Data Analytics
In order to combine all this data in a single place, the team creating
the Atlas had to overcome several technical and conceptual chal‐
lenges. For example, while as much data as possible was pulled from
the city’s DataBridge (described above), there were inevitable issues
concerning the compatibility of data sets. Differences between data
standards and formats create a major and time-consuming challenge
in the effort to combine multiple data streams into one usable tool.
In addition, finding accurate data for local businesses proved more
challenging than anticipated. As Mollineaux explained, each indus‐
try has its own particular licensing regulations (and some busi‐
nesses, for example bookstores, have no licensing requirements at
all), making it difficult to accurately represent and synthesize local
business information across sectors.25
Project Description and Inception 
| 
269

26 GovLab interview with Lindsay Mollineaux, Director of Analytics, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, July 2, 2015.
27 GovLab interview with Lindsay Mollineaux, Director of Analytics, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, July 2, 2015.
User-Centered Design and Partnering with Department
of Small Business Services
Although the general value proposition of the NYC Business Atlas
was clear from the outset, MODA decided to partner with the New
York City Department of Small Business Services (SBS) to ensure
that the needs of small businesses (its target audience) were truly
met. As Mollineaux noted: “Some of the needed data in designing
the Atlas was obvious to us, but the question was what is useful to
entrepreneurs versus information overload? SBS served as our sub‐
ject matter experts who interfaced with actual entrepreneurs (for
example, people might come to them about opening a bakery) and
could use the Atlas to directly serve these needs. ... We always part‐
ner with client agencies who are subject matter experts and can help
define what success looks like.”26
Through ethnographic research and interviews, SBS was able to help
MODA determine what was most relevant for various types of users.
For example, MODA originally focused on displaying some of the
business and demographic information as a score for a given geo‐
graphic location. User feedback, gathered with the assistance of SBS,
helped MODA to recognize that, in fact, entrepreneurs would be
more interested in less-aggregated data; most businesspeople
wanted the underlying data rather than a one-size-fits-all score.27
Rather than a simple score or grade, therefore, the data is now map‐
ped in a disaggregated, “raw” form, allowing users to draw their own
conclusions.
In addition to partnering with SBS to supplement the informational
base of the platform, MODA partnered with the New York City
library system to drive use. Research had indicated to Flowers and
his team that many entrepreneurs rely on their local library to gain
insight into how to start a new business. With this audience of
potential users in mind, MODA worked with and trained library
270 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

28 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
29 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
staff to introduce the platform to potential entrepreneurs and essen‐
tially serve as “small business counselors.”28
Overall, MODA’s approach of partnering with different agencies and
institutions has proven remarkably fruitful. According to Flowers, it
is part of a well-thought-out strategy to ensure the longevity of the
Business Atlas. As Flowers puts it: “You have to get the civil service
on board. ... If you don’t have them on board as major participants,
then in the next election everything you worked on is gone.”29
Impact
Like many data-driven urban projects around the world, the Busi‐
ness Atlas has benefited from the existence of copious amounts of
data and a relatively sophisticated user base that is well-informed
and aware about the potential of open data. This conducive ecosys‐
tem has translated into tangible—and almost immediate—impact
for the project’s intended beneficiaries.
Intended Beneficiaries
Entrepreneurs and
Small Business Owners
• Community that will make the most direct use of data housed in the
Business Atlas.
• Improved decision-making capabilities engendered through free
access to market research data and analytics that would normally
come at great cost.
• Evidence of market opportunities provided by the Atlas can be
useful for securing financing and investment for new businesses.
Impact 
| 
271

30 Neubauer, Miranda. “With Business Atlas, NYC Analytics Office Looks to 2014.” Tech‐
President. January 2, 2014. http://techpresident.com/news/24635/business-atlas-nyc-
analytics-office-look​s-2014
31 Krasny, Jill. “NYC Data Tool Gives Small Business an Edge.” Inc. December 27, 2013.
http://www.inc.com/jill-krasny/nyc-business-atlas-helps-small-businesses.html
Citizens of New York
City
• By providing small business entrepreneurs with decision-making
support, the Business Atlas seeks to enable the creation of new jobs
across New York City.
• As a result of the new businesses opened based on Business Atlas
insights, consumers should see an influx of new businesses targeted
to the needs of their communities.
• In particular, residents of traditionally underserved neighborhoods
in the city stand to benefit from new businesses being opened in
their area as a result of a greater understanding of community-level
needs and opportunities.
Leveling the Playing Field for Market Research
One of the most important impacts of the Business Atlas is the way
in which it levels the playing field between large and small busi‐
nesses. MODA’s 2013 annual report points out that, “When a major
national retailer looks to open a new storefront, they often commis‐
sion sophisticated neighborhood market research that helps the
company decide where to locate the new business.”30 That type of
research is often too expensive for smaller businesses. But the Busi‐
ness Atlas, as John Feinblatt, former Mayor Bloomberg’s chief policy
adviser, puts it, “democratizes ... research, putting quality research
into the hands of small business owners.”31
Even when small businesses do have access to data (for example,
through public feeds or other sources), they may lack the analytical
skills to process and understand it. Here, too, the Business Atlas
plays a powerful role, its sophisticated analytics and visualization
tools further leveling the playing field between larger and smaller
players. At a meeting of municipal chief data officers, Amen Ra
Mashariki, New York City’s chief analytics officer, pointed out the
many ways in which such data and analysis can empower small
businesses. He cited the example of an entrepreneur approaching a
bank for a loan. With the information contained within the Business
Atlas, the entrepreneur can make a far more compelling case,
272 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

32 “Towards Data Driven Cities? Meet up with Chief Data Officers.” Proceedings of La
Fabrique De La Cite, Paris. March 23, 2015. http://www.lafabriquedelacite.com/
fabrique-de-la-cite/data.nsf/FDD3CB2E8CEA41D2C1257E0F00324482/$file/
actes_cdo_02062015_def_web.pdf.
33 New York City Department of Small Business Services. “Starting a Business Improve‐
ment District: A Step-by-Step Guide.” Nyc.gov. 2003. http://www.nyc.gov/html/sbs/down
loads/pdf/bid_guide_complete.pdf.
34 “Towards Data Driven Cities? Meet up with Chief Data Officers.” Proceedings of La
Fabrique De La Cite, Paris. March 23, 2015. http://www.lafabriquedelacite.com/
fabrique-de-la-cite/data.nsf/FDD3CB2E8CEA41D2C1257E0F00324482/$file/
actes_cdo_02062015_def_web.pdf.
backed by real evidence, for the sustainability and potential of the
business.32
Enabling Business Improvement District (BID) Analysis
A further impact of the Business Atlas is evident in SBS’ intentions
to deploy the Atlas for its own work. Currently, SBS is planning to
use data contained within the Atlas to aid in the analysis of how
Business Improvement Districts (BIDs) are fueling economic
growth in New York. BIDs are public-private partnerships “in which
property and business owners elect to make a collective contribution
to the maintenance, development and promotion of their commer‐
cial district.”33 The data now in place, thanks to the Business Atlas,
will allow SBS to compare BID neighborhoods in terms of economic
change, commercial investments and business activities; this will in
turn permit SBS to identify which BIDs have been most impactful to
date and develop best practices to replicate their success across the
city.
The deployment of the Business Atlas to fuel the growth of BIDs
points to another particular community that stands to benefit from
new availability of market research data: residents of underserved
NYC neighborhoods. As Mashariki has pointed out, “city agencies
can also use Business Atlas to address large businesses and show
them that there is good reason for them to open locations in neigh‐
borhoods which they may have otherwise avoided.”34 Instead of
making location-based decisions based purely on intuition (or
media-driven biases), companies can now take a closer look at data
and find underserved areas that offer a compelling business case.
This is just one more way in which the Business Atlas holds poten‐
Impact 
| 
273

35 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
36 “FireCast: Leveraging Big Data for Mitigating Fire Risks.” The Innovation Enterprise.
January 22, 2014. https://ieondemand.com/divisions/big-data/events/4/presentations/
firecast-leveraging-big-data-for-mitigating-fire-risk​s#sthash.FidXBzgc.dpuf.
37 Yasin, Rutrell. “How analytics is making NYC’s streets and buildings safer.” GCN, Octo‐
ber 4, 2013. http://gcn.com/articles/2013/10/04/gcn-award-nyc-databridge.aspx.
38 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
39 http://gcn.com/articles/2014/02/19/new-york-city-geek-squad.aspx
tial to level the playing field—for consumers as well as for busi‐
nesses.
Influencing Data Analytics Innovation in New York and
Abroad
As with many of the examples included in this report, MODA’s work
has had important ripple effects, spurring the development of other
similar open data projects. Flowers notes that the Business Atlas
“certainly has this burst through the wall capacity to show that open
data can mean a lot more than simply building a Yelp app.”35
Recently, for example, the Fire Department of New York (FDNY) set
up an analytics unit modeled on MODA’s own analytics team. The
efforts of the FDNY team include the development and use of a Risk
Based Inspection System (RBIS), which “enables the Department to
identify buildings most at risk for fire and prioritizes those for fire
inspections.”36 Data is pooled using DataBridge from an FDNY data
warehouse and other city databases including City Planning, Build‐
ings and others.37 In setting up the unit and its analytics platform,
FDNY worked directly with MODA, providing an example of a con‐
structive partnership and synergy across city departments.38
Another example of MODA’s ripple effects within NYC can be
found in a NYC Buildings Department project to manage com‐
plaints about illegal building conversions, a “311 City Pulse” pro‐
gram that live-feeds city 311 activities, and a data collection and
sharing mechanism on disaster response.39 All of these programs
used lessons and principles that have been applied and tested by
MODA.
274 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

40 Coepland, Eddie. “Big Data in the Big Apple.” Capital City Foundation. 2015. http://capi
talcityfoundation.london/big-data-in-the-big-apple-web-version/.
41 Flowers, Mike and Lauren Talbot. “Building a Gov Data Skunkworks.” Code for Amer‐
ica. February 18, 2014. http://www.codeforamerica.org/peer-network-training/
02-18-2014/.
42 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
Other cities have also taken notice of New York’s open data efforts.
The London-based Capital City Foundation has suggested, for
instance, that London should look to projects like the Business Atlas
in its efforts to become a “smart city.” In a recent report, the founda‐
tion argued: “If a business wanted to appeal to customers from cer‐
tain parts of London, data from Transport for London (TfL) shows
exactly where people touch in and touch out of the transport net‐
work. Maps can thereby be created showing where people move
from and to. This could be helpful to know which tube or bus stops
to place a business near. Creating an online tool to make these kinds
of data sets available would build on ideas started in New York
City.”40 It is likely that the appetite for similar data analytics teams
will continue to spread, as the lessons learned and best practices
from MODA are increasingly shared with innovators and policy‐
makers around the world.41
Challenges
Communicating Opportunity
A tool is only useful if people actually use it. So while the Business
Atlas presents a major opportunity for giving more businesspeople
an understanding of the contexts in which they might consider
opening a business, communicating that opportunity to the public
will be an important ongoing challenge to ensure wide use. As Mike
Flowers put it: The Business Atlas is part of an effort to give (a hypo‐
thetical) “Nadine’s Burritos” the type of market research insights and
capabilities that have been enjoyed by the likes of McDonald’s and
Subway for years.42 But making sure that Nadine—and thousands of
small entrepreneurs like her—is aware of the availability of this
information remains something of a challenge.
Challenges 
| 
275

43 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
44 GovLab interview with Lindsay Mollineaux, Director of Analytics, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, July 2, 2015.
45 GovLab interview with Mike Flowers, former Chief Analytics Officer, Mayor’s Office of
Data Analytics, New York City, August 14, 2015.
To that end, awareness-raising and the types of outreach already
conducted with city libraries will be essential. In addition, Flowers
believes that the creation of an application program interface (API)
to enable developers to take the data housed on the Business Atlas
and create new apps could also help disseminate that data more
widely.43
Addressing Technical Challenges
In order to achieve its many ambitions for growing the Business
Atlas, MODA will also need to address a number of technical chal‐
lenges that could serve as stumbling blocks. For example, as noted
previously, different types of businesses typically have different
licensing requirements. As Mollineaux points out, this is just one
instance of a more general issue—the different “data contexts” that
exist for different categories of businesses, and that make it chal‐
lenging to pull together and meaningfully analyze data from dispa‐
rate sources.44
In the past, MODA has written a number of proprietary algorithms
to overcome such difficulties. But challenges remain, and as the
agency plans to add more data, they could possibly grow. Finding
new ways to synthesize and harmonize large sources of data, pulled
from different agencies and groups, is one of the key tasks confront‐
ing the agency as it seeks to expand its reach and scale up its efforts.
Improving Granularity of Data
The information contained on the Business Atlas has proven to be
very helpful for businesspeople seeking to identify suitable (or
unsuitable) neighborhoods in which to operate. But as Flowers
points out, “a neighborhood in New York City is bigger than most
towns in America.”45 He adds that, to increase its usefulness, the
Business Atlas could seek to provide a finer level of granularity in
the analysis it provides its users. For example, it could move beyond
276 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

46 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
47 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
neighborhood-level information and, perhaps, focus on areas that
included five or 10 blocks.
Looking Forward
MODA has in many respects changed the way citizens and policy‐
makers in New York make decisions. The Business Atlas is just one
example, albeit one with particularly significant potential. Given the
early success of and positive response to Business Atlas, MODA has
plans to scale it up and extend its reach in the coming years.
Business Atlas 2.0: New Tools and Features
Business Atlas 2.0 is the name being applied to a suite of new tools
and enhancements MODA is currently planning to add to the origi‐
nal Business Atlas. Among the new features that may be included in
the planned update:46
• a feature that will allow businesspeople to compare multiple
locations;
• more traffic information, including daily subway rider informa‐
tion;
• crowdsourced data on foot and vehicular traffic, with the inten‐
tion of adding accuracy and completeness to Placemeter’s traffic
numbers; and
• a “solver” tool that will allow entrepreneurs to enter their needs
or specifications and identify potentially suitable locations for
their businesses.
MODA is also considering adding a predictive analytics tool that
would identify businesses at risk of failure, and proactively target
them by offering assistance from other small businesses. This “tar‐
geted assistance” would, for example, take the form of loan offers or
other financial assistance.47
Looking Forward 
| 
277

48 Flowers, Michael. “NYC by the Numbers Annual Report.” New York City Government.
December 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/analytics/downloads/pdf/
annual_report_2013.pdf.
49 GovLab interview with Florent Peyre, Chief Operating Officer and Co-Founder, Place‐
meter, August 19, 2015.
Partnerships and Collaborations
In addition to rolling out new features, MODA also plans to
enhance existing, and initiate new, partnerships designed to increase
the reach and usefulness of the Business Atlas. As discussed above,
MODA is already partnering with SBS to analyze the economic
growth of Business Improvement Districts in New York. This part‐
nership will be continued and extended, with a particular focus on
identifying common traits and behaviors that are most conducive to
economic growth. One of the goals is to identify a series of Best
Practices that can guide economic growth in the city.
Additionally, MODA plans to continue and initiate partnerships
with a number of outside agencies, institutions, businesses and indi‐
viduals.48 In the academic and research sector, MODA already part‐
ners with New York University’s Center for Urban Science and
Progress (CUSP), Columbia’s Center for Data Science and the
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. MODA’s collaboration with Micro‐
soft Labs is specifically focused on a project regarding automated
responses to 311 SMS messages. MODA also works closely with
average citizens through hackathons during which new projects are
developed and feedback from users is collected.
Although much of the work with Placemeter occurred as a single,
one-time collaboration, new work by the startup could lead to future
opportunities to supplement the Business Atlas. The next big step
for Placemeter “is the ability to actually measure in real time the
speed of cars in your neighborhood, then gather that data for the
benefit of your neighborhood and more widely than city officials.”49
This could not only play a major role in Vision Zero—Mayor Bill de
Blasio’s mission to reduce traffic deaths to zero in New York City—
but also provide additional traffic flow information to businesses.
These and other changes are either planned or already underway.
But many of the most important changes and additions in the years
ahead remain unforeseen, and will likely arise directly from users.
MODA’s “Open Data for All” strategy document outlines a concer‐
278 
| 
Chapter 13: United States’ New York City Business Atlas

50 “Open Data for All” New York City Government. 2015. http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/
home/downloads/pdf/reports/2015/NYC-Open-Data-Plan-2015.pdf
ted effort to learn by watching how the site is used, and by whom.50
What types of data and analytical tools are most useful? What
aspects of the site seem to pose difficulties or represent friction for
users? How do people discover the site, and what converts them into
repeat visitors (as opposed to single-occasion users)? These are
some of the questions MODA will be asking—and building on—as
it moves forward.
Looking Forward 
| 
279


CHAPTER 14
United States’ NOAA: Opening Up
Global Weather Data in
Collaboration with Businesses
Creating a New Industry Through Access to
Weather Data
By Christina Rogawski, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: Opening up weather data through the United States
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has
significantly lowered the economic and human costs of weather-
related damage through more accurate forecasts; the development of
a multi-billion-dollar weather derivatives financial industry; and the
growth of a million-dollar industry of tools and applications derived
from NOAA’s real-time data. In many ways, the industry built
around NOAA’s weather data is seen as the paradigmatic example of
how the release of open data can yield major economic impacts. To
further scale the impact of its data, NOAA has launched the Big
Data Project (BDP), which provides an opportunity to combine
NOAA’s tremendous volume of high-quality environmental data and
advanced data products, private industry’s vast infrastructure and
technical capacity, and the U.S. economy’s innovation and energy.
Dimension of Impact: Creating Opportunity—Economic Growth
281

1 “A History of NOAA.” NOAA History - NOAA Legacy/Agency History/NOAA His‐
tory. http://www.history.noaa.gov/legacy/noaahistory_1.html
Key Takeaways:
• The impacts of a given open data set can span an incredible
array of sectors and users—with NOAA’s real-time data able to
both help an individual decide whether or not to bring an
umbrella on her commute or enable a farmer to better prepare
for this season’s crop yield, to name just two.
— NOAA collects over 3.5 billion weather observations per day.
Around 96 percent of the U.S. public obtains 301 billion
forecasts each year, providing $31.5 billion in benefits, far
exceeding the $5.1 billion spent annually by both private and
public weather bureaus on generating forecasts.
• These estimated benefits are available because of NOAA’s use of
a variety of quantitative estimates of the value of its products
and services using the Value of Information (VOI) methodolo‐
gies. This focus on assessing the impacts of information on
decisions and on the effect of those decisions on real-world out‐
comes sets NOAA apart from many other open data initiatives
in terms of quantified impacts.
• Collaborations between public data providers and private
industry actors can create new value and opportunities from
open data.
• Crowdsourcing ideas for how to best make use of open data
could help to ensure that data owners build fruitful partnerships
and/or release data in ways that can create maximum value
without requiring maximum resource investment.
Context and Background
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
traces its roots to 1807 as the Coast and Geodetic Survey.1 Over
time, numerous other scientific and environmentally focused federal
agencies formed. In 1970, President Nixon proposed the creation of
NOAA to “unify the nation’s piece-meal environmental activities
and provide a rational and systematic approach to understanding,
282 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

2 “A History of NOAA.” NOAA History - NOAA Legacy/Agency History/NOAA His‐
tory. http://www.history.noaa.gov/legacy/noaahistory_1.html
3 “Assessing the Economic and Social Benefits of NOAA Data.” NAS/OECD Conference.
February 2008. http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/40066192.pdf
4 Chopra, Aneesh P. and Ethan Skolnick. Innovative State: How New Technologies Can
Transform Government. (New York, NY: Atlantic Monthly Press), 2014.
5 “Assessing the Economic and Social Benefits of NOAA Data.” NAS/OECD Conference.
February 2008. http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/40066192.pdf
6 “NOAA Looks for Advice to Make Its Data Easier to Use.” Eos, Vol. 95, No. 11. March
18, 2014. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014EO110003/pdf
7 Diaz, Jesus. “How Large Is a Petabyte?” Gizmodo. July 8, 2009. http://gizmodo.com/
5309889/how-large-is-a-petabyte
protecting, developing and enhancing the total environment.”2
Today, NOAA is housed under the U.S. Department of Commerce,
and its stated mission is “to understand and predict changes in
Earth’s environment and conserve/manage coastal and marine
resources to meet the nation’s economic, social and environmental
needs.”3
With an annual budget over $5 billion, NOAA deploys weather-
monitoring satellites and high-tech instrumentation and sensors to
collect large amounts of climate and environmental data.4 Today, its
operating units include the National Weather Service (which con‐
ducts forecasts, and broadcasts severe weather watches and warn‐
ings), the National Environmental Satellite and Data Service (which
operates satellites and the atmospheric data center), the National
Ocean Service (which performs hydrographic, geodesy and mari‐
time services), the National Marine Fisheries Service (which man‐
ages commercial fisheries and protects marine species) and the
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (which conducts
applied research).5
Data is at the heart of NOAA’s mission and central to virtually all its
activities. As of 2014, “about 100 petabytes of environmental data
currently are stored in NOAA data centers,” with another 30 peta‐
bytes added every year.6 For perspective, 1 petabyte = 1 million giga‐
bytes; or about the equivalent of 20 million four-drawer filing
cabinets filled with texts, or 13.3 years of HD-TV video. The “entire
written works of mankind from the beginning of recorded history”
is about 50 petabytes.7 Over 3.5 billion observations are collected
Context and Background 
| 
283

8 Breggin, Linda and Judith Amsalem. “Big Data and Environmental Protection: An Ini‐
tial Survey of Public and Private Initiatives.” Environmental Law Institute. 2014. https://
www.eli.org/sites/default/files/eli-pubs/big-data-and-environmental-protection.pdf
each day8 from over 90 operational and research observing systems
as well as 100 real- and near-real-time information systems, includ‐
ing: satellite data, regional monitoring (e.g., coastal, arctic), model
data and archives, ocean profiles, climatology, etc.
The resulting information underlies huge swathes of economic,
social and political life in America (and, indeed, around the world).
Among other activities, they inform weather forecasts, climate pre‐
dictions, ship and aircraft navigation, and conservation work involv‐
ing marine populations. Thus NOAA’s data helps guide decisions
that are both momentous (e.g., how much electricity to produce on
a given weekend) and more trivial (e.g., should I make outdoor
plans this weekend?).
NOAA also plays a significant role in limiting losses from natural
disasters by working with the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). In this partnership, NOAA doesn’t simply provide
data. It is also involved in the analysis of information, converting
raw data into an “index of severity” that helps guide FEMA’s plan‐
ning for and responses to disasters.
NOAA’s data is widely consumed by actors in both the private and
public sectors. In funding and supporting NOAA, and especially in
opening up its information systems to private and public actors, the
United States government is performing a vital social, economic,
political and cultural service that could not easily be replaced by pri‐
vate sector actors. The data that NOAA publishes is best handled by
a public sector entity for a variety of reasons: a) it is non-exclusive
(anyone can observe and record the environment); b) it is non-rival
(one actor using that data does not subsequently make it any less
useful to others); c) it requires a high cost of the infrastructure
(expensive scientific equipment); and d) it is reproducible at near
zero-marginal cost (for most purely information goods, once pro‐
duced, the marginal cost of redistribution is close to zero; therefore
they cannot be created and produced by firms that use revenues
obtained from sales to cover costs. For firms to make revenue, there
must be a value-added service, as seen in The Weather Channel
reformatting NOAA data into concise, localized formats for TV,
284 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

9 Rifkin, Jeremy. “Capitalism is making way for the age of free.” The Guardian. March 31,
2014. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/31/capitalism-age-of-free-
internet-of-things-economic-shift
10 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
11 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
12 GovLab interview with Jeff De La Beaujardiere, Data Management Architect, NOAA,
September 18, 2015.
websites and mobile phones.).9 As NOAA CIO Zach Goldstein
describes, “It’s our job to get that data out there. The data doesn’t
belong to us, it belongs to the American people.”10
Project Description and Inception
Since its inception, NOAA has boasted a strong open data culture
and is considered a leader in open data, if not the leading open data
example among government agencies. When the Obama adminis‐
tration launched data.gov as part of its flagship Open Government
Initiative in January 2009, NOAA was cited as the paradigmatic
example as to how government agencies can both publish data and
make that data accessible for the private sector to use and build a
multi-billion-dollar industry.11
It follows that NOAA’s data products and services have always been
user-driven, determined by demand among consumers and citizens
who have a need for weather-related information. Demand has been
particularly strong from certain sectors that are highly affected by
weather events (e.g., energy, agriculture, water resources and emer‐
gency management). These sectors have in many ways helped shape
the way NOAA provides data, and have been at the forefront of
pushing the agency to open up its information pool and services. As
NOAA Data Management Architect Jeff de La Beaujardiere explains,
if NOAA measures something to predict the weather, users will get
their weather forecast for tomorrow, but those observations might
have other uses, like long-term forecasting for planting crops. “The
broader societal objective is to make sure that data gets out there so
that as many people and companies and stakeholders can get to
them and make decisions based on the data, and make new infor‐
mation products based on the data they find.”12
Project Description and Inception 
| 
285

13 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
14 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
15 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
16 “NOAA Issues New Partnership Policy: Response to ‘Fair Weather’ Recommendations
Strengthens Relationships Among Government, Universities and the Private Sector.”
NOAA Magazine. December 1, 2004. http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2004/
s2348.htm
17 “NOAA Issues New Partnership Policy: Response to ‘Fair Weather’ Recommendations
Strengthens Relationships Among Government, Universities and the Private Sector.”
NOAA Magazine. December 1, 2004. http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2004/
s2348.htm
In its early years, NOAA collected its data in a proprietary format,
making it difficult for private users or companies to download and
manipulate it independently. This primarily was due to technical
limitations of the time. NOAA otherwise, culturally and policy-wise,
has always prioritized making its data as accessible to users as possi‐
ble.13 When NOAA first began developing a centralized open data
portal in the early 2000s, its goal was to make the portal as techno‐
logically “cutting edge as possible.”14 In particular, the organization
hoped to transition from being simply a clearing house for raw data
to “actually a menu of html and formats to be pulled directly into
applications,” in response to user demand.15
As advances in data technology proliferated, and the sophistication
of users continued to increase, NOAA recognized the need for more
standardized goals and policies regarding its relationship with users.
In 2003, The National Research Council (NRC), the working arm of
the U.S. National Academies, therefore conducted a study examin‐
ing the respective roles of government, academic and private sectors
in the weather industry. The study found that “advances in science
and technology have blurred the distinctions between the sectors,”
and provided recommendations on how “partnership can effectively
move forward in an era of rapid advances.”16 The NRC identified the
need for a policy that would “define processes for decision-making
rather than defining roles.”17
286 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

18 “NOAA Issues New Partnership Policy: Response to ‘Fair Weather’ Recommendations
Strengthens Relationships Among Government, Universities and the Private Sector.”
NOAA Magazine. December 1, 2004. http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2004/
s2348.htm
In response, in 2004 NOAA announced a new partnership policy,
which included the following provisions:18
• NOAA will adhere to applicable law regarding government
information, based on the premise that government informa‐
tion is a valuable national resource and the benefits to society
are maximized when such information is available to all.
• NOAA will carry out activities that contribute to its mission and
provide open and unrestricted access to publicly funded infor‐
mation at the lowest possible cost.
• NOAA will provide information in forms accessible to the pub‐
lic as well as the underlying data in forms convenient to addi‐
tional processing.
• NOAA will give due consideration to the ability of private sec‐
tor entities and the academic and research community to pro‐
vide diverse services and will consider the effects of its decision
on the activities of these entities, to serve the public interest and
advance the environmental information enterprise as a whole.
• NOAA will not haphazardly institute significant changes in
existing information dissemination activities, or introduce new
services without first carefully considering the full range of
views and capabilities of all parties.
• NOAA will use appropriate mechanisms to encourage input
from and collaboration with others on decisions affecting the
environmental information enterprise.
• NOAA will promote the open and unrestricted exchange of
environmental information worldwide.
• NOAA’s participation in the environmental information enter‐
prise will be based on the principles of mission connection, con‐
sultation, open information dissemination, equitable dealings
and recognition of the role of others.
These provisions were designed to help “nurture the growth of a
complex and diverse environmental information enterprise and to
Project Description and Inception 
| 
287

19 “NOAA Issues New Partnership Policy: Response to ‘Fair Weather’ Recommendations
Strengthens Relationships Among Government, Universities and the Private Sector.”
NOAA Magazine. December 1, 2004. http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2004/
s2348.htm
20 Chopra, Aneesh P. and Ethan Skolnick. Innovative State: How New Technologies Can
Transform Government. (New York, NY: Atlantic Monthly Press), 2014.
serve the public interest by giving our nation the best environmental
information services in the world,” as described by Conrad C. Lau‐
tenbacher, undersecretary of commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere
and NOAA administrator at the time.19 Accordingly, in 2004, NOAA
changed its data format to the widely used XML, significantly lower‐
ing barriers to data use and expanding the base of potential infor‐
mation consumers tremendously. These actions set the stage for
NOAA to be a leader in open data policies, and more specifically, for
the NOAA Data Catalog that is available today (data.noaa.gov/).20
Figure 14-1. NOAA’s Geoportal
Today, NOAA data is archived at the National Centers for Environ‐
mental Information (NCEI), which “is committed to full and open
data access in support of its community of Data Producers and Data
Consumers.” NCEI archives data in collaboration with a number of
international and national organizations “dedicated to the exchange
and open access of ocean- and climate-related data.” NOAA contin‐
ues to work hard to make its forecasting information more relevant
and precise, corresponding to advances in technology and in user
288 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

21 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
22 GovLab interview with Jeff De La Beaujardiere, Data Management Architect, NOAA,
September 18, 2015.
feedback on data service or product needs. Once a service has been
developed, NOAA promotes it through formal and informal ave‐
nues, such as its Web channels and list-servs.21 NOAA’s early
attempts to use standard and modern Web services to distribute the
data, as opposed to “dumping it all on an FTP site,” helped reinforce
the perception of NOAA as an open data innovator, both externally
and within internal culture.22
Figure 14-2. Oceanography Data Sets on NOAA’s Data Portal
Data sets and data products on the NOAA portal are organized:
• by categories
— Satellite Data
— Regional Products (e.g., Harmful Algal Blooms Observing
Systems, Arctic Regional Climatology, Gulf of Mexico Data
Atlas)
— Observational & Near-Real-Time Data
— Instrument Types (e.g., Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler
Data, Buoy Data)
Project Description and Inception 
| 
289

23 https://data.noaa.gov/dataset
24 “NOAA Looks for Advice to Make Its Data Easier to Use.” Eos, Vol. 95, No. 11. March
18, 2014. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014EO110003/pdf
25 “U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker Delivers Remarks on the Power and
Potential of Open Government Data.” U.S. Department of Commerce. July 14, 2014.
http://www.commerce.gov/news/secretary-speeches/2014/07/us-secretary-commerce-
penny-pritzker-delivers-remarks-power-and.
26 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
27 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
— Model Data (e.g., NOAA Operational Model Archive and
Distribution System)
— Ocean Profile Data
— Ocean Climatology
— Project Data (e.g., Coral Reef Information System, Joint
Archive for Sea Level)
— International Ocean Atlas Series (e.g., Climatic Atlas of the
North Pacific Seas 2009)
• by data types (e.g., Temperature, Oxygen, Ocean Currents,
Waves)
• by specific data services (e.g., Live Access Server, HTTP)23
However, of the 30 petabytes of NOAA data collected and archived
every year, only about 10 percent is openly available for public
access on its websites.24 Again, this is due to the technical challenges
inherent in providing access to the 20 terabytes of data produced
daily,25 rather than cultural or policy barriers. Still, NOAA’s home
page, noaa.gov and the more weather-specific data site, weather.gov,
are the most visited websites for the U.S. federal government overall.
26 The average citizen looking for basic information about weather,
such as beach forecasts or severe weather alerts, knows to go to
those two sites, or to climate.gov for more detailed climate research
data. Indeed, climate data has become “very important” to NOAA’s
communications with both the public and the private sector. Offi‐
cials are learning that the demand for this data is very high and the
expectations surrounding the access, availability and products from
NOAA data are increasing.27
290 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

28 https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/noaas-national-ocean-service-nos-data-explorer-
geoportal
29 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
30 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
Industry users (e.g., utilities, energy, agriculture, space) usually
access NOAA data through a more advanced open data application
called the Geoportal, which attempts to centralize access to dis‐
tributed geospatial data, tools, applications and services, allowing
users to search and access data via a master catalog.28 However,
NOAA recognizes that much of its data remains siloed, which can
make searching difficult for all users, and therefore launched a web‐
site redesign in late 2015, described in more detail below.
Users can directly use these sites and data sets on their own, or they
can partner with NOAA to develop applications and other products
to access and analyze the data to fit their specific needs. Some of
these partnerships are listed below. These partnerships have
changed NOAA’s own perceptions of its data, nudging it to improve
its services and the quality of the information and tools on its site.
Overall, say NOAA insiders, partnerships have greatly expanded the
scope and the potential of the organization’s data. As Tim Owen,
chief of the NOAA Climate Information Services Division, puts it:
The move toward openness is “as much of a cultural change as it is a
policy change. ... Open data brought collaborative channels to work
that haven’t worked before, or weren’t even possible to work 10-15
years ago.”29
Private partnerships have also helped shift the internal culture to be
more willing to allow industry and economic forces to find new
ways to publish and use the data, with NOAA filling in the gaps as
necessary. However, NOAA firmly believes that its data is a public
good, open and already paid for by the taxpayers, and so, as NOAA
CIO Zach Goldstein explains, “NOAA will always focus on advanc‐
ing science and fulfilling its duty to serving the public interest.”30
“Open data brought collaborative channels to work that haven’t
worked before, or weren’t even possible to work 10-15 years ago.”
—Tim Owen, NOAA Climate Services Division
Project Description and Inception 
| 
291

31 “Google’s Participation in the Climate Data Initiative.” https://docs.google.com/docu
ment/d/15BH83pdO0-hY-vnznLxCU6mH9sZ_8mkSZHBIJsOPqU4/pub.
32 “Surging Seas.” Surging Seas: Sea Level Rise Analysis by Climate Central. http://
sealevel.climatecentral.org/.
33 “Creating a Climate-Resilient Planet with Maps, Apps, and Data.” ArcWatch: GIS News,
Views, and Insights. April 1, 2014. http://www.esri.com/esri-news/arcwatch/0414/
creating-a-climate-resilient-planet-with-apps-maps-and-data
34 “Creating a Climate-Resilient Planet with Maps, Apps, and Data.” ArcWatch: GIS News,
Views, and Insights. April 1, 2014. http://www.esri.com/esri-news/arcwatch/0414/
creating-a-climate-resilient-planet-with-apps-maps-and-data
35 “FACT SHEET: The President’s Climate Data Initiative: Empowering America’s Com‐
munities To Prepare For The Effects Of Climate Change.” The White House, 2014.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/19/fact-sheet-president-s-climate-
data-initiative-empowering-america-s-comm.
NOAA Partnerships
31,32,33,34
An example of NOAA’s partnerships can be seen in the Climate Data
Initiative, launched in March 2014 by the Obama administration
with the goal of leveraging the government’s data resources to stim‐
ulate innovation and entrepreneurship in response to climate
change. As a part of the president’s Climate Action Plan, the Climate
Data Initiative launched a number of significant commitments from
federal agencies (including NOAA), private-sector collaborators and
research institutions to combat climate change through data-driven
innovation.35
Google
In support of the White House Climate Data Initiative, Google
is donating one petabyte of cloud storage to house satellite
observations, digital elevation data and climate/weather model
data sets and 50 million CPU hours of high-performance cloud
computing resources on the Google Earth Engine geospatial
analysis platform. The goal is to make climate information “as
accessible to the public as using Google Maps to get driving
directions.”
Climate Central
Climate Central, a nonprofit news organization that performs
analysis on climate science to inform reporting, will release a
“free Web tool providing local projections, maps and assess‐
ments of exposure to sea level rise and coastal flooding tabula‐
ted for every coastal zip code, municipality, county and state in
292 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

36 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
37 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
the U.S., along with planning, legislative and other geographic
districts.” Exposure assessments will cover more than 100 dem‐
ographic, economic, infrastructure and environmental variables
using data drawn mainly from federal sources, including NOAA
open data.
Esri
Esri, a data and geography research group focused on sustaina‐
bility, is offering geospatial technology and expertise to 12
coastal cities to help them build maps and applications with
NOAA data to help plan for climate change’s impact. Esri will
also host a new climate-focused geo-collaboration portal and
sponsor a Climate Resilience App Challenge, awarding prizes to
applications that focus on solutions to climate-related issues.
Impact
There are many ways to measure the impact of NOAA’s data and its
data portal. One fairly conventional way is simply to look at data
consumption—to count visitors to the site and data downloads.
NOAA officials remark that these usage numbers reveal an increase
over time, as user interest in and sophistication with data increases,
as does the amount of data and products NOAA offers.36 Tim Owen,
chief of the NOAA Climate Information Services Division, explains
that open data has “raised our awareness of the level of sophistica‐
tion of the use-community and in turn forces the government to
step up the response.”37
Economic Benefits
However, data consumption does not on its own provide an accurate
indicator of value created. What matters is not how much data users
download or analyze, but what they do with that data. More sectors
of the U.S. economy are recognizing the impacts of weather, water
and climate on their operations and are becoming more sophistica‐
ted at using weather-related information to make better decisions.
Impact 
| 
293

38 “Value of a Weather Ready Nation.” NOAA. October 13, 2011. http://www.ppi.noaa.gov/
wp-content/uploads/PPI-Weather-Econ-Stats-10-13-11.pdf
39 Adams, R.M., C.C. Chen, B.A. McCarl, and R.W. Weiher, “The economic consequences
of ENSO events for agriculture,” Climate Research, 13 (December 10, 1999). Available
at: http://www.int-res.com/articles/cr/13/c013p165.pdf
40 “Value of a Weather Ready Nation.” NOAA. October 13, 2011. http://www.ppi.noaa.gov/
wp-content/uploads/PPI-Weather-Econ-Stats-10-13-11.pdf
41 Weiher, Rodney. “Assessing the Economic & Social Benefits of NOAA Data.” NOAA.
February 2008. http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/40066192.pdf
NOAA’s National Weather Service (NWS) collects environmental
information and provides services for other governmental agencies,
emergency managers, the private sector, the public and the global
community. NOAA’s National Ocean Service (NOS) provides ocean
and coastal science, tools and services to address threats to coastal
areas such as climate change, population growth, port congestion
and contaminants in the environment, all working toward healthy
coasts, coastal populations and coastal economies.
To better understand the impact of its data, NOAA has made a
number of quantitative estimates of the value of its products and
services using the Value of Information (VOI) methodologies. These
methodologies are based on the premise that the information
informs decisions, and that these decisions have real-world eco‐
nomic outcomes.38
Several methodologies can be employed to estimate VOI, including:
39
• The first is to model and compare the outcomes of decisions
taken with information vs. those taken without information.
• The second is to ask stakeholders (e.g., those who have taken
decisions using information) to assess the value of the informa‐
tion they used—i.e., a self-assessment methodology.
• The third is by comparing data from actual events—i.e.,
observed effects of, for example, weather phenomena with and
without forecasts or warnings.40,41
294 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

42 “Value of a Weather Ready Nation.” NOAA. October 13, 2011. http://www.ppi.noaa.gov/
wp-content/uploads/PPI-Weather-Econ-Stats-10-13-11.pdf
43 “The Economic Value of Resilient Coastal Communities.” NOAA. March 18, 2013.
http://www.ppi.noaa.gov/wp-content/uploads/EconomicValueofResilientCoastalCommuni
ties.pdf.
Based on these various methodologies (and sometimes a combina‐
tion of them), several estimates have been made of the VOI of
NOAA’s data products:42,43
• NOAA real-time data supplies a burgeoning private weather
service industry with well over $700 million in value added
annually.
• The United States’ $8-10 billion and growing annual Weather
Derivatives financial industry relies on NOAA’s seasonal
weather data and records.
• NOAA’s forecasts and warnings and associated emergency
responses result in $3 billion in a typical hurricane season.
• United States electricity generators save $166 million annually
using 24-hour temperature forecasts.
• Economic benefits of new investments in United States coastal
ocean observing systems from improved coastal marine infor‐
mation is estimated at over $700 million annually.
• Benefits to world ship routing from NOAA polar satellite data is
estimated at $95 million annually.
• Every dollar invested in mitigation of storm-surge effects on
coastal communities saves the U.S. taxpayer four dollars in los‐
ses from natural hazards.
• Installation of NWS Doppler radars reduced tornado fatalities
and injuries by 40 percent from the levels in late 80s and early
90s.
Other studies have attempted to quantify the value of accurate
weather data over the years. Notable findings include:
• The agriculture industry has always been among the most
important consumers of NOAA’s products. By providing more
accurate climate forecasts and more timely warnings of adverse
weather, NOAA has helped the industry improve decision-
Impact 
| 
295

44 http://www.weather.gov/about
45 “Value of a Weather Ready Nation.” NOAA. October 13, 2011. http://www.ppi.noaa.gov/
wp-content/uploads/PPI-Weather-Econ-Stats-10-13-11.pdf
46 Teisberg, T., R. Weiher, and A. Khotanzad. “The Economic Value of Temperature Fore‐
casts in Electricity Generation.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, Vol. 86,
No. 12. December, 2005. http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/BAMS-86-12-1765
47 Lazo, Jeffrey K., Rebecca E. Morss, and Julie L. Demuth. “300 Billion Served: Sources,
Perceptions, Uses, and Values of Weather Forecasts.” Bulletin of the American Meteoro‐
logical Society, Vol. 90. June 2009. http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/
10.1175/2008BAMS2604.1
48 Lazo, Jeffrey K., Rebecca E. Morss, and Julie L. Demuth. “300 Billion Served: Sources,
Perceptions, Uses, and Values of Weather Forecasts.” Bulletin of the American Meteoro‐
logical Society, Vol. 90. June 2009. http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/
10.1175/2008BAMS2604.1
making and crop yields. According to one estimate, data pro‐
vided by the NWS Climate Prediction Center—a component of
NOAA44—has benefited U.S. agriculture by over $460 million by
helping guide planting decisions in El Niño, normal and La
Niña years.45
• The U.S. electricity industry is estimated to save $166 million
every year due to better forecasts that allow it to estimate and
plan for demand. Each percentage point of improvement in the
quality of forecasts saves an additional $1.4 million; each 1°C
improvement results in approximately $59 million of additional
savings annually.46
• According to a nationwide survey, 96 percent of the U.S. public
obtains, either actively or passively, 301 billion forecasts each
year. Based on an average annual household value of $286
placed on weather information,47 the American public collec‐
tively receives $31.5 billion in benefits from forecasts each year.
These benefits far exceed the $5.1 billion spent annually by both
private and public weather bureaus on generating forecasts.48
• Data from NOAA (and other government agencies) has also
created value by spurring the development of a booming
weather-related industry that creates jobs and new economic
opportunities. According to Aneesh Chopra, the nation’s former
chief technology officer, “Weather is a $5 billion-a-year indus‐
296 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

49 “Government Data Could Unleash Economic Growth, Expert Says,” Government Tech‐
nology. December 11, 2014. http://www.govtech.com/data/Government-Data-Could-
Unleash-Economic-Growth-Expert-Says.html.
50 Upbin, Bruce. “Monsanto Buys Climate Corp for $930 Million.” Forbes. October 2,
2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/bruceupbin/2013/10/02/monsanto-buys-climate-corp-
for-930-million/
51 Lazo, J.K., D.M. Waldman, B.H. Morrow, and J.A. Thacher. “Assessment of Household
Evacuation Decision Making and the Benefits of Improved Hurricane Forecasting.”
Weather and Forecasting, Vol. 25, No. 1. February, 2010. http://
journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/2009WAF2222310.1
52 “U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker Delivers Remarks on the Power and
Potential of Open Government Data.” 2014 Esri International User’s Conference, July
14, 2014.
http://www.commerce.gov/news/secretary-speeches/2014/07/us-secretary-commerce-
penny-pritzker-delivers-remarks-power-and
try.”49 Some prominent examples of companies built around
weather data include The Weather Channel, which uses NOAA
data to reach some 97.3 million American households; and the
Climate Corporation, which used weather data to provide
“weather insurance” to businesses and was sold in 2013 to Mon‐
santo for $930 million.50
• Using the self-assessment methodology mentioned above to
estimate VOI, a survey was conducted of households in states
prone to hurricane damage to learn how much taxpayers would
be willing to pay for enhanced hurricane forecasts. Researchers
found that, on average, households in at-risk states were willing
to pay an additional $14.34 per year.51
Additionally, some of NOAA’s impacts are less obviously economic
in nature. But while fighting erosion and lessening toxins in coastal
waters clearly have wider benefits, these results can help to bolster,
for example, tourism industries and lessen disaster-related eco‐
nomic losses.
• Penny Pritzker, the U.S. Secretary of Commerce, recently poin‐
ted out that more accurate weather forecasts have saved lives by
improving warning-times for events like tornadoes, resulting in
individuals having more time to get to safety, and also for busi‐
nesses to prepare their properties and activities to mitigate dam‐
age.52
Impact 
| 
297

53 “Stories from the Field.” Digital Coast, Office for Coastal Management, NOAA. http://
coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/stories/list
54 “Assessing Fire Hazard Risk in Southern California.” Digital Coast, Office for Coastal
Management, NOAA. http://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/stories/californiafire
55 “Harmful Algal Blooms Observing System—HABSOS,” NOAA: Harmful Algal Blooms
Observing System. http://habsos.noaa.gov/.
• NOAA’s data has proved instrumental in a number of environ‐
mental and conservation efforts in recent years whether
through one of operating units or other government agencies
using NOAA data. For example, the data has been used to track
and respond to coastal erosion;53 to predict and forecast areas at
risk from wildfires, particularly in southern California;54 to pro‐
tect ecosystems in the Gulf of Mexico that are adversely affected
by toxins released by algae blooms in coastal waters;55 and in a
host of additional settings and applications designed to protect
water bodies, forests, animal life and other natural phenomena,
key factors in many regional economies, including seafood, rec‐
reation, tourism, property and development.
“... [E]verything that we do is of service to someone. From kinder‐
garten students to aviators, every spectrum of the public has some‐
thing that NOAA touches in their lives.”
—Allison Soussi-Tanani, NOAA Digital Strategy Lead and Web
Committee Co-Chair
Challenges
NOAA’s ultimate ambition is to make more data available at any
time, in any format. While the organization has made significant
strides toward that goal, several challenges remain. These include:
Scaling
Despite NOAA’s leadership in open data, some data remains locked
up due to technical and resource-related challenges. As data collec‐
tion and analysis grows both in volume and complexity, NOAA will
have to continue integrating new technologies to provide accurate,
useful data services and keep up with user demand and sophistica‐
tion. NOAA’s Big Data Partnership, a plan to collaborate more
closely with the private sector, described further below, should prove
central to meeting this challenge. Through the Partnership, NOAA
298 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

56 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
57 GovLab interview with Jeff De La Beaujardiere, Data Management Architect, NOAA,
September 18, 2015.
will be able to crowdsource and assess innovative ideas directly from
the private sector to help meet existing and emerging demands.
Crowdsourcing solutions among partners and the public will also
help NOAA to more quickly identify gaps or quality issues with the
data, as more users mean more frequent testing of the data.56
To help scale, NOAA is also working to measure how open its data
is by taking an inventory of all its data and analyzing how accessible
that data is through its websites. Asking for example, how many data
sets have an online link to the data? Where do those links lead to
exactly: a standardized Web service that lets users download data or
a project home page that requires additional navigation? NOAA
hopes this assessment will provide a better understanding of exactly
which data sets are open and to what extent that data meets accepted
open standards and usability, in order to better scale and meet user
needs—perhaps by writing software that automatically accesses the
catalog holdings, services offered and formats used for each user
need.57
Data Security
To address data security challenges, from hackers to the broader sys‐
tem risks inherent in such large volumes of data processing, NOAA
has a dedicated Cyber Security Division, which serves as the NOAA
IT security officer. The division oversees the accreditation of
NOAA’s IT systems, including the “development of computer secu‐
rity plans, risk assessments, development and testing of contin‐
gency/disaster recovery plans, and system certification.” NOAA also
has an Information Technology (IT) Security Program with a dedi‐
cated Computer Incident Response Team, which provides “reason‐
able and acceptable assurance that IT systems are performing as
specified; that information is provided adequate protection; that
data and software integrity is maintained; and, that unplanned dis‐
ruptions of processing will not seriously impact mission accom‐
plishment.” While data security will likely always be a threat, as it is
with any data service, continued investment in the Cyber Security
Division can help NOAA mitigate any risks.
Challenges 
| 
299

58 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
59 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
Understanding User Needs
In order to keep growing and serving its users, NOAA must also
develop more accurate data use measurement tools and better
understand its user capabilities and needs. To those ends, NOAA
has already expanded upon rudimentary measures of usage (e.g.,
volume and downloads) to more detailed customer analytics over
the past decade, and has provided more data formats, visualizations
and applications in response to user requests. To remain useful and
meet its full potential for users, NOAA will have to continue invest‐
ing in customer analytics and apply the insights learned from ana‐
lyzing user behavior toward developing more products and services,
as user needs inevitably evolve and grow.58
Better understanding of user needs is also one of the goals of the Big
Data Project (detailed below.) By partnering with key private sector
actors involved in big data, open data and cloud computing, NOAA
can directly collaborate with experts representing different user
bases and their specific needs regarding open data access, types,
standards and products. Building an active “ecosystem” around the
data, with an active feedback loop among partners, is “very high on
[NOAA]’s list of priorities,”59 and will help NOAA better address this
challenge as its open data initiatives continue to scale in size and
scope.
Data Navigation and User Experience
NOAA is also seeking to improve user experience by redesigning its
entire Web presence, a process launched in 2014. Given NOAA’s his‐
tory as an aggregation of different agencies, its Web presence grew
in a similar way, with many sub-sites with siloed information that
may be difficult to find and/or repeat elsewhere, making navigation
difficult. To make the Web experience more cohesive, NOAA has
been working to promote itself both internally and externally as
more of a unified entity, shifting from “this is my [agency’s] content,
300 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

60 GovLab interview with Allison Soussi-Tanani, Digital Strategy Lead and Web Commit‐
tee Co-Chair, NOAA, September 16, 2015.
61 GovLab interview with Allison Soussi-Tanani, Digital Strategy Lead and Web Commit‐
tee Co-Chair, NOAA, September 16, 2015.
62 GovLab interview with Allison Soussi-Tanani, Digital Strategy Lead and Web Commit‐
tee Co-Chair, NOAA, September 16, 2015.
63 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
64 GovLab interview with Jeff De La Beaujardiere, Data Management Architect, NOAA,
September 18, 2015.
to this is our [NOAA’s] content.”60 Redesigning its websites and por‐
tals under this mindset will hopefully help unify NOAA’s messaging
in addition to improving user experience and understanding of
NOAA’s offerings.61
The other cultural driver to the website redesign is viewing NOAA
as a service agency, with the “understanding that everything that we
do is of service to someone. From kindergarten students to aviators,
every spectrum of the public has something that NOAA touches
their lives,” and therefore the website, and NOAA data, should be as
accessible and open to users as possible.62
Data Awareness
Finally, raising and promoting data awareness remains a challenge.
Although NOAA’s customer service teams help customers navigate
data sets and tools they may not be aware of through Web channels,
list-servs, targeted outreach initiatives and surveys,63 there may be
new potential clients or users who could benefit from NOAA’s data,
and who are currently unaware of the portal, do not have a formal
partnership with NOAA, and/or are not as sophisticated as a typical
NOAA data-user and so would need more assistance.
For the end user, who’s not necessarily the “expert data manipulator,”
according to NOAA’s de La Beaujardiere: “The really key thing is to
be able to see yourself in the data or have the data apply to you or
where you are. If people are given a global figure, e.g., temperature
around the globe is going to go up by a tenth of a degree, then that
doesn’t seem to have much of an impact. If you can see what’s going
to happen, has been happening, might happen at your location, that
is probably the most important contextual variable.”64
Challenges 
| 
301

65 http://www.cio.noaa.gov/cio_orgs.html
66 GovLab interview with Allison Soussi-Tanani, Digital Strategy Lead and Web Commit‐
tee Co-Chair, NOAA, September 16, 2015.
67 “U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker Delivers Remarks on the Power and
Potential of Open Government Data.” U.S. Department of Commerce. July 14, 2014.
http://www.commerce.gov/news/secretary-speeches/2014/07/us-secretary-commerce-
penny-pritzker-delivers-remarks-power-and.
68 https://data-alliance.noaa.gov/
69 “NOAA announces RFI to unleash power of ’big data.’” NOAA. February 24, 2014.
http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2014/20140224_bigdata.html.
Therefore, to reach these users, NOAA plans to continue growing its
outreach and customer services teams to identify demands and
needs that users may not even be aware of themselves.65 Addition‐
ally, NOAA plans to continue supporting social media and market‐
ing efforts, particularly around the more day-to-day stories of not
just how NOAA data is impacting people’s lives, but how the indi‐
vidual people of NOAA prioritize serving citizens.66
Looking Forward
Key among NOAA’s strategies to meet these various challenges is a
plan to pursue more partnerships with private sector companies. In
a 2014 speech, the U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker extol‐
led the virtues of NOAA’s work and the weather industry it had
spurred. But she pointed out that, despite all this work, “the public
has access to just 10 percent of NOAA’s more than 20 terabytes of
data produced daily.” (Twenty terabytes of data is equivalent to
20,480 gigabytes—in other words, NOAA produces the storage
capacity of 1,280 standard iPhones each day.) She went on to suggest
that in order to tap into the potential of the remaining 90 percent,
“we must partner with the private sector to make our data even
more useful to businesses, communities, individuals and decision-
makers of all types.”67 Her remarks point to a broader interest in so-
called “data collaboratives,” innovative solutions for cross-sectoral
data collaboration to benefit the public good.
At the heart of NOAA’s plans to develop more partnerships is its
“Big Data Project.”68 In February 2014, NOAA issued a request for
information (RFI) to businesses and researchers to solicit ideas from
the private sector on ways to better improve access to, and the usa‐
bility of, its data and data products,69 opening access to its 30 peta‐
302 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

70 “NOAA Looks for Advice to Make Its Data Easier to Use.” Eos, Vol. 95, No. 11. March
18, 2014. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014EO110003/pdf
71 “NOAA asks industry to fund open data program.” Federal Times. November 18, 2014.
http://www.federaltimes.com/article/20141114/FEDIT03/311140011/NOAA-asks-
industry-fund-open-data-program
72 GovLab interview with Tim Owen, Chief of Climate Information Services Division,
NOAA, July 27, 2015.
73 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
74 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
bytes of annual environmental data to spur innovation and
economic growth.70 The RFI focused on developing physical infra‐
structure for storing and sharing NOAA’s data within a publicly
accessible cloud that would allow industry experts and scientists to
extrapolate vast amounts of data. After receiving 70 responses from
individuals, academia and industry organizations, NOAA developed
an initial concept for its big data partnership business model called
The Cooperative Research & Development Agreement (CRADA).71
Currently, there are two major pipelines of NOAA data. The first is
station-based data via weather services channels, which has an
established pipeline that can publish all data, in near real time.72 The
other data, consisting of remote sensing, radar and other advanced
forecast and climate research data, however, has a much higher vol‐
ume and can only be handled by a supercomputer. Providing
unlimited access therefore poses a problem, as NOAA currently
does not have the resources to allow unlimited access without risk‐
ing slowing down the entire data system. As NOAA CIO Zach Gold‐
stein explains, “The last thing I want to do is run the risk of
preventing citizens from getting information on hurricanes, for
example. People’s lives depend on getting information from
NOAA.”73
As part of CRADA, private companies IBM, Amazon, Google,
Microsoft and nonprofit Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) will help
NOAA publish this supercomputer data with almost no latency,
while innovating, researching and providing feedback on the data.74
The CRADA model allows NOAA to explore what works from a
cloud perspective without risking slowing down its current data
publishing processes. Instead, the Big Data Project will take an itera‐
Looking Forward 
| 
303

75 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
76 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
77 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
78 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
79 GovLab interview with Maria Patterson, Scientific Lead, Open Science Data Cloud,
University of Chicago, Open Cloud Consortium, October 1, 2015.
tive approach, starting with a few large data sets and allowing
CRADA members themselves to determine how to most efficiently
and effective publish the data into the public domain.75 NOAA chose
this incremental approach to help maximize value by better under‐
standing which data sets are most valuable, and to encourage a feed‐
back loop among Big Data Project partners.76
CRADA is also innovative in that it asks the private companies
involved to pay the marginal cost for the data, with Goldstein noting
that “it may be open but it’s not free.”77 Dr. Maria Patterson of the
Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) echoes this sentiment, noting that
data being “freely available doesn’t mean there is not a cost associ‐
ated with it,” and in order to have a lot of data open, someone has to
be paying for storage, access and sharing. To balance this cost, there‐
fore, NOAA will not charge users for access to the data itself, but if
the cost of providing new access requires additional resources,
CRADA members will absorb that marginal cost. If successful, the
Big Data Project will represent a new and cost-effective approach to
publishing and utilizing NOAA’s vast data resources.
It is important to highlight that in addition to offering an innovative
public-private business model, the research component of the Big
Data Project is equally valuable, illustrated by the fact that the part‐
ners involved are not “contractors” but participants in a “cooperative
research and development agreement.”78 As Dr. Patterson explains,
NOAA was very deliberate in developing the CRADA approach, and
that “the entire project itself is its own research experiment—asking
how can NOAA work with partners in a mutually beneficial
arrangement to release data into an ecosystem. If the business model
fails, the research project can still succeed in identifying what works
and what does not work.”79 NOAA CIO Zach Goldstein expands
304 
| 
Chapter 14: United States’ NOAA: Opening Up Global Weather Data in Collaboration
with Businesses

80 GovLab interview with Zachary Goldstein, Chief Information Officer, NOAA, Septem‐
ber 3, 2015.
upon this sentiment, “No one else in government has looked at
building open data with big data in this way. What we’re doing that’s
unique is putting it all together and updating it with today’s technol‐
ogy. It’s possible it won’t work, and NOAA may eventually have to
resort to a more traditional pay-per-service model, but the only way
we’ll fail is if we fail to learn—if we fail to try.”80
As anticipated, the partnership with the private sector combines
three powerful resources: NOAA’s tremendous volume of high-
quality environmental data and advanced data products, private
industry’s vast infrastructure and technical capacity, and the Ameri‐
can economy’s innovation and energy. The overall goal is to create a
sustainable, market-driven ecosystem that lowers the cost barrier to
data publication, spurs economic development and creates new jobs.
From its early, closed inception to today’s Data Portal to tomorrow’s
Big Data Project, the evolution of NOAA’s data efforts represents a
powerful illustration of how opening data can have significant eco‐
nomic, social, environmental and other impacts. The changes
wrought by NOAA’s 30 petabytes of annual data have rippled
through American (and, indeed, global) life, often under the surface,
but no less powerful for that. With NOAA’s plans for expansion and
new partnerships, there is every reason to believe that further trans‐
formations await.
Looking Forward 
| 
305


CHAPTER 15
United States Opening GPS
for Civilian Use
Creating a Global Public Utility
By Andrew Young, Christina Rogawski and
Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: The Global Positioning System (GPS) has had a major
impact on both business and society—with estimated losses reach‐
ing $96 billion were the system to be somehow discontinued. GPS is
a U.S. government-owned technology that provides military and
civilian users with positioning, navigation and timing (PNT) serv‐
ices. The system was developed by the U.S. Department of Defense
in 1978 and originally restricted to military use. Following the
Korean Airlines disaster in 1983, the Reagan administration
announced that GPS would be available for civilian use. In 2000,
President Clinton announced a commitment to grant civilians
access to un-degraded GPS signals on par with those used by the
military, and in 2007, under President Bush, the Department of
Defense made that commitment permanent. Over the past 20 years,
GPS technology has led to a proliferation of commercial applica‐
tions across industries and sectors, including agriculture, construc‐
tion, 
transportation, 
aerospace 
and—especially 
with 
the
proliferation of portable devices—everyday life. In addition to creat‐
ing new efficiencies and reducing operating costs, the adoption of
GPS technology has improved safety, emergency response times and
environmental quality, and has delivered many other less-readily
quantifiable benefits.
307

1 “GPS Trackers in Fake Elephant Tusks Reveal Ivory Smuggling Route.” NPR. August 12,
2015. http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2015/08/12/431908397/gps-trackers-in-
fake-elephant-tusks-reveal-ivory-smuggling-route
Dimension of Impact: Creating Opportunity—Economic Growth
Key Takeaways:
• One of the paradigmatic examples pointed to by open data
advocates, the GPS system is not truly a data system. Rather, it is
a service—like a dial-tone. That said, its role in demonstrating
the incredible value and potential impacts of opening informa‐
tion to the public cannot be discounted.
• Open data initiatives can be self-reinforcing. When GPS was
opened for civilian use, aviation was the only explicitly named
industry that would gain access to the signal, and there was no
mention of any kind regarding the system being free of charge.
Once the system was opened, however, the impacts across
industries and sectors were so massive that it would be nearly
impossible to turn back to a more constrained system.
• Location information enabled by governments can be put to
potentially troubling ends. While GPS has created incredible
value for the global public, it has also enabled a diversity of
privacy-intruding technologies—from smartphone games that
share a user’s location with unnamed third parties to employers
tracking every move of their factory employees.
Context and Background
GPS in Our Lives Today
For most of human history, the ability to determine our exact loca‐
tion in the world at almost any time only existed in the realm of fan‐
tasy. The benefits and uses of such a capability—from easing travel
headaches to ensuring kindergartners do not venture too far from
the playground to uncovering elephant poaching rings1—are limited
only by the imagination.
The Global Positioning System (GPS) has become such a central
piece of life for so many across the globe that, despite the system
308 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

2 Easton, Richard D. Easton and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to
Smartphones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
3 Easton, Richard D. Easton and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to
Smartphones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
only becoming fully operational in the mid 1990s, “the Associated
Press uses the GPS acronym without elaboration.”2 The story of how
GPS came to occupy a nearly ubiquitous place in global life, creating
impacts across regions and sectors, touches upon the Space Race
and Cold War and involves a diversity of major technical, geopoliti‐
cal and governing decisions.
Early History of Satellite Navigation: Sputnik
The roots of this system can be traced back to October 1957, when
the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, mankind’s first satellite. A few
days after Sputnik entered orbit and captured the world’s attention,
two physicists at Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Labo‐
ratory, George Weiffenbach and William Guier, realized that they
were able to predict Sputnik’s orbits by analyzing the Doppler shift
of its radio signal as the satellite circled the earth.3 By relying on the
frequency of the Sputnik signals, which shifted between 500 to 1,500
hertz, they were able to calculate the satellite’s orbital path with great
reliability.
Weiffenbach and Guier were still in the midst of their work when
the Sputnik radio went dead. However, a month later, in November
1957, the Russians launched a second satellite, Sputnik II. This one
broadcast on two radio frequencies at once, a fact which not only
made the signal more reliable but also helped the scientists get a
more accurate fix on the satellite’s location.
Even more importantly, the early work with Sputnik I and II led to a
central insight that helped lay the groundwork for modern GPS. Sci‐
entists soon realized that if satellites could be tracked from the
ground by measuring the frequency of their radio signals, then con‐
versely, the locations of receivers on the ground could also be
tracked by their distance from the satellites. This realization has
been described as the “conceptual foundation of modern GPS”;
indeed, much the same system is used today by the GPS in our
smartphones or cars.
Context and Background 
| 
309

4 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
5 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
6 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
Early History of Satellite Navigation: Transit
During the 1960s, Guier and Weiffenbach built on the research they
had conducted with Sputnik to develop the first satellite-based navi‐
gation system. This work was done in collaboration with the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) which led to
the deployment of the first operational satellite navigation system,
Transit. Although Transit was invented by the United States as a
military technology, it was accessible to any user—including both
Argentina and Great Britain who used Transit as a navigational aid
for their navies during the 1982 Falklands War.4
Transit was an extraordinarily effective technology, but it did have a
couple of serious limitations. First, Transit satellites were not always
within range, meaning that a ship at sea might have to wait several
hours before one of the Transit satellites passed overhead. This was
obviously a problem for any potential user or application that relied
on continuous updates. In addition, because Transit was a two-
dimensional system, a receiving unit could calculate only its latitude
and longitude, but not altitude. So, for example, a user would know
how far north, south, east or west he was, but not how high above
the land or sea.5
Project Description and Inception
The Arrival of GPS
In 1978, the first GPS satellite was launched into orbit—20 years
after Sputnik first inspired the system to be developed, and 14 years
after Transit paved the way for space-based navigation. The GPS sys‐
tem began with a $150 million budget. This relatively meager fund‐
ing, “and the fact that this program lacked the self-evident drama of
the Apollo program,” led to the completion of the fully operational
GPS Network taking “about twice as long as putting a man on the
moon.”6 Indeed, it was not until 1995—three decades after the idea
310 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

7 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
8 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
9 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
10 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
for GPS was initially developed—that constant, uninterrupted
worldwide GPS coverage was achieved shortly after the 24th GPS sat‐
ellite began to orbit the Earth.7
Who Deserves the Credit?
To this day, significant debate exists regarding who deserves the
lion’s share of the credit for GPS. Bradford Parkinson, the air force
engineer who brought together the joint program that helped to ini‐
tiate GPS, is one likely candidate. Parkinson and his collaborator,
Aerospace Corporation president Ivan Getting, have received
numerous honors “for conceiving and creating the GPS system.”
However, Navy engineer Roger Easton was in many ways the indi‐
vidual who put those concepts into practice. Easton created and hel‐
ped to deploy TIMATION satellites. TIMATION was a precursor to
GPS that built on Transit’s early advances and included many of the
central components of GPS, including space-based atomic clocks.
All three of the men are now in the National Inventors Hall of Fame.
8
The ideas behind GPS date back even before Parkinson, Getting and
Easton began to move GPS forward in earnest. In 1964, Roy E.
Anderson of the General Electric Corporate Research and Develop‐
ment Center was the first person to propose a navigation system
based on 24 satellite coverage in a mid-altitude configuration. This
passive design is a central feature of today’s GPS system.9 Moreover,
the spread-spectrum signal structure that enables GPS signals to be
received on Earth was invented in World War II by actress Hedy
Lamarr and composer George Antheil.10
Project Description and Inception 
| 
311

11 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
12 “GPS Accuracy.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/systems/gps/performance/accuracy/
13 “Augmentation Systems.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/systems/augmentations/
14 http://www.gps.gov/governance/excom/
GPS Today
Today, GPS is enabled by a collection of satellites weighing around
two tons each that orbit the Earth at an altitude of around 12,500
miles. In the interest of ensuring constant signals from the satellites
reaching Earth, the GPS satellites are separated across six orbital
planes. The satellites orbit the earth approximately every 12 hours.11
The system available for military, commercial and civilian use is
highly accurate, with the typical GPS signal in space providing a
“worst case” pseudorange accuracy of 7.8 meters at a 95 percent
confidence level. Note that this is not the same as user accuracy, as
pseudorange is the distance from a GPS satellite to a receiver. The
actual accuracy for users depends on uncontrollable variables such
as atmospheric effects, sky blockage and receiver quality; however,
data from the FAA shows that their high-quality GPS receivers pro‐
vide better than 3.5 meter horizontal accuracy.12 The average citizen
or commercial users typically does not need higher levels of accu‐
racy; however, greater accuracy is attainable through GPS augmen‐
tation systems, which in some cases enable real-time positioning to
within a few centimeters.13
Currently, the GPS system is governed by a diversity of U.S. Govern‐
ment departments and agencies, which are coordinated by the
National Executive Committee for Space-Based Positioning, Naviga‐
tion and Timing, which was created by President George W. Bush in
2004. The secretaries of defense and transportation were tasked with
jointly chairing the committee, along with officials from the State,
Interior, Agriculture, Commerce and Homeland Security Depart‐
ments, as well as representatives from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
NASA acting as members. Individuals from the White House and
FCC also act as liaisons.14 The permanent staff of the Committee
make up the National Coordination Office Space-Based PNT
(NCO).
In addition to collaborating with industry to ensure the system
serves the needs of GPS users, the central role of the NCO is to
312 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

15 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
16 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
17 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
18 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
coordinate the efforts of the many agencies involved in the GPS pro‐
gram—with particular focus on “modernization, funding, policy,
interference detection, spectrum management, international cooper‐
ation, and applications,” and on providing transparency among the
agencies involved in governing the system.15
The Nature of GPS Data
One of the key features of GPS, responsible in many ways for its
widespread adoption, is the fact that it has a “passive” character.
Hiawatha Bray, technology columnist for The Boston Globe and
author of You Are Here: From the Compass to GPS, the History and
Future of How We Find Ourselves, likens it to “the same way any
number of people can tune in to a radio station at the same time.”16
In other words, since a GPS user does not directly interact with the
navigational satellites, but rather simply accesses the signals pro‐
vided by those satellites, the number of simultaneous users is
unlimited, a fact that makes the whole system much more robust
and scalable.
Despite its robustness and scalability, however, there are some
aspects of GPS that are surprisingly fragile. For example, GPS sig‐
nals are relatively low-power “line-of-sight” communications. This
means that while they can pass through clouds and other thin mate‐
rials with little trouble, solid objects (e.g., buildings, walls and even
tree foliage) can significantly disrupt reception.17 In addition, the
precision needed for GPS to successfully complete its many duties is
extremely high. A time signal error of a billionth of a second can
result in a GPS receiver missing its mark by about a foot.18
Finally, it is important to recognize that, while references to “GPS
data” are common, as Jason Kim, senior adviser at the NCO states,
GPS is actually “not really a data service at all. ... GPS is a measure‐
Project Description and Inception 
| 
313

19 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
20 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
21 “Part 1: The Origins of GPS, and the Pioneers Who Launched the System.” GPS World.
May 1, 2010. http://gpsworld.com/origins-gps-part-1/
22 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
ment tool. It’s just a beacon that, instead of being on the ground, it’s
in space—like a lighthouse or a radio tower, and you just measure
your distance from it.”19 So while GPS is often seen as a paradigmatic
example of how government openness can create major global
impacts, the tendency to label the system as an “open data” initiative
is not entirely accurate.
How GPS Became Open
While not truly an open data service, as Kim puts it: “[GPS has]
been our gift to the world.”20 This is all the more remarkable given
that GPS originally emerged as an American military technology. Its
general adoption for civilian purposes, by companies and govern‐
ments around the world, is a significant development.
In fact, although the popular narrative of GPS often describes a sys‐
tem created exclusively for military use that was later made available
for civilian use, GPS was always intended to be opened for civilians
as well. Co-developers Bradford Parkinson and Stephen Powers
have written that, “Contrary to some versions of GPS history, from
the very beginning, GPS was configured to be a dual-use system.”21
Nonetheless, it was a major civilian tragedy, the 1983 downing of
Korean Air Lines (KAL) Flight 007, that provided the moment dur‐
ing which to push GPS from being primarily a military technology
to widespread civilian adoption.
The KAL disaster was a significant milestone in Cold War history. It
occurred on September 1, 1983, when the civilian airliner, on a flight
from New York City to Seoul, strayed accidentally into Soviet air‐
space and was shot down by a Soviet fighter jet. All 269 people on
board died. The fact that the plane deviated from its flight plan
despite having “triple-redundant inertial navigation systems (INS)
on board”22 quickly made the potential value of GPS in averting such
314 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

23 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
24 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
25 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
26 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
27 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
future tragedies clear. Fifteen days after the disaster, White House
Press Secretary Larry Speakes announced that: “World opinion is
united in its determination that this awful tragedy must not be
repeated. As a contribution to the achievement of this objective, the
president has determined that the United States is prepared to make
available to civilian aircraft the facilities of its Global Positioning
System when it becomes operational in 1988.”23
Bray, author of You Are Here, argues that, “causes of the crash aside,
Reagan’s seemingly magnanimous offer of GPS technology was a
clever propaganda coup, no more.” He points to a notice from the
Federal Register posted two years prior saying the completed net‐
work “will be made available to the worldwide civil/commercial
community within the limits of national security considerations.”24
This posting was developed by the National Oceanic and Atmos‐
pheric Administration (NOAA) and included detailed technical
standards for the civilian use of GPS and, at least in part, was meant
to assure the surveying industry—eventually a key user of GPS, as
discussed below—that GPS would be available for its use when
ready.25
Since the administration’s statement came at a time when only a few
GPS satellites were in the air, and GPS did not yet exist as a fully
operational service, it was, as Kim puts it, “kind of a futuristic state‐
ment.” In fact, “it was really addressing civil aviation, but people
read it to mean all civil applications,” which obviously was the even‐
tual outcome, but the statement “didn’t say anything about free” at
the time.26
It is only since that time that GPS has grown into the ubiquitous
“global utility”27 used in millions of applications and devices today.
During that time, the nature of GPS has also changed, growing more
Project Description and Inception 
| 
315

28 “FACT SHEET: U.S. Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Policy.” http://
www.aopa.org/-/media/Files/AOPA/Home/News/All-News/News-Archives/2004/
Importance-of-GPS-to-GA-is-affirmed-by-Bush/041216space_facts.pdf
29 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
recognizably “open.” Indeed, in 2004, the Bush administration
released a policy adding another layer of openness to GPS. The U.S.
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Policy enshrined a
number of principles, including a commitment to “provide on a
continuous, worldwide basis civil space-based, positioning, naviga‐
tion and timing services free of direct user fees for civil, commercial
and scientific uses, and for homeland security through the Global
Positioning System and its augmentations, and provide open, free
access to information necessary to develop and build equipment to
use these services.”28
According to Kim, the relevance of this announcement goes beyond
just a commitment to sharing technical specifications; it also shows
that innovators can depend on “the U.S. government to meet certain
standards of performance in terms of accuracy, availability, reliabil‐
ity, continuity. ... The stability of all those commitments over time ...
has really helped the private sector rely on and trust GPS.”29
Continuously Operating Reference Station (CORS)
While there is significant debate regarding whether or not the GPS
system truly fits the open data model, the closely related Continu‐
ously Operating Reference Station (CORS) system, on the other
hand, exists comfortably within its contours. The CORS system is a
massive network of GPS receivers and antennas that constantly col‐
lect data at specific sites. The satellite data collected is then transmit‐
ted to the National Geodetic Survey (NGS) and NOAA, where
quality control is conducted before making that data available to the
user.
The network was originally designed by the father of CORS, Bill
Strange, the chief geodesist and scientist at NGS and NOAA in 1993.
The Network started with a single site in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
316 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

30 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
31 Leveson, Irving. “Socio-Economic Benefits Study: Scoping the Value of CORS and
GRAV-D.” Final Report Prepared for the National Geodetic Survey. January 2009.
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/PUBS_LIB/Socio-EconomicBenefitsofCORSandGRAV-D.pdf
32 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
33 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
34 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
Today, the 2,000 sites found in the CORS network cover nearly the
entirety of the U.S.30
CORS users process GPS data that they have collected at a location
of interest, together with associated GPS data from a CORS site, to
calculate the coordinates of their data-collection points relative to
the CORS site. With its associated tools such as OPUS (Online Posi‐
tioning User Service), CORS provides free access to highly accurate
(centimeter level) positions in the National Spatial Reference System
(NSRS) using GPS, yielding a substantial improvement over “stand
alone” GPS which can have meters of inaccuracy.31
The CORS Network not only provides information to users free of
charge, it also exists as a cross-sector collaboration in itself. In addi‐
tion to partnering with the Coast Guard, which has over 50 stations
around the coast and inland waterways, “we partner with academic
institutions, universities, state [Departments of Transportation] and
the private sector. They follow a set of guidelines to build a uniform
infrastructure, and then we manage it from there,” says Dr. Neil
Weston, chief scientist of the National Geodetic Survey, part of the
National Ocean Service within NOAA.32 Today, the CORS network
has over 230 partners. This system allows NGS and NOAA to over‐
see a largely uniform network without being responsible for deploy‐
ing and maintaining the equipment found at each site. That
information was made available to the public almost from the start,
when the “Internet was still in its infancy.”33
Given its user-centricity, NGS’s Geodetic Services Division has made
a significant effort “to educate the public on how they could use this
data; how it could be more efficient for them to collect it, what the
benefits were, and what the numbers meant.”34 This focus on prepar‐
Project Description and Inception 
| 
317

35 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
36 Pham, Nam D. “The Economic Benefits of Commercial GPS Use in the U.S. and The
Costs of Potential Disruption.” NDP Consulting. June 2011. http://www.gpsalliance.org/
docs/GPS_Report_June_21_2011.pdf
37 Pham, Nam D. “The Economic Benefits of Commercial GPS Use in the U.S. and The
Costs of Potential Disruption.” NDP Consulting. June 2011. http://www.gpsalliance.org/
docs/GPS_Report_June_21_2011.pdf
ing the public to make use of the data has taken the form of webi‐
nars, in-person training sessions, conferences and more.
Impact
Like many other examples included in this report, the impact of GPS
can be hard to capture. Unlike other examples, however, that diffi‐
culty does not stem from limited impact or a paucity of evidence
and data. On the contrary, it is hard to capture the impact of GPS
precisely for the opposite reason—because it has become so far-
reaching and central to so many aspects of our lives. Nonetheless, in
what follows, we attempt a broad overview of some of the most
important ways in which GPS has transformed everyday life.
Economic Impact
According to Kim, it is a mistake to try to capture the impact of GPS
primarily in economic terms. Pointing out that GPS was created for
a range of purposes—including national security and public safety—
he argues: “If there are economic benefits on top of that, well that’s
great, but that’s not why we fielded the system. That’s not why we
continue to field the system.”35 Still, as with many technologies that
have a wide variety of uses, examining the economic impact of GPS
is a useful way to analyze the wider breadth of its impact. It allows us
to better understand the sheer variety of fields that GPS has affected.
According to a 2011 NDP Consulting study, the U.S. government
spent around $19.6 billion to build and maintain GPS satellites and
ground stations.36 The same report estimated that a complete degra‐
dation of the GPS signal would cost the United States $96 billion
annually—with the vast majority of the impact being the result of
lost productivity for commercial GPS users ($67.6 billion).37
Here, we examine a sampling of impacts across three industries:
318 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

38 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
39 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
40 “Aviation.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/aviation/
41 “Aviation.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/aviation/
Aviation
In 1984, defense contractor Rockwell International successfully
flew a private jet from Cedar Rapids, Iowa to Paris—the first
instance of a transcontinental flight relying exclusively on GPS
for navigation. While the flight took four days due to the limited
coverage of the GPS network at the time, the flight ultimately
concluded within 20 feet of its targeted destination.38 Pilots
began using GPS equipment in 1993 as the primary means of en
route navigation—though restrictions existed during landings.
In March 1994, Continental Airlines testified before the House
Subcommittee on Technology, Environment, and Aviation that
GPS could help the industry save $5 billion annually as a result
of reducing delays and the better-targeted routing of flights.
Moreover, Continental itself was estimated to save $1.9 million
each year as a result of fewer cancellations thanks to the ability
to alter routes to avoid weather concerns.39
In addition to millions in cost savings, GPS allows aircrafts to
fly pre-established routes “from waypoint to waypoint, where
waypoints do not depend on ground infrastructure,”40 enabling
greater flexibility, efficiency and accuracy in route planning and
execution, particularly when travelling across areas without
suitable ground surveillance or navigation equipment, such as
across oceans. GPS has also helped improve approaches to air‐
ports, making landing during poor visibility conditions safer, or
even feasible under what were previously prohibitive circum‐
stances.41
Engineering and Construction
GPS also increases productivity in engineering and construc‐
tion, primarily by providing highly accurate mapping, machine
guiding and measurements for a variety of processes such as
surveying, excavating, transportation management, urban plan‐
ning and jobsite safety monitoring. Often, a single GPS device
can achieve in just a few hours what used to take several people
Impact 
| 
319

42 Pham, Nam D. “The Economic Benefits of Commercial GPS Use in the U.S. and The
Costs of Potential Disruption.” NDP Consulting. June 2011. http://www.gpsalliance.org/
docs/GPS_Report_June_21_2011.pdf
43 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
44 “Roads & Highways.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/roads/
45 “Roads & Highways.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/roads/
many hours, using numerous instruments and labor-intensive
processes. The resulting savings of this increased efficiency are
estimated to be $7.6 billion in construction labor and $1.3 bil‐
lion in capital machinery and equipment, according to the 2011
NDP Consulting study.42
Transportation
In the early days of GPS, the Department of Transportation esti‐
mated that traffic congestion cost over $73 billion in lost pro‐
ductivity annually.43 GPS helps reduce this congestion by
making traffic and mass transit management systems more
accurate and efficient. Local and federal transportation agencies
use GPS to help survey their road and highway networks and to
locate, map and analyze road features such as service stations,
emergency services and supplies, entry and exit ramps, and
road damage. GPS is also used to provide more accurate traffic
updates to drivers and the media, such as construction or an
accident ahead, and additional research is being conducted to
examine how GPS can help enable minimal vehicle control
when there is a clear need for action, such as the predeployment
of air bags.44
Using GPS technology to better track and more accurately fore‐
cast the movement of freight has “made a logistical revolution”
possible, for example through the application of what is known
as “time-definite delivery.” In time-definite delivery, companies
can use GPS to guarantee delivery and pickup at a set time, over
both short or long distances.45 Aside from providing customers
the convenience of near real-time status of their package, deliv‐
ery companies like FedEx, UPS and even the U.S. Postal Service
use GPS to improve services and reduce costs in three critical
ways: 1) reducing fuel use via accurate monitoring of driver
routes and idling times; 2) pinpointing vehicle dispatching; 3)
providing roadside service and updates if something happens to
320 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

46 Galloway, Ryan. 5 Ways GPS Tracking Gives Businesses a Competitive Edge. April 23,
2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/fedex/2013/04/23/5-ways-gps-tracking-gives-
businesses-a-competitive-edge/
47 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
48 Jackson, William. “The serious side of GPS, where timing is everything.” GCN. Novem‐
ber 12, 2013. http://gcn.com/articles/2013/11/12/gps-timing-position.aspx
49 Bach, Andrew F. “GPS & precision timing’s role in the financial services sector.” Juniper
Networks. 2014. http://www.gps.gov/governance/advisory/meetings/2014-12/bach.pdf
50 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
51 “Timing.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/timing/
a vehicle en route.46 The use and future of GPS in transportation
systems is further detailed below.
Precise Timing
In addition to its location services, another benefit and major
impact of GPS stems from the way it has allowed for space-based
worldwide clock synchronization. Today, GPS satellites act as the
global standard for precision timing.47 The resulting split-second
accuracy provides major benefits to several industries. Telecommu‐
nications companies, for instance use GPS to synchronize call hand‐
offs when a phone moves between areas serviced by different
cellular stations.48 Second, accurate timing helps financial compa‐
nies reduce costs and improve algorithms, while improving market
transparency and regulatory compliance.49 As Kim notes: “Financial
networks will have their requirements for timing accuracy going
down to the microsecond within a couple of years. The only way
you can get that is either run your own atomic clock, or use GPS.”50
Finally, time synchronization across the power grid enables the effi‐
cient transmission and distribution of power and enables power
companies and utilities to quickly identify the site of power line
breaks, which assists in avoiding larger-scale blackouts.51
Smartphones / Mobile Navigation
Despite the relatively short period of time during which GPS has
been available to the public, the system has enabled the creation of a
massive consumer industry, and seen that industry’s disruption by
an even more omnipresent technology. In many ways, the story of
Impact 
| 
321

52 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
53 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
54 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
55 “The Smartphone Difference.” Pew Research Center. April 2015. http://www.pewinter
net.org/files/2015/03/PI_Smartphones_0401151.pdf
56 Zickuhr, Kathryn. “Three-quarters of smartphone owners use location-based services.”
Pew Research Center. May 11, 2012. http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/05/11/three-
quarters-of-smartphone-owners-use-location-based-services/
57 The 2015 Pew report found that over two-thirds of smartphone users at least occasion‐
ally use GPS for turn-by-turn navigation while driving, 25 percent to get public transit
information and 11 percent to reserve a taxi or car service. The survey did not, how‐
ever, ask respondents about their general use of GPS or location-enabled apps. “About
the December Week 1 and Week 3 Omnibus Survey.” Pew Research Center. http://
www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/03/MethodsAndSurveyQuestions.pdf
consumer GPS from its initial release through its continued matur‐
ity has been the move from stand-alone GPS receivers to GPS-
enabled smartphone applications.
Mobile navigation became an official heading in the NPD Group’s
market share annual report in 2004, with the industry garnering
$72.8 million in revenues, chiefly among the top brands of Magel‐
lan, Garmin, Pioneer, Alpine and Kenwood.52 By the end of 2009,
more than a third of households in the U.S. were believed to have at
least one personal navigation device.53
While the industry remained a market force over the next decade,
especially market leader Garmin, smartphones began to eat into rev‐
enues in earnest in 2008 when Apple launched its first iPhone with
GPS capabilities. By mid-2009, there were over 3,000 navigation
applications in Apple’s App Store.54 As of 2015, a Pew Research Cen‐
ter survey found that nearly two-thirds of Americans own smart‐
phones.55 Back in 2012, when only 46 percent of Americans owned
smartphones, Pew found that almost three-quarters of those smart‐
phone owners used some type of GPS service on their phone.56 If the
prevalence of GPS usage among smartphone owners remained con‐
sistent, then in 2015, around 150 million Americans used GPS-
enabled location services on their smartphones.57
While turn-by-turn navigation remains the quintessential use of
GPS on smartphones, the system enables a wide diversity of uses,
322 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

58 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
59 http://www.gps-coordinates.net/
60 Cassavoy, Liane. “21 Awesome GPS and Location-Aware Apps for Android.” PCWorld.
July 31, 2012. http://www.pcworld.com/article/260112/21_awesome_gps_and_loca
tion_aware_apps_for_android.html#slide22
61 “Top GPS-based apps for everything from traffic to travel.” Qualcomm Snapdragon
Blog. June 27, 2013. https://www.qualcomm.com/news/snapdragon/2013/06/27/top-gps-
based-apps-everything-traffic-travel
62 Cassavoy, Liane. “21 Awesome GPS and Location-Aware Apps for Android.” PCWorld.
July 31, 2012. http://www.pcworld.com/article/260112/21_awesome_gps_and_loca
tion_aware_apps_for_android.html#slide22
63 Cassavoy, Liane. “21 Awesome GPS and Location-Aware Apps for Android.” PCWorld.
July 31, 2012. http://www.pcworld.com/article/260112/21_awesome_gps_and_loca
tion_aware_apps_for_android.html#slide22
64 “Top GPS-based apps for everything from traffic to travel.” Qualcomm Snapdragon
Blog. June 27, 2013. https://www.qualcomm.com/news/snapdragon/2013/06/27/top-gps-
based-apps-everything-traffic-travel
65 https://www.uber.com/features
including check-in services like Foursquare and location-aware rec‐
ommendation engines like Yelp.58 Some widely used GPS-enabled
applications include:
• Google Maps: provides users with directions via car, transport
or walking, integrating real-time updates to transit service
changes or traffic delays59
• Nike+ Running: uses smartphone GPS to track users’ location
and speed as they run,60 similar to MapMyRun, which lets users
record and share their workouts and goals61
• Waze: a social GPS navigation app that crowdsources traffic and
road data, including accidents and speed traps, from users62
• GasBuddy: finds and directs users to nearby gas stations sorted
by price and distance, including details on other services avail‐
able63
• Life 360: creates private, invite-only maps showing where family
members are—without sending dozens of text messages64
• Uber: hails taxies, private cars or ride shares and allows users to
pay for their ride via phone65
Impact 
| 
323

66 http://www.yelp.com/about
67 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
68 “Public Safety & Disaster Relief.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/safety/
69 “2014 West Africa Ebola Response.” OpenStreetMap. http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/
wiki/2014_West_Africa_Ebola_Response
70 “Public Safety & Disaster Relief.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/applications/safety/
• Yelp: locates and provides user-submitted reviews of businesses
and restaurants near users66
Each of these mobile applications illustrates the growth of a whole
new economic sector based on GPS, digital location-based services,
the effects and impacts of which are still being discovered.
Public Safety and Emergencies
While the rise of cellular telephones is often credited with increasing
public safety due to citizens’ increased ability to reach authorities in
the event of an emergency, the true game-changer for public safety
came when a great number of cell phones became equipped with
GPS. Rather than simply being able to report an emergency, often
with little ability to pinpoint the exact location where it occurred,
GPS capabilities enabled emergency response personnel to reach the
exact location of the affected parties, whether the individual report‐
ing the emergency was familiar with the location or not.67
Reducing the time to locate an individual in need saves lives, partic‐
ularly in disaster events. For example, teams used GPS, combined
with other mapping technologies, to find victims, provide aid and
improve relief effort response for global disasters such as the 2004
Indian Ocean tsunami, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005,68 and
the Ebola outbreak of 2014.69 GPS is also used in tracking storms,
hurricanes, floods, tornados and wildfires, mitigating both human
and economic loss.70
In addition, a host of new applications and benefits use GPS tech‐
nology to enable new ways of increasing public safety. One good
example is the popular application ChildChecker—a safety vest mar‐
keted by Purple Scout that constantly reports a child’s exact location
to schools and day care centers charged with monitoring their safety.
324 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

71 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
72 http://www.outdoorsafetygps.com
73 http://www.motosafety.com
74 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
75 Leveson, Irving. “Socio-Economic Benefits Study: Scoping the Value of CORS and
GRAV-D.” Final Report Prepared for the National Geodetic Survey. January 2009.
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/PUBS_LIB/Socio-EconomicBenefitsofCORSandGRAV-D.pdf
76 Leveson, Irving. “Socio-Economic Benefits Study: Scoping the Value of CORS and
GRAV-D.” Final Report Prepared for the National Geodetic Survey. January 2009.
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/PUBS_LIB/Socio-EconomicBenefitsofCORSandGRAV-D.pdf
77 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
71 Other examples include SPOT, a personal tracker for outdoor
enthusiasts like hikers or skiers,72 and MOTOsafety, a tool allowing
parents to monitor teen driving safety.73
CORS Impacts
Looking exclusively at CORS, the system is being used across a
diversity of industries, with uses including surveying, engineering,
vehicle tracking, container tracking and more.74 In 2008, CORS data
was downloaded 10.6 million times.75 A study prepared for the NGS
in 2009 found that “the order of magnitude of CORS benefits is esti‐
mated as $758 million per year. ... If benefits grew at a 15 percent
annual rate, less than the recent growth rate of 22 percent, the order
of magnitude of the present value of CORS benefits over the next 15
years would be $18.5 billion.”76
Industry is not the only sector making use of CORS. NOAA itself
uses CORS “to monitor the ionosphere; to measure the troposphere,
which helps with short-term weather modeling.” Neil Weston notes,
“We can estimate tectonic plate motion and coastal subsidence;
enhance tsunami warning systems.” Certain academic institutions
also “download all of the CORS data that’s collected every night.
They use the CORS data to perform large simulations.”77
Impact 
| 
325

78 Leveson, Irving. “Socio-Economic Benefits Study: Scoping the Value of CORS and
GRAV-D.” Final Report Prepared for the National Geodetic Survey. January 2009.
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/PUBS_LIB/Socio-EconomicBenefitsofCORSandGRAV-D.pdf
79 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
Among other aims, CORS enables the analysis of data related to
plate tectonics, precipitable water vapor, free electrons in the atmos‐
phere and much more, to the ends of:78
• Defining legal marine and land boundaries
• Creating storm surge models
• Monitoring sea level rise
• Enabling restoration of coastal habitat
• Improving coastal resilience
• Predicting flooding vulnerability
• Mapping shorelines
• Predicting earthquakes
• Assessing hurricane damage
• Improving weather prediction
• Measuring space weather
Challenges
Although GPS has grown and spread rapidly, it has faced, and con‐
tinues to face, a number of obstacles that either limit its spread or its
potential to effect change. These include:
Governance Challenges
Effectively governing GPS poses significant challenges given the
many agencies involved in the system and the diversity of needs that
it satisfies. As Jason Kim of NCO puts it: “Wrangling all the different
cats under one roof is difficult because there really aren’t that many
governmental programs that touch so many different parts of the
government—pretty much everyone uses GPS.”79
326 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

80 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
81 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
82 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
Not only are many entities involved in the decision-making pro‐
cesses regarding GPS, but different actors also take the lead on dif‐
ferent issues. While the National Executive Committee for Space-
Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) is co-chaired by
the Department of Defense and Department of Transportation, the
DoD is the main driver of GPS in general and the DoT acts as the
lead agency for civil uses. The FCC, on the other hand, handles all
issues related to the private sector and any other non-federal users
of the GPS spectrum. Making matters even more complicated, the
Department of Commerce handles federal use of the system, while
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration
(NTIA) has authority over the GPS spectrum.80
All this overlapping authority can lead to turf battles and frequent
confusion. Because a specific issue or problem may cover multiple
dimensions, it is often unclear which agency or department has
authority in a particular case. Kim adds, however, that one concern
(and thus one agency) often trumps all others: “When it comes
down to the nitty-gritty, hard decisions, who wins out? Well, it’s usu‐
ally National Security because they’re paying the bills and we’re just
along for the ride.”81
Funding and U.S. Policymaking
The initial investments in GPS have of course long since been recou‐
ped. But funding for any new challenges or investments remains
challenging. This challenge is closely related to another challenge:
GPS’ reliance on U.S. Government decision-making, particularly in
these fiscally challenged times. As Kim notes, whenever the possibil‐
ity of expansion or spreading GPS is considered, “that’s considered a
new start and basically, any new start under this current fiscal envi‐
ronment is impossible. ... It’s kind of a sad situation, but it’s true.”82
A deeper, underlying concern here relates to the U.S.’ central role in
maintaining and running GPS. This role continues to elicit some
Challenges 
| 
327

83 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
84 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
85 Thurm, Scott and Yukari Iwatani Kane. “Your Apps Are Watching You.” The Wall Street
Journal. December 17, 2010. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424052748704694004576020083703574602
86 Timberg, Craig. “Is Uber’s rider database a sitting duck for hackers?” The Washington
Post. December 1, 2014. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/
2014/12/01/is-ubers-rider-database-a-sitting-duck-for-hackers/
international concern, whether over the U.S.’ willingness to keep
funding needed investments (for example, to ensure that updates to
the system allow for backward compatibility)83 or in ensuring that
the system will remain open to international actors and will not
return to the two-track system (one for civilian use, one for mili‐
tary) that used to exist. Such concerns were heightened in the wake
of the September 11 terrorist attacks, when some observers feared
the U.S. might deliberately degrade a system that could in theory be
used by terrorists to target the U.S. itself. Today, such concerns are
largely unfounded; the current generation of GPS satellites that
began to be deployed in 2014 do not have the hardware capability to
reintroduce selective availability.84
Privacy Concerns
The increased adoption of GPS, driven in large part by a prolifera‐
tion of GPS-enabled devices, has also led to growing concerns over
privacy. While GPS allows individuals to know exactly where they
are, it also often allows the makers of devices and applications to
access the same information. In a 2010 report, the Wall Street Jour‐
nal found that nearly half (47 out of 101) of the most popular smart‐
phone applications share users’ location with third parties. It is
important to note that many of these applications do not require
access to users’ location in order to perform their core functions.85
They may nonetheless share this data with companies (such as
advertisers) or even government agencies. Similar concerns over
privacy have swirled around car manufacturers and popular ride-
sharing services, many of which collect potentially sensitive
location-based information about individuals.86
328 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

87 “Geolocation Privacy Legislation.” GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/policy/legislation/gps-
act/
88 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
89 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
In 2011, a bill was introduced in Congress titled The Geolocation
Privacy and Surveillance Act (GPS Act). The bill, sponsored by Rep.
Jason Chaffetz and Sen. Ron Wyden, sought to limit government
surveillance using geolocation signals from mobile phones and GPS
devices. The bill was reintroduced in 2015, but, as of early 2016, has
not been passed.87 Regardless of such efforts, however, concerns over
privacy persist. If left unaddressed or unchecked, they have the
potential to reduce trust and thus limit the spread (and potential
benefits) of GPS technology.
GPS “Jamming” / Hacking / Security
As GPS grows in popularity and becomes increasingly intertwined
with networked devices, the security challenges are also likely to
grow. The potential impact of a successful hack into the system
could be devastating. As Kim notes: “These satellites are up there.
They’re pretty much sitting ducks. If anyone wants to try to mess
with them, either through jamming or actually attacking the satel‐
lites—there’s just so many ways that you could massively disrupt our
security, our economy, our safety.”88
The potential impact of an attack that would degrade or otherwise
affect GPS signals was felt in 2010, when the Newark Airport found
that its new ground-based augmentation system (GBAS)—a system
designed to improve the precision of GPS to aid in flight landings—
was degrading intermittently. Upon investigation, the FAA found
that GPS signals were being lost when truck drivers on the nearby
New Jersey Turnpike drove past the site’s antenna while using GPS
jammers in order to obscure their movements from managers and
dispatchers.89 While no major disasters resulted from this incident,
it heightened concerns about the potential consequences of a secu‐
rity breach.
It is because of such longstanding concerns that Kim’s office is work‐
ing to develop a ground-based system for providing redundant GPS
Challenges 
| 
329

90 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
91 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
signals in the event of any major issues with the satellites’ signals.
The U.S. government is “so concerned about fielding a backup,” he
notes, because “we recognize that GPS is a highly vulnerable system.
The technology was developed in a different era when we didn’t
have to worry about hackers or malicious threats through jam‐
ming.”90
CORS Challenges
The central challenges for the CORS system are more in line with
other open data initiatives included in this series of case studies. The
first involves standardization. NOAA found that many of the people
running its sites “wouldn’t quite configure their receivers correctly,
so it wouldn’t output all of the information necessary.” NOAA’s
ongoing outreach efforts and the continued maturity of the system
should help to mitigate the standardization challenge.
Second, at the beginning, the sheer volume of data reaching the
CORS handlers could be almost overwhelming. Weston recalls, “We
were constantly buying hard drives and big systems to do the data
management. ... Data comes in 24/7, round-the-clock, and we only
had four or five individuals to do this.” Weston himself played a cen‐
tral role in mitigating the challenge through automating much of the
process: “My scripts were refined over the years to scale up from a
handful to a hundred sites across the country to over 2,000.”91
Looking Forward
Notwithstanding the debate over whether GPS can truly be consid‐
ered an “open data” initiative or not, there is no doubt that GPS
stands as a paradigmatic example of the transformative potential
represented by accessible and freely available information. Going
forward, it is certain that its influence is likely to grow, and be felt in
a wider range of sectors and activities. We identify the following as
some of the key areas in which GPS’ impact is likely to be felt:
330 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

92 Pham, Nam D. “The Economic Benefits of Commercial GPS Use in the U.S. and The
Costs of Potential Disruption.” NDP Consulting. June 2011. http://www.gpsalliance.org/
docs/GPS_Report_June_21_2011.pdf
93 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
94 Bobkoff, Dan. “Seed by seed, acre by acre, big data is taking over the farm.” Business
Insider. September 15, 2015. http://www.businessinsider.com/big-data-and-
farming-2015-8
95 Bobkoff, Dan. “Seed by seed, acre by acre, big data is taking over the farm.” Business
Insider. September 15, 2015. http://www.businessinsider.com/big-data-and-
farming-2015-8
Precision Farming
Agriculture is one of the key industries benefiting from GPS. As far
back as 1996, around 5 percent of farmers used GPS to better target
their efforts—down to fractions of an inch—in order to avoid over‐
lapping the spread of “seeds, irrigation, fertilizers and herbicides.” A
2011 NPD Consulting study estimates that the aggregate annual
benefits of GPS to crop farming totals $19.9 billion per year.92 The
next wave is so-called precision farming, which is expected to reach
a 100 percent adoption rate by the early 2020s.93 Beyond GPS-
guided tractors and precision farming strategies, location-aware data
collected from farmers is increasingly being aggregated to yield new
insights into optimal strategies for agricultural development. Scott
Shearer, chair of the Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biologi‐
cal Engineering at Ohio State University notes that this aggregated
information can provide prescriptions to enable individual-level
farms to, for instance, plant two different hybrid plants in different
zones, allowing for improved returns—“the analytics are going to
drive the development of those prescriptions.”94
That said, major questions still remain about who owns the data
generated by farms. Companies like Monsanto and John Deere are
leading the precision farming big data revolution, and while provid‐
ing data to companies that aggregate information from many farms
can lead to better individual-level models and more strategic farm‐
ing, some remain reluctant to surrender their data to large players in
the field.95
Looking Forward 
| 
331

96 Bray, Hiawatha. You Are Here: From the Compass to the GPS, the History and Future of
How We Find Ourselves. (New York: Basic Books), 2014.
97 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
98 Solon, Olivia. “Wearable Technology Creeps into the Workplace.” Bloomberg Business.
August 7, 2015. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-08-07/wearable-
technology-creeps-into-the-workplace
99 Pullen, John Patrick. “You Asked: How Do Driverless Cars Work?” Time. February 24,
2015. http://time.com/3719270/you-asked-how-do-driverless-cars-work/
Indoor Navigation
One of the key weaknesses of GPS is the lack of indoor navigation
capabilities. Taking lessons from GPS and the multi-billion-dollar
industry it enables, private sector players are making moves to give
consumers the ability to place themselves in large indoor areas.
Companies big and small are increasingly providing detailed infor‐
mation on spaces like airports, museums and shopping malls to
improve navigation capabilities.96 Indeed, analysts predict that by
2018 the indoor location market will swell to $2.6 billion worldwide
from $449 million in 2013.97
A controversial application of indoor GPS can be seen in Amazon
warehouses, where the retail giant has its employees wear GPS tags
that, combined with a handheld scanner, direct them to the most
efficient route to move products. However, critics argue that not
only is monitoring an employee’s every movement an invasion of
privacy, but that such hyper-focus on efficiency is leading to oppres‐
sive employee surveillance, resulting in increasingly higher demands
from employers and decreasing employee morale.98
Intelligent Transportation Systems and Driverless Cars
GPS is in many ways at the heart of efforts by companies like Goo‐
gle, Apple, Tesla and others to introduce driverless cars. In a driver‐
less car, GPS defines the “mission” of the autonomous vehicle by
setting the starting and ending point of the drive. It considers all the
road options and chooses the best path.99 Of course, GPS cannot
handle every variable on the road, and to account for the many fac‐
tors and obstacles, technology and other companies are innovating
332 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

100 Pullen, John Patrick. “You Asked: How Do Driverless Cars Work?” Time. February 24,
2015. http://time.com/3719270/you-asked-how-do-driverless-cars-work/
101 https://plus.google.com/+SelfDrivingCar/posts/iMHEMH9crJb
102 Easton, Richard D. and Eric F. Frazier. GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart‐
phones. (Lincoln: Potomac Books, University of Nebraska Press), 2013.
103 GovLab interview with Jason Kim, Senior Advisor, National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, September 22, 2015.
with a form of “differential GPS” that would leverage radar and cam‐
eras to help vehicles deal with the shifting dynamics of a road.100
While the widespread use of driverless cars in many ways still
smacks of science fiction, in June 2015, Google announced that its
experimental versions eclipsed the 1 million-mile mark—the equiv‐
alent of 75 years of typical adult driving. In a Google+ post, the
Google Self-Driving Car Project team announced that, “along the
way, we’ve navigated more than 200,000 stop signs, 600,000 traffic
lights, and seen 180 million vehicles.”101 By 2040, the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers expects that autonomous vehi‐
cles will represent three-quarters of cars on the road.102
Terrestrial Backups
As mentioned above, the development of a terrestrial backup system
to mitigate the impacts of a potential GPS outage—whether inten‐
tional or otherwise—is a key priority for the U.S. government. Jason
Kim believes that, “we need it like yesterday because the vulnerabil‐
ity is the same it’s always been, but I think the recognition of it is
becoming more recognized, is becoming more acute. The threat of
exploiting that vulnerability is going way up.” The government is
looking to explore potential scenarios—from disruptive solar activ‐
ity to malicious attacks—and take steps to field a land-based alterna‐
tive in the event of an interruption to GPS service.103
Evolving the CORS System
The CORS network has two main next steps: expanding coverage to
the entire U.S., and increasing the capacity of data passing between
stations. On the first point, Weston notes that, “there are some areas
in the country—North and South Dakota, Wyoming—where there
aren’t that many CORS stations. There are enough up there to do a
Looking Forward 
| 
333

104 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
105 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
106 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
107 GovLab interview with Dr. Neil D. Weston, Chief Scientist, National Geodetic Survey,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, September 24, 2015.
certain type of positioning, but the people want the data faster.”104
This leads into the second point, for NOAA, Weston notes, “our
focus is to get the data from all the stations in real time. Once it’s
available to NOAA, we can quickly turn it over and make it available
to the public. Now, the sooner they have access to it, the sooner they
can make use of it. Near real-time data access is critical.”105 Gaining
real-time data poses a few challenges, arising from both the govern‐
ment end and the outside partner segment. Weston explains, “we
have to get all the site operators to modify their infrastructure to
send the data to us as fast as they can. We, in turn, have to quality
control that data in a fast time frame and make it available.”106
Although increasing the turnaround of CORS data is a focus,
Weston is quick to point out that “CORS data is not intended to do
real-time positioning.”107
As the world’s first and only global public utility, GPS is testament to
the incredibly deep and broad impact that can arise from a govern‐
ment opening information. Today, GPS has become such an essen‐
tial part of everyday life, so woven into the fabric of ordinary
activities, that its relatively recent creation is often overlooked.
While the debate over whether GPS should truly be labeled as “open
data” persists, the success of GPS makes clear the type of innovation,
economic development and broad social impacts that can follow
from the free flow of information to the public.
334 
| 
Chapter 15: United States Opening GPS for Civilian Use

PART V
Case Studies: Solving Public
Problems
Open data is playing an increasingly important role in solving big
public problems—from health crises to cases of institutional dis‐
crimination. Solutions often arise as a result of citizens and policy‐
makers accessing new forms of data-driven assessment of the
problems at hand. Open data also enables data-driven engagement
between stakeholders, producing more targeted interventions and
enhanced collaboration.
The case studies in this section examine:
• The coordinated sharing of data among government and inter‐
national actors during the response to the Ebola outbreak in
Sierra Leone.
• The identification of discriminatory water access decisions in
the case Kennedy v the City of Zanesville, resulting in a $10.9
million settlement for the African-American plaintiffs.
• Increased awareness among Singaporeans about the location of
hotspots for dengue fever transmission.
• Improved, data-driven emergency response following earth‐
quakes in Christchurch, New Zealand.

• Troubling privacy violations on Eightmaps related to Californi‐
ans’ political donation activity.

CHAPTER 16
Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone
Data Sharing to Improve Crisis Response
By Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: In 2014, the largest Ebola outbreak in history occurred
in West Africa. Information on Ebola cases and response efforts was
dispersed across a diversity of data collectors, and there was little
ability to get relevant data into the hands of those who could lever‐
age it. A number of data-driven initiatives sought to improve the
quality of information available to humanitarians working to
address the crisis. This case study examines three initiatives in par‐
ticular—Sierra Leone’s National Ebola Response Centre (NERC), the
United Nation’s Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) and the Ebola
GeoNode—and shows both the potential and challenges of open
data projects in combating Ebola specifically, and more generally in
addressing humanitarian crises.
Dimension of Impact: Solving Public Problems—Data-Driven
Engagement
Key Takeaways:
• Data and information have important roles to play in the battle
not just against Ebola, but more generally against a variety of
natural and man-made crises.
• However, in order to maximize that potential, it is essential to
foster the supply side of open data initiatives—i.e., to ensure the
availability of sufficient, high-quality information. This can be
especially challenging when there is no clear policy backing to
337

1 Abdulai, Saffa. “Connecting Open Data and the Right to Information in Sierra Leone.”
Open Data Research Network. http://www.opendataresearch.org/content/2014/642/
connecting-open-data-and-right-information-sierra-leone
2 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
3 http://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/SIERRA%20LEONE_FINAL
%20NATIONAL%20ACTION%20PLAN_6_15_2014_Final.pdf
4 http://sierraleone.opendataforafrica.org
5 http://sierraleone.opendataforafrica.org
push actors into compliance and to set clear standards for data
quality and format.
• Particularly during a crisis, the early stages of open data efforts
can be chaotic, and at times redundant. Improving coordination
between multiple actors working toward similar ends—though
difficult during a time of crisis—could help reduce redundancy
and lead to efforts that are greater than the sum of their parts.
Context and Background
Open Data in Sierra Leone
In 2014, Sierra Leone was ranked 78th in the Open Data Barometer, a
ranking which puts it near the bottom. It was nonetheless highligh‐
ted as a “country to watch,” due to the country’s Right to Access
Information Law, passed in 2013, which requires proactive publica‐
tion of a diversity of publicly held data and information.1 The gov‐
ernment has in recent years also made some efforts to make data
more accessible to the public in digital and non-digital formats.2
Also in 2013, Sierra Leone joined the Open Government Partner‐
ship (OGP), with open data projects representing a significant por‐
tion of its first OGP Action Plan commitments.3
One of the country’s more important open data efforts is Open Data
for Sierra Leone,4 an initiative of the African Development Bank
Group’s Open Data for Africa project. The site contains a number of
data sets and infographics focused on economics, demographics,
agriculture, energy, health care, education, food security and inter‐
national trade. Understandably, as of late 2015, the focus of the site
appeared to be largely on Ebola cases and fatalities.5
338 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

6 “Ebola virus disease—Fact Sheet.” World Health Organization. Updated January 2016.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/
7 “Ebola (Ebola Virus Disease)—Signs and Symptoms.” Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/symptoms/
8 “Ebola (Ebola Virus Disease)—Outbreaks.” Centers for Disease Control and Preven‐
tion. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/
9 “Ebola (Ebola Virus Disease)—Outbreaks Chronology: Ebola Virus Disease.” Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/history/
chronology.html
10 Garrett, Laurie. “Ebola’s Lessons: How the WHO Mishandled the Crisis.” Foreign
Affairs. September/October 2015. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/west-africa/
2015-08-18/ebolas-lessons
The 2014 Ebola Outbreak
Ebola virus disease (EVD) was first discovered during two simulta‐
neous outbreaks in 1976, one in Sudan and the other in the Demo‐
cratic Republic of Congo. The disease takes its name from the Ebola
River, where the Congolese outbreak first occurred,6 and its symp‐
toms include fever, severe headache, muscle pain, weakness, fatigue,
diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and uncontrollable hemorrhag‐
ing.7
In 2014, the first ever Ebola outbreak to occur in West Africa was
also the largest outbreak of the disease in history, and, according to
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the “first
Ebola epidemic the world has ever known.”8 From March 2014 to
September 2015, 28,355 cases of Ebola were reported, over 66 times
the number of cases reported in the previous (second-biggest) out‐
break, which occurred in 2000-2001 in Uganda.9
The disease quickly spread across countries in West Africa—particu‐
larly Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia. The epidemic most likely
spread so rapidly as a result of traditional burial practices and rituals
that put family members of the deceased and those tasked with
burying bodies at high risk for infection. Porous borders between
the three countries also played an important role.10 In September
2014, the UN Security Council declared Ebola a “threat to interna‐
Context and Background 
| 
339

11 United Nations Security Council Resolution 2177 (2014). http://www.ifrc.org/docs/
IDRL/UN%20SC%20Res.pdf
12 Spooner, Samantha. “Ebola could kill 100,000 and needs $1 billion to defeat, but
Nigeria shows the world how it’s done.” Mail & Guardian Africa. September 21, 2014.
http://mgafrica.com/article/2014-09-19-as-the-war-against-ebola-rages-nigeria-shows-
the-world-how-its-done
13 Garrett, Laurie. “Ebola’s Lessons: How the WHO Mishandled the Crisis.” Foreign
Affairs. September/October 2015. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/west-africa/
2015-08-18/ebolas-lessons
14 “UNMEER-WHO Transition Message.” World Health Organization Regional Office for
Africa. http://www.afro.who.int/en/sierra-leone/press-materials/item/7897-unmeer-who-
transition-message.html
tional peace and security”;11 experts predicted that the disease could
kill 100,000 people and require $1 billion to successfully contain.12
On September 19, 2014, the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER) was established.13 UNMEER was
“mandated as a temporary measure to harness the capabilities of all
the relevant UN actors under a singular operational crisis manage‐
ment system to reinforce unity of purpose among responders and to
ensure a rapid and effective response to the Ebola crisis.”14
UNMEER headed up the UN’s efforts to stop Ebola in West Africa
until August 1, 2015, when the World Health Organization (WHO)
took over a central coordinating role. Coordination between actors
within Sierra Leone and across the international community proved
essential to battling the Ebola crisis. Indeed, as the projects dis‐
cussed below (and in several other case studies in this report) indi‐
cate, coordination, collaboration and information-sharing are
central in the response to a variety of humanitarian and other crises.
Project Description and Inception
Using Data in Combating Ebola
Early on, it became apparent that information would be key in the
battle against Ebola. Efforts to combat the epidemic were, for exam‐
ple, hampered by limited information sharing between national gov‐
ernments, aid organizations and front-line actors like the rural
health clinics that often bore the brunt of the crisis. Even the most
basic information—for example, the number of cases or dead—was
hard to come by, making it difficult to assess the severity of the epi‐
340 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

15 Westcott, Lucy. “Q&A with Anthony Banbury: UN’s Ebola Mission Can Still Do More.”
Newsweek. November 24, 2014. http://www.newsweek.com/qa-anthony-banbury-uns-
ebola-mission-can-still-do-more-286724
16 Maxmen, Amy. “How Ebola Found Fertile Ground in Sierra Leone’s Chaotic Capital.”
National Geographic. January 27, 2015. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
2015/01/150127-ebola-virus-outbreak-epidemic-sierra-leone-freetown-photos-pictures/
demic and target interventions. For all these reasons, the UNMEER
chief, Anthony Banbury, promised in November 2014 that “We’re
going to be really data- and information-driven and that will
strengthen our response.”15
Recognizing the importance of information—governments, aid
agencies and international organizations soon began designing and
implementing a number of data tools. This case study focuses on
three tools and initiatives that played a particularly important role in
mitigating the public health crisis: the National Ebola Response
Centre (NERC), the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) and Ebola
GeoNode.
National Ebola Response Centre (NERC)
In October 2014, Sierra Leone created the NERC, which led all fac‐
ets of the on-the-ground Ebola response efforts in the country and
coordinated the activities of District Ebola Response Centres
(DERCs).16 NERC brought together the Presidency of the Republic
of Sierra Leone with the ministries of Health and Sanitation; Local
Government and Rural Development; Social Welfare, Gender and
Children’s Affairs; Foreign Affairs; Finance and Economic Develop‐
ment; Defence; Internal Affairs; and Information and Communica‐
tion. In addition, the NERC coordinated with external agencies and
groups like the CDC, Red Cross, World Bank, UK Department for
International Development (DFID), African Development Bank and
the U.S. Embassy.
NERC was one of many efforts by international organizations and
government actors to help domestic efforts to mitigate the effects of
the disease and stop its spread. The African Governance Initiative
(AGI), based in the United Kingdom, for instance, helped to set up a
Situation Room within NERC, which focused on putting the most
important information into the hands of the decision-makers in the
best position to act on it. In many ways, the Situation Room—and
Project Description and Inception 
| 
341

17 Maxmen, Amy. “How Ebola Found Fertile Ground in Sierra Leone’s Chaotic Capital.”
National Geographic. January 27, 2015. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
2015/01/150127-ebola-virus-outbreak-epidemic-sierra-leone-freetown-photos-pictures/
18 Simons, Rupert. “Inside the National Ebola Response Centre.” Africa Governance Ini‐
tiative. October 17, 2014. http://www.africagovernance.org/article/inside-national-ebola-
response-centre
19 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
20 Example brief: http://nerc.sl/sites/default/files/docs/20151126_Nerc_Eve_Brief%20Count
%20Down.pptx%201.pdf
NERC more generally—were primarily efforts to create the infra‐
structure for collecting and disseminating important information
related to the crisis. This infrastructure was sorely needed because,
as OB Sisay, the director of the Situation Room, put it: “The core
crux of the problem is not Ebola. It’s system failure.”17
Rupert Simons, CEO of Publish What You Fund and formerly an
adviser to AGI, helped to set up the Situation Room and led the
team as it conducted daily data collection efforts of conditions on
the ground. A key piece of these efforts involved the design, imple‐
mentation and maintenance of a reporting system for the 14 dis‐
tricts in Sierra Leone. Simons describes the reporting system as one
where districts were asked to “call or email us once a day with infor‐
mation on the response. We didn’t ask them how many Ebola
patients they had; the Ministry of Health knows that already. But we
did ask how many safe beds they had, how many calls they got every
day to investigate a case, and how many people had died, because
everyone who dies needs to be given a safe medical burial.”18
Armed with such on-the-ground information, the Situation Room
hosted twice-daily briefings for leadership at NERC.19 These brief‐
ings, focused on identifying and operationalizing key action points
based on the day’s information, typically included officials from the
government, UNMEER and other UN agencies, and governmental
and nongovernmental aid agencies.20
342 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

21 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
22 Example newsletter: http://199.230.52.230/sites/default/files/docs/National
%20%20Ebola%20Response%20%20Centre%20--%20Week​ly%20%20%20Newsletter
%20%2029th%20June%20-5th%20July%202015%20%282%29.pdf
Figure 16-1. Portion of National Ebola Response Centre Weekly News‐
letter
NERC also shared a daily evening briefing with the public (usually
by radio), as well as a weekly newsletter and press conference.21 The
public briefings included a wide variety of data on the current Ebola
situation, including facts and figures on the status of the disease
(often broken up by region), the location and accessibility of treat‐
ment centers, and other information on steps to address the crisis.22
Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX)
On July 15, 2014, at the Open Knowledge Festival in Berlin, the Uni‐
ted Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) announced the development of the Humanitarian Data
Exchange (HDX). HDX was intended as “a new data sharing plat‐
form that encompasses the best standards in data collection, offering
Project Description and Inception 
| 
343

23 “Humanitarian Data: OCHA launches ground-breaking data exchange platform.” Uni‐
ted Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. July 15, 2014. http://
www.unocha.org/top-stories/all-stories/humanitarian-data-ocha-launches-ground-
breaking-data-exchange-platform
24 Griliopoulos, Dan. “Data exchange helps humanitarians act fast and effectively.” The
Guardian. December 29, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/
2014/dec/29/humanitarian-data-exchange-ebola-refugees
25 Griliopoulos, Dan. “Data exchange helps humanitarians act fast and effectively.” The
Guardian. December 29, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/
2014/dec/29/humanitarian-data-exchange-ebola-refugees
26 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
27 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
28 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
access to useful and accurate data.”23 Designed to cover a wide range
of humanitarian crises around the world, the platform was originally
focused on two pilot locations in Kenya and Colombia. But as the
Ebola crisis worsened, HDX’s potential in West Africa quickly
became apparent and it became one of the most important data
efforts in the fight against the epidemic.
HDX has been referred to as a “humanitarian data-centric Wikipe‐
dia.”24 It allows users to track and follow specific data sets, create
curated organization data hubs, and share data across previously
siloed organizations working to improve humanitarian efforts
around the world.25 According to Javier Teran, an OCHA statistician
who works on HDX, the platform focused from the start on the
“baseline indicators that humanitarians are always using, like popu‐
lation statistics and mortality rates—the types of data related to a
crisis, before, during and after.”26 At its launch, HDX held around
1,600 files, covering a range of regions and humanitarian concerns
—but none of those files were targeted to the use case that would
take HDX from being a largely speculative platform to one being put
to real practical application.27
By late 2014, Teran recalls, “we [the team behind HDX] were
appointed by the UN to be the platform for Ebola data exchange.”28
At that point, the original 1,600 files on the platform were signifi‐
cantly increased in number, mostly with the addition of regional
data—from Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia—drawn from WHO.
344 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

29 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
30 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
31 https://data.hdx.rwlabs.org/group/sle
32 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
33 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
34 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
WHO fed data into the platform on the number of Ebola cases and
fatalities, the locations of cases, the amount of money being spent on
the crisis, as well as information on Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs
—e.g., how many were open at the time, how many were eventually
planned to be opened, and their locations).29 On-the-ground WHO
representatives were tasked with collecting, validating and curating
the information.30
As of early 2016, HDX held 178 data sets on the Sierra Leone loca‐
tion page, including information on the number of health-care
workers infected; status and location of ETCs; status and location of
safe and dignified burial teams; location of education establish‐
ments; status and location of Ebola Community Care Centers, and
much more.31 The expected opening date for new ETCs was one of
the most important pieces of information in HDX.32 This informa‐
tion was immediately made open in computable formats to analysts
and developers working on Ebola response.
In order to collect all this information, the HDX team combined
WHO situation report data with information pulled from existing
data sources, like OpenStreetMap’s geospatial data and OCHA’s
common operational data sets.33
A central task confronting the HDX team from the start was the
need to “make connections with the different players in the field.”34
Teran notes that, “it was a very difficult assignment, especially at the
beginning of the crisis,” due to a lack of sophistication in existing
information systems. For example, it took some time for WHO rep‐
resentatives “to consolidate the information, to standardize it, to
make it comparable” with information from other sources and other
countries. This challenge, like Ebola itself, was not limited to Sierra
Project Description and Inception 
| 
345

35 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
36 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
Leone. “We were dealing with not only one country, but with three
countries,” says Teran.35 This need to work across borders added a
significant degree of complexity to the HDX effort, and indeed to
the other data projects discussed in this case study.
As the HDX platform matured, visualizations, many created with
platforms like Tableau and CartoDB, were also added. The top of the
Ebola Crisis page featured a link to each of the most important data
sets on the platform: Cumulative Cases of Ebola, Cumulative Deaths
from Ebola, Response Plan Coverage, People Receiving Food Assis‐
tance, and Open Ebola Treatment Centers. Each of these could be
viewed as raw data or as user-friendly visualizations. According to
Teran, the statisticians leveraging HDX data were “trying to convert
all these spreadsheets, CSVs, and maps into information” that was
more easy to digest and understand.36 While the raw data was essen‐
tial for policymakers and others fighting the disease, the visualiza‐
tions played a particularly important role in disseminating
information through intermediaries like the media.
Figure 16-2. Humanitarian Data Exchange Ebola Crisis Page
346 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

37 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
38 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
39 http://ebolageonode.org/layers/geonode%3Asle_heal_pt_unmeer_ccc
The Ebola GeoNode
The result of a collaboration with the Red Cross, World Bank,
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR),
UNMEER and the US Humanitarian Information Unit (HIU), Ebola
GeoNode is an open source geospatial platform that lets users build
maps and conduct geospatial analysis on Ebola’s impacts in West
Africa. According to Patrick Dufour, a former senior Web GIS
developer at HIU, Ebola GeoNode is primarily “an open data plat‐
form” designed with the intent “to make as much [data] as you can,
open.”37
As of early 2016, GeoNode consists of 61 data sets containing data
on, among other things, administrative boundaries in affected coun‐
tries, transportation and logistics information, and geo-tagged
health crisis data. According to Dufour, logistics data—like the loca‐
tion of ETCs health facilities—occupy an especially important piece
of the platform. While simple, such information helped to ensure
that on-the-ground actors, like representatives of USAID and
UNMEER, had a clear understanding of the location of important
points—“sav[ing] a bunch of people time.”38
The GeoNode is more than a simple collection of points on a map,
however. Information on the platform exists in three categories:
Layers, Maps and Documents. In the Layers and Maps categories,
users have the option of manipulating the information directly on
the GeoNode website or downloading it for any other use. For
example, when selecting the Sierra Leone Community Care Centres
(CCC) layer, the user can download the geospatial data on the CCC’s
locations to her hard drive in a variety of formats, or create a new
map on GeoNode using the CCC data as one layer, with the option
of adding additional layers—like the location of global supply
routes.39 Similarly, the eight user-generated maps on the platform—
Food Insecurity (Estimates), Health Facilities, Mali Admin Bound‐
aries, Sierra Leone Admin Boundaries, Guinea Admin Boundaries,
Project Description and Inception 
| 
347

40 http://ebolageonode.org/maps/#?limit=100&offset=0
41 http://ebolageonode.org/documents/541
42 https://www.gfdrr.org/ebola-geonode
43 http://www.mapaction.org
Liberia Admin Boundaries, and two Ebola Care Facilities maps40—
can be viewed, shared and printed as is, or duplicated and further
built upon with additional geospatial data layers. The Documents
category includes mapped trend analyses, such as “Evolution of con‐
firmed Ebola cases over the period from 12 January to 22 February
2015.”41 These documents can be accessed directly, or the user can
download the underlying metadata in a number of formats.
Figure 16-3. Ebola Care Facilities Map on Ebola GeoNode
The central purpose of the GeoNode platform was to alleviate infor‐
mation fragmentation that hampered the fight against Ebola. As the
GFDRR website puts it: Data fragmentation meant that “field staff
had to devote scarce time to finding and reassembling the data sets.
In many cases, this task was far more difficult than it needed to be.”42
GeoNode played a particularly important role in enabling collabora‐
tion between employees working at international institutions and
those on the ground in affected countries, particularly UNMEER
representatives and employees of MapAction, a humanitarian map‐
ping charity.43 Vivien Deparday, a disaster risk management special‐
ist at GFDRR, points out that much of the work for those
348 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

44 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
45 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
46 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
maintaining the GeoNode platform outside of West Africa was “pro‐
viding technical support on the platform” for those on the ground
and “maintaining some authoritative data sets” that could be used
and supplemented by the UNMEER and MapAction representatives.
44 Dufour agrees that the work of the people on the ground was criti‐
cal for collecting and operationalizing the relevant data for the Geo‐
Node—“otherwise, it’s just a bunch of people at headquarters talking
to each other.”45
Impact
As many of the case studies in this series show, information plays an
important role in a variety of natural and man-made humanitarian
disasters. Simons, who was on the forefront of the Ebola crisis,
argues that, amid an epidemic, “data is absolutely crucial.” He adds
that it is especially important in the early stages of an epidemic,
when responders must decide “how to deploy the initially scarce
resources.”46 In this section, we examine some of the most important
ways in which the data-driven efforts examined above had an
impact on the Ebola crisis in Sierra Leone in particular, and West
Africa in general.
Providing Evidence to Decision-makers
Across the projects included in this case study, one particularly
important form of impact stands out: Data plays a critical role in
giving policymakers a better understanding of conditions on the
ground, and thus an evidence basis for their decisions. For example,
HDX data was accessed (and supplied) by the UN World Food Pro‐
gramme (WFP), which turned out to be one of the main users of the
platform. According to Teran, the WFP used HDX to understand
how Ebola was affecting farmers and to forestall any potential food
shortages. When Ebola hits agricultural communities, says Teran,
Impact 
| 
349

47 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
48 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
49 Simons, Rupert. “Inside the National Ebola Response Centre.” Africa Governance Ini‐
tiative. October 17, 2014. http://www.africagovernance.org/article/inside-national-ebola-
response-centre
50 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
51 Cassano, Jay. “Inside the Crowdsourced Map Project That Is Helping Contain the Ebola
Epidemic.” Fast Company. October 22, 2014. http://www.fastcolabs.com/3037350/elastic
ity/inside-the-crowdsourced-map-project-that-is-helping-contain-the-ebola-epidemic
“nobody collects the rice from the fields from the paddy, and then
there is no way [the farmer] can bring it to market, and then it’s a
domino effect.”47 WFP used data tracking and visualization tools on
HDX to monitor these potential problems and to help the relevant
authorities develop an appropriate response.
While NERC also provided information to decision-makers within
international aid and governance organizations, as Simons notes,
“the priority at the time was to make good data available to decision-
makers within the government of Sierra Leone.”48 In a post describ‐
ing his time at NERC, Simons argues that, although much of the
media focus during the crisis was trained on international organiza‐
tions, “99% of those fighting [Ebola] in the field are Sierra Leoneans.
Their government needs to lead that fight. The Situation Room pro‐
vides them with the information to do so.”49
The Impact of Maps
For the Ebola GeoNode in particular, and efforts to increase access
to geospatial data more generally, assessing impact involves what
Patrick Dufour of HIU calls a “perennial hard question”:50 What is
the impact of maps? The impacts are perhaps clearer in the case of
Ebola response than in other uses. For instance, an article on Open‐
StreetMap (OSM), a free, crowdsourced mapping tool that provided
information to NERC, HDX and GeoNode, notes that: “In the parts
of West Africa affected by the Ebola epidemic, Google barely has the
roads mapped out. More often than not, the names of villages are
missing—and sometimes the village altogether.”51 Simons also recog‐
nizes the importance of the OSM data, noting that prior to its exis‐
350 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

52 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
53 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
54 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
55 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
tence, “the [only] way to find out where to go was driving around
and asking for directions.”52
The geospatial information, often provided by OSM and available
on the GeoNode and HDX, demonstrates how filling an information
void—even with something as simple as road information—can play
an important role in fighting an epidemic as complex as Ebola. And
though difficult to quantify, Dufour is “comfortable knowing that
[the GeoNode] was a success” as a result of “knowing that some guy,
when he was making his daily situation report, he was using the
Ebola GeoNode every day.”53
Spurring Wider Use of Open Data in International
Organizations
As mentioned, one of the unexpected benefits—“a big achievement”
in the words of Teran—that came from HDX’s efforts in West Africa
was inspiring greater uptake of open data in other international
organizations. For example, as the WFP began publishing its food-
price data as part of an effort to combat Ebola, it became more
aware of the benefits of data and, in particular, open data portals.
The organization has now increased its commitment to open data,
publishing a range of information about food prices from around
the world.54 As of early 2016, the WFP organization page on HDX
houses 19 data sets, including those pertaining to global food prices
and food security in 70 locations. This is just one example of a phe‐
nomenon we have seen repeatedly across the projects examined in
this report: how a single, localized use of open data can spur a much
wider recognition of data’s value and potential.
Patrick Dufour from HIU sees a similar development of an open
data “ecosystem” that he believes “is going to have an impact on
long-term humanitarian information sharing.”55 He points in partic‐
Impact 
| 
351

56 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
57 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
58 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
ular to the collaborative and data-sharing culture built as a result of
the Ebola GeoNode and HDX working together. Vivien Deparday,
from GeoNode, agrees, seeing a “complementary role” played by
GeoNode and HDX in combating Ebola, and adding that “we will be
trying to formalize a bit more of these roles in future scenarios.”56
Internal Capacity Building and Identifying Best
Practices
Finally, given that both GeoNode and HDX were launched by
organizations playing a direct role in the Ebola response, the infor‐
mation provided through the platforms was also useful in improving
their own response efforts, as well as establishing internal best prac‐
tices. Dufour, for example, emphasizes that HIU used the GeoNode
to create its own map products and target response efforts. “I think
that phrase is to eat your dog food,” he says, emphasizing the valua‐
ble contribution made by the GeoNode platform to HIU’s efforts on
the ground.57 Taking the longer view, HDX applied the lessons
learned during the Ebola response in its next major humanitarian
initiative: the Nepal Earthquake of April 2015. Teran notes that
when HDX began work for Nepal, the team knew to quickly build a
partnership with the national government, and to immediately iden‐
tify and liaise with the main organizational player on the ground—
in this case the International Organization for Migration (IOM).58
Further, many of the databases and data products created during the
Ebola epidemic are likely to have a certain “asset value” that will
extend beyond this immediate crisis. This is particularly true of the
maps and cartographic products generated during the crisis, which
are useful for a variety of circumstances beyond combating Ebola.
352 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

59 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
60 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
61 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
Challenges
While the initiatives included in this case study had common areas
of impact, they also faced common challenges. We have identified
three main challenges that posed barriers to greater impact and
effectiveness. Although we discuss these challenges with specific ref‐
erence to the fight against Ebola, they also surface in many of the
other case studies in this report, and have broader applicability to
open data initiatives around the world.
Data Management
Perhaps the main challenge faced by many of the initiatives under
discussion pertained to data quality. Some of the problems stemmed
from quite simple—yet ultimately consequential—errors. For exam‐
ple, on the Ebola GeoNode, it was sometimes difficult to track when
data was out of date. Dufour says that it was difficult to determine if
a date referenced when data was published, collected or edited.59
Likewise, simple misspellings of a patient’s name could cause prob‐
lems on the HDX platform, leading—at least initially—to what
Teran says was significant data duplication. For example, a patient’s
name could be spelled differently at each stage of treatment (poten‐
tial, suspected, confirmed), leading to that same patient being coun‐
ted multiple times.60
The way the data was handled at ETCs also posed challenges for
HDX. Internal capacity at ETCs, and particularly the speed with
which they could report data to HDX, was, understandably, not
always as smooth as would be hoped. More generally, the sheer task
of coordinating Ebola response efforts across three countries created
tremendous challenges. Teran recalls that data would arrive at dif‐
ferent times from different countries, or that on any given day one
or more country’s numbers would simply never arrive—“it was
always fluctuating.”61 He adds that these and other data problems
were particularly acute in the early stages of the epidemic, that the
Challenges 
| 
353

62 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
63 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
64 GovLab interview with Rupert Simons, Former Advisor to the African Governance Ini‐
tiative; CEO Publish What You Fund, August 6, 2015.
65 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
66 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
crisis was an ongoing learning process for all involved, and that
many of the data challenges eased as time went on.62
Collaborating with Government
Responding to an in-process crisis created major challenges of coor‐
dination and governance. For example, while on the ground in
Sierra Leone working with NERC, Rupert Simons found that, “peo‐
ple spent a lot of time in coordination meetings instead of doing
anything.”63 Coordination with national governments could be par‐
ticularly challenging, forcing humanitarian workers to master the
intricacies of national and regional politics while in the midst of a
crisis. Simons put it this way: “Even a crisis does not suspend the
rule of Sierra Leonean government and politics, where information
is power.” This was especially true of the relationship between the
Ministry of Health and the National Ebola Response Centre, which
—though nominally partners—often acted as rivals.64
Others were more positive, but still pointed to challenges. Teran, for
example, says that while the Sierra Leonean government in general
collaborated well, the process for getting its data into HDX was not
always technically straightforward.65 Before data made its way onto
HDX, it first had to pass from the government to WHO in the form
of a report. WHO then captured the information, sent it to their
headquarters in Geneva, and finally HDX gained access and was
able to share the information on the platform. This extended pro‐
cess meant that while HDX had a direct line to data held by WHO,
that data was not in fact real time.66
354 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

67 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
68 GovLab interview with Patrick Dufour, Former Senior Web GIS Developer, U.S.
Department of State, Humanitarian Information Unit, December 17, 2015.
69 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
70 “Report of the Ebola Interim Assessment Panel.” World Health Organization. May
2015. http://www.who.int/entity/csr/resources/publications/ebola/report-by-panel.pdf?
ua=1
Lack of Existing Structures and Best Practice
Much of the effort to fight Ebola was done “on the fly,” without the
benefit of established procedures and practices. This made it sub‐
stantially more difficult to mount an effective response. “[R]elation‐
ships and platforms should be established before a crisis happens so
that you already have this relationship in place,” says Dufour, of
HIU.67 Deparday of GFDRR agrees, arguing that “it’s better to have a
GeoNode deployed before crisis. It’s definitely hard to deploy it in
the midst of a crisis.”
Perhaps surprisingly, the challenges arising from the “on the fly”
GeoNode deployment were not primarily technical. Dufour and
Deparday agree that setting up the platform and creating the techni‐
cal infrastructure was in many ways the easy part. The difficult part
was really in creating institutional frameworks, establishing rela‐
tionships, and defining shared best practices and procedures that
can be used by all responders.68,69
In the wake of the crisis, a panel of independent experts comprising
the Ebola Interim Assessment Panel concluded that the lack of infra‐
structure and established best practices played a significant role in
hampering the response. Among the conclusions reached by the
panel were:70
• National surveillance activities need to be better integrated with
existing components of health systems;
• Data aggregation and sharing was often limited, or nonexistent;
• Stronger collaboration was required, in particular between the
private and public sectors.
Challenges 
| 
355

71 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
72 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
The Ebola crisis had much to teach the international humanitarian
community. These and other lessons are now being digested, pro‐
cessed, and hopefully will inform responses to future crises.
Looking Forward
In many ways, the Ebola crisis has established a set of best practices
for future data usage in response to humanitarian crises. The teams
behind HDX and GeoNode have many plans for the future—how to
grow their platforms, how to use them in other contexts and geogra‐
phies, and how to make them even more effective. Here, we high‐
light just a few of the plans for HDX and GeoNode, and describe the
fate of NERC.
HDX: Enabling New Insights into the Spread of Ebola
The experience of HDX in West Africa during the Ebola crisis is
teaching lessons to people around the world. Researchers at MIT
and the University of Virginia, for example, are using the platform
to analyze how the virus spread in affected countries. This analysis
will focus especially on the cultural factors that enabled the rapid
spread of the virus—for example, the tendency for families in the
region to come together when someone is sick, rather than avoiding
the infected person.71 Although no one is arguing for major cultural
changes to occur—many people in Sierra Leone are unlikely to
accept cremation, for example—researchers and HDX’s organizers
believe that analysis of the data found on the platform can help
uncover ways to stop the virus’ spread. One particularly important
avenue of research involves the need for safer burial practices, which
played a central role in spreading the virus.72
In general, says Teran, HDX is seeking to “facilitate” the flow of
information to parties that can yield potentially lifesaving insights
from the platform. These parties include a wide range of actors—
individual university researchers, and media groups like the New
356 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

73 http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/07/31/world/africa/ebola-virus-outbreak-
qa.html
74 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
75 GovLab interview with Javier Teran, Statistician, United Nations Office for the Coordi‐
nation of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian Data Exchange, September 18, 2015.
76 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
77 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
78 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
York Times73 and National Geographic.74 The licensing system
applied to the HDX data—users are allowed to profit from the use of
the information as long as credit is given to the original data suppli‐
ers—lowers the potential barriers to wide use of the data even fur‐
ther.75 It stands in many ways as a model for open sharing and
collaboration around data, all in the interests of social change and
improvement.
Next Steps for GeoNode
GeoNode’s open nature results in “a very vibrant community with
more and more people studying and contributing development.”76
As a result, the organizers “can’t really keep track” of where it’s
going. Indeed, Deparday, speaking about GeoNode in general, notes
that, “This is, I think, a really great success story about open
source.”77 The GeoNode team, as of late 2015, is supporting around
20 active GeoNodes around the world. That number climbs to “a
hundred or more if we are talking about people using it for their
own use—people who have installed it for their university or their
local governments.”78
Perhaps the greatest impact of the Ebola GeoNode is still to come.
Benson Wilder of HIU notes that, “There’s a mind toward longer
term management of the geospatial data and the ability to transfer
the content and the governance to entities who will have an interest
Looking Forward 
| 
357

79 Quinn, Kristin. “An Unprecedented Response: The GEOINT Community’s Role in the
Ebola Relief Effort.” Trajectory Magazine. 2015. http://trajectorymagazine.com/govern
ment/item/1908-an-unprecedented-response.html
80 GovLab interview with Vivien Deparday, Disaster Risk Management Specialist, Open
Data for Resilience Initiative Operational Deployment Lead, Global Facility for Disaster
Risk and Reduction, World Bank, December 17, 2015.
81 O’Carroll, Lisa and Umaru Fofana. “WHO officially declares Sierra Leone Ebola-free.”
The Guardian. November 7, 2015. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/07/
world-health-organisation-sierra-leone-ebola-free
82 “Sierra Leone dissolves Ebola response centre.” The Citizen. January 6, 2016. http://
www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Sierra-Leone-dissolves-Ebola-response-center/-/
1840340/3022944/-/11h8g99z/-/index.html
83 “Sierra Leone dissolves Ebola response centre.” The Citizen. January 6, 2016. http://
www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Sierra-Leone-dissolves-Ebola-response-center/-/
1840340/3022944/-/11h8g99z/-/index.html
84 “Sierra Leone dissolves Ebola response centre.” The Citizen. January 6, 2016. http://
www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/Sierra-Leone-dissolves-Ebola-response-center/-/
1840340/3022944/-/11h8g99z/-/index.html
in using it and keeping it up to date.”79 This focus on governance is
key for future GeoNode efforts, particularly around open data pre‐
paredness since, as Deparday makes clear, “technology is the easy
part.”80
The Closure of NERC
In November 2015, WHO declared Sierra Leone officially Ebola-free
after the passage of 42 days without any new cases reported.81 The
next month, on December 31, 2015, NERC closed its doors. At that
point, the Centre’s responsibilities were distributed among the Min‐
istry of Health and Sanitation (MoHS), the Ministry of Social Wel‐
fare and the Office of National Security.82
The closure of NERC was not welcomed by some in Sierra Leone.
The Tanzanian newspaper The Citizen noted “skepticism” among the
public as a result of “fear [that] the expertise within the institution
can’t be replaced.”83 The government, however, noted that the finan‐
cial implications of maintaining NERC were too significant given
the Centre’s preponderance of international staff.84
Sadly, the body of a young woman tested positive for Ebola two
months after the country was officially declared Ebola-free, and just
358 
| 
Chapter 16: Battling Ebola in Sierra Leone

85 Searcey, Dionne and Sheri Fink. “Day After a Victory Over Ebola, Sierra Leone Reports
a Death.” The New York Times. January 15, 2016.
two weeks after NERC’s closure.85 It remains to be seen whether this
case will become anything more than a tragic, isolated setback in the
country’s recovery from the crisis.
The data-driven response to the Ebola crisis in Sierra Leone in many
ways took on the character of the crisis itself—a massive, chaotic
task involving a broad range of well-meaning actors who were
attempting to improve conditions while facing significant chal‐
lenges. Although the direct impact of efforts like the initiatives
described here can be difficult to quantify, it is clear that data played
a key role in placing relevant information into the hands of those
who needed it and in helping address the Ebola crisis. It is equally
clear that these initiatives offer best practices and pathways to those
at the forefront of disaster response around the world. In many
ways, the experience in West Africa can be considered a valuable
proof-of-concept for the positive role of data and information in a
variety of crises, man-made or natural.
Looking Forward 
| 
359


CHAPTER 17
New Zealand’s Christchurch
Earthquake Clusters
Open Data for Improving Emergency Response
By Juliet McMurren, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew
Young
Summary: In February 2011, Christchurch was struck by a severe
earthquake that killed 185 people and caused significant disruption
and damage to large portions of a city already weakened by an ear‐
lier earthquake. In the response to the quake, volunteers and offi‐
cials at the recovery agencies used open data, open source tools,
trusted data sharing and crowdsourcing to develop a range of prod‐
ucts and services required to respond successfully to emerging con‐
ditions. These included a crowdsourced emergency information
Web app that generated 70,000 visits within the first 48 hours after
the earthquake; a series of geographic information system (GIS) data
sharing agreements between agencies that enabled the successful
provision of mapping services throughout the response and recov‐
ery; websites using open property data that enabled citizens to check
the status of their homes and land, and generated millions of hits
within hours of release; a construction intention viewer built using
open data and open source tools that saved NZ$4 million in con‐
struction costs within its first year of use; and a crowdsourced com‐
petition for school children that generated over 18,000 new building
footprints for open property databases at a cost of $0.02 per foot‐
print.
361

1 http://www.stats.govt.nz/infoshare/default.aspx?RedirectReason=session_expired
2 http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table-1-human-development-index-and-its-components
3 http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/earthquakes/page-1
4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_earthquakes_in_New_Zealand#Earthquakes_result
ing_in_fatalities
Dimension of Impact: Solving Public Problems—Data-Driven
Engagement
Key Takeaways:
• Open maps and property data can be paired with trusted data
sharing and open-source tools to craft quick, cost-effective solu‐
tions for crisis response.
• The capacity to recover and rebuild quickly can benefit tremen‐
dously from a good pre-existing data infrastructure, and espe‐
cially on a robust and authoritative property data set.
• Crises can provide excellent preconditions for innovation,
including the freedom and permission to innovate.
• Agile development and management techniques are particularly
well suited to emergency response.
• Crowdsourcing emergency information can provide a way of
engaging would-be volunteers safely in disaster relief efforts.
Context and Background
New Zealand is a high-income Pacific Island nation with a popula‐
tion of 4.6 million.1 It was ranked seventh on the UN Human Devel‐
opment Index in 2013.2 The country is located on the Pacific Ring of
Fire, where the Australian and Pacific plates meet, and is seismically
active. It experiences about 14,000 earthquakes every year, of which
around 150 to 200 are strong enough to be felt.3 Most of these earth‐
quakes occur down the Alpine fault, which runs down the center of
the South Island, and along another fault that runs from southwest
to northeast through the central North Island. In the last 200 years,
New Zealand has experienced 12 major earthquakes resulting in loss
of life.4
Because of this seismic history, New Zealand is an acknowledged
world leader in earthquake engineering, having applied itself to
362 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

5 http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10672097
6 http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/earthquakes/page-4
7 http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/earthquakes/page-3
8 https://freedomhouse.org/country/new-zealand#.Vbo0evlViko
9 http://index.rsf.org/#!/index-details
10 http://survey.internationalbudget.org/#timeline
11 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/analysis/rankings.html
12 http://ssc.govt.nz/nz-ogp-action-plan
13 https://www.ict.govt.nz/guidance-and-resources/open-government/declaration-open-and-
transparent-government/
learning the lessons from a series of deadly earthquakes in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.5 The country has some of
the most stringent building standards in the world, which set
requirements for how buildings must perform in earthquakes.6 Cur‐
rent New Zealand building codes require structures with a 50-year
use life to be able to withstand the predicted loads generated by
earthquakes of a magnitude expected to occur every 500 years. New
Zealand is also one of the only countries in the world to have
national government earthquake insurance for homeowners
through the Earthquake Commission (EQC).7
Open Data in New Zealand
New Zealand has an excellent record of press freedom and govern‐
ment transparency. The New Zealand press is considered free
according to Freedom House,8 and the country is ranked sixth on
the 2015 World Press Freedom Index by Reporters without Borders.
9 New Zealand was ranked second on Transparency International’s
Corruption Perceptions Index in 2014, and first on the International
Budget Partnership’s two most recent Open Budget Surveys (2012
and 2015).10
New Zealand is ranked fourth on the Open Data Barometer,11 and is
considered a “high capacity” country, meaning that the country has
existing open data policies, political backing and a general culture of
data openness. It announced its intention to join the Open Govern‐
ment Partnership (OGP) in 2013, and, in October 2014, released its
first action plan, completing the process of joining OGP.12
In August 2011, the Declaration on Open and Transparent Govern‐
ment was passed by the New Zealand government.13 Under that pol‐
Context and Background 
| 
363

14 https://www.ict.govt.nz/guidance-and-resources/open-government/new-zealand-
government-open-access-and-licensing-nzgoal-framework/
15 http://www.ssc.govt.nz/nzgoal
16 https://data.govt.nz/
17 http://web.archive.org/web/20100905033623/http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/
recenteqsww/Quakes/us2010atbj.php; “Why so few casualties in Canterbury quake?”
Stuff.co.nz. September 4, 2010. http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/4096813/Why-so-few-
casualties-in-Canterbury-quak​e
18 Office of the Prime Minister’s Science Advisory Committee. “The Canterbury Earth‐
quakes: Scientific answers to critical questions.” The Royal Society of New Zealand.
2011. http://www.royalsociety.org.nz/media/Information-paperThe-Canterbury-
Earthquak​es.pdf
icy, central government agencies were directed, state-owned
enterprises encouraged, and local government invited, to actively
release high-value, non-personal data for reuse. During 2011, the
New Zealand government also implemented New Zealand Govern‐
ment Open Access and Licensing Framework (NZGOAL),14 an open
access and open licensing protocol for state agencies to use when
releasing data for reuse. This protocol encourages the release of
non-personal copyright data using the most open Creative Com‐
mons license, and the release of non-copyright data with no restric‐
tions on its use, all in the interest of harnessing the economic and
creative benefits of opening the data for reuse.15 As of December
2015, the New Zealand government data portal, data.govt.nz, offered
a total of 3,813 data sets.16
Project Description and Inception
In 2010 and 2011, the city of Christchurch, New Zealand’s third
largest, with a population of 375,000, experienced a series of devas‐
tating earthquakes. On September 4, 2010, a magnitude 7.1 quake
caused widespread property damage and minor injuries, but no
deaths.17 Nearly six months later, on February 22, 2011, before the
city had fully recovered from the first earthquake, it experienced a
second severe quake. While weaker in magnitude than the first and
a mere 12 seconds long, an unlucky combination of factors—shal‐
low depth, steep angle, and an epicenter located a mere 10 kilome‐
ters from the city center18—meant that the second earthquake
produced some of the most intense and violent shaking ever recor‐
ded in an urban area. Peak ground acceleration during the earth‐
364 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

19 Campbell, Hamish. “Technically it’s just an aftershock.” New Zealand Herald. February
24, 2011. http://www.nzherald.co.nz/opinion/news/article.cfm?c_id=466&objec
tid=10708275
20 Lin II, Rong-Gong and Sam Allen. “New Zealand quake raises questions about L.A.
buildings.” Los Angeles Times. February 26, 2011. http://www.latimes.com/local/la-me-
quake-california-20110226-story.html
21 Carver, Julian. “Using the Web in Earthquake Recovery.” New Zealand Government
Web Toolkit. March 25, 2013. https://webtoolkit.govt.nz/blog/2013/03/using-the-web-in-
earthquake-recovery/
22 Clifton, Charles. “Christchurch Feb 22nd Earthquake: A Personal Report by Charles
Clifton—March 2011.” HERA. March 2011. http://www.hera.org.nz/Story?
Action=View&Story_id=1398
23 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
quake approached 2g in parts of central Christchurch19 (as
compared to 0.5g in the 2010 Haiti earthquake), and eyewitness
accounts reported people literally being thrown into the air.20
Julian Carver, former CIO of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery
Authority (CERA), describes the experience of the earthquake:
“February 22nd 2011, 12:51 p.m., I’m working from home, lying on
my bed, reading email on my iPhone. Thirty seconds later, my city,
my life, and my future had changed irrevocably. Anything not bol‐
ted down was on the floor and half of it was smashed. Computer
monitors, TVs, bookshelves, food from the fridge. The power went
off, then stayed off for five days. Mobile calls worked for a few
minutes, then failed. Texts became patchy after an hour. The only
thing that was semi-reliable was Twitter over 3G.”21
The quake caused significant structural damage to the city’s already
weakened buildings. The country’s strict building codes and the
mercifully short duration of the quake limited the damage,22 but 185
people were killed, half of them in a single building collapse, in what
was New Zealand’s second-deadliest recorded natural disaster. As of
April 2013, the cost of rebuilding stood at $40 billion NZD.23
The recovery was significantly aided by a number of projects mak‐
ing innovative use of open data, open source tools, crowdsourcing
and trusted data sharing. These tools, which we describe below, were
developed in a highly agile and iterative manner. They allowed the
city to recover rapidly and cheaply; together, they suggest the tre‐
Project Description and Inception 
| 
365

24 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
25 Clifton, Charles. “Christchurch Feb 22nd Earthquake: A Personal Report by Charles
Clifton—March 2011.” HERA. March 2011. http://www.hera.org.nz/Story?
Action=View&Story_id=1398
26 McNamara, Tim. “Eq.org.nz—The Power of Ushahidi.” Institute of IT Professionals
TechBlog. March 18, 2011. http://techblog.nz/94-eqorgnzThePowerofUshahidi
27 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
28 McNamara, Tim. “Eq.org.nz—The Power of Ushahidi.” Institute of IT Professionals
TechBlog. March 18, 2011. http://techblog.nz/94-eqorgnzThePowerofUshahidi
29 Carver, Julian. “Using the Web in Earthquake Recovery.” New Zealand Government
Web Toolkit. March 25, 2013. https://webtoolkit.govt.nz/blog/2013/03/using-the-web-in-
earthquake-recovery/
mendous potential of innovation and data-driven projects in the
midst of a crisis and as responses to natural and other disasters.24
Canterbury Recovery Map (Eq.org.nz)
Immediately after the 2011 earthquake, significant parts of the city
were without water or sewerage for up to three weeks, since up to 80
percent of the city’s below-ground infrastructure had been damaged.
25 Roads in some parts of the city were inaccessible because of dam‐
age or soil liquefaction, and normal channels of communication
were significantly disrupted by power outages. One of the most
immediate problems was a lack of information, as residents tried to
work out where to go for essential goods and services. Official sour‐
ces did exist: A cloud-hosted emergency information website (can‐
terburyearthquake.govt.nz) had been set up immediately after the
earthquake,26 when it became apparent that the City Council servers
were not up to the task of handling demand for emergency informa‐
tion because of power outages, building damage, and inadequate
capacity. However, this website didn’t have mapping capabilities, and
depended on a small, overworked team—“four people sitting
around a trestle table with laptops,” according to Carver27—physi‐
cally located inside the emergency operations center in the heavily
damaged city center.28
Within hours of the quake, a group of skilled volunteers in New
Zealand and overseas responded to these shortcomings by using
Ushahidi, an open source disaster response platform29 using open
366 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

30 Bell, Stephen. “Tech volunteers quick to help in quake aftermath.” Computerworld. Feb‐
ruary 24, 2011. http://www.computerworld.co.nz/article/498626/tech_volun
teers_quick​_help_quak​e_aftermath/
31 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
32 Bell, Stephen. “Tech volunteers quick to help in quake aftermath.” Computerworld. Feb‐
ruary 24, 2011. http://www.computerworld.co.nz/article/498626/tech_volun
teers_quick​_help_quak​e_aftermath/
33 Bell, Stephen. “Tech volunteers quick to help in quake aftermath.” Computerworld. Feb‐
ruary 24, 2011. http://www.computerworld.co.nz/article/498626/tech_volun
teers_quick​_help_quak​e_aftermath/
34 McNamara, Tim. “Eq.org.nz—The Power of Ushahidi.” Institute of IT Professionals
TechBlog. March 18, 2011. http://techblog.nz/94-eqorgnzThePowerofUshahidi
35 Meyer, Patrick. “Launching Eq.org.nz for the New Zealand Earthquake.” Ushahidi. Feb‐
ruary 24, 2011. http://www.ushahidi.com/blog/2011/02/24/launching-eq-org-nz-for-the-
new-zealand-earthquake/
map data that had been successfully deployed after the Haiti quake,
to create Eq.org.nz, a crowdsourced disaster map.30
The site helped residents navigate the post-earthquake urban envi‐
ronment by crowdsourcing information about damage, road clo‐
sures, and the availability of essential supplies and services, and
offers or requests for help.31 At the time, Tim McNamara, one of the
Eq.org.nz leads, summed up the project: “We’re asking people to tell
us where they are and what they see—if roads are blocked, which
[store] is open, which [hardware store] is open, which medical cen‐
ter, where there are phones working and Internet access.”32 Contrib‐
utors could enter information on a website form, or via email, SMS
code, or Twitter with hashtags #eqnz or #helpme for emergency
requests.33 Human curators categorized every incoming message
that contained both a fact and a location, and plotted it on a map.
Eq.org.nz’s volunteers were able to verify, categorize and publish
reports within five minutes of receipt of a new message. The data
was published via an open Web application programming interface
(API) that allowed third parties, including Environment Canterbury,
to combine the site’s information with their own data.34
By February 24, 2011, two days after the earthquake, the site had
amassed 779 reports, 781 different locations, and almost 70,000
unique visitors.35 It also helped inform the activities of local volun‐
teers such as the Student Army and Farmy Army, which provided
thousands of volunteers to help clear more than 360,000 tons of silt
Project Description and Inception 
| 
367

36 “September 2010 Christchurch Earthquake.” Volunteer Army Foundation. http://
www.volunteerarmy.org/history/
37 Meyer, Patrick. “Launching Eq.org.nz for the New Zealand Earthquake.” Ushahidi. Feb‐
ruary 24, 2011. http://www.ushahidi.com/blog/2011/02/24/launching-eq-org-nz-for-the-
new-zealand-earthquake/
38 Carver, Julian. “Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies.” Open New Zealand. February 6,
2013. https://wiki.open.org.nz/wiki/display/main/
Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies#Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies-
OpenDataSupportsEmergencyOperations
39 Carver, Julian. “Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies.” Open New Zealand. February 6,
2013. https://wiki.open.org.nz/wiki/display/main/
Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies#Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies-
OpenDataSupportsEmergencyOperations
deposited by liquefaction from residential properties, over more
than 80,000 volunteer working hours.36 The Ushahidi volunteers
reported feedback from users such as a Christchurch diabetic, who
thanked them for telling her where she could get insulin.37 The site
was active for three weeks after the earthquake, until power and
normal channels of communication were fully restored.
GIS and trusted data sharing
In the immediate aftermath of the second earthquake, officials
responsible for GIS data at Christchurch City Council and Environ‐
ment Canterbury found themselves overwhelmed with demands
from Civil Defence and emergency services for maps to help with
search and rescue and other emergency response.38 Requests quickly
outstripped their capacity, and the team knew that it needed to call
in outside help. Ultimately, they found solutions in various data-
sharing initiatives.
Volunteer teams from the Wellington City Council and Greater
Wellington Regional Council, and Eagle Technology, a Wellington-
based IT firm offering open systems and GIS platforms, had all
offered help, but the traditional solution—mailing data on DVD or
hard drive to the Wellington volunteers—was too slow. The Christ‐
church GIS data team obtained permission to open their data so that
it could be freely used under a Creative Commons license, enabling
the Wellington teams to produce maps to help with emergency
response.39 Static data, including aerial imagery of Christchurch
taken within 48 hours of the quake, was uploaded to, and made
368 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

40 https://koordinates.com/
41 Carver, Julian. “Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies.” Open New Zealand. February 6,
2013. https://wiki.open.org.nz/wiki/display/main/
Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies#Open_Data_Mini_Case_Studies-
OpenDataSupportsEmergencyOperations
42 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
43 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
44 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
freely available from the geodata distributor Koordinates.com,40
while dynamic data was made available to the emergency mapping
data teams via open geospatial standards.41
Similar data sharing occurred after the establishment of CERA. Hav‐
ing been set up on a relatively ad hoc basis six weeks after the sec‐
ond earthquake, CERA’s office and IT solutions were basic, and had
no mapping, GIS, or data functionality. Carver, the acting CIO,
approached Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) for assistance
with GIS data infrastructure: “They said, we’ve got a set of those
services we could spin up for you, and then feed in all of the open
data from LINZ data services, and that would get you started.”42
Having established CERA’s mapping capacity, Carver began to get
requests for help from the Christchurch City Council, which was
facing heavy demands generating maps for CERA demolition crews
working in the central city. Christchurch City Council provided
CERA with a list of all of its data sets that it could open up as data
services, which was then prioritized by CERA. The data was then
opened through open or secure data feeds, and the CERA GIS team
was able to do analysis and make maps for the Christchurch City
Council.43
This began a pattern of GIS data sharing and opening between the
earthquake recovery agencies. As Carver put it:
“It was a New Zealand-scale, Christchurch-scale [solution]. You
could get the four or five people ... who understood the need,
understood what users wanted, had the technical understanding
and had the authority to make it happen ... in a room, every two
weeks, [saying] OK, now we need to add this, or change this, or
open this up. ... It was very agile, very iterative.”44
Project Description and Inception 
| 
369

45 Carver, Julian. “Using the Web in Earthquake Recovery.” New Zealand Government
Web Toolkit. March 25, 2013. https://webtoolkit.govt.nz/blog/2013/03/using-the-web-in-
earthquake-recovery/
46 http://www.landcheck.org.nz/
47 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
48 http://cera.govt.nz/my-property
49 http://cera.govt.nz/residential-green-zone-technical-categories/overview
Landcheck and MyProperty
By late June 2011, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority
had completed its geotechnical assessment and zoning of residential
property to indicate the level of risk for a given area in the event of
an earthquake. Now it needed a way to communicate those zoning
decisions to the people of Christchurch. As Carver recalled in a blog
post: “Like everything in the recovery, time frames were tight. Peo‐
ple want government decisions to be based on sound scientific and
economic evidence. They also want to know where they stand (and
can live), as soon as possible. CERA needed a way to let people see
exactly which zone their house was in. That required an interactive
website, capable of taking a massive initial load, which would be
implemented in a very short time frame.”45
The solution was a partnership between the engineering firm
responsible for creating the earthquake zoning maps, and Trade Me,
New Zealand’s largest online auction site. Carrying out the work pro
bono, Trade Me built the Landcheck46 site using open property and
address data in four days, using their server farms in Auckland and
Wellington. Carver reports that the site received 2 million page
views in the first hour, and 5 million page views and 3.3 million
individual property searches on the first day.47
Three months later, in October 2011, Landcheck was replaced by
MyProperty,48 as CERA made public the results of citywide geotech‐
nical studies. MyProperty allowed residents to check not only the
zoning of their property, but also the technical category of the land,
which defined how it was expected to perform in future earth‐
quakes, and the foundation type required for new construction.49
The technical category maps on MyProperty were built on the same
GIS viewer and open data as had been used for Landcheck, incorpo‐
370 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

50 GovLab interview with Stephen Ferris, GIS and Data Manager, Canterbury Earthquake
Recovery Authority, September 22, 2015.
51 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
52 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
53 “Online tool enhances Canterbury rebuild.” Land Information New Zealand. July 29,
2014. http://www.linz.govt.nz/news/2014-07/online-tool-enhances-canterbury-rebuild
54 “Forward Works Viewer.” Media Suite. https://www.mediasuite.co.nz/forward-works.php
rating photographs, maps, zoning, and technical category data.50
Although Carver notes it would be difficult to place a monetary
value on the benefit provided by these sites, they were an essential
public service that was widely accessed by the public, giving assur‐
ance to citizens about the safety of their property as aftershocks con‐
tinued, and authoritative information about the legal context for
repairs and rebuilds.51
Forward Works Viewer
During the repair and rebuild of the central city, which had been
badly damaged by the February 2011 earthquake, CERA found itself
tasked with the near-impossible: demolishing 1,200 commercial
buildings, repairing all below-ground infrastructure (wastewater,
stormwater, water supply, power, and broadband), and beginning
the process of reconstructing new buildings, all within a small geo‐
graphic area, at the same time. In an interview, Carver said that “the
only way of viably doing that [was to enable] everyone to see every‐
one else’s forward construction intentions well enough in advance to
avoid expensive clashes and delays.”52
LINZ, CERA, and the other agencies coordinating the Canterbury
rebuild responded with the Forward Works Viewer, a tool which
gave those agencies and other public and private sector users a
shared online view of horizontal infrastructure repair, planned
buildings, and other construction.53 The viewer allowed users to
manage and view projects and their impacts spatially and over time,
and detect potential clashes and opportunities for collaboration.54
The development of Forward Works, which was carried out using
the agile software development methodology Scrum, was subcon‐
tracted to companies with geospatial, engineering and Web develop‐
Project Description and Inception 
| 
371

55 “Forward Works Viewer.” Media Suite. https://www.mediasuite.co.nz/forward-works.php
56 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
57 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
58 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
59 “Online tool enhances Canterbury rebuild.” Land Information New Zealand. July 29,
2014. http://www.linz.govt.nz/news/2014-07/online-tool-enhances-canterbury-rebuild
60 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
ment expertise.55 The site drew heavily on open property and road
network data, open source tools, and open geospatial standards.56
The open public road network data, however, had significant limita‐
tions, according to Carver.
“The road network data was simply road center-line ... and didn’t
tell you anything about lanes, directions, turns, and turn restric‐
tions. We wanted to be able to build those things into Forward
Works’ viewer because we wanted to be able to assess impact on the
road network of vertical construction or road closures due to road
repair. Is it this lane, or this lane? Is it total closure or reduced
capacity? That was quite important to know for traffic modelling,
but we didn’t have an open, freely reusable, routable roading net‐
work.”57
The solution was to contract four postgraduate GIS students for two
weeks to bring OpenStreetMap for the relevant area fully up to date,
at a cost of NZ$10,000, and make it fully routable for Christchurch.
They then integrated this data into the Forward Works viewer with
an impact selector to enable planners to choose the best lane for clo‐
sures.58
The total cost of constructing the Forward Works viewer was NZ
$1.6 million. A LINZ assessment in 2014 showed that the Forward
Works viewer had delivered NZ $4 million in benefits since its
launch in 2013, with a total of more than NZ$20 million forecast.59
These benefits were the result of cost savings in reduced clashes and
delays, shared roadworks and trenching, reduced impact on the
travelling public and traffic modelling that allowed twice as many
closures within the central city while maintaining the same traffic
flows.60
372 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

61 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
62 http://www.canterburymaps.govt.nz/buildingourfootprints/
63 http://www.canterburymaps.govt.nz/buildingourfootprints/Prizes
64 http://www.canterburymaps.govt.nz/buildingourfootprints/Results
65 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
Building Our Footprints
During the recovery, the agencies involved in rebuilding had identi‐
fied deficits in some of the geospatial and property data sets. Resi‐
dential building footprint databases did not exist for the satellite
municipalities of Selwyn and Waimakariri, and the Christchurch
data set was incomplete, with potential consequences for emergency
response and rebuilding. In 2014, Jeremy Severinson, a LINZ
employee who had been conducting postgraduate research assessing
the trustworthiness of crowdsourced data at the University of Can‐
terbury, approached Environment Canterbury with an idea.61
Severinson proposed crowdsourcing the creation of a database, in
the form of a competition for school students. “Building Our Foot‐
prints” was run by Environment Canterbury in collaboration with
LINZ and the University of Canterbury. Environment Canterbury
created a Web app62 with instructions, registration, and login for
participants, who digitized building outlines from open aerial pho‐
tographs, attempting to achieve a trust metric above 75 percent. The
first participant to achieve 75 percent or better was awarded the
point for that building, and the participant with the greatest number
of points won. LINZ provided a small amount of sponsorship for
prizes, in the form of an iPad Mini for the eventual winner, cash,
and movie tickets.63 The competition ran for a month and generated
18,789 building outlines,64 which were integrated into the relevant
council databases and OpenStreetMap.65
Carver admits that this competition was done “for fun, because we
wanted to see what would work in terms of solving problems. ... Just
as importantly, we got a bunch of kids, who might not have consid‐
ered spatial or open data or technology ... in their careers, engaged
with that. So it was ... just a little ‘Let’s see what happens!’ exemplar
Project Description and Inception 
| 
373

66 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
67 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
68 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
—and it worked really well.”66 Iain Campion is also enthusiastic
about the competition: “We were quite keen on it, not just for the
building footprints, but to give us an insight on how we could use ...
the crowd for our other data sets, like water quality.”67
Campion concedes, however, that not all of the objectives of the
competition were met. Map areas were not randomly assigned, but
were chosen by the participants, with the result that most chose the
area in which they lived. The majority of participants came from a
handful of schools within Christchurch itself, so the competition
generated fewer building outlines from outlying towns, and duplica‐
ted some outlines already held by Christchurch City Council. The
overall quality of the data, however, was good, and the cost per out‐
line was a mere NZ$0.02.68
Impact
Those who lived and worked through the Christchurch earthquake
response came away impressed by the potential of open data, open
source tools, and data sharing to improve the efficiency and effec‐
tiveness of disaster response and recovery. Beyond the practical and
financial impacts of the individual tools described above, there were
several broader ways in which this impact was evident. Each holds
valuable insights about the ways in which open data and open
source tools can contribute to disaster response.
“Don’t be afraid to share [data]. If you can anonymize the data,
share it, and people will make use of it.”
—Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environ‐
ment Canterbury
Higher-Quality Geospatial Data
Improvement of open data coverage and quality was an indirect
benefit of at least two of the projects described above. The additional
374 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

69 McNamara, Tim. “Eq.org.nz—The Power of Ushahidi.” Institute of IT Professionals
TechBlog. March 18, 2011. http://techblog.nz/94-eqorgnzThePowerofUshahidi
70 McNamara, Tim. “Eq.org.nz—The Power of Ushahidi.” Institute of IT Professionals
TechBlog. March 18, 2011. http://techblog.nz/94-eqorgnzThePowerofUshahidi
data captured during the development of Forward Works and
through Building Our Footprints greatly increased the accuracy and
granularity of OpenStreetMap data for Christchurch, which was
then made available for subsequent reuse by other users. Although
intended as a simple solution to an emergent need, the distribution
of GIS data through Koordinates to facilitate distributed mapping
also opened new, previously unavailable geographic data sets.
Facilitating Collaboration
As with other examples in this report, a large part of the value of the
data tools used in New Zealand came from the way in which they
facilitated collaborative efforts and teamwork. In part, this was the
result of an ability to work asynchronously and across geographies.
McNamara summed up many of these benefits in a blog post from
March 2011: “The open source model was critical for the success of
[the Canterbury Recovery Map],” he wrote. “The open source com‐
munity shares ... practices and norms for effective remote communi‐
cation and collaboration. This meant that it was simple to manage a
software project that had developers working in multiple time zones
in a very constrained timeframe. [A large] part of the success was
due to the ability for multiple people and organizations [to collabo‐
rate].”69
Collaboration and teamwork were also facilitated by the neutrality
of open data products and tools. McNamara points out that using
open source tools allowed the Map to be vendor-neutral and ad-free,
which made it easier for competitors to collaborate on the site. That
neutrality also encouraged businesses to contribute data directly to
the site, which shifted the burden of accuracy to those with the
greatest interest in it: the businesses themselves.70
Impact on Other Data Projects
Both Carver and Campion feel that the earthquake experience has
advanced the cause of open data and accelerated data release in New
Zealand. Carver notes that the earthquake provided a rapid and dra‐
Impact 
| 
375

71 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
72 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
73 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
74 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
75 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
matic conversion to open data for the agencies involved in the
recovery.
“Those ... organizations, that previously didn’t have much in the
way of policy or practice around open data or social media, went
from ‘Oh, no, we couldn’t possibly do that!’ to it being the only
thing that would work over the span of a week—and then just
never looked back. It wasn’t that it would be a good idea and incre‐
mentally value-adding, but then you had to persuade a bunch of
naysayers. It was the only thing that would work.”71
Campion agrees that the Christchurch experience has changed atti‐
tudes toward open data. “I think it has opened up all the agencies
involved, and some of the peripheral ones. There’s not so much
pushback any more. They know that that’s what should be happen‐
ing.”72
Carver also believes that the Christchurch experience has probably
accelerated the pace of data release by local governments in New
Zealand, by demonstrating both the benefits and the manageability
of associated risk.73 He observes that resistance to opening data has a
similar pattern worldwide. “The fears ... which are barriers to open
data release, and therefore to realizing the value from open data
release ... are often just a slightly more explicit articulation of ... ‘We
can’t possibly do this because a bad thing will explode.’ [They] are
almost always not especially evidence-based, and the risks are able
quite easily to be managed. It’s primarily a change management pro‐
cess, not a risk management process.”74 And “Crises give you an
opportunity to go through that process of getting through those
objections faster.”75 Adds Campion, “Don’t be afraid to share [data].
376 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

76 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
If you can anonymize the data, share it, and people will make use of
it.”76
• Canterbury Recovery Map (Eq.org.nz): In the two days after
the earthquake, amassed 779 reports, 781 different locations,
and almost 70,000 unique visitors; informed the activities of
local volunteers who helped clear more than 360,000 tons of silt
deposited by liquefaction from residential properties, over more
than 80,000 volunteer working hours.
• CERA: Created maps for Christchurch City Council and per‐
formance analysis on those maps to inform the activities of
demolition crews, among other uses.
• Landcheck and MyProperty: Provided citizens with informa‐
tion on safety of their property as aftershocks continued, and
authoritative information about the legal context for repairs and
rebuilds.
• Forward Works Viewer: In its first year, the Forward Works
viewer delivered NZ$4 million in benefits with a total of more
than NZ$20 million forecast, as a result of reduced clashes and
delays, shared roadworks and trenching, reduced impact on the
travelling public and improved traffic modelling.
• Building Our Footprints: The month-long competition gener‐
ated 18,789 building outlines, which were integrated into the
relevant council databases and OpenStreetMap.
Challenges
Data Infrastructure Challenges
Christchurch recovered remarkably fast from its earthquake, and
many reasons have been given for its resilience: the existence of
comprehensive insurance cover, including compulsory earthquake
insurance; the geography of the city, which did not experience any
single points of failure that could have devastating broader impacts
if affected by the quake; and a rapid injection from the New Zealand
government of NZ$15 billion of the estimated NZ$40 billion needed
Challenges 
| 
377

77 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
78 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
79 GovLab interview with Iain Campion, former Application Team Leader, Environment
Canterbury, July 28, 2015.
80 McMurren, Juliet, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew Young. “Denmark’s Open Address
Data Set: Consolidating and Freeing Up Address Data.” Open Data’s Impact. January
2016. http://odimpact.org/case-denmarks-open-address-data-set.html
to rebuild.77 A further reason offered for the city’s quick recovery
was the existence of a robust data infrastructure that made it easy to
resettle people in safe areas and enable the business community to
continue to function.
Although good, the data infrastructure was not perfect, and those
involved in the recovery effort have pointed out several flaws that
could be remedied to improve the response to future disasters. In
particular, both Carver and Campion point to the absence of a sin‐
gle, comprehensive and authoritative property data set. Carver notes
that different pieces of property-related data—land parcels, records
related to building footprints, addresses data and ratings—existed in
“separate systems, across different organizations, and were often
duplicated or differently updated and inaccurate.”78
Lack of a Property Framework
Campion points to a related problem: the lack of a “good property
framework” that would allow responders to confidently and com‐
prehensively track, check and record response locations. “Relying
on addresses that are not a standard or unique data set ... was really
problematic,” he said. “For instance, [search and rescue teams]
would go to a building in the CBD and they would say, yes, I’ve
checked 34 Chester St West—but there is no actual address of 34
Chester St West, although there is a building there. There may be
two Smith Streets in Christchurch: Well, which one did you check? I
don’t know!”79 A single comprehensive property data set might have
reduced the cost of claims administration, allowing more money to
go toward the rebuild. Such a standardized, public address data set
exists in Denmark, resulting in improved public services, including
emergency response.80
378 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

81 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
82 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
83 http://m.stats.govt.nz/about_us/what-we-do/our-publications/cabinet-papers/data-
futures-partnership-cabinet-paper
Collaborations and Sharing Challenges
Finally, although the recovery effort was in many ways a testament
to strong teamwork, there were some problems related to collabora‐
tion. In particular, Carver reports that the team behind Eq.org.nz
developed certain tensions with some parts of the official emergency
response teams. He says:
“The people doing the Web and social media in the emergency
operations center were much more communicative and friendly
with the crisis mapping teams [of Eq.org.nz] than the ... civil
defense and emergency management folks, who got quite con‐
cerned that there was all this information being published and it
wasn’t authoritative. [The] citizen response was, well, you don’t
have any maps or authoritative information, so even if this isn’t per‐
fect, it’s a lot better than nothing! That interaction and conflict
meant fairly substantial post-earthquake upgrading of the emer‐
gency services’ understanding of how to engage with online com‐
munities during a natural disaster.”81
Carver contrasts the Canterbury example with the more successful
response of the Queensland police to the Brisbane floods in 2010
and 2011, who made extensive and successful use of social media.82
Looking Forward
Advancing Data-Driven Innovation in New Zealand
The experience of the Christchurch earthquake, which demon‐
strated that crises demanded innovative, highly cost-effective and
rapid solutions, has pushed New Zealand to explore new uses and
sources for data. Having embraced open data, the New Zealand gov‐
ernment is now looking beyond it, to the possibilities of data-driven
innovation. In August 2015, Statistics NZ, in partnership with the
New Zealand Treasury and a group of expert stakeholders,
announced the Data Futures Partnership,83 a cross-sector collabora‐
tion of influential individuals working to drive change in NZ’s data
Looking Forward 
| 
379

84 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
85 GovLab interview with Julian Carver, former Chief Information Officer, Canterbury
Earthquake Recovery Authority, August 3, 2015.
86 Carver, Julian. “Using the Web in Earthquake Recovery.” New Zealand Government
Web Toolkit. March 25, 2013. https://webtoolkit.govt.nz/blog/2013/03/using-the-web-in-
earthquake-recovery/
ecosystem. The partnership is intended to develop catalyst data-use
projects and encourage increased trusted data sharing use of data
that cannot be opened for reasons of privacy or commercial sensi‐
tivity between government agencies, and potentially between public
and private sectors, to help promote data-driven innovation.84
Carver believes the expansion from open data to data-driven inno‐
vation and data sharing was accelerated by the Christchurch experi‐
ence. “If anything, this has happened faster because we’ve had lots of
successes with open data in public, because we’ve had this earth‐
quake context in which we had permission to innovate.”85 Carver
sees significant opportunity for innovation in crises. “The necessary
preconditions for innovation are starvation, pressure, and perspec‐
tive shift,” he says, quoting complexity theorist and management
expert Dave Snowden. “Under significant time pressure, with fewer
than normal resources, in a situation that’s really important to get
right, [you’re] much more likely to come up with innovative solu‐
tions than ... when everything is comfortable.”86
380 
| 
Chapter 17: New Zealand’s Christchurch Earthquake Clusters

CHAPTER 18
Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map
Open Data for Public Health
By Andrew Young, David Sangokoya and
Stefaan Verhulst
Summary: Faced with a dengue fever epidemic, the government of
Singapore and the city’s National Environmental Agency (NEA)
turned to open data to control the spread of the disease. In 2005, the
NEA started sharing information on the location of dengue clusters
as well as disease information and preventive measures online,
through a website now commonly known as the “Dengue Website.”
Since then, the NEA’s data-driven cluster map has evolved, and it
became an integral part of the campaign against a dengue epidemic
in 2013. The campaign had two key components: an awareness-
raising campaign, and a system of alerting the community to the
severity of the dengue situation and the corresponding preventive
measures to take. The data was also opened to app developers, who
have used it to create a more nuanced and rich picture of the spread
of dengue fever.
Dimension of Impact: Solving Public Problems—Data-Driven
Engagement
Key Takeaways:
• In many cases, open data initiatives can become more impactful
when they integrate an element of citizen engagement—in the
interest of conducting user-centered design, filling gaps in exist‐
ing data sets or driving use of the data and/or platform.
381

1 “Dengue.” World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/topics/dengue/en/.
2 Associated Press. “Singapore on alert after dengue fever cases rise.” The Independent.
June 11, 2013. http://www.independent.co.uk​/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/
singapore-on-alert-after-dengue-fever-cases-rise-8654478.html.
3 “Dengue.” World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/topics/dengue/en/.
• Open data projects that are problem-focused have great poten‐
tial to expand across borders to other areas facing similar chal‐
lenges.
• Particularly in problem-focused efforts, there is a need for
ongoing iteration around open data projects to address shifting
conditions on the ground or better target the needs of the affec‐
ted user community.
Context and Background
Dengue Fever
Dengue fever is a viral disease that causes symptoms such as high
fever, severe headaches with pain behind the eyes, joint and muscle
pain, skin rashes, nausea, vomiting, bruising, and bleeding from the
nose or gums. Humans are the natural reservoirs of the dengue
virus, of which there are four serotypes, and the disease is spread by
the female Aedes mosquitoes, who pick up the virus from infected
humans and then further transmit the virus to other humans
through its bites.1 The severe form of the disease—dengue haemor‐
rhagic fever—is potentially fatal, particularly for older children and
adults with weakened immune systems. This variation of dengue
damages the lymph and blood vessels, and can lead to an enlarge‐
ment of the liver.2
Over 2.5 billion people living in tropical areas are at risk for dengue,
and the disease is particularly widespread in the Asia Pacific region,
where some 70 percent of the population is considered at risk.3
However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
found that the reported incidence of dengue is growing across the
world, in developed as well as developing countries. The CDC posits
that this increase is likely due to a combination of a number of fac‐
tors, such as population growth, urbanization, lack of sanitation,
increased long-distance travel, ineffective mosquito control, and cli‐
382 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

4 “Dengue and Climate.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://
www.cdc.gov/Dengue/entomologyEcology/climate.html.
5 A serotype is a “group of intimately related microorganisms distinguished by a com‐
mon set of antigens.” Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary. http://www.merriam-
webster.com/medical/serotype.
6 “Host Response to the Dengue Virus.” Scitable by Nature Education. http://
www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/host-response-to-the-dengue-virus-22402106.
7 Wong, Chun Han. “Dengue Fever on the Rise in Singapore.” The Wall Street Journal.
April 29, 2013. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887324743704578446162122159222.
mate change. Improvements in reporting capacity could also play a
role in the apparently increasing numbers.4
Dengue’s four different serotypes5 create an added challenge in
efforts to address the spread of the disease. Once a patient suffers
from dengue, they develop lifelong immunity to that particular sero‐
type of the disease. However, immunity to the other serotype varia‐
tions is only short-lived, and the risk of developing a more severe
version of the disease increases with each subsequent infection by
other serotypes.6
There is currently no vaccine or drug to combat dengue, and the
principal form of treatment involves intravenous rehydration. The
World Health Organization (WHO) reports that about 500,000 peo‐
ple with the severe form of dengue are hospitalized each year, with
around 2.5 percent of those people dying. Highlighting the impor‐
tance of initiatives like the one described here, WHO believes that
early detection and medical attention could bring dengue’s fatality
rate below 1 percent.7 Individuals armed with an understanding of
their level of risk for contracting dengue fever, it would seem, would
be far more likely to seek early medical attention—the key factor in
improving their chance of survival.
Dengue Fever in Singapore
Dengue has posed a public health challenge to the residents of Sin‐
gapore since the mid-1960s, when it supplanted malaria as the num‐
ber one mosquito-borne disease affecting the country. Recent years
have witnessed two of the country’s worst epidemics. In 2005,
authorities in Singapore confirmed 14,209 cases of dengue, with 25
Context and Background 
| 
383

8 Wong, Chun Han. “Dengue Fever on the Rise in Singapore.” The Wall Street Journal.
April 29, 2013. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887324743704578446162122159222.
9 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
10 “Fact Sheet on Managing Singapore’s Dengue Outbreak.” National Environment
Agency of Singapore. March 11, 2014. http://www.nea.gov.sg/docs/default-source/
corporate/COS-2014/managing-singapore’s-dengue-outbreak.pdf.
11 According to the World Bank, Singapore had a population density of 7,814 people per
square kilometer in 2014, making it the third-densest country in the world. Source:
“Population density (people per sq. km of land area).” World Bank Data. http://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST?
order=wbapi_data_value_2014+wbapi_data_value+wbapi_data_value-last&sort=desc.
12 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, January 22,
2016.
13 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
14 Tiong, Sabrina. “NEA officers fanning out in dengue hot spots.” AsiaOne. March 31,
2013.
deaths.8 In 2013, Singapore saw a second major epidemic, with cases
rising by more than 50 percent over the 2005 outbreak9 to 22,170.10
These increases are most likely being driven by a combination of
greater population density,11 increased international travel, and
urbanization. A lower level of immunity throughout the population
—the result of long periods of relatively low dengue incidence—has
further elevated the risk of transmission. The availability of better
and faster diagnostic kits also likely helped to increase the number
of reported cases.12
Over time, the Singaporean government has developed a dynamic,
evolving dengue control program that seeks to respond to changes
in the disease’s epidemiology and to conditions on the ground.13
Authorities have taken an evidence-based integrated approach, cou‐
pling virus, mosquito and case surveillance with source reduction—
through, among other efforts, the removal of potential mosquito
breeding grounds (in the form of standing water in, for instance,
flower pot plates and pails) by residents; increasing insecticide fumi‐
gation; and penalizing people with a $200 fine if their homes are
found to be non-reported mosquito breeding zones within dengue
cluster and transmission areas.14
Awareness-building has also played a key role. In April 2013, the
National Environment Agency (NEA) launched the “Do the Mozzie
Wipeout” campaign, focused on improving public awareness of den‐
384 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

15 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
16 https://www.facebook.com/Stop.Dengue.Now?fref=ts
17 https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2013/singapore.
18 Centre for Strategic Futures. “Foresight.” 2014. http://www.csf.gov.sg/docs/default-
source/default-document-library/csf-report-2014.pdf.
19 Kuah, Adrian W.J. and Lim Seok Hui. “After Our Singapore Conversation: The Futures
of Governance.” Singapore Civil Service College. June 2014. https://www.cscol
lege.gov.sg/Knowledge/ethos/Ethos%20-%20Issue%2013,%20June%202014/Pages/After
%20Our%20Singapore%20Conversation%20The%20Futures%20of%20Governance.aspx.
20 Wei, Leong Ming. “Developing Talents in Futures.” in Foresight. 2014. http://
www.csf.gov.sg/docs/default-source/default-document-library/csf-report-2014.pdf.
21 http://www.internetworldstats.com/asia.htm#sg.
22 http://www.opendatabarometer.org/report/summary/.
gue, inspiring citizens to take preventive actions, and encouraging
advocacy over social media and in person.15 The campaign included
a variety of innovative communications and outreach components,
including home-visits by volunteers to raise awareness; road shows
aimed at educating the public; a campaign website and a regularly
updated Facebook page.16
Open Data in Singapore
Singapore has an increasingly tech-driven and innovative public and
government culture, perhaps in opposition to concerns over civil
liberties issues in the nation state—Freedom House labels Singapore
as “partly free” with a rating of 4 in civil liberties and political rights.
17 In 2009, for instance, the prime minister’s office established the
Centre for Strategic Futures, “a think tank within government, with
the freedom to focus on issues of strategic importance even if they
are not perceived as immediately urgent.”18 The think tank’s initia‐
tives and research have focused on enabling broadly focused dia‐
logue between citizens and the government,19 and arming
government employees with the skills and competencies needed to
lead in the 21st century.20
As of 2014, the nation’s Internet penetration rate was 78.5 percent
according to Internet World Statistics.21 It is considered a “high
capacity” country on the Open Data Barometer, albeit at the very
bottom of that cluster, with limitations in the areas of political,
social and economic impacts, data accessibility, accountability, and
citizen and civil society readiness.22 Part of the governmental effec‐
Context and Background 
| 
385

23 https://ideas.ecitizen.gov.sg/a/pages/visualisationchallenge-home
24 http://singaporenews.github.io/
25 GovLab interview with Professor Ee-Peng Lim, Ph.D., Co-Director, Living Analytics
Research Centre, Singapore Management University, September 28, 2015.
tiveness for which Singapore is known, is likely due in part to its rel‐
atively small size and keen focus on government-driven efficiency
across sectors.
As of late 2015, the government’s open data portal (data.gov.sg/)
houses data sets from 71 government ministries and agencies,
including over 350 data sets related to health originating from the
Health Promotion Board, Health Sciences Authority and Ministry of
Health. The portal also features a diversity of applications, including
many focused on improving public health, such as apps focused on
improving 
citizens’ 
nutritional 
intake 
(Mealplan), 
sharing
government-sponsored sport and fitness activities (Health Friend),
and encouraging citizens to stop smoking (Smoke Free @ SG).
Singapore has also used the data portal as a means for catalyzing
citizen engagement around available data, through, for example, the
Data in the City Visualization Challenge, which asked citizens to tell
“your Singapore story using data.”23 The winning entrant, The Sin‐
gapore Story as told by the Straits Times, visualizes a 170-year-old
Singaporean newspaper archive to capture the mood of the era in
which the news stories appeared.24
As Professor Ee-Peng Lim, co-director of Living Analytics Research
Centre, Singapore Management University, describes, “Singapore is
heading toward an effort to use both public and private enterprise
data to innovate her economy as well as her society. This is currently
the mindset of the government, as well as the nation.”25
386 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

26 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
27 The NEA defines a dengue cluster as “a locality with active transmission where inter‐
vention is targeted. It is formed when two or more cases have onset within 14 days and
are located within 150m of each other (based on residential and workplace addresses as
well as movement history).” GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency
of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
Figure 18-1. The Singapore Story, winner of the Singaporean Data Vis‐
ualization Challenge
Project Description and Inception
Among Singapore’s various efforts to combat dengue, the cluster
map stands out for its combination of technology with on-the-
ground public efforts. The cluster map grew originally out of the
2005 dengue epidemic. In September of that year, the weekly inci‐
dence of dengue climbed to over 700, a record high for Singapore.26
As a result, the government began to take more proactive measures
to provide information to the public, notably through updates on
dengue cases and dengue clusters that were uploaded on the NEA
and the Ministry of Health (MOH) websites every day.27 This even‐
tually developed into a website (the “Dengue Website,” as it came to
be known, dengue.gov.sg). That website brought together maps and
tables from the NEA and MOH sites (along with other information)
to build cluster maps that help authorities and the public geographi‐
cally visualize locations where dengue is a problem. Among other
things, these maps help plan vector control operations, inform the
Project Description and Inception 
| 
387

28 Under the Infectious Diseases Act, Cap. 137, every medical practitioner is required to
notify the Director of Medical Services (Ministry of Health) not later than 24 hours
from the time of diagnosis of dengue fever/dengue haemorrhagic fever.
29 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, August 31,
2015.
public where vector control operations will be carried out, and
enable the public in affected areas to take necessary precautions to
protect themselves from mosquito bites and help to remove or pre‐
vent mosquito breeding areas.
The data used to build the cluster map is gathered from a variety of
sources, including medical practitioners who attend or treat dengue
cases28 and laboratories that diagnose the disease. Because much of
the data is gathered at the individual level, it is anonymized before
being uploaded to the site (see note on privacy concerns below). The
data is fed into a network that connects the NEA’s headquarters with
five satellite offices, as well as the Environmental Health Institute, an
NEA-staffed laboratory where investigators conduct research on
dengue and GIS modeling as a tool to combat dengue. The dengue
cluster map is probably the first instance where the NEA made
available to the public on a continuous basis such comprehensive
information that was previously only used for internal operational
planning29
Figure 18-2. Map of Active Dengue Clusters on the “Dengue Website”
388 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

30 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
Over the years, the cluster map has changed—and improved—con‐
siderably. For example, soon after the website’s launch, it became
apparent that a “point map”—a simple map with dots representing
affected areas—did not provide a useful level of information to the
public. In particular, it provided an inadequate indication of the
exact boundaries of dengue clusters, and left some citizens confused
about whether or not they resided within a cluster area. As a result,
the point map was replaced with a map showing the boundary of
each cluster. To complement this, the key breeding habitats detected
were also published alongside the dengue clusters.30
In addition, in 2013, following the epidemic mentioned above, a
color-coded system was introduced to indicate the severity of an
epidemic in a particular cluster. The map was also enhanced to
include more granular data, including specific blocks in public
housing and road names for private houses. All these enhancements
have helped to give the public more specific, actionable information
on how to protect themselves from mosquito bites in dengue clus‐
ters, and where a high level of vigilance is required in order to com‐
bat mosquito breeding.
Community outreach plays a key role in improving the cluster map.
Direct outreach to citizens helps the NEA team to identify function‐
ality gaps for the map, ensuring that the tools on offer match the
needs of the user base. Perhaps more importantly, direct citizen
communication continues to play a large role in supplementing the
data housed in the cluster map. Upon receiving dengue case infor‐
mation, the NEA epidemiological officers authorized by the Minis‐
try of Health interview cases to verify case details and learn more
about citizens’ usual routines and recent travel history. This infor‐
mation is key for identifying where the mosquito bite leading to
infection is likely to have occurred.
Simultaneously, a second group of officers use a predefined algo‐
rithm to incorporate the new cases and information obtained from
epidemiological investigation into the cluster map and update exist‐
ing cluster boundary information for daily publishing on the Den‐
gue Website.
Project Description and Inception 
| 
389

31 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, August 31,
2015.
Impact
Since its inception, the Dengue Website has seen significant, sus‐
tained use, particularly during the peak dengue season. As indicated
by the graph below, the site typically sees between 25,000 and 45,000
monthly visits, with that number rising to almost 100,000 during
peak season.
Figure 18-3. Traffic to the Dengue Website in 2014. Copyright Singa‐
pore NEA. Used with permission.
It would be a mistake, however, to assess the impact of the site and
its maps solely through direct Web traffic. Singapore’s efforts to
combat dengue with open data have changed behaviors and atti‐
tudes across a variety of different social and demographic groups. It
is an important initiative to make information more readily avail‐
able to the public during this period to urge the public to play a part
in dengue prevention and to help curb the dengue transmission.31
The reach of the cluster map has been extended by making it avail‐
able through NEA’s myENV app for smartphones on various operat‐
ing platforms. Beyond just a passive aggregator of information, the
app has opened up new functionalities for the data behind the clus‐
ter map, such as automated user alerts based on user-defined set‐
390 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

32 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
33 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, August 31,
2015.
34 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
35 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
tings and location-based alerts. We consider three impact groups in
particular: average citizens, media and developers.
Average Citizens
The largest group of users for the Dengue Website and cluster map
is the “Web-savvy public.”32 Given dengue’s potential for rapid trans‐
mission, arming the public with information on the areas of active
transmission allows the public to take preventive measures against
dengue fever, including removal of potential mosquito breeding and
wearing insect repellent.33 Prior to the NEA’s concerted effort to give
the public this information, there was no surefire way for the public
to know the areas of potential active dengue transmission, likely
leading to states of either constant vigilance or gradual, learned
complacency.
Media
Since the Dengue Website’s inception, journalists have increasingly
turned to it for reliable information. According to the NEA, for
example, “the mainstream media regularly uses the case count and
case breakdown in clusters that are published on the website to
report on the prevailing dengue situation, particularly during the
peak season.”34 With the importance of open dengue information to
the media in mind, since 2014 the NEA has published a brief assess‐
ment of the dengue situation each week to go along with the hard
data on dengue cases from the previous week, to inform media
reports and, subsequently, the public of the situation on the ground.
35
Developer Community
One of the more impressive spin-off benefits of the Dengue Website
is evident in the galvanization and mobilization of Singapore’s devel‐
oper community. In recent years, local developers have built a num‐
ber of Web and mobile applications that build on the data and maps
Impact 
| 
391

36 “Dengue on the Rise—Some Apps to Stay Informed on Dengue Clusters.” Iheartapple.
http://iheartapple.com/2013/01/dengue-on-the-rise-some-apps-to-stay-informed-on-
dengue-clusters/.
37 https://www.facebook.com/xdengue
included on the website. Several of these applications improve on
the functionality of the the Dengue Website and illustrate open
data’s capacity to spur innovation and social and economic develop‐
ment.
Built from raw data sets available through an application program‐
ming interface (API) on the Singapore government open data por‐
tal, developers have created applications built using this API, in
addition to the myENV app created by the NEA itself. Two of the
most popular are:
• DengueLah, created by Buuuk, a mobile app development
agency, tells the user where dengue active clusters are and, using
location awareness, alerts the user if he or she approaches
within a 2km radius of a known dengue cluster. The app also
has a page with tips for prevention against dengue infection,
illustrated with cartoons.
• X-Dengue, created through a collaboration between the NEA
and Smart Communities Pte Ltd, a local software development
company, alerts users on dengue clusters through location-
based SMS and email alerts. Users can also check if their current
location is considered to be at risk. The accompanying Web por‐
tal allows users to update danger zones that are then broadcast
through the app.36 X-Dengue has since been discontinued, with
many users lamenting the loss of the platform on its Facebook
page. “All the best!” one user writes, “You’ve helped lots of peo‐
ple across SG with your community spirit!”37
Challenges
Over the course of the Dengue Website’s first decade of existence, it
has increased in sophistication and become one of the measures in
Singapore’s dengue control program. Yet, if Singapore’s open data
efforts are to remain effective, particularly at a time when dengue
392 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

38 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
39 GovLab interview with Professor Ee-Peng Lim, Ph.D., Co-Director, Living Analytics
Research Centre, Singapore Management University, September 28, 2015.
40 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
itself has shown great resilience and even a resurgence around the
world, it will need to overcome several challenges. These include:
• Timeliness: Dengue information is only useful if it is current.
Especially during peak dengue months, when the dengue case‐
load is high, maintaining the currency of dengue data requires
good coordination among the team assembling the data.
• Privacy: As described above, information on dengue cases must
be anonymized in order to maintain the privacy of cases.38
Given the fact that dengue is vector transmitted, there is a less‐
ened concern of stigma being attached to carriers of the disease,
but, of course, the need for maintaining the privacy of citizens
remains essential. While speaking about dengue in particular—
but pointing to challenges relevant for a broader range of open
data initiatives—Ee-Peng Lim of the Living Analytics Research
Centre describes a sometimes difficult balance “between pro‐
tecting the data, the privacy of the data,” and allowing “certain
room for people to innovate.”39
• Complacency: The boundaries displayed in the dengue cluster
map play a key role in making it known to the public where
increased vigilance is required. These approximated boundaries,
however, also had the unintended and unforeseen effect of fos‐
tering undue complacency in some segments of the population.
In some cases, the NEA found that some members of the public
felt that “they should only act (to undertake dengue prevention
measures) when their residence falls within the cluster bound‐
ary.”40 Upon recognizing this tendency, the NEA began releasing
targeted communications to the public on the importance of
sustaining their vigilance even during “peacetime” so as to
inculcate a regular habit against mosquito breeding.
• User-Friendly Competition: In 2014, Xie Rufeng, a developer
based in Singapore, created outbreak.sgcharts.com, a website for
mapping cases of dengue in the country. Rufeng was aware of
the NEA’s similar cluster map, but noted that he is a “big fan of
Google Maps, which is highly customizable, so I decided to roll
Challenges 
| 
393

41 Xu, Terry. “App site tracks dengue cases in Singapore using Google Maps.” The Online
Citizen. July 30, 2014. http://www.theonlinecitizen.com/2014/07/app-site-tracks-dengue-
cases-in-singapore-using-google-maps/
42 Xu, Terry. “App site tracks dengue cases in Singapore using Google Maps.” The Online
Citizen. July 30, 2014. http://www.theonlinecitizen.com/2014/07/app-site-tracks-dengue-
cases-in-singapore-using-google-maps/
up my sleeves and do my own map.”41 Moreover, Rufeng’s site
includes historical data on dengue cases, which is not found on
the NEA cluster map. He notes, “I thought it will be interesting
to provide an interactive timeline where users can view past
dengue clusters. This information will help us to understand
where dengue has re-emerged, or how long does it take for den‐
gue clusters to reach a certain size.”42 With the existence of a
feature-rich, user-friendly competitor, NEA will likely need to
add new functionalities to its cluster map in order to keep pace.
Additionally, 
as 
some 
users 
begin 
to 
rely 
on 
out‐
break.sgcharts.com, concerns are likely to arise over whether
the information found on the third-party site is fully accurate,
or if it is spreading any level of misinformation to the public.
Looking Forward
For over a decade, Singapore has used open, digital tools to give the
public the information and tools necessary to stop the spread of
dengue. Looking ahead, the NEA will likely need to make a choice
about the future of its open data efforts around data. The first
option would be to add additional functionalities to the site—
including the use of the overwhelmingly popular Google Maps
engine—to keep pace with similar non-governmental competitors.
Adding new functionalities, however, will likely be resource-
intensive, making focused efforts to improve the site difficult, espe‐
cially considering that keeping the information housed on the site
current (itself a resource-intensive task) will always be of paramount
importance. The second option would be to move away from plat‐
form efforts and instead focus on simply collecting and supplying
up-to-date, high-quality dengue data, and letting the developer
community take the lead in producing public-facing platforms to
mitigate the spread of the disease.
394 
| 
Chapter 18: Singapore’s Dengue Cluster Map

43 GovLab Interview with the National Environment Agency of Singapore, July 23, 2015.
44 https://www.unitedengue.org/index.html
45 “Potential dengue vaccine protects those aged 9 and above: Study.” Your Health Asia
One. August 4, 2015. http://yourhealth.asiaone.com/content/potential-dengue-vaccine-
protects-those-aged-9-and-above-study
Beyond updates to the site, the NEA is conducting outreach to pub‐
lic health institutions and practitioners in other dengue-endemic
regions to explore the potential for future collaborations and/or
knowledge-sharing. This type of knowledge-sharing has occurred,
for instance, at the regular Asia-Pacific Dengue Workshop, organ‐
ized by the NEA and WHO, where participants from across dengue-
endemic countries are trained in how to leverage geographic
information system (GIS) data to develop situation awareness.43
UNITEDengue, a Web-based platform for data-sharing among
countries in the region has also been initiated.44
While there is new hope regarding a potential vaccine to prevent the
spread of dengue,45 the Singaporean government will likely continue
to face the threat of outbreaks of the disease for at least the near
future. By recognizing that the best way to engender safe, healthy
decision-making regarding the spread of the disease is to give citi‐
zens timely access to information on the location of active dengue
clusters, Singapore is taking steps toward turning the potential vic‐
tims of dengue—whether application developers or citizens armed
with information to help avoid enabling new cases—into the factors
stopping its spread.
Looking Forward 
| 
395


CHAPTER 19
United States’ Eightmaps
The Unintended Negative Consequences
of Open Data
By Auralice Graft, Stefaan Verhulst and Andrew Young
Summary: In 2008, voters in California were presented with a
choice regarding the legal right of same-sex couples to marry. Prop‐
osition 8, which passed successfully on November 4, 2008, made
same-sex marriage illegal in the state. Given the strong opinions on
both sides of the issue, it is not surprising that debate did not con‐
clude after the final ballot was counted. In 2009, the anonymous cre‐
ator(s) of Eightmaps.com launched a tool providing detailed
information on supporters of Prop 8. The site collected information
made public through state campaign finance disclosure laws and
overlaid that information onto a Google map of the state. Through
Eightmaps, users could find the names, approximate locations,
amount donated, and, where available, employers of individuals
who donated money to support Prop 8 and stop same-sex marriage
in the state. While the site is no longer live, and a federal court even‐
tually found Prop 8 unconstitutional in 2010, Eightmaps demon‐
strates how the increased computability and reusability of open data
—especially data related to contentious issues like same-sex mar‐
riage—might be used in unexpected ways that not only create major
privacy concerns for citizens, but could also lead to harassment and
threats based on political disagreements.
Impact: Solving Public Problems—Data-Driven Engagement
Key Takeaways:
397

1 Alexander, Kim. “Initiative Disclosure Reform: Overview and Recommendations.”
Greenlining Institute. June 16, 2011. http://www.calvoter.org/issues/disclosure/pub/green
liningpaper.pdf
• Open data efforts, especially those that involve individual-level
information, have the potential for unintended consequences in
the form of negative impacts to citizen privacy.
• Legislation focused on transparency and accountability passed
prior to the rise of the Internet could have insufficient safe‐
guards for privacy, given that today’s data analysis and computa‐
tion capabilities could not have been predicted to reach the
current level even throughout the late 1990s and early 2000s.
• Accessible public data can be mashed up with other data sour‐
ces using free tools to create new insights and public impacts. In
some cases, those impacts are positive and create new value to
users. In others, the results can be more troubling.
Context and Background
In the interest of creating transparency and accountability in the
political process and around political messaging, among other rea‐
sons, the U.S. government today publicly discloses personal infor‐
mation about voters through two different data sets: those for voter
data and those for campaign finance. Voter data sets are created
when citizens register to vote. The type of data required varies to
some extent by state. The state of California, where the case under
consideration occurred, requires that voters provide their name,
address, party affiliation, previous residence and signature, among
other information. Aside from a citizen’s signature, this data is read‐
ily accessible online. Some other states require the submission of a
formal request to access such data. Campaign finance data sets on
the other hand, are compiled and disclosed by campaigns that are
required to file data about donors who give over a certain amount in
support of that candidate or referenda. As with voter data, the type
of data required to be disclosed also varies by state. In California,
which is known to have likely the strongest campaign finance dis‐
closure laws in the country,1 a donor’s name, address, occupation
and employer are required. As of 2015, the donation threshold over
which disclosure is mandated is $100 in California, with campaign
398 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

2 cal-access.sos.ca.gov/
3 Messner, Thomas M. “The Price of Prop 8.” Heritage Foundation. October 22, 2009.
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/10/the-price-of-prop-8
4 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
finance data available on the California Secretary of State’s website.2
Anyone with access to the Internet can view it online or download it
as a Microsoft Excel file.3 A more detailed report including donors’
complete addresses (which is redacted from the online display) can
also be accessed by submitting a signed request to the California
Secretary of State’s office, at which point it is delivered on a CD.
Large data users, like news organizations, can also access a live
online feed following the completion of an agreement with the Sec‐
retary of State’s office.
Legal Foundation of Campaign Finance Data Disclosure
Laws in California
Written in the 1970s as an outgrowth of the Watergate scandal, Cali‐
fornia’s campaign finance disclosure laws built upon earlier require‐
ments to provide just the names of donors openly to the public.
Then a movement gained steam to ensure that the public remain
fully informed, and that improper practices (like those relating to
the Watergate scandal) be prohibited by the enactment of new dis‐
closure laws. California’s current Governor Jerry Brown who was
secretary of state at the time, and Bob Stern of the Center for Gov‐
ernment Studies, among others, wrote California’s Political Reform
Act of 1974, which required that all candidates disclose the name,
address, occupation and employer for every donation over the
threshold—which at the time was $50. Information must be filed for
donations toward candidates (to limit the potential for corruption)
as well as donations toward issues and referenda (to help voters
know who supports what, which in turn helps them make informed
political decisions).4 The law stipulates that disclosure must be made
in an itemized, timely manner, and include all contributions and
expenditures. It also prohibits anonymous contributions and con‐
tains a regulatory framework imposing penalties for failure to com‐
ply. Kim Alexander of the California Voter Foundation recalls,
“Writing and passing the law was done through the initiative pro‐
Context and Background 
| 
399

5 Alexander, Kim. “Initiative Disclosure Reform: Overview and Recommendations.”
Greenlining Institute. June 16, 2011. http://www.calvoter.org/issues/disclosure/pub/green
liningpaper.pdf
6 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
7 Senate Bill No. 49, Chapter 866. http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/97-98/bill/sen/
sb_0001-0050/sb_49_bill_19971011_chaptered.pdf
8 Alexander, Kim. “Initiative Disclosure Reform: Overview and Recommendations.”
Greenlining Institute. June 16, 2011. http://www.calvoter.org/issues/disclosure/pub/green
liningpaper.pdf
9 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
10 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
cess, so the language was very voter focused in terms of people hav‐
ing the right to be informed.”5
Electronic Filing
Initially, after disclosure laws were enacted, campaign finance data
was filed on paper and housed in filing cabinets and accessible at the
Secretary of State’s office. However, in the decades that followed, it
became increasingly clear to many who were familiar with this data
that it should be digitized. Alexander, who worked to change laws to
require that reports be filed electronically, says, “It was clear there
was so much more to be learned about what was going on in cam‐
paign finance if campaign finance records were computerized.”6 The
first bill was drafted in 1995, and the final bill enacted in 1997. The
1997 bill states that candidates’ disclosure records have to be filed
online: “This bill would require the secretary of state to develop a
process whereby reports and statements that are required under the
act to be filed with the secretary of state could be filed electronically
and viewed by the public at no cost on an online disclosure system
by way of the largest nonproprietary, cooperative public computer
network.”7 California was among the first states to pass these elec‐
tronic filing laws.8 Alexander recalls, “I was very aware of the fact
that if California did pass this law, it would be seen as a ‘bellwether’
kind of act that other states would likely copy. Because we’re Califor‐
nia, we have a lot of influence in the rest of the country.”9 San Fran‐
cisco was the first jurisdiction to enact and implement an electronic
filing law, in 1993 and 1995, respectively.10
400 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

11 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
12 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
13 http://www.ag.ca.gov/cms_pdfs/initiatives/i737_07-0068_Initiative.pdf
Privacy Concerns of Electronic Filing
People like Kim Alexander of the California Voter Foundation were
adamant advocates of electronic filing, but were also aware that digi‐
tization could have negative consequences in terms of privacy. She
recalls, “We didn’t want to create a process where people who had
the right to speak with their dollars—as the U.S. Supreme Court has
affirmed they can—felt that right was being denied because their
personal information was disclosed to a wide audience; that there
shouldn’t be this price they would pay.”11 This was in the mid-1990s,
before the meteoric rise of the Internet. At the time, campaign
finance data reports were provided on CDs or floppy disks. Elec‐
tronic filing on the Internet as per campaign disclosure laws only
began in 2000. From the beginning, stakeholders had a sense that
there were potential security threats related to the electronic filing,
but not to the extent that became possible after the rise of the Inter‐
net. To calm security concerns, the final version of 1997 bill required
that donors’ addresses be redacted from the online display. Candi‐
dates still had to file addresses as part of their reports—so they were
included in the formal record—but they were not viewable on secre‐
tary of state’s website. Donor addresses were still publicly available
but digital access to them required a special, signed agreement with
secretary of state’s office. The paper records, however, continue to be
filed with the secretary of state and are made publicly accessible free
of any redaction.12
California’s Proposition 8
Proposition 8 was a California state constitutional amendment cre‐
ated by opponents of same sex marriage forbidding the licensing or
recognition of same sex marriages in California. The proposition
was titled the “California Marriage Protection Act,” and read: “Only
marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in the
State of California.”13 Proposition 8 was preceded by Proposition 22
which was adopted in 2000 as an ordinary statute with exactly the
Context and Background 
| 
401

14 California General Election—Official Voter Information Guide. November 4, 2008.
http://vigarchive.sos.ca.gov/2008/general/argu-rebut/argu-rebutt8.htm
15 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
16 “Proposition 8: Who gave in the gay marriage battle?” Los Angeles Times. http://
projects.latimes.com/prop8/
17 http://www.californiansagainsthate.com/
same wording as Proposition 8. Proposition 22 was invalidated on
constitutional grounds at the U.S. Supreme Court level in 2008.
Proposition 8 replaced it as a state constitutional amendment and
was passed in 2008 California state elections with a vote of 52-48
percent. It was subsequently ruled as unconstitutional by a federal
court in 2010.
The Proposition 8 campaign was extremely polarized. Supporters
and opponents alike felt passionate about its outcome and signifi‐
cance. While supporters argued vehemently that marriage should be
reserved for men and women, opponents felt equally strongly that
California’s constitution should, as the legal document argues,
“guarantee the same freedoms and rights to everyone,” and that “no
one group should be singled out to be treated differently.”14 In many
cases, voters iterated their beliefs and sentiments with donations.
Kim Alexander notes that “there was a lot of money spent on both
sides of this initiative. It was one of the most expensive initiatives
we’ve ever seen [in California].”15 The LA Times described it as the
“state’s costliest initiative,” reporting that a total of more than $83
million was raised on both sides.16
Donors to the Proposition 8 campaign experienced widespread
intimidation and public shaming, led in large part by a group called
Californians Against Hate. This group’s stated mission was to “fight
back” against those supporting Proposition 8 by letting “the world
know who donors [to the proposition] are.”17 Their website listed
people and organizations who had contributed $5,000 or more to
the campaign. That list included individuals’ addresses, which were
publicly available as a result of campaign finance laws, as well as
phone numbers and website addresses—information that is not
included in the publicly accessible data, but rather collected man‐
ually through research on identified individuals. The group, and
others affiliated to it—including BoycottManchesterHotels.com and
BoycottA1SelfStorrage.com—also organized boycotts against very
402 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

18 Richardson, Valerie. “Pestered Prop 8 donors file suit.” The Washington Times. March
23, 2009. http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2009/mar/23/pestered-prop-8-donors-
file-suit/?page=all; “Boycotts related to California Proposition 8.” BallotPedia. http://
ballotpedia.org/Boycotts_related_to_California_Proposition_8
19 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
20 Roy, Jessica. “Gawker Slammed for Story Outing Condé Nast Exec.” New York Maga‐
zine. July 17, 2015. http://nymag.com/thecut/2015/07/gawker-slammed-for-story-outing-
conde-nast-exec.html
21 Tate, Ryan. “Map of Anti-Gay Donors Created by Big Chicken.” Gawker. February 8,
2009. http://gawker.com/5149276/map-of-anti-gay-donors-created-by-big-chicken
large donors, including a hotel owner who contributed $125,000 to
Yes on Proposition 8, and a storage company whose owners donated
$700,000. As a result of these efforts, in some cases people lost their
jobs due to their support for the proposition.18
Kim Alexander echoes a widely held opinion in California and
beyond, “Voters should have never been asked to decide Proposition
8 in the first place. Now we know in hindsight that it was an uncon‐
stitutional proposition. People were in a fight over constitutional
rights, and that’s part of the reason why there was so much passion.
That’s why it was so contentious. In hindsight, we can say it should
never have gone before the voters in the first place.”19
Project Description and Inception
Californians Against Hate targeted larger donors to Proposition 8.
But several websites showed less restraint, including Eight‐
maps.com. Launched in early 2009 by opponents of Proposition 8,
the creators of Eightmaps—also known as “Prop. 8 Maps”—took the
publicly available names and address information of anyone who
had given more than $100 to the campaign and “mashed it” (i.e.,
overlaid it) with Google maps to provide an electronic map to the
residences and workplaces of those donors. Gawker—a media outlet
that at times traffics in uncomfortable levels of transparency20—
called it an “icon for the extremes to which political transparency
can be taken.”21
Eightmaps.com is no longer available online, but an archive search
brings up some of its pages (See Figure 19-1 below). There, a head‐
line announces “Prop 8 Maps: A mash-up on Google Maps and
Prop 8 Donors,” and “Proposition 8 changed the California state
Project Description and Inception 
| 
403

22 http://web.archive.org/web/20090302143108/http://www.eightmaps.com/
23 Stone, Brad. “Prop 8 Donor Web Site Shows Disclosure Law Is 2-Edged Sword.” The
New York Times. February 7, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/08/business/
08stream.html?_r=0
24 “Google Map: Intimidation or Conversation Starter?” WND. February 11, 2009. http://
www.wnd.com/2009/02/88616/
25 Stone, Brad. “Prop 8 Donor Web Site Shows Disclosure Law Is 2-Edged Sword.” The
New York Times. February 7, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/08/business/
08stream.html?_r=0
constitution to prohibit same-sex marriage. These are the people
who donated in order to pass it.” The site displays a Google map that
apparently used to depict markers indicating contributors’ names,
approximate location, amount contributed, and, if available, their
employer (these markers are no longer available in the archived ver‐
sion). The site provides the option to view maps in San Francisco,
Salt Lake City and Orange County.22
It is not clear when exactly Eightmaps was launched or when or how
the wider public first began realizing it existed. But beginning the
week of February 9, 2009, it was covered widely in the U.S. media.
Articles about it appeared in many major newspapers, including The
New York Times,23 the Los Angeles Times and the San Francisco
Chronicle, as well as in blogs and other news sources. Reactions var‐
ied from concern about negative outcomes to praise for the idea.
Referencing Eightmaps, one headline asked, “Google Map: Intimida‐
tion or Conversation Starter?”24
The New York Times wrote that Eightmaps revealed a darker side of
transparency laws: “Eightmaps.com is the latest, most striking exam‐
ple of how information collected through disclosure laws intended
to increase the transparency of the political process, magnified by
the powerful lens of the Web, may be undermining the same demo‐
cratic values that the regulations were to promote.” This could lead
to citizens becoming discouraged from participating in the political
process, the article pointed out.25
A blogger for the Dallas Morning News saw Eightmaps as “a terrible
development,” and worried about the threat to Proposition 8 donors’
privacy. “Given that there has been harassment by gay radicals of
people who supported Prop 8, it is potentially dangerous that it’s
404 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

26 “Eightmaps.com and too much information.” The Dallas Morning News. January 14,
2009. http://dallasmorningviewsblog.dallasnews.com/2009/01/eightmapscom-an.html/
27 Keeling, Brock. “Map of Prop 8 Donors.” SFist. January 9, 2009. http://sfist.com/
2009/01/09/mash-up_map_of_google_maps_and_prop.php
28 “Exposing bigots: eightmaps.com.” The Planetologist. February 14, 2009. https://planetol
ogist.wordpress.com/2009/02/14/exposing-bigots-eightmapscom/
29 Lincoln, Ross A. “Eightmaps.com: Hypocritical Privacy Violation, or Reverse-Super
Judo?” LAist. February 19, 2009. http://laist.com/2009/02/19/
for_people_concerned_that_the.php
now easy to find your way to the homes of these donors—even small
donors,” they opined.26
Others saw the effort as justified, and suggested that it gave Proposi‐
tion 8 donors what they deserve. The SFist.com blogged:
“Is this a witch hunt? No. Is it cruel? A bit, maybe. But aren’t the
36,000 people whose marriages risk nullification entitled to know
which of their neighbors paid to force them into divorce? Criminals
are entitled to face their accusers in court. why can’t married cou‐
ples know who’s funding their forced divorces? And do the yes-
on-8 people REALLY want to play the ‘who’s a bigger victim’ game
with the gays? No.”27
Another blogger described the site as “an interesting convergence ...
between information technology and election donor transparency,”
arguing that: “The laws in California are clear: donate enough and
your name goes public. If the filth who donated to support institu‐
tionalized bigotry are truly proud of themselves, this shouldn’t be a
problem for them. Keep in mind Eightmaps doesn’t expose everyone
who voted for Prop 8, only those who donated enough that they
tripped California’s public disclosure laws. Well, you get what you
pay for.”28
The creators of eightmaps.com remain anonymous and made no
statements about the site. They also refused all requests to be inter‐
viewed. This makes it impossible to know about project inception.
No major efforts to unmask the creators were mentioned in the
media, though many have observed the irony of the creators’ choice
to remain anonymous, given the full-disclosure nature of the web‐
site.29 Gawker referred to them at the time as “Big Chicken[s],” stat‐
ing that “when the people behind a public shaming tool insist on
Project Description and Inception 
| 
405

30 Tate, Ryan. “Map of Anti-Gay Donors Created by Big Chicken.” Gawker. February 8,
2009. http://gawker.com/5149276/map-of-anti-gay-donors-created-by-big-chicken
31 Stone, Brad. “Prop 8 Donor Web Site Shows Disclosure Law Is 2-Edged Sword.” The
New York Times. February 7, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/08/business/
08stream.html?_r=0
lurking in the shadows, they cover their particular tactical effort in a
veneer of slime.”30
Figure 19-1. Screenshot of eightmaps.com. Image copied from the New
York Times31
Impact
The impact of the Eightmaps project was significant. It began with
widespread media coverage and, importantly, a public debate on
transparency in political donations—both arguably positive out‐
comes. Not surprisingly, other impacts were not as positive.
Harassment of Proposition 8 Donors
Many donors to Proposition 8 began experiencing threats, vandal‐
ism, intimidation and property destruction in the weeks and months
after Eightmaps was launched—though whether or not their infor‐
mation was obtained from Eightmaps or other similar sources can‐
not be confirmed. Some reported receiving envelopes containing
white powder. The Washington Times quoted Charles LiMandri, a
Proposition 8 supporter who lived in San Diego as having begun to
receive unexpected correspondence after Eightmaps. “I got about
406 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

32 Richardson, Valerie. “Pestered Prop 8 donors file suit.” The Washington Times. March
23, 2009. http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2009/mar/23/pestered-prop-8-donors-
file-suit/?page=all
33 “Google Map: Intimidation or Conversation Starter?” WND. February 11, 2009. http://
www.wnd.com/2009/02/88616/
34 Richardson, Valerie. “Pestered Prop 8 donors file suit.” The Washington Times. March
23, 2009. http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2009/mar/23/pestered-prop-8-donors-
file-suit/?page=all
35 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
36 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
two dozen emails and hate phone calls,” Mr. LiMandri was quoted as
saying.32 Others received messages like “Burn in Hell,” “Consider
yourself lucky,” and “If I had a gun I would have gunned you down
along with each and every other supporter.”33 Other Proposition 8
donors reported being pushed out of their jobs following the release
of their donation activity.34
The result was a potential chilling effect on some donors’ sense of
safety. While the Californians Against Hate website had also pro‐
vided donors’ names and addresses, these were for a smaller number
of people (because of the higher threshold) and Eightmaps took
things one step further by actually depicting addresses, along with
other information about the donor, on a map. Alexander of the Cali‐
fornia Voter Foundation said, “This idea of giving people a map to
someone’s home is a way of inviting widespread attack on that per‐
son. When you put that on the Internet, you are literally providing
an invitation or suggestion that people go to this person’s home and
confront them. This was threatening on an exponential level.”35
This chilling effect was largely the result of Eightmaps mashing up
of publicly accessible and manually collected data. While individual-
level voter and political donor data has been available to the public
for years, mashups were far from the norm even late into the 00s.
“In 2008 [just before Eightmaps launched], people weren’t doing
that with the Internet,” said Kim Alexander.36
In this way, Eightmaps was an important, thought-provoking lesson
for open data advocacy. Advocates had argued tirelessly about the
benefits of disclosure, about the possibility for limiting corruption
and of informing voters. But they had not perhaps considered the
Impact 
| 
407

37 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
38 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
39 “Prop 8 Donors: Find Out Who Backed California’s Anti-Gay Marriage Amendment.”
The Huffington Post. May 25, 2011. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/02/02/prop-8-
donors-find-out-wh_n_163234.html?ir=India&adsSiteOverride=in
40 Egelko, Bob. “Prop. 8 campaign can’t hide donors’ names.” SFGate. January 30, 2009.
http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Prop-8-campaign-can-t-hide-donors-
names-3174252.php
extent to which outcomes could be negative as well. Alexander
notes, “It’s really hard when you’re an open data advocate to con‐
sider all the potentially negative things that can be done.”37 These
risks are, of course, magnified dramatically by the Internet. “We
realized that when you make data available to everyone [on the
Internet], that means everyone.”38
Threats to Free Speech
Projects like Eightmaps can also threaten free speech by undermin‐
ing disclosure laws. On January 8, 2008, prior to the believed date of
Eightmaps’ launch, a federal lawsuit was filed by James Bopp that
argued California disclosure laws should be changed so candidates
would no longer be required to report information on Proposition 8
donors. Much of the case was built on testimony of those who had
felt threatened in the wake of Proposition 8, and subsequently
demanded that the disclosure law be thrown out or donors’ names
shielded as a result of retaliation against some contributors. “Cer‐
tainly the state has an interest in requiring disclosure,” said Richard
Coleson, an attorney representing the plaintiffs, Protect Marriage,
“but there has to be an exception when there is a reasonable proba‐
bility of reprisal.”39 The case went before U.S. District Judge Morri‐
son England in November 2008, and was denied. “If there ever
needs to be sunshine on a particular issue, it’s a ballot measure,” he
concluded, emphasizing the continued need for transparency on
issues such as the Proposition 8 measure. He also said that illegal
reprisals resulting from online databases—like those available on
Eightmaps the following year—while “repugnant and despicable,”
could be dealt with by law enforcement, without giving donors addi‐
tional legal protection.40
408 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

41 GovLab interview with Daniel Kreiss, Assistant Professor, University of North Carolina
School of Journalism and Media, September 18, 2015.
42 Stolz, Kim. “Are Prop 8 Opponents Using EightMaps.com for the Right Reasons?”
MTV News. February 10, 2009. http://newsroom.mtv.com/2009/02/10/are-prop-8-
opponents-using-eightmapscom-for-the-right-reasons/
43 Karger, Fred. “Fighting for Civil Rights Has Consequences.” The Huffington Post.
November 21, 2009. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/fred-k​arger/fighting-for-civil-
rights_b_294273.html?ir=India&adsSiteOverride=in
Activism Around Gay Rights
Not everyone focused on the negative impacts of Eightmaps. Some
saw its impact to be positive, particularly in terms of activism
around gay rights. Opponents of Proposition 8 were thrilled to see
what they saw to be supporters of discrimination (by opposing gays’
right to marriage) targeted and boycotted.41 Erica Anderson, of the
Erica-America.com blog was quoted in the MTV newsroom as say‐
ing “With Eightmaps, the gays are fighting back, and I say good for
them, good for us. This tool is a perfect example of democracy
meeting Web 2.0—in a thoughtful, productive way.”42
Californians Against Hate founder Fred Karger was propelled into
gay rights activism by his fight against Proposition 8: “Our oppo‐
nents want to send a message to all of us that we are second-class
citizens, who are not entitled to the same rights as our mothers and
fathers, brothers and sisters, aunts, uncles, co-workers, neighbors
and our friends who happen to be straight. This will not deter me. I
will continue to bring attention to those companies and individuals
who spend millions and millions of dollars to stop us from attaining
full and equal civil rights,” he wrote in a September, 2009 Huffington
Post piece.43
This impact on gay rights was not limited to the immediate period
around the launch of Eightmaps, but has snowballed into more per‐
manent changes in national cultural attitude—particularly in terms
of Silicon Valley and the world of information technology. Five years
after Eightmaps, in 2014, Mozilla CEO Brendan Eich was forced to
resign days after assuming the position when he was outed as having
donated $1,000 to support Proposition 8 back in 2008. His compa‐
ny’s Firefox Web Browser faced boycott threats as a result of that
support and he resigned saying, “Under the present circumstances, I
cannot be an effective leader.” The SFGate newspaper quoted Frank
Schubert, a political consultant who ran the Prop. 8 campaign, as
Impact 
| 
409

44 Wildermuth, John. “Mozilla’s Prop. 8 uproar reveals much about tech, gay rights.”
SFGate. April 11, 2014. http://www.sfgate.com/politics/article/Mozilla-s-Prop-8-uproar-
reveals-much-about-tech-5393875.php
45 Wildermuth, John. “Mozilla’s Prop. 8 uproar reveals much about tech, gay rights.”
SFGate. April 11, 2014. http://www.sfgate.com/politics/article/Mozilla-s-Prop-8-uproar-
reveals-much-about-tech-5393875.php
46 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
saying “There’s now no place in current society for holding a view
that people have held for thousands of years.”44
Not everyone was pleased with Eich’s predicament. Gay activist and
commentator Andrew Sullivan blogged that he was disgusted by the
episode, saying, “If this is the gay rights movement today—hound‐
ing our opponents with a fanaticism more like the religious right
than anyone else—then count me out.”45
Transparency vs Privacy
Not surprisingly, the voices in support of Eightmaps are less preva‐
lent than those who are troubled by the potential for other negative
outcomes, regardless of their political leanings or feelings about gay
marriage in particular. Concern about a preponderance of threats
and intimidation and particularly about destruction of privacy gov‐
ern much of the discussion in the wake of the Eightmaps case. In
fact, this issue is really the crux of the case. How to mitigate the ten‐
sion between the need for transparency in voter and campaign
finance data with the need to protect citizens’ privacy? At what point
does one need become more important than the other? We explore
these questions in the next section on Challenges.
Challenges
A primary outcome of the case of Eightmaps is the challenge of how
to balance the sometimes competing goals of transparency and pri‐
vacy. This can also be framed as the right to speak with one’s dollars
versus the right to be informed about who is funding campaigns—
rights the U.S. Supreme Court has said are vital to the decision-
making process in the states that have it.46 At what point does one
right become more important than the other?
410 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

47 Johnson, Deborah G., Priscilla M. Regan and Kent Wayland. “Campaign Disclosure,
Privacy and Transparency.” William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal, Vol. 19, No. 4. 2011.
http://scholarship.law.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1585&context=wmborj
48 Johnson, Deborah G., Priscilla M. Regan and Kent Wayland. “Campaign Disclosure,
Privacy and Transparency.” William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal, Vol. 19, No. 4. 2011.
http://scholarship.law.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1585&context=wmborj
49 Stone, Brad. “Prop 8 Donor Web Site Shows Disclosure Law Is 2-Edged Sword.” The
New York Times. February 7, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/08/business/
08stream.html?_r=0
50 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
Transparency and privacy compete against each other in several
domains of the law. For example, in domains that relate to court
records or community notification laws for sex offenders. The
Eightmaps case shows how campaign finance laws are another
domain. On the one hand, individual privacy is considered impor‐
tant because, as one journal article puts it, “the secret ballot and
associational privacy are at stake.”47 On the other hand, public inter‐
ests such as the need to limit corruption and keep citizens informed
can outweigh the importance of privacy.48 Also to be considered are
the dangers of threatening individuals’ sense of privacy and security,
one of which is that it might inhibit them from participating in
political life.
These tensions are an unintended outcome of transparency laws. “I
don’t think the law was designed to identify people for direct feed‐
back to them from others on the other side,” Joseph Clare, a San
Francisco accountant, was quoted as saying in The New York Times,
“I think it’s been misused.”49 They are certainly questions that have
been brought to the fore by the advent of the Internet. Disclosure
laws were written before the Internet, when donors’ information
resided in government filing cabinets and would largely be inacces‐
sible to many people. “Nobody anticipated when the laws were ini‐
tially written that reports were going to be widely accessible to
everybody in the world,” says Alexander of the California Voter
Foundation, who helped update disclosure laws. “Identity theft was
not an issue at the time. It didn’t matter so much if people knew
your address—there was not much they could do with it. Now you
can do things like mash it up with other data—which is what hap‐
pened with Eightmaps,” she said.50
Challenges 
| 
411

51 GovLab interview with Daniel Kreiss, Assistant Professor, University of North Carolina
School of Journalism and Media, September 18, 2015.
52 GovLab interview with Ira Rubinstein, Research Fellow and Adjunct Professor of Law
at New York University, September 14, 2015.
These concerns also do not resound with everyone. For example,
Daniel Kreiss, who studies the impact of technological change on
the public sphere and political practice, and was aware of Eightmaps
at the time of launching, did not share concerns about its privacy
outcomes. While condemning any speech or activity intended to
silence or harm another person, Kreiss also indicates that there is no
empirical evidence of people voting less or being less politically
active because of laws requiring that their political donation data
being made public—or as a result of privacy concerns. Kreiss is far
more concerned about transparency in terms of how political data is
used by third-party data processing entities—for example, by Super
PACs. He feels it is ironic that there is more talk about transparency
in terms of the information the government collects than about such
third-party efforts to use that data. To Kreiss, projects like Eight‐
maps are both “a valuable tool,” and also par for the course in a dem‐
ocratic system. “Outcomes like Eightmaps are part and parcel of
participating in political life. If we’re going to say that money is
speech and there is going to be transparency and accountability for
what we say, then we also have to accept the consequences of our
actions. If you are going to donate to a cause, you should expect
there may be consequences like this,” he said.51
Ira Rubinstein, who writes about privacy and big data, agrees.
Rubinstein doesn’t believe voter privacy is so important once a citi‐
zen gets to the stage of their political life where they are voting or
donating to causes. He does think citizens need privacy in the ear‐
lier, more formative stages of their political lives. “At that stage they
need space of quiet reflection for formatting their own positions,” he
said. “But once a person takes that step toward supporting or oppos‐
ing something that has a clear public face, that person has entered
the realm of politics” and has to recognize what that means in terms
of possible outcomes, he said.52
Rubinstein does, however, think the U.S. tilts too far in favor of
transparency and away from privacy, at least in the context of small-
donor donations. Rubinstein also reiterates Kreiss’ concerns about a
lack of transparency around larger political donations. “The prob‐
412 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

53 GovLab interview with Ira Rubinstein, Research Fellow and Adjunct Professor of Law
at New York University, September 14, 2015.
54 GovLab interview with Daniel Kreiss, Assistant Professor, University of North Carolina
School of Journalism and Media, September 18, 2015.
55 Alexander, Kim. “Testimony at Public Hearing of the Fair Political Practices Commis‐
sion’s Subcommittee on the Political Reform Act & Internet Political Activity.” March
17, 2010. http://www.calvoter.org/issues/disclosure/pub/031710KAremarks.html
56 GovLab interview with Kim Alexander, President and Founder of the California Voter
Foundation, September 16, 2015.
lem is that big money gets to shield who donors are—through Super
PACs and other similar entities—whereas small donors have to say
who they are.”53
Looking Forward
To help mitigate the potentially negative impacts of political data
disclosure, a few strategies could be considered.
Raising the Itemized Disclosure Threshold
By raising the threshold after which in-depth disclosure must occur,
people could take an active role in certain pieces of political life
without being concerned about potentially threatening activity hap‐
pening as a result. Rubinstein and Alexander, for example, argue
that there is no strong reason not to raise the minimum given the
high potential to improve privacy with a very small likelihood of
negative impacts on anticorruption efforts. Others, like Kreiss, see
little justification in restricting the collection and transparency of
political donation data, given an individual’s conscious decision to
play a part in political life.54
Thresholds do create additional challenges, however. Alexander and
the California Voter Foundation found that many campaigns item‐
ize contributions at $99—just below the threshold for public disclo‐
sure.55 As a result, the foundation recommended that the Fair
Political Practices Commission enforcement agency more aggres‐
sively monitor and fine campaigns intentionally obscuring donor
information that, by law, should be made public.56
Looking Forward 
| 
413

57 GovLab interview with Daniel Kreiss, Assistant Professor, University of North Carolina
School of Journalism and Media, September 18, 2015.
58 “Voter Privacy in the Digital Age: Recommendations.” California Voter Foundation.
June 9, 2004. http://www.calvoter.org/issues/votprivacy/pub/voterprivacy/recommenda
tions.html
Placing New Safeguards on Downloads of Donor
Information
While maintaining transparency, states could consider putting new
safeguards onto their campaign activity and disclosure databases to
help avoid threats to privacy. By asking for, for example, a valid form
of identification before allowing for the bulk download of
individual-level donor data, users with malicious intent could
reconsider and/or the proper authorities could more easily address
any illegal activities enabled by access to the data.
Better Transparency About How Data Is Used by
Political Campaigns and Other Actors
The question of transparency versus privacy is perhaps of greatest
concern not so much when it comes to cases like Eightmaps that use
government-collected citizen data, but when it comes to what Ira
Rubinstein calls “enhanced political data.” This data is what Rubin‐
stein calls “more granular”: It is founded on government-collected
voter data and then enhanced by a combination of data from com‐
mercial brokers as well as historical participation data that a party or
candidate gathers over time. Political campaigns and parties have
created such mashups for decades, but the ability to create them has
expanded greatly in recent years. Such data offers more insight into
citizens’ profiles and preferences, and is not available to the public at
all. It is used and swapped by political campaigns and other actors to
target the electorate. Daniel Kreiss feels there is “an alarming lack of
transparency” here.57 Alexander, Rubinstein and Kreiss all empha‐
size a need to require that entities trading in this data to be more
accountable and explicit about how they’re using it.58
414 
| 
Chapter 19: United States’ Eightmaps

After Proposition 8 was found unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme
Court in 2010, much of the public memory has moved past the frac‐
tious debates of 2008 and 2009. And while marriage equality is now
the law of the land, and Eightmaps is no longer accessible to the
public, the questions and debates it raised about balancing transpar‐
ency and privacy in the realm of individual-level political activity
remain.
Looking Forward 
| 
415


CHAPTER 20
Kennedy v. City of Zanesville,
United States
Open Data as Evidence
By Christina Rogawski, Stefaan Verhulst and
Andrew Young
Summary: For over 50 years, while access to clean water from the
City of Zanesville water line spread throughout the rest of Muskin‐
gum County, residents of the predominantly African-American area
of Zanesville, Ohio were only able to use contaminated rainwater or
drive to the nearest water tower to truck water back to their homes.
After years of legal battles, one of the key pieces of evidence used
during Kennedy v the City of Zanesville was a map derived from
open data from the water company displaying houses connected to
the water line and data showing town demographics. The insights
from the map showed significant correlation between the houses
occupied by the white residents of Zanesville and the houses hooked
up to the city water line, and the case went in favor of the African-
American plaintiffs, awarding them a $10.9 million settlement.
Dimension of Impact: Solving Public Problems—Data-Driven
Assessment
Key Takeaways:
• Access to open data, combined with other forms of data, can
lead to important insights and evidence of conditions on the
ground and how they are impacting different communities—in
this case, highlighting systemic inequalities.
417

1 “Kennedy v. City of Zanesville.” Relman, Dane & Colfax PLLC. http://www.relman
law.com/civil-rights-litigation/cases/zanesville.php
2 Johnson, Dirk. “For a Recently Plumbed Neighborhood, Validation in a Verdict.” The
New York Times, August 11, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/12/us/12ohio.html?
_r=0.
• Awareness of open data is an important first step that may be
overlooked, particularly if stakeholders are not particularly
data- or tech-savvy.
• Owners of data sets may add new (or more rigorously enforce
existing) barriers to access if the data can negatively impact
them.
• The usefulness and relevance of open data can be amplified
when data sets are supplemented with data collected through
other means—like crowdsourcing or surveys.
Context and Background
For decades, residents of the Coal Run neighborhood in Zanesville
Ohio, a predominately African-American neighborhood, were
denied public water service despite living within one mile of public
water lines.1 The situation went back to 1956, when a now-defunct
water board refused to extend service to parts of Coal Run. As some
residents described in a 2008 New York Times article, the water stop‐
ped “where the black folks started.”2
418 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

3 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
4 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
5 Johnson, Dirk. “For a Recently Plumbed Neighborhood, Validation in a Verdict.” The
New York Times, August 11, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/12/us/12ohio.html?
_r=0.
Figure 20-1. Map of Water Line Extensions in Muskingum County3.
Copyright Allan Parnell. Used with permission.
Many residents were forced to rely on extreme measures to source
water. For example, they had to use electric pumps to retrieve water
from a cistern that was fouled with animals and residue from old
coal deposits. Due to contamination, many residents couldn’t even
use the water and spent time and money instead trucking water in.4
Others collected rain via buckets and gathered snow in the winter.5
Not only did the situation impose a daily burden on residents, it was
also demeaning and humiliating. One lawyer cited the following
example, which reveals the racial disparities in water distribution:
Context and Background 
| 
419

6 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
7 Johnson, Dirk. “For a Recently Plumbed Neighborhood, Validation in a Verdict.” The
New York Times, August 11, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/12/us/12ohio.html?
_r=0.
8 “Kennedy v. City of Zanesville.” Relman, Dane & Colfax PLLC. http://www.relman
law.com/civil-rights-litigation/cases/zanesville.php
9 http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bk​mk​
“One man ... spent the whole morning trying to get water or deal
with the water shortage. Meanwhile, he could see his white neigh‐
bor caddy corner to him sprinkling his lawn. It became clear if you
were white and living outside Zanesville you would get water, but if
you were black, you wouldn’t.”6
In 2002, some two dozen black residents of Coal Run filed a com‐
plaint with the Ohio Civil Rights Commission, saying they had been
denied service because of race. The next year, the commission found
“probable cause” of discrimination and a month after that, Muskin‐
gum County officials announced they would extend water to Coal
Run, to be completed in 2004.7
The decision to extend the water lines did not mark the end of the
battle, however. In 2005, after construction on the new water lines
was completed, 67 residents of the Coal Run neighborhood filed a
lawsuit, alleging that the City of Zanesville and the East Muskingum
Water Authority had refused to provide them public water service
for over 50 years simply because they lived in the one predominately
African-American neighborhood in a virtually all-white county8—in
the 2000 Census, Muskingum County was found to have a 93.9 per‐
cent white population, with the black community making up only 4
percent of the county.9
The case was eventually taken up by the civil rights law firm Rel‐
man, Dane & Colfax, based in Washington, D.C. In 2008, after a
three-year trial, a federal jury returned verdicts totaling nearly $11
million against the City of Zanesville. This case study examines the
innovative use of public data that went into building the successful
case and, in the process, addressing a decades-old civil rights viola‐
tion.
420 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

10 http://www.cedargroveinst.org/mission.php
11 http://www.cedargroveinst.org/mission.php
12 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, October 2, 2015.
13 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
Case Description and Inception
To determine whether there was an association between race and
access to public water services in the Coal Run neighborhood, the
plaintiff’s lead attorneys, John Relman and Reed Colfax, obtained
the demography services of Dr. Allan Parnell of the Cedar Grove
Institute for Sustainable Communities. The Cedar Grove Institute is
a nonprofit in Mebane, North Carolina that provides technical assis‐
tance, analysis and training to help community groups promote
equitable community development.10 It grew out of the for-profit
company, McMillan and Moss Research, Inc., whose “research and
analyses were being called for in cases involving civil rights, preda‐
tory lending, segregation in schools, institutionalized discrimination
and community economic development.”11 Mr. Colfax reached out
to Dr. Parnell based on the recommendation of Jennifer Klar, now a
partner at Relman, Dane & Colfax who met Dr. Parnell during a
conference, and based on the Cedar Grove Institute’s reputation for
work in civil rights cases and community development. Ms. Klar, as
well as pro bono attorneys from the law firm Jones Day and other
organizations, also worked with Mr. Relman and Mr. Colfax on the
case.12
As civil rights attorneys, Relman and Colfax were well aware of how
public data can help provide critical evidence in cases, but lacked the
technical know-how to analyze the data themselves. Parnell, a well-
known public data specialist, regularly serves as an expert witness in
civil rights cases using open data. For example, he was one of the
plaintiff experts in Texas Department of Housing and Community
Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project, the 2015 Supreme Court
decision that affirmed the validity of disparate impact cases where
public data are key.13 Parnell therefore led the data research and
analysis for Relman and Colfax, eventually settling on a strategy of
combining data from multiple sources (public GIS data, water bill‐
Case Description and Inception 
| 
421

14 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
15 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
16 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
17 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
18 “What is GIS?” ESRI. http://www.esri.com/what-is-gis/howgisworks
ing data and demographic data) to create maps that established a
clear pattern of racial discrimination.14,15
Relman and Colfax agreed with Parnell’s strategy in using public
data. Once the decision was taken, however, Parnell soon realized
that census data would not be effective due to the small size of the
neighborhood in question and the distribution of residents within
the blocks. For example, within each block, the northern part was
typically predominantly white and the southern predominantly
non-white.
Instead of using census data, Parnell proposed using publicly avail‐
able geographic information systems (GIS) data from Muskingum
County to perform a house-by-house analysis within the neighbor‐
hood.16 Although not available via an open data portal, GIS data is
typically available by request, and Parnell and Reed successfully
obtained the needed GIS data through a direct request to Muskin‐
gum County officials, and it was provided in a standard, machine-
readable format. GIS data uses spatio-temporal location as the key
index variable. Parnell explained that for most municipalities, one
needs to first fill out a form requesting access to such GIS data, but
that there is a “wealth of data available if you know how or where to
ask for it.”17 Essentially, the nature of GIS data allows users to ana‐
lyze and interpret data in ways that make it easier to identify, manip‐
ulate and understand relationships, patterns and trends, and then
visualize that data in forms that are accessible for anyone (data
expert or not) to understand and share (e.g., maps, globes, reports
and charts.)18 Parnell, being experienced with GIS data, recognizes
the opportunities GIS data presents more readily than those with
422 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

19 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
20 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
less experience, such as attorneys. However, should the open data
movement continue to grow, more people of all backgrounds could
recognize and use GIS data.
Parcel data—which identified all occupied houses in the study areas,
the location of water lines with dates of construction, Zanesville’s
city limits and the street locations—provided the backbone of the
case. Additionally, Relman, Dane & Colfax obtained water-billing
data, which provided the addresses of all houses with public water
service. With this data in hand, Parnell’s team of paralegals under‐
took a door-to-door effort to: a) confirm that property identified in
the parcel data was an occupied house; and b) determine racial com‐
position and how long each resident had lived in that location in
order to determine that “there was no difference between the people
with and without water other than race.”19
“The easier it is to access data, and the more people that can access
data without having to pay for it, the more egalitarian society we
will have.”
—Tara Ramchandani, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC
Using the public GIS data, the household survey information, the
plaintiff information and the addresses of houses with billed water
service, Parnell’s colleague, Ben Marsh, Ph.D., Professor of Geogra‐
phy and Environmental Studies at Bucknell University, built the GIS
layers for the maps showing a clear pattern of racial discrimination.
Parnell wrote the expert report used in the case based on the maps,
survey information and additional information taken from the
plaintiffs. During the trial, Relman and Colfax walked the jury
through the information contained in the maps by rebuilding Par‐
nell’s maps, “layer by layer,” while explaining how each piece of
information was obtained and what it uncovered about water access
discrimination.20
Case Description and Inception 
| 
423

21 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
Figure 20-2. Map of Water Line Extensions in Muskingum County
with GIS layers21. Copyright Allan Parnell. Used with permission.
Meanwhile, the expert testifying on behalf of the defense attorneys
representing the City of Zanesville, Muskingum County and the
East Muskingum Water Authority also attempted to use data-driven
maps to support the opposition’s case. The defense’s expert, however,
did not effectively manipulate the data or maps, leading to a mis‐
match between the claims made by the attorneys and the informa‐
tion being displayed. The defense used the GIS and census data to
try and argue that race did not affect who had water service, claim‐
ing that all residents of a certain census block had water if a water
line intersected any part of that census block. This is demonstrably
false, and the defense was unable to prove the claim. Parnell coun‐
tered the assertion using the same census data, showing that in 2000,
the water lines for the block in question only served 34 African-
424 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

22 Parnell, Allan M. “Maps Used in Support of the Plaintiff’s Argument in Kennedy et al.
v. City of Zanesville, et al.” Legal Services of Northern California Race Equity Project.
August 6, 2008. http://equity.lsnc.net/2008/08/maps-used-in-support-of-the-plaintiff
%E2%80%99s-arguement-in-k​ennedy-et-al-v-city-of-zanesville-et-al/
23 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
24 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
American residents—all of whom lived in a nursing home whose
population was 88 percent white.22
The use of open data, in some cases drawn from the same source, to
make contradictory points from two sides of the same court case
demonstrates the danger of selective, perhaps manipulative use of
data to lead people to make incorrect conclusions. The defense was
unable to use the data to create a compelling case, however, and, as a
result, appeared “clueless.”23
Impact
The impact of using open data in the Kennedy v. Zanesville case can
broadly be split into two categories: immediate, and long term.
The immediate impact was clear, tangible and in many respects
highly positive. The use of open data (along with maps) was at the
heart of a legal strategy that identified and remedied a long-standing
civil rights violation. As Parnell put it: Some black residents were
unaware that “for 50 years their [white] neighbor had a hot tub
[while] they couldn’t turn the tap on.”24 Open data helped visualize
and irrefutably identify a systematic form of discrimination that had
long been woven into the fabric of daily life in Zanesville.
Significant monetary damages were also assessed:
• The federal jury awarded $11 million against the City of Zanes‐
ville and the East Muskingum Water Authority for illegally
denying water on the basis of race.
• The jury also awarded $80,000 in damages to Fair Housing
Advocates Association, the agency that initially assisted the
Impact 
| 
425

25 “Kennedy v. City of Zanesville.” Relman, Dane & Colfax PLLC. http://www.relman
law.com/civil-rights-litigation/cases/zanesville.php
26 “Kennedy v. City of Zanesville.” Relman, Dane & Colfax PLLC. http://www.relman
law.com/civil-rights-litigation/cases/zanesville.php
27 http://www.huduser.org/portal/affht_pt.html#final-rule
28 Badger, Emily. “Obama administration to unveil major new rules targeting segregation
across U.S.” The Washington Post. July 8, 2015. http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
wonkblog/wp/2015/07/08/obama-administration-to-unveil-major-new-rules-targeting-
segregation-across-u-s/
29 “Expert Witness Work.” Cedar Grove Institute for Sustainable Communities. http://
www.cedargroveinst.org/partners.php
plaintiffs with their administrative complaints before the Ohio
Civil Rights Commission.25
• All told, the plaintiffs were eligible for payments of between
$15,000 and $300,000.26
The medium and longer-term impact, while in many ways positive,
is somewhat less clear. On the one hand, the use of data and maps
quantified and solidified the case made by the plaintiffs that their
neighborhood had long suffered discrimination. Although the city
of Zanesville had completed laying water pipes before the jury
reached its verdict, the data-driven case established by the legal team
validated the original complaint, and potentially made it harder for
municipal authorities to scale back their expanded water distribu‐
tion or deny water services to other neighborhoods, as communities
or attorneys could reference this case in the future.
In addition, in July 2015, The U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) announced new rules to the Fair Hous‐
ing Act of 1968, which barred outright racial discrimination, then
routine, and required active desegregation in housing.27 The new
rules require “cities and towns all over the country to scrutinize their
housing patterns for racial bias and to publicly report, every three to
five years, the results. Communities will also have to set goals, which
will be tracked over time, for how they will further reduce segrega‐
tion.”28 While not a direct result of this case, the new HUD rules will
create even more open data that can be applied to civil rights and
fair housing cases. Law firms engaging in civil rights litigation often
rely on GIS or similar open data sets for evidence in a variety of
cases, including fair housing, school segregation, redevelopment and
relocation, code enforcement abuse and unequal service provision.29
426 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

30 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
31 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
32 Badger, Emily. “Obama administration to unveil major new rules targeting segregation
across U.S.” The Washington Post. July 8, 2015. http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
wonkblog/wp/2015/07/08/obama-administration-to-unveil-major-new-rules-targeting-
segregation-across-u-s/
33 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, October 2, 2015.
 Data helps illuminate the local political geography, providing “a link
to a diversity of policy decision information, such as the relationship
of race to the proximity of superfund sites.”30 In illegal discrimina‐
tory lending cases, open data enables attorneys to determine where
loans from the bank are going, and whether loans are given to
minority neighborhoods or not.31 Regarding the new HUD rules,
civil rights attorneys representing fair housing cases will have even
more data to identify and prove patterns of discrimination, with
civil-rights groups lauding the decision as “an important advance‐
ment on what’s been one of the most fraught frontiers of racial pro‐
gress.”32
Yet despite such advances, research conducted by Parnell (and oth‐
ers) has, somewhat paradoxically, concluded that the overall cause of
open data has been little advanced in the community and among
Muskingum County officials. In fact, perhaps because the case cost
the county $11 million and significant negative publicity, its after‐
math has actually been marked in many cases to a tightening of data
availability and supply. For example, Parnell found that public GIS
data from Muskingum County, which although not online, had pre‐
viously been available through a simple phone or form request,
became more challenging to locate and access, requiring more
phone calls and forms, and, often, the skills of an attorney or some‐
one familiar with navigating the bureaucracy.33 Parnell has also
experienced similar difficulties in obtaining water and sewer infor‐
mation in certain California and North Carolina municipalities,
with officials mandating that only necessary third parties, such as
engineering companies, may access such data. The process for
obtaining GIS data greatly varies across governments—by location
and by level—although Parnell observed that this increase in steps
to access GIS data became even more apparent after the attacks on
Impact 
| 
427

34 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, October 2, 2015.
35 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
36 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
September 11, 2001, as data custodians had more leeway in citing
security concerns to delay access.34 Unfortunately, Parnell believes
that uncovering the true motives behind these actions, if they are
indeed to discourage lawsuits and/or hide potential wrong-doing,
would prove extremely time- and resource-intensive.35
In several cases, these restrictions on data were justified in the name
of security. For example, county officials said that making infra‐
structure data more fully open, for example by publishing it online
in a downloadable format, posed a potential security threat that
would allow terrorists to locate targets such as water or energy
plants. However, Parnell argues that since that type of location infor‐
mation is not particularly difficult to find without access to GIS
data, should one be motivated, these policy changes may need to be
re-evaluated if the result is less transparency and decreased access to
public data.36
Challenges
These less-than-optimal outcomes of the Kennedy v. Zanesville case
point to some recurring obstacles faced by open data advocates. In
particular, the deployment of security as a justification for restrict‐
ing access to information is fairly common, as several other case
studies in this series indicate.
Broadly, the Zanesville case suggests three challenges to the wider
release and dissemination of open data:
Security Concerns
After the incidents of September 11, 2001, concerns over security
are frequently raised by custodians of data. These can express them‐
selves as anxieties over national security, data security or other
forms of security. These concerns are, of course, often masks for
other reasons (for example, a desire to restrict negative publicity or
428 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

37 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
avoid lawsuits). As Parnell, who has dealt with officials across the
spectrum of transparency, in counties across the country, explains,
“You’re either going to hide your data or you’re going to fix things.”
Nonetheless, putting aside the validity of security as a justification
for restricting access, there are steps open data advocates can take to
mitigate such concerns.
Awareness and Usability
Open data offers a powerful way to combat discrimination (and var‐
ious other injustices), but like all technologies, it is only a tool, its
potential defined by the extent to which it is usable and actually
used. Repeatedly, we see instances where data is made available but
lies under-utilized due to a lack of awareness or barriers to usability.
A similar pattern was very much evident in Zanesville, where the
data finally deployed to such great success in the lawsuit had in fact
been available for years but residents were unable to use it.
As Tara Ramchandani, an attorney at Relman, Dane & Colfax,
explains:
How do you know if you’re being denied water service if you have
to know to get the data, and then hire a lawyer to actually get and
use the data? That makes it unfair. The more information that’s
easily accessible [in simplified formats], the more easily you can
understand what’s happening to you, and you can put your experi‐
ence in context of the population around you.37
She points out that even attorneys, who may use this type of data
more regularly than the average citizen, often have to rely on experts
in order to identify which data sets are useful, and how to access
them. In addition, open data is often most useful when combined
with other forms of closed or proprietary data (in this case, for
example, the free and open public GIS data was combined with a
Zanesville-specific, door-to-door survey conducted by Parnell’s
team to confirm the race of residents in the neighborhood). The
sophisticated technical and other skills required to access and com‐
bine data are quite often out of reach for ordinary citizens. As Ram‐
chandani puts it: “The easier it is to access data, and the more
Challenges 
| 
429

38 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
39 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
40 GovLab interview with Allan Parnell, Ph.D., Vice President, Cedar Grove Institute for
Sustainable Communities, July 21, 2015.
41 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
42 GovLab interview with Tara Ramchandani, Attorney, Relman, Dane, & Colfax PLLC,
August 3, 2015.
people that can access data without having to pay for it, the more
egalitarian society we will have.”38
Advocates of open data therefore need to first increase awareness of
open data, as “it never crosses most people’s minds that this infor‐
mation is out there.”39 Civil rights groups and law firms in particular
should be targeted in outreach campaigns, and provided resources
to learn how to access, use or find experts in open data to help sup‐
port their cases.
Data—the Human Factor
Open data is a tool.40 Its true potential derives from the way it is
used by humans. Data unquestionably played a key role in winning
the case, but one of the plaintiffs’ attorneys from Relman, Dane &
Colfax noted that testimony given at trial was an equally, if not
more, important factor in winning the case than the data and map‐
ping evidence. For example, plaintiffs describing in their own words
the experiences of discrimination, the hardships of not having
access to water and the disappointment in repeatedly asking for
water and being denied, painted a very moving, emotional story for
the jury to consider. Meanwhile, the testimony of the defendants
and all the people involved in deciding to deny people water, and the
investigative process of discovering discrimination patterns in
decision-makers’ behavior, also proved to be a powerful narrative in
the courtroom, helping the jury to more fully understand and relate
to the experiences of the community.41
Therefore, while the data and maps proved to be critical, hard evi‐
dence in the plaintiffs’ case, the more visceral aspects of the case
help describe the real-world impact.42 For example, many Coal Run
residents, including Doretta Hale, 74, wept the first time clean water
430 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

43 Johnson, Dirk. “For a Recently Plumbed Neighborhood, Validation in a Verdict.” The
New York Times, August 11, 2008. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/12/us/12ohio.html?
_r=0.
44 “Society boosts DataOhio legislation.” The Ohio Society of CPAs. May 20, 2015. http://
www.ohiocpa.com/utilities/displaynewsitem/2015/05/21/society-boosts-dataohio-
legislation
45 https://data.cincinnati-oh.gov/
came through her pipes, describing, “I could wash clothes whenever
I wanted ... I could go out and water the flowers.”43
While not a challenge experienced by the plaintiffs in this case, it is
clear that, especially in situations involving advocacy or persuasion,
cold, hard data can only go so far. Personal experiences can help
exemplify and ground the insights uncovered through open data,
perhaps making takeaways easier to understand and relate to.
Looking Forward
Although Muskingum County seems to have pushed back against
open data in some manner at the local level as a result of this case,
water services are now supplied to residents equally. More broadly,
the open data movement in Ohio on the state level does seem to be
growing. The Office of the Ohio Treasurer, for example, has
launched OhioCheckbook.com, an interactive online tool allowing
users to search and access state spending data, as part of its trans‐
parency program. As of late 2015, the state House of Representatives
was also developing a bill to launch DataOhio, an initiative that pro‐
motes open data standards and transparency in a number of ways. If
enacted, state and local agencies in Ohio will be required to adhere
to an open data standard. Similar to the federal open data portal and
portals established in other states, DataOhio would establish an
online catalog (data.ohio.gov) to provide descriptions of data sets,
tutorials and tools. To help provide the financial backing for spur‐
ring open data activity, DataOhio also calls for the disbursal of
$10,000 in grants to local governments as an incentive to provide
budgetary, staffing and compensation information online in an open
data format using uniform accounting.44 The city of Cincinnati,
meanwhile, has its own open data portal to “provide access to gov‐
ernment data, improve services, increase accountability and stimu‐
late economic activity.”45
Looking Forward 
| 
431

As more state-wide and large-city open data initiatives are imple‐
mented across Ohio, there is potential for trickle-down effects. Gov‐
ernment officials in smaller localities like Zanesville could be
encouraged to embrace open data and help boost awareness among
residents of the broad potential impacts of making government data
more publicly accessible.
432 
| 
Chapter 20: Kennedy v. City of Zanesville, United States

APPENDIX A
Appendix
Open Data Definitions—What’s in a Name?
Open Definition (referenced by Open Data Handbook, ODI, Open
Data Census, and OECD Open Data Analytical Framework)
“Open data is data that can be freely used, reused, and redistrib‐
uted by anyone—subject only, at most, to the requirement to
attribute and share alike.”
The White House, 2013 OMB Memorandum
“Open data refers to publicly available data structured in a way
that enables the data to be fully discoverable and usable by end
users.”
Data.Gov.UK
“Open data is data that is published in an open format, is
machine readable, and is published under a license that allows
for free reuse.”
Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data
“Open data is the idea that certain data should be freely avail‐
able to everyone to use and republish as they wish, without
restrictions from copyright, patents, or other mechanisms of
control.”
Open Data Institute
“Open data is information that is available for anyone to use, for
any purpose, at no cost. Open data has to have a license that
says it is open data. Without a license, the data can’t be reused.
433

These principles for open data are described in detail in the
Open Definition.”
LinkedGov
“Open data is non-personally identifiable data produced in the
course of an organization’s ordinary business, which has been
released under an unrestricted license. Open public data is
underpinned by the philosophy that data generated or collected
by organizations in the public sector should belong to the tax‐
payers, wherever financially feasible and where releasing it
won’t violate any laws or rights to privacy (either for citizens or
government staff).”
McKinsey Global Institute
“Machine-readable information, particularly government data,
that’s made available to others. These open data sets share the
following four characteristics: 1) Accessibility: a wide range of
users is permitted to access the data. 2) Machine readability: the
data can be processed automatically. 3) Cost: data can be
accessed free or at negligible cost. 4) Rights: limitations on the
use, transformation, and distribution of data are minimal.”
Open Data Now
“Open data is accessible public data we can use to launch new
ventures, analyze trends, make decisions, and solve problems.”
Open Data Barometer
Excerpt from report indicates that researchers assessed data sets
based on the “full Open Definition requirements of being
machine readable, accessible in bulk, and openly licensed.”
The World Bank
“Data is open if it satisfies both of the following conditions:
• Technically open: available in a machine-readable standard for‐
mat, which means it can be retrieved and meaningfully pro‐
cessed by a computer application
• Legally open: explicitly licensed in a way that permits commer‐
cial and non-commercial use and re-use without restrictions.”
434 
| 
Appendix A: Appendix

Figure A-1. Open data definitions: matrix of analysis
Appendix 
| 
435

About the Authors
Andrew Young is the Associate Director of Research at The Gov‐
Lab, where he leads a number of grant-funded research efforts
focusing on the impact of technology on public institutions. He has
written extended work on how public sector institutions use new
technology to coordinate work and provides research and writing
support to all members of GovLab’s team and to its extended net‐
work of participants in GovLab’s training programs. He is also the
Network Coordinator of the GovLab-chaired MacArthur Founda‐
tion Research Network on Opening Governance. In this role, he
plans and organizes collaborative research projects and events with
the Network’s members, post-docs, and advisory group who span a
dozen disciplines and institutions. Andrew earned his Master’s
degree in the Media, Culture and Communication department of
NYU’s Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human Devel‐
opment, with a focus on Technology and Society.
Stefaan G. Verhulst is the cofounder and Chief R&D of the GovLab
at Tandon-New York University where he is responsible for experi‐
mentation and evidence gathering on how to transform governance
using advances in science and technology. Before joining NYU full
time, Verhulst spent more than a decade as Chief of Research for the
Markle Foundation, where he continues to serve as Senior Advisor.
He is also affiliated with the Department of Culture and Communi‐
cations at New York University, the Central European University in
Budapest; and the Annenberg School for Communications (Penn
University). Previously at Oxford University he cofounded and was
the head of the Programme in Comparative Media Law and Policy at
the Centre for Socio Legal Studies, and also served as Senior
Research Fellow of Wolfson College. He also taught several years at
the London School of Economics. He has published widely and is a
regular speaker on a issues at the intersection of innovation, policy
and governance.

