The Basics of IT Audit

The Basics of IT Audit
Purposes, Processes, and 
Practical Information
Stephen D. Gantz
Technical Editor
Steve Maske
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON 
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO 
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Steve Elliot
Editorial Project Manager: Benjamin Rearick
Project Manager: Malathi Samayan
Designer: Matthew Limbert
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic  
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,  
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further  
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations  
such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our  
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the  
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices, may become  
necessary. Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge  
in evaluating and using any information or methods described here in. In using such information or  
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for  
whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume  
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,  
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or  
ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gantz, Stephen D.
  The basics of IT audit: purposes, processes, and practical information / Stephen D. Gantz.
    pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-12-417159-6 (pbk.)
  1. Information technology—Auditing. 2. Computer security.  
3. Computer networks--Security measures. I. Title.
  T58.5.G37 2013
  004.068'1--dc23
	
2013036148
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
For information on all Syngress publications,  
visit our website at store.elsevier.com/Syngress
ISBN: 978-0-12-417159-6
Printed and bound in the United States of America
14  15  16    13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Dedicated to my wife Reneé, my son Henry, and my daughters Claire and Gillian, 
without whose support and forbearance I would not have been able to devote the 
necessary time and energy into this project.

xiii
Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge the very capable support provided by members 
of the Syngress/Elsevier team in bringing this project to completion, particularly 
including Steve Elliot and Ben Rearick. Thanks also go to Steven Maske for his 
helpful feedback, comments, and technical edits on this book. I am also grateful 
for the guidance and constructive criticism on my writing provided by Dr. Thomas 
Mierzwa, who served as my dissertation adviser as I completed my doctorate in 
management shortly before beginning work on this book.
Work in information technology (IT) characterizes my entire career—as a 
consultant, as a software and security architect, and as an educator and author. I 
appreciate the many professional opportunities I have received during that time, 
including my initial exposure to fraud detection and forensic investigation from 
Malcolm Sparrow more than 15 years ago and subsequent experience in IT audit-
ing and information security since that time. I have been fortunate to work for many 
managers and executives who have encouraged my continued career development 
and self-directed projects and writing initiatives. I am especially grateful for the 
leadership and support of my current management team, including Michele Kang, 
Davis Foster, Aaron Daniels, Tom Stepka, and Sean Gallagher, who collectively 
helped in providing a dynamic and engaging work environment and the opportunity 
to challenge myself on many types of internal and client-facing projects.

xv
About the Author
Dr Stephen D. Gantz (CISSP-ISSAP, CEH, CGEIT, CRISC, CIPP/G, C|CISO) is 
an information security and information technology (IT) consultant with over 20 
years of experience in security and privacy management, enterprise architecture, 
systems development and integration, and strategic planning. He currently holds 
an executive position with a health information technology services firm primar-
ily serving federal and state government customers. He is also an associate profes-
sor of Information Assurance in the Graduate School at University of Maryland 
University College (UMUC) and an adjunct lecturer in the Health Information 
Technology program of the Catholic University of America’s School of Library and 
Information Science. He maintains a security-focused web site and blog at http://
www.securityarchitecture.com.
His security and privacy expertise spans program management, security archi-
tecture, policy development and enforcement, risk assessment, and regulatory com-
pliance with major legislation such as FISMA, HIPAA, and the Privacy Act. His 
industry experience includes health, financial services, higher education, consumer 
products, and manufacturing, but since 2000 his work has focused on security and 
other information resources management functions in state and federal govern-
ment agencies and in private sector industries responsible for critical infrastruc-
ture. He holds a Doctor of Management degree from UMUC, where his dissertation 
focused on trust and distrust in inter-organizational networks, alliances, and other 
cooperative relationships. He also earned a master’s degree in public policy from 
the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University and a bachelor’s degree 
from Harvard. He currently resides in Arlington, Virginia with his wife Reneé and 
children Henry, Claire, and Gillian.

xvii
About the Technical Editor
Steven Maske (CISA, CISSP) is an information security professional with over 12 
years in the information technology (IT) industry. As the lead security engineer for 
a Fortune 1000 company he designs, develops, and tests information security solu-
tions and establishes policies, procedures, and controls to ensure regulatory com-
pliance. He is responsible for identifying and managing risks and overseeing IT 
projects and strategic initiatives. He has previous experience as a consultant where 
he performed over 150 vulnerability assessments, penetration tests, and IT audits.
He is an active member of the security community and can be found on Twitter 
as @ITSecurity or via his blog, http://SecurityRamblings.com.

xix
Trademarks
Institute of Internal Auditors trademarks: Certified Internal Auditor (CIA®), Certified 
Government Auditing Professional (CGAP®), Certified Financial Services Auditor 
(CFSA®), Certification in Control Self-Assessment (CCSA®), Certification in Risk 
Management Assurance (CRMA®), International Professional Practices Framework 
(IPPF®)
International Council of Electronic Commerce Consultants EC-Council trade-
marks: Certified Ethical Hacker (C|EHTM), Certified Hacking Forensic Investigator 
(C|HFITM)
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium certifica-
tions: Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP®), Systems Security 
Certified Professional (SSCP®), Certified Accreditation Professional (CAP®), Certified 
Secure Software Lifecycle Professional (CSSLP®)
ISACA® trademarks: Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA®), Certified 
Information Security Manager (CISM®), Certified in Risk and Information Systems 
Control (CRISC®), Certified in the Governance of Enterprise Information Technology 
(CGEIT®), Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT®)
Other trademarks:
American Society for Quality (ASQ®)
Certified Computer Examiner (CCE®)
International Organization for Standardization (ISO®)
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL®)
Projects in Controlled Environments, version 2 (PRINCE2®)
Project Management Institute (PMI®)
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®)

xxi
Introduction
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Introduction to IT auditing
●	 Purpose and rationale for this book
●	 Intended use
●	 Key audiences
●	 Structure and content of the book
●	 Summary descriptions of each chapter
Introduction to IT auditing
An audit is a systematic, objective examination of one or more aspects of an 
organization that compares what the organization does to a defined set of crite-
ria or requirements. Information technology (IT) auditing examines processes, 
IT assets, and controls at multiple levels within an organization to determine the 
extent to which the organization adheres to applicable standards or requirements. 
Virtually, all organizations use IT to support their operations and the achievement 
of their mission and business objectives. This gives organizations a vested interest 
in ensuring that their use of IT is effective, that IT systems and processes operate as 
intended, and that IT assets and other resources are efficiently allocated and appro-
priately protected. IT auditing helps organizations understand, assess, and improve 
their use of controls to safeguard IT, measure and correct performance, and achieve 
objectives and intended outcomes. IT auditing consists of the use of formal audit 
methodologies to examine IT-specific processes, capabilities, and assets and their 
role in enabling an organization’s business processes. IT auditing also addresses IT 
components or capabilities that support other domains subject to auditing, such as 
financial management and accounting, operational performance, quality assurance, 
and governance, risk management, and compliance (GRC).
IT audits are performed both by internal auditors working for the organization 
subject to audit and external auditors hired by the organization. The processes and 
procedures followed in internal and external auditing are often quite similar, but the 
roles of the audited organization and its personnel are markedly different. The audit 
criteria—the standards or requirements against which an organization is compared 
during an audit—also vary between internal and external audits and for audits of 
different types or conducted for different purposes. Organizations often engage in 
IT audits to satisfy legal or regulatory requirements, assess the operational effec-
tiveness of business processes, achieve certification against specific standards, 
demonstrate compliance with policies, rules, or standards, and identify opportuni-
ties for improvement in the quality of business processes, products, and services. 
Organizations have different sources of motivation for each type of audit and 

xxii
CHAPTER ﻿  Introduction
different goals, objectives, and expected outcomes. This book explains all of these 
aspects of IT auditing, describes the establishment of organizational audit programs 
and the process of conducting audits, and identifies the most relevant standards, 
methodologies, frameworks, and sources of guidance for IT auditing.
Purpose and rationale
The use of IT auditing is increasingly common in many organizations, to validate 
the effective use of controls to protect IT assets and information or as an element of 
GRC programs. IT auditing is a specialized discipline not only in its own right, with 
corresponding standards, methodologies, and professional certifications and experi-
ence requirements, but it also intersects significantly with other IT management and 
operational practices. The subject matter overlap between IT auditing and network 
monitoring, systems administration, service management, technical support, and 
information security makes familiarity with IT audit policies, practices, and stand-
ards essential for IT personnel and managers of IT operations and the business areas 
that IT supports. This book provides information about many aspects of IT audits 
in order to give readers a solid foundation in auditing concepts to help develop an 
understanding of the important role IT auditing plays in contributing to the achieve-
ment of organizational objectives. Many organizations undergo a variety of IT audits, 
performed by both internal and external auditors, and each often accompanied by 
different procedures, methods, and criteria. This book tries to highlight the common-
alities among audit types while identifying the IT perspectives and characteristics 
that distinguish financial, operational, compliance, certification, and quality audits.
Intended use
This book describes the practice of IT auditing, including why organizations con-
duct or are subject to IT audits, different types of audits commonly performed in 
different organizations, and ways internal and external auditors approach IT audits. 
It explains many fundamental characteristics of IT audits, the auditors who perform 
them, and the standards, methodologies, frameworks, and sources of guidance that 
inform the practice of auditing. This is not a handbook for conducting IT audits 
nor does it provide detailed instructions for performing any of the audit activities 
mentioned in the book. Auditors or other readers seeking prescriptive guidance on 
auditing will find references to many useful sources in this book, but should look 
elsewhere—potentially including the sources referenced below—for audit check-
lists, protocols, or procedural guidance on different types of IT audits. This book 
is intended to give organizations and their employees an understanding of what to 
expect when undergoing IT audits and to explain some key points to consider that 
help ensure their audit engagements meet their objectives. By covering all major 
types of IT auditing and describing the primary drivers and contexts for IT audits 
in most organizations, this book complements more detailed but narrowly focused 

xxiii
Purpose and Rationale
texts intended to guide or instruct auditors in the step-by-step procedural execution 
of audits. The following are among recently published books especially relevant to 
IT auditing:
●	 IT Auditing: Using Controls to Protect Information Assets (2nd edition) by 
Chris Davis and Mike Schiller emphasizes auditing practices applicable to 
different types of technologies and system components.
●	 Auditor’s Guide to IT Auditing (2nd edition) by Richard Cascarino provides broad 
coverage of IT audit concepts and practices applicable to information systems, 
organized and presented in the context of major IT management disciplines.
●	 IT Audit, Control, and Security by Robert Moeller highlights requirements, 
expectations, and considerations for auditors of IT systems stemming from 
prominent laws, frameworks, and standards.
●	 Information Technology Control and Audit (4th edition) by Sandra Senft, 
Frederick Gallegos, and Aleksandra Davis approaches IT auditing drawing 
largely on practice guidance and governance frameworks defined by ISACA, 
particularly including COBIT.
●	 The Operational Auditing Handbook: Auditing Business and IT Processes by 
Andrew Chambers and Graham Rand focuses on operational auditing and 
uses a process-based approach to describe auditing practices for different 
organizational functions.
●	 The ASQ Auditing Handbook (4th edition) edited by J.P. Russell offers 
prescriptive guidance for quality auditors, particularly those following the 
quality auditor body of knowledge defined by the American Society for Quality 
(ASQ) and its Certified Quality Auditor Certification Program.
Key audiences
This book provides a treatment of IT auditing that emphasizes breadth rather than 
depth. Audit professionals engaged in performing IT audits have a variety of stand-
ards, guidance, and prescriptive procedures for thoroughly and effectively con-
ducting various types of IT audits. Auditors and other consulting or professional 
services practitioners who regularly conduct audits may find the information in this 
book useful as a point of reference, but will likely rely on more detailed, purpose-
specific sources to assist them in their work. Auditors are important stakeholders 
in IT auditing, but only one of many groups involved in IT auditing or affected by 
how it is carried out. The material in this book is intended primarily to help develop 
an understanding of auditing purposes and practices to nonauditor groups such as 
operational and administrative personnel, managers, and IT program and project 
staff, all of whom may be required to furnish information to or otherwise support 
external or internal audits in their organizations. It also provides an explanation of 
IT auditing suitable for practitioners focused on other aspects of IT management or 
on the performance of functions supported by IT audits such as GRC, quality man-
agement, continuous improvement, or information assurance.

xxiv
CHAPTER ﻿  Introduction
Structure and content
This book could not hope to provide, and is not intended to be, a substitute for for-
mal standards, protocols, and practice guidance relevant to IT auditing. What it 
does offer is a thorough introduction to many aspects of IT auditing and the role 
of IT audits within the broader context of other major forms of audits. The book is 
structured in a way that should be equally helpful to readers looking for informa-
tion on a specific audit-related subject or for those interested in developing a more 
general understanding of the IT audit discipline. The material in the early chap-
ters focuses on describing why organizations undergo different types of audits and 
what characteristics distinguish those types of audits from each other. References 
provided in each chapter, in addition to the information in the last two chapters in 
the book, should help direct readers to authoritative sources of guidance on vari-
ous aspects of auditing and to the major standards organizations and professional 
associations shaping the evolution of the field. This book does not recommend a 
particular approach or methodology, but instead highlights the similarities among 
many of the most prominent frameworks, methodologies, processes, and standards 
in the hope that readers will recognize the basic aspects of IT auditing in any real-
world context.
A brief summary of each chapter follows.
Chapter 1: IT Audit Fundamentals
Chapter 1 establishes a foundation for the rest of the material in the book by defin-
ing auditing and related key terms and concepts and explaining the nature and 
rationale for IT auditing in different organizations, differentiating internal from 
external audits in terms of the reasons and requirements associated with each per-
spective. It also identifies organizations and contexts that serve as the subject of IT 
audit activities and describes the individuals and organizations that perform audits.
Chapter 2: Auditing in Context
Chapter 2 emphasizes the practical reality that IT auditing often occurs as a compo-
nent of a wider-scope audit not limited to IT concerns alone, or a means to support 
other organizational processes or functions such as GRC, certification, and quality 
assurance. Audits performed in the context of these broader programs have different 
purposes and areas of focus than stand-alone IT-centric audits, and offer different 
benefits and expected outcomes to organizations.
Chapter 3: Internal Auditing
Chapter  3 focuses on internal IT auditing, meaning audits conducted under the 
direction of an organization’s own audit program and typically using auditors who 
are employees of the organization under examination. This chapter highlights the 

xxv
Structure and Content
primary reasons why organizations undergo internal audits, including drivers of 
mandatory and voluntary audit activities. It also describes some of the benefits and 
challenges associated with internal auditing and characterizes the role, experience, 
and career path of internal IT audit personnel.
Chapter 4: External Auditing
Chapter 4 provides a direct contrast to Chapter 3 by addressing external auditing, 
which bears many similarities to internal auditing but is, by definition, conducted 
by auditors and audit firms wholly separate from the organization being audited. 
This chapter identifies the key drivers for external audits, explains the role of inter-
nal staff in preparing for and supporting external audits, and describes benefits 
and challenges often encountered by organizations subject to such audits. Because 
audited organizations often have to choose their external auditors, the chapter also 
discusses the process of selecting an auditor, the registration requirements applica-
ble to auditors in many countries, and key auditor qualifications.
Chapter 5: Types of Audits
Chapter 5 offers an overview of the major types of audits organizations undergo, 
including financial, operational, certification, compliance, and quality audits in 
addition to IT-specific audits. For each type of audit, the chapter explains charac-
teristics such as audit rationale, areas of focus, suitability for internal and external 
auditing approaches, applicable standards and guidance, and anticipated outcomes.
Chapter 6: IT Audit Components
The IT domain is too broad to easily address as a whole, whether the topic is audit-
ing, governance, operations, or any other key functions that organizations manage 
about their IT resources. Chapter 6 breaks down IT and associated controls into dif-
ferent categories—reflecting decomposition approaches commonly used in IT audit 
methodologies and standards—to differentiate among IT audit activities focused on 
different IT components. The material in this chapter addresses technical as well as 
nontechnical categories, describing different technologies and architectural layers, 
key processes and functions, and aspects of IT programs and projects that are also 
often subject to audits.
Chapter 7: IT Audit Drivers
Chapter 7 describes key types of external and internal drivers influencing organiza-
tions’ approaches to IT auditing, including major legal and regulatory requirements 
as well as motivating factors such as certification, quality assurance, and opera-
tional effectiveness. This chapter summarizes the audit-related provisions of major 
U.S. and international laws governing publicly traded firms and organizations in 

xxvi
CHAPTER ﻿  Introduction
regulated industries such as financial services, health care, energy, and the public 
sector. It also explains the motivation provided by internally developed strategies, 
management objectives, and initiatives on the ways organizations structure their 
internal audit programs and external audit activities.
Chapter 8: IT Audit Process
The IT audit process description provided in Chapter 8 explains in detail the steps 
organizations and auditors follow when performing audits. Although there is no 
single accepted standard process applicable in all contexts, most methodologies, 
frameworks, standards, and authoritative guidance on auditing share many common 
activities and process attributes, often traceable to the familiar plan-do-check-act 
(PDCA) model originally developed for quality improvement purposes. Chapter 8 
focuses on the activities falling within the generic process areas of audit plan-
ning, audit evidence collection and review, analysis and reporting of findings, and 
responding to findings by taking corrective action or capitalizing on opportunities 
for improvement.
Chapter 9: Methodologies and Frameworks
Although the high-level process of auditing is very similar across organizations, 
industries, audit purposes, and geographies, there is a wide variety of methodolo-
gies and control and process frameworks available for organizations and individual 
auditors to apply when performing audits. Almost all external auditors follow one 
or more of these approaches and many organizations choose to adopt established 
methodologies and frameworks as an alternative to developing their own. Chapter 9 
presents the best-known and most widely adopted methodologies and frameworks, 
including those focused explicitly on auditing as well as those intended to support 
IT governance, IT management, information security, and control assessment.
Chapter 10: Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and 
Certifications
There are many standards development bodies and other types of organizations that 
produce and promote standards relevant to IT auditing and that offer professional 
certifications for individuals engaged in auditing or related disciplines. Chapter 10 
identifies the most prominent organizations and summarizes their contributions to 
available standards and certifications.

1
IT Audit Fundamentals
1
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
●	 What is auditing?
●	 Why audit?
●	 Who gets audited?
●	 Who does auditing?
Dependence on information technology (IT) is a characteristic common to virtu-
ally all modern organizations. Organizations rely on information and the processes 
and enabling technology needed to use and effectively manage information. This 
reliance characterizes public and private sector organizations, regardless of mission, 
industry, geographic location, or organization type. IT is critical to organizational 
success, operating efficiency, competitiveness, and even survival, making impera-
tive the need for organizations to ensure the correct and effective use of IT. In this 
context, it is important that resources are efficiently allocated, that IT functions at a 
sufficient level of performance and quality to effectively support the business, and 
that information assets are adequately secured consistent with the risk tolerance of 
the organization. Such assets must also be governed effectively, meaning that they 
operate as intended, work correctly, and function in a way that complies with appli-
cable regulations and standards. IT auditing can help organizations achieve all of 
these objectives.
Auditing IT differs in significant ways from auditing financial records, gen-
eral operations, or business processes. Each of these auditing disciplines, however, 
shares a common foundation of auditing principles, standards of practice, and high-
level processes and activities. IT auditing is also a component of other major types 
of auditing, as illustrated conceptually in Figure 1.1. To the extent that financial and 
accounting practices in audited organizations use IT, financial audits must address 
technology-based controls and their contribution to effectively supporting inter-
nal financial controls. Operational audits examine the effectiveness of one or more 
business processes or organizational functions and the efficient use of resources in 
support of organizational goals and objectives. Information systems and other tech-
nology represent key resources often included in the scope of operational audits. 
Quality audits apply to many aspects of organizations, including business pro-
cesses or other operational focus areas, IT management, and information security 

2
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
programs and practices. A common set of auditing standards, principles, and prac-
tices informs these types of auditing, centered as they are on an organization’s 
internal controls. IT auditing, however, exhibits a greater breadth and variety than 
financial, operational, or quality auditing alone in the sense that it not only repre-
sents an element of other major types of audits but also comprises many different 
approaches, subject matter areas, and perspectives corresponding to the nature of an 
organization’s IT environment, governance model, and audit objectives.
What is IT auditing?
An audit is often defined as an independent examination, inspection, or review. 
While the term applies to evaluations of many different subjects, the most fre-
quent usage is with respect to examining an organization’s financial statements or 
accounts. In contrast to conventional dictionary definitions and sources focused on 
the accounting connotation of audit, definitions used by broad-scope audit stand-
ards bodies and in IT auditing contexts neither constrain nor presume the sub-
ject to which an audit applies. For example, the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) guidelines on auditing use the term audit to mean a “sys-
tematic, independent and documented process for obtaining audit evidence and 
evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which the audit criteria are 
fulfilled” [1] and the Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) glossary 
defines audit as “formal inspection and verification to check whether a standard or 
Financial
auditing
Quality
auditing
IT auditing
Integrated auditing
Operational
auditing
FIGURE 1.1 
IT auditing has much in common with other types of audit and overlaps in many respects 
with financial, operational, and quality audit practices.

3
What is IT Auditing?
set of guidelines is being followed, that records are accurate, or that efficiency and 
effectiveness targets are being met [2].” Such general interpretations are well suited 
to IT auditing, which comprises a wide range of standards, requirements, and other 
audit criteria corresponding to processes, systems, technologies, or entire organiza-
tions subject to IT audits.
The definitions cited above also emphasize a characteristic that differentiates 
audits from other types of evaluations or assessments by referring to explicit cri-
teria that provide the basis for comparison between what is expected or required 
in an organization and what is actually observed or demonstrated through evi-
dence. Words like assessment, evaluation, and review are often used synony-
mously with the term audit and while it is certainly true that an audit is a type of 
evaluation, some specific characteristics of auditing distinguish it from concepts 
implied by the use of more general terms. An audit always has a baseline or stand-
ard of reference against which the subject of the audit is compared. An audit is not 
intended to check on the use of best practices or (with the possible exception of 
operational audits) to see if opportunities exist to improve or optimize processes 
or operational characteristics. Instead, there is a set standard providing a basis for 
comparison established prior to initiating the audit. Auditors compare the sub-
jects of the audit—processes, systems, components, software, or organizations 
overall—explicitly to that predefined standard to determine if the subject satis-
fies the criteria. Audit determinations tend to be more binary than results of other 
types of assessments or evaluations, in the sense that a given item either meets or 
fails to meet applicable requirements—auditors often articulate audit findings in 
terms of controls’ conformity or nonconformity to criteria [1]. Audit findings iden-
tify deficiencies where what the auditor observes or discovered through analysis 
of audit evidence differs from what was expected or required such that the audit 
subject cannot satisfy a requirement. In contrast, a typical assessment might have 
It is important to use “IT” to qualify IT audit and distinguish it from the more 
common financial connotation of the word audit used alone. Official definitions 
emphasizing the financial context appear in many standards and even in the text 
of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, which defines audit to mean “the examination of 
financial statements of any issuer” of securities (i.e., a publicly traded company) 
[3]. The Act also uses both the terms evaluation and assessment when refer-
ring to required audits of companies’ internal control structure and procedures. 
When developing IT audit plans and other materials that reference standards, 
principles, processes, or other prescriptive guidance for conducting IT audits, it 
helps to be specific, particularly if the audience for such documentation extends 
beyond IT auditors or other IT-focused personnel.

4
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
a quantitative (i.e., score) or qualitative scale of ratings (e.g., poor, fair, good, 
excellent) and produce findings and recommendations for improvement in areas 
observed to be operating effectively or those considered deficient. Because auditors 
work from an established standard or set of criteria, IT audits using comprehen-
sive or well thought-out requirements may be less subjective and more reliable than 
other types of evaluations or assessments.
It is impossible to overstate the importance of the baseline to an effective audit. 
In both external and internal audits, an auditor’s obligation is to fully understand 
the baseline and use that knowledge to accurately and objectively compare the sub-
ject of the audit to the criteria specified in the baseline. The use of formally spec-
ified audit criteria also means that an organization anticipating or undergoing an 
audit should not be surprised by the nature of the audit, what it covers, or what 
requirements the organization is expected to meet. External audits—especially 
those driven by regulatory mandates or certification standards—follow procedures 
and apply criteria that should be available and just as well known to organizations 
being audited as by the external auditors conducting the audits. Internal audits fol-
low strategies, plans, and procedures dictated by the organization itself in its audit 
program, so internal auditors and the business units, system owners, project manag-
ers, operations staff, and personnel subject to or supporting audits should also be 
familiar with the audit criteria to be used.
Internal controls
External and internal IT audits share a common focus: the internal controls imple-
mented and maintained by the organization being audited. Controls are a central 
element of IT management, defined and referenced through standards, guidance, 
methodologies, and frameworks addressing business processes; service delivery and 
management; information systems design, implementation, and operation; informa-
tion security; and IT governance. Leading sources of IT governance and IT auditing 
guidance distinguish between internal control and internal controls. The Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) defines inter-
nal control as a process “designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives” including operational effectiveness and efficiency, reli-
able reporting, and legal and regulatory compliance. In this context, a control is “a 
Like other types of audits, IT audits compare actual organizational processes, practices, 
capabilities, or controls against a predefined baseline. For an external audit, the audit 
baseline is usually defined in rules or legal or regulatory requirements related to the pur-
pose and objectives of the external audit. For internal audits, organizations often have 
some flexibility to define their own baseline or to adopt standards, frameworks, or require-
ments specified by other organizations, including those described in Chapters 9 and 10.

5
What is IT Auditing?
policy or procedure that is part of internal control,” the result of policies and proce-
dures designed to effect control [4]. The IT Governance Institute offers a definition 
consistent with COSO: “policies, plans and procedures, and organizational structures 
designed to provide reasonable assurance that business objectives will be achieved 
and undesired events will be prevented or detected and corrected [5].” This makes for 
a somewhat circular and potentially confusing formulation in which internal controls 
are discrete elements applied within a management process of control in support of 
an organizational objective of establishing and maintaining control.
From the perspective of planning and performing IT audits, internal controls 
represent the substance of auditing activities, as the controls are the items that are 
examined, tested, analyzed, or otherwise evaluated. Organizations often implement 
large numbers of internal controls intended to achieve a wide variety of control 
objectives. Categorizing internal controls facilitates the documentation, tracking, 
and management of the diverse sets of controls present in many organizations. 
The prevalent control categorization schemes used in internal control frameworks, 
IT audit, and assessment guidance, and applicable legislation classify controls by 
purpose, by functional type, or both. Purpose-based categories include preventive, 
detective, and corrective controls, where organizations use preventive controls to 
try to keep unintended or undesirable events from occurring, detective controls to 
discover when such things have happened, and corrective controls to respond or 
recover after unwanted events occur. Controls are further separated by function into 
administrative, technical, and physical control types, as illustrated in Figure 1.2. 
Administrative controls include organizational policies, procedures, and plans that 
FIGURE 1.2 
Internal and external IT audits focus primarily on internal controls, differentiated by 
purpose and type; different auditing methods apply when evaluating different kinds of 
controls.

6
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
specify what an organization intends to do to safeguard the integrity of its opera-
tions, information, and other assets. Technical controls are the mechanisms—
including technologies, operational procedures, and resources—implemented and 
maintained by an organization to achieve its control objectives. Physical controls 
comprise the provisions an organization has in place to maintain, keep available, 
and restrict or monitor access to facilities, storage areas, equipment, and informa-
tion assets. Table 1.1 provides example of internal controls for each combination of 
control type and purpose.
Table 1.1  Examples of Internal Controls Categorized by Type and Purpose
Preventive
Detective
Corrective
Administrative
Acceptable use 
policy; Security 
awareness training
Audit log review 
procedures; IT audit 
program
Disaster recovery 
plan; Plan of action 
and milestones
Technical
Application firewall; 
Logical access 
control
Network monitoring; 
Vulnerability scanning
Incident response 
center; Data and 
system backup
Physical
Locked doors and 
server cabinets;
Video surveillance; 
Burglar alarm
Alternate 
processing facility;
Biometric access 
control
Sprinkler system
Some sources use different control categorizations, such as the management, opera-
tional, and technical control types defined by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) in its information security guidance for federal government agencies 
[6]. NIST uses operational to distinguish controls implemented and performed by people. 
In many auditing contexts, however, “operational controls” is used to mean “internal con-
trols” so to avoid confusion auditors and organizations prefer the more prevalent adminis-
trative–technical–physical categorization.
What to audit
Just as financial, quality, and operational audits can be executed entity-wide or at 
different levels within an organization, IT audits can evaluate entire organizations, 
individual business units, mission functions and business processes, services, sys-
tems, infrastructure, or technology components. As described in detail in Chapter 5, 
different types of IT audits and the approaches used to conduct them may con-
sider internal controls from multiple perspectives by focusing on the IT elements 

7
What is IT Auditing?
to which the controls correspond or on controls implemented in the context of 
processes performed or services delivered by an organization. Irrespective of the 
overall IT auditing method employed, IT audits invariably address one or more 
technology-related subject areas, including controls related to the following:
●	 Data centers and other physical facilities
●	 Network infrastructure
●	 Telecommunications
●	 Operating systems
●	 Databases
●	 Storage
●	 Virtualized servers and environments
●	 Outsourced services and operations
●	 Web and application servers
●	 Software and packaged applications
●	 User and application interfaces
●	 Mobile devices
Internal IT control elements can be audited in isolation or together, although 
even when a given IT audit focuses narrowly on one aspect of IT, auditors need to 
consider the broader technical, operational, and environmental contexts, as reflected 
in Figure 1.3. IT audits also address internal control processes and functions, such 
as operations and maintenance procedures, business continuity and disaster recov-
ery, incident response, network and security monitoring, configuration manage-
ment, system development, and project management.
Network infrastructure
Server platforms
Databases
Applications
Business processes and services
Interfaces
Monitoring, operations,
maintenance and security
Data center/hosting facilities
FIGURE 1.3 
Whether performed from a technical, operational, business process, or organization-wide 
perspective, IT audits typically consider internal controls associated with different IT 
components or architectural layers and common processes supporting technologies across 
multiple layers.

8
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
IT audit characteristics
Definitions, standards, methodologies, and guidance agree on key characteristics 
associated with IT audits and derived from Generally Accepted Auditing Standards 
(GAAS) and international standards and codes of practice. These characteris-
tics include the need for auditors to be proficient in conducting the types of audits 
they perform; adherence by auditors and the organizations they represent to ethi-
cal and professional codes of conduct; and an insistence on auditor independence 
[7,8]. Proficiency in general principles, procedures, standards, and expectations 
cuts across all types of auditing and is equally applicable to IT auditing contexts. 
Depending on the complexity and the particular characteristics of the IT controls 
or the operating environment undergoing an audit, auditors may require specialized 
knowledge or expertise to be able to correctly and effectively examine the controls 
included in the IT audit scope. Codes of conduct, practice, and ethical behavior 
are, like proficiency, common across all auditing domains, emphasizing princi-
ples and objectives such as integrity, objectivity, competency, confidentiality, and 
adherence to appropriate standards and guidance [9,10]. Auditor independence—
a principle applicable to both internal and external audits and auditors—means 
that the individuals who conduct audits and the organizations they represent have 
no financial interest in and are otherwise free from conflicts of interest regarding 
the organizations they audit so as to remain objective and impartial. While auditor 
independence is a central tenet in GAAS and international auditing standards, audi-
tor independence provisions mandated in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and enforced by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) legally require independence for 
audits of publicly traded corporations.
Why audit?
Performing and supporting IT audits and managing an IT audit program are time-, 
effort-, and personnel-intensive activities, so in an age of cost-consciousness and 
competition for resources, it is reasonable to ask why organizations undertake IT 
auditing. The rationale for external audits is often clearer and easier to understand—
publicly traded companies and organizations in many industries are subject to legal 
and regulatory requirements, compliance with which is often determined through an 
audit. Similarly, organizations seeking or having achieved various certifications for 
process or service quality, maturity, or control implementation and effectiveness typi-
cally must undergo certification audits by independent auditors. IT audits often pro-
vide information that helps organizations manage risk, confirm efficient allocation of 
IT-related resources, and achieve other IT and business objectives. Reasons used to 
justify internal IT audits may be more varied across organizations, but include:
●	 complying with securities exchange rules that companies have an internal audit 
function;
●	 evaluating the effectiveness of implemented controls;

9
Who Gets Audited?
●	 confirming adherence to internal policies, processes, and procedures;
●	 checking conformity to IT governance or control frameworks and standards;
●	 analyzing vulnerabilities and configuration settings to support continuous 
monitoring;
●	 identifying weaknesses and deficiencies as part of initial or ongoing risk 
management;
●	 measuring performance against quality benchmarks or service level agreements;
●	 verifying and validating systems engineering or IT project management 
practices; and
●	 self-assessing the organization against standards or criteria that will be used in 
anticipated external audits.
Further details on organizational motivation for conducting internal and exter-
nal IT audits appear in Chapters 3 and 4, respectively. To generalize, internal IT 
auditing is often driven by organizational requirements for IT governance, risk 
management, or quality assurance, any of which may be used to determine what 
needs to be audited and how to prioritize IT audit activities. External IT auditing 
is more often driven by a need or desire to demonstrate compliance with externally 
imposed standards, regulations, or requirements applicable to the type of organiza-
tion, industry, or operating environment.
Who gets audited?
Given the pervasive use of IT in organizations of all sizes and types, and the ben-
efits accruing to organizations that successfully establish and maintain internal 
IT audit programs, almost any organization can find IT auditing valuable. With 
respect to external IT auditing, organizations may not be in a position to deter-
mine whether, how, or when to undergo IT audits, as many forms of external 
audits are legally mandated, not optional. To the extent that organizations seek 
certification or other external validation of their controls or operations they effec-
tively choose to subject themselves to external IT audits. Other types of organi-
zations are subject to specific legal and regulatory requirements based on the 
nature of their business operations or the industries in which they participate. As 
explained in detail in Chapter 7, legal and regulatory requirements are among the 
most prevalent IT audit drivers for organizations in some industries and sectors. 
Table 1.2 lists significant sources of external IT audit requirements for different 
types of organizations. More than one category or attribute may apply to a given 
organization, in which case the organization is likely subject to multiple IT audit 
regulations and requirements.
As noted above and emphasized in Chapter 2, beyond any intrinsic value to an 
organization it might provide, IT auditing is also a critical component of enterprise 
risk management, IT governance, and quality assurance programs and initiatives, 
in addition to supporting regulatory and standards compliance. This means that 
an organization that implements formal governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) 

10
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
models or quality assurance standards also needs an effective IT auditing capabil-
ity. For many organizations the decision to establish and maintain risk management 
or IT governance programs is a choice, not a requirement, but such approaches 
are commonly viewed as best practices. United States publicly traded companies 
listed on the New York Stock Exchange are required, by rules promulgated shortly 
after the passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, to maintain an internal audit func-
tion. Rules in effect for firms subject to statutory audit in countries in the European 
Union also emphasize the importance of monitoring the effectiveness of internal 
audit functions, although they do not explicitly require organizations to maintain 
such a function [17]. Collectively, the combination of legal and regulatory require-
ments and business drivers give organizations a strong incentive to establish an 
internal IT audit capability if they do not already have one, and to make sure that 
the IT audit programs they put in place are properly structured, staffed, managed, 
and maintained.
Who does IT auditing?
Auditing internal IT controls requires broad IT knowledge, skills, and abilities 
and expertise in general and IT-specific audit principles, practices, and processes. 
Table 1.2  Sources of External IT Audit Requirements
Sector, Industry, or Type
External IT Audit Drivers
Public corporations
SEC rules; Sarbanes–Oxley Act rules on internal 
controls (§404) [3] and the PCAOB the law 
created
Financial institutions
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
IT Examination Handbook, Audit Booklet [11]
Health care organizations
Revisions to Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule and 
Privacy Rule in the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act 
[12]
Nonprofit organizations
Federal and state audits of internal controls for 
various types of nonprofits, often tied to sources 
and amount of funding received
Government agencies
Government Auditing Standards (the “Yellow 
Book”) [13]
Federal funding recipients
Single Audit Act of 1984 [14] and OMB Circular 
A-133, Audits of states, local governments, and 
nonprofit organizations [15]
Service providers
ISAE 3402: Assurance reports on controls at a 
service organization [16]

11
Who Does IT Auditing?
Organizations need to develop or acquire personnel with the specialized under-
standing of control objectives and experience in IT operations necessary to effec-
tively conduct IT audits. This requirement is equally true for organizations whose 
IT audit programs focus on performing internal audits as it is for professional ser-
vice firms that conduct external audits or provide auditors or expertise to support 
organizations’ internal audit activities. The types of organizations and individuals 
that perform IT audits include:
●	 Internal auditors, comprising either employees of organizations that undertake 
internal IT auditing or contractors, consultants, or outsourced specialists hired 
by organizations to carry out internal audits;
●	 IT auditors working as independent contractors or as employees of professional 
service firms that provide external or internal IT auditing services;
●	 Auditing or accounting firms (or the audit or accounting divisions of firms 
offering a wider range of services);
●	 Certification organizations authorized to evaluate organizational practices and 
controls and confer certification to organizations whose internal processes, 
systems, services, or operational environments adhere to applicable standards  
or other certification criteria;
●	 Organizations with the authority to oversee the implementation of required 
controls or enforce regulations, such as the Government Accountability Office 
(GAO), SEC, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR) within the 
U.S. federal government; and
●	 Inspectors general, audit executives, or equivalent officials charged with the 
authority to provide independent review of many aspects of the organizations for 
which they work, including compliance with organizational policies, provision 
of adequate security, effective allocation of resources, and maintenance of 
fiduciary responsibility or other standards of care.
Various types of organizations and audit professionals conduct different types of 
IT audits, as the breadth of skills and experience required and the primary objectives 
depend substantially on the scope of the audits to be performed. Figure 1.4 depicts 
types of audits with increasing specificity ranging from organization-wide scope at 
the broadest level through audits of all internal controls, IT-specific controls, con-
trols implemented for an individual information system, and information security 
controls. Technology vendors, service providers, and other types of organizations 
may conduct narrowly focused IT audits to monitor performance against service 
level agreements, check compliance with legal or contractual terms and conditions, 
enforce licensing agreements, or safeguard against fraud, waste, or abuse.
External auditors
External IT audits are, by definition, performed by auditors and entities outside 
the organization subject to the audits. Depending on the size of the organization 

12
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
and the scope and complexity of the IT audit, external audits may be performed 
by a single auditor or a team. In general, the relationship between an organization 
and its external auditors is typically established and managed at entity level—that 
is, organizations engage the services of outside firms or professional organiza-
tions that perform the type of IT audits needed or required. This type of relation-
ship is required for publicly traded companies in the United States and many other 
countries, under rules that require firms that audit these corporations to be regis-
tered or licensed with government oversight bodies, such as the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) in the United States and the members of 
the European Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies (EGAOB) in countries in the 
European Union. Publicly traded companies are therefore constrained in their selec-
tion of external auditing firms, but by requiring that audits of such companies are 
performed only by qualified firms (and the qualified personnel working for them) 
the regulatory structure for statutory audits in many countries ensures that audits 
are conducted in a consistent manner that conforms to applicable principles, stand-
ards, and practices.
Auditor independence is important for both internal and external audits, but in 
the context of external auditing such independence is often not just required but 
Information
system audit
Information
technology audit
Internal
control audit
Security
control audit
Organizational
audit
FIGURE 1.4 
The scope of IT audit activities ranges from organization-wide to more narrowly defined 
subsets of internal controls, including those implemented for specific information systems 
or to achieve specific objectives such as information security.

13
Who Does IT Auditing?
legally enforced. Title II of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act [3] includes provisions man-
dating independence of both the firms that conduct audits and the employees of 
those firms that lead audit engagements at client organizations. Specifically, regis-
tered firms and their employees engaged to perform audits of a given organization 
cannot provide nonaudit services to that organization such as accounting, design 
and implementation of financial systems, actuarial services, outsourced internal 
audits, management functions, investment banking or advising, legal or expert ser-
vices, or any other activity that the PCAOB determines cannot be performed at the 
same time as external auditing services [3]. In many organizations it is not uncom-
mon to retain the same external auditor for many years, so regulations adopted by 
the SEC after Sarbanes–Oxley Act was enacted that required external audit firms to 
rotate lead personnel (“audit partners”) at least every five years, a reduction from a 
maximum of seven years prior to the Act (European Community regulations simi-
larly require audit partner rotation every seven years).
While firms providing external auditing services are subject to organization-
level regulations and oversight, individual auditors performing external audits 
typically must demonstrate adequate knowledge and expertise and appropriate qual-
ifications. Professional certifications provide one indicator of auditor qualification, 
particularly where specific certifications correspond to the type of external audit 
being conducted. Many certifications available to audit professionals have sub-
stantial higher education and prior work experience requirements in addition to the 
demonstration of subject matter expertise through formal examinations. Both audit 
firms and the organizations that engage such firms to perform external audits place 
a high value on certified personnel to help ensure sufficient competency, integrity, 
and domain-specific experience. Due to the close connection and overlapping sub-
ject matter between financial audits and IT audits in external auditing contexts, 
the Certified Public Accountant (CPA) certification—conferred by the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)—is often seen among experi-
enced external auditors. Other common external IT auditor credentials include the 
ISACA’s Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA) and Certified in Risk and 
Information Systems Control (CRISC); the GIAC Systems and Network Auditor 
(GSNA) from the SANS Institute; and ISO/IEC 27001 Lead Auditor. These certifi-
cations and the organizations that manage them are described in Chapter 10.
Internal auditors
Auditing internal controls is a discipline in its own right, having much in com-
mon with external IT auditing but in many respects extending further in terms of 
the technical expertise, operational knowledge, and level of detail required to effec-
tively conduct internal IT audits. Internal auditors often work as employees of the 
organizations they audit, which over time yields an understanding of organization-
specific IT environments, controls, information systems, and operational character-
istics that is difficult if not impossible to replicate in outsourced internal auditors or 
external auditors. In a well-structured internal IT audit program, internal auditors 

14
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
also possess knowledge of mission and business processes and organizational goals 
and objectives that provide a clear context for the IT resources and associated con-
trols deployed in an organization. Due to the emphasis on auditor independence in 
internal as well as external auditing, the internal IT audit function is often organ-
ized in a way that facilitates objectivity and integrity, including a management and 
accountability structure that reports directly to an organization’s board of directors or, 
for organizations lacking such oversight bodies, to a senior member of the executive 
management team. Although their skills often overlap to some degree with IT opera-
tions and information security personnel, technical project managers, and compliance 
officers, the need for independence means that internal IT auditors in most organiza-
tions do not have any operational job duties in addition to their audit responsibilities.
Because the scope of internal IT auditing is broad, internal auditors may rep-
resent many different knowledge areas, skills, and capabilities. Depending on the 
size of an organization and the scale and diversity of its IT operations, ensuring 
the internal audit program adequately covers the relevant functional areas and tech-
nical domains that may require a small team of relatively senior audit personnel 
with broad IT experience or a larger group of auditors with more specialized areas 
of expertise corresponding to the facilities, infrastructure, processes, systems, and 
technology components implemented by the organization. Internal IT auditors also 
need appropriate nontechnical skills and characteristics, including personal and 
professional integrity and ethical standards. Internal IT auditors may demonstrate 
qualifications that satisfy the combination of IT-related capabilities and individual 
professional traits by attaining relevant certifications, notably including the Institute 
of Internal Auditors’ Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) credential and ISACA’s CISA 
or Certified Information Systems Manager (CISM). The certifying organizations 
responsible for these and other internal control-related certifications require hold-
ers of these credentials to adopt explicit principles and standards for auditing and 
to adhere to codes of ethics and standards of professional practice. Details on these 
and a variety of more specialized technical certifications appear in Chapter 10.
IT auditor development paths
Like financial, operational, or quality auditing, IT auditing is a discrete profession 
that shares core principles and standards of practice applicable to auditing in gen-
eral but that also requires specific knowledge, skills, and abilities. There is no single 
“standard” career development path for IT auditors; instead, successful IT auditors 
may come from a variety of backgrounds and follow many different career tracks, 
as illustrated in Figure 1.5. No matter where future IT auditors begin, an individ-
ual’s career progression and the development of necessary knowledge, skills, and 
abilities typically combines:
●	 Formal education in one or more applicable subject areas, potentially including 
completion of degree or certificate programs in higher education institutions;

15
Who Does IT Auditing?
●	 On-the-job training or assigned duties that provide exposure to IT projects 
and operations, business processes supported by IT resources, compliance 
initiatives, or audit-related activities;
●	 Employer-provided or self-directed professional training and skills 
development, continuing professional education, or study in pursuit of relevant 
certifications or other professional qualifications; and
●	 Acquired work experience directly or indirectly involving risk management,  
IT governance, quality management, information assurance, standards 
development or adoption, or controls assessment.
If the education and relevant professional experience prerequisites associated 
with many IT audit-related certifications are any indication, auditors need extensive 
training, domain knowledge, and practical experience before they can be effective 
in conducting audits. Even for IT audit specialists, relevant knowledge and abilities 
Fi
n
a
n
c
e 
an
d 
a
c
c
o
u
nt
in
g
IT
 a
n
d 
S
y
st
e
m
s 
e
n
gi
n
e
er
in
g
B
u
si
n
e
s
s 
a
n
d 
la
w
F
o
r
m
al
 e
d
u
c
at
io
n
F
o
r
m
al
 e
d
u
c
at
io
n
F
o
r
m
al
 e
d
u
c
at
io
n
Information
assurance
Software
development
Project
management
General
auditing
Process
analysis
Compliance
Auditing
standards
Financial
systems
Quality
assurance
IT auditing
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
C
e
r
t
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
FIGURE 1.5 
Individuals travel through many different career paths to develop the skills and expertise 
needed for IT auditing, coming from traditional finance and accounting, business and 
legal, or IT backgrounds.

16
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
are not only IT-related, as experience in many facets of business operations, organi-
zational management and governance, risk management, and process execution and 
service delivery, but also contributes to the body of knowledge IT auditors need to 
be successful in their work. This is not to diminish the significance of IT-specific 
experience, particularly for technical types of IT audits, addressing systems engi-
neering and deployment, software development, IT operations and maintenance, IT 
project management, or security control selection, use, and monitoring.
IT auditing requires broad technical and functional knowledge and touches 
business and IT domains at multiple levels within an organization, meaning effec-
tive IT auditors can potentially come from many different disciplines or initial 
areas of expertise. Figure 1.5 highlights three discrete yet interrelated subject mat-
ter categories of professional backgrounds that often provide good foundations 
for developing IT auditors. The career paths implied in the figure are representa-
tive examples offered to suggest that IT auditing skills and capabilities are equally 
likely to develop as part of conventional finance and accounting work or business 
analytical and legal professions as they are from IT-related fields. In the modern 
regulatory environment applicable to publicly traded companies and many other 
types of organizations, comprehensive internal or external audits of internal con-
trols cannot be completed without addressing IT systems and operations in place 
to support financial management and related business functions. The inclusion of 
manual and automated internal controls on financial reporting within the scope of 
audit requirements prescribed in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act in practice demands that 
firms performing audits—and the auditors they employ—be able to address IT con-
trols. This experience offers a potential avenue for professional specialization in IT 
auditing for individuals with a background in finance or accounting. Many institu-
tions of higher education offer undergraduate and graduate programs in these fields; 
completion of such a program offers a point of entry for careers in auditing. The 
CPA or CIA certifications often possessed by audit professionals following this sort 
of career direction provide a strong foundation for IT auditing from the standards, 
principles, and codes of conduct adopted by the AICPA and the IIA. These profes-
sional organizations also offer IT audit-specific guidance and specialized creden-
tials, such as the IIA IT Auditing Certificate.
Organizations subject to legal, regulatory, or industry standards or that choose 
to pursue certification for quality management, information security management, 
service delivery, or other operational functions rely on personnel with knowledge of 
effective business and operational practices and of applicable standards and regula-
tory requirements. Many formal education programs concentrating in business, law, 
or other fields emphasizing research and analytical skills provide good preparation 
for this type of work. Positions in business process analysis, corporate compliance, 
and organizational legal departments offer individuals significant exposure to inter-
nal operations and practices that may be the subject of internal or external audits. 
Such experience may facilitate the development of the level of expertise in par-
ticular regulatory or compliance frameworks or standards and certification criteria 
to qualify individuals to conduct applicable types of external or internal IT audits. 

17
Relevant Source Material
This type of career path is characterized by specialization in areas such as qual-
ity assurance, industry-specific regulations, compliance with particular standards, 
and service or process maturity frameworks. Various organizations offer standards, 
guidance, and professional certification in these areas, as described in Chapter 10.
The preceding paragraphs described career paths for IT auditors originat-
ing from non-IT disciplines. Many IT audit professionals do of course come from 
backgrounds in IT. Working in areas such as systems design and implementa-
tion, software development, information assurance, IT operations and mainte-
nance, or technical project management provides substantial opportunities to learn 
about implement, monitor, and assess IT controls. This experience is directly rel-
evant to IT auditing and to the governance and risk management processes which 
the IT auditing supports. Organizations following formal IT governance or infor-
mation security control frameworks and guidance typically perform control self-
assessments to satisfy organizational policies and procedures or externally driven 
requirements. IT personnel responsible for implementing, configuring, operating, 
monitoring, or assessing IT controls often acquire sufficient knowledge and rele-
vant skills to perform many types of IT audits. A seemingly unlimited number of IT 
certifications and professional credentials are available to help individuals attest to 
their qualifications in different technologies or processes. These include narrowly 
focused certifications in technical areas of specialization such as software engi-
neering, quality, and programming; network hardware, device configuration and 
analysis; operating systems configuration and administration; penetration testing; 
intrusion analysis and incident handling; and computer forensics. Relatively few 
certifications focus explicitly on IT auditing and, with the exception of the CISA 
and GSNA credentials, those that do address specific IT domains such as informa-
tion security.
Relevant source material
The fundamental concepts and characteristics of IT auditing have a common 
foundation in general audit principles and practices, including GAAS [7] and 
the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing [8], 
as well as codes of practice and of professional ethics which many auditors and 
Although multiple alternatives exist in higher education to prepare individuals for pro-
fessional work in finance and accounting, business management, law, and IT disciplines 
such as software development and systems engineering, relatively few formal higher edu-
cation programs focus on auditing beyond financial analysis and accounting contexts. This 
gap in institutional education options means that IT audit professionals must rely primar-
ily on work experience and professional training and certification programs to develop the 
skills necessary to perform many types of IT auditing.

18
CHAPTER 1  IT Audit Fundamentals
organizations follow. The most significant influences on the practice of external 
auditing of internal IT controls include major legislation and resulting regulations 
establishing various audit requirements for publicly traded, nonprofit, and govern-
ment organizations and for entities in specific industry sectors such as financial 
services and health care. These requirements also affect internal IT audit practices, 
which are also driven by internal control frameworks, methodologies, standards, 
and guidance, including those described in Chapter 9. Exemplary sources of such 
guidance include COSO’s Internal Control—Integrated Framework [4] and the 
Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) [5] offered 
by ISACA and the IT Governance Institute.
Summary
This chapter introduced key concepts relevant to understanding IT auditing and 
provided an overview of IT audit purposes and organizational rationale, described 
different subjects and areas of focus for various types of organizations subject to 
IT audits, and identified the individuals and organizations typically responsible for 
conducting different types of IT audits. It also highlights the significance of internal 
and external IT audits to different types of organizations, as its own discipline as a 
subordinate function to enterprise risk management, IT governance, quality assur-
ance, and regulatory and standards compliance.
References
	[1]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[2]	 ITIL glossary and abbreviations. London (UK): Cabinet Office; 2011.
	[3]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	[4]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Internal con-
trol—Integrated framework. New York (NY): Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
of the Treadway Commission; 2013.
	[5]	 IT Governance Institute. COBIT 4.1. Rolling Meadows (IL): IT Governance Institute; 
2007.
	[6]	 Recommended security controls for federal information systems and organizations. 
Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security 
Division; 2009 August. Special Publication 800-53 revision 3.
	[7]	 Generally accepted auditing standards. New York (NY): American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants, Auditing Standards Board; 2001 December. Statement on Auditing 
Standards 95.
	[8]	 International standards for the professional practice of internal auditing. Altamonte 
Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012 October.
	[9]	 Code of Ethics [Internet]; Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/mandatory-
guidance/Pages/Code-of-Ethics.aspx>.

19
References
	[10]	 Code of Professional Ethics [Internet]; Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; [cited 2013 
May 4]. Available from: < http://www.isaca.org/Certification/Code-of-Professional-
Ethics/Pages/default.aspx > .
	[11]	 IT examination handbook. Arlington (VA): Federal Financial Institutions Examination 
Council; 2012 April.
	[12]	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, Pub. L. 
No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226.
	[13]	 Government auditing standards. Washington (DC): Government Accountability Office; 
2011 December.
	[14]	 Single Audit Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-502, 98 Stat. 2327.
	[15]	 Audits of states, local governments, and non-profit organizations. Washington (DC): 
Office of Management and Budget; 2007 June. OMB Circular A-133.
	[16]	 Assurance reports on controls at a service organization. New York (NY): International 
Auditing and Assurance Standards Board; 2011. International Standards for Assurance 
Engagements 3402.
	[17]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on statutory audits of annual 
accounts and consolidated accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.

21
Auditing in Context
2
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 IT governance
●	 Risk management
●	 Legal and regulatory compliance
●	 Quality management and quality assurance
●	 Information security management
With the exception of organizations subject to external regulations or policies 
requiring them to maintain internal audit functions or conduct information tech-
nology (IT) auditing, the decision to establish an internal IT audit capability is 
typically driven by internally defined objectives. The primary impetus leading 
organizations to set up and operate IT audit programs is the need to provide sup-
port to enterprise management initiatives or programs that depend on IT. Effectively 
supporting such programs is also an important factor in realizing anticipated 
benefits or value from such programs, at least to the extent that their success is 
measured in terms of efficiency, effectiveness, and related performance metrics. 
Organizational functions reinforced or facilitated through internal IT audit pro-
grams include IT governance, enterprise risk management, standards compliance 
and certification, continuous improvement, and quality assurance, all of which sus-
tain mission and business initiatives and help organizations attain strategic plan-
ning goals, objectives, and outcomes. This chapter describes these organizational 
initiatives and the role of IT audit in each of them. It summarizes the major struc-
tural elements, processes, and other characteristics of enterprise programs that IT 
auditing supports and describes the reciprocal relationship between IT auditing and 
governance, risk, compliance, and quality, as illustrated in Figure 2.1. Planning 
and executing the processes associated with these programs influences the design 
and implementation of the IT audit program and helps organizations identify and 
prioritize various aspects of their operations that constitute the subject of needed 
IT audits. Conversely, weaknesses or deficiencies in internal controls, gaps in 
meeting compliance requirements, or other potential IT audit findings influence 
organizational decisions made at the enterprise program level about allocation of 
resources, risk response, corrective action, or opportunities for process or control 
improvement.
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00002-X

22
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
IT governance
The term governance in business contexts refers generally to the set of policies, 
processes, and actions taken by management to define organizational strategy and 
operate the organization in a way intended to help realize its business goals and 
objectives. In contrast, IT governance refers to the structure and processes organi-
zations use to try to ensure that their IT operations support the overall goals and 
objectives of the organization. According to the IT Governance Institute, govern-
ance objectives applicable to virtually any organization include aligning IT strat-
egy with enterprise strategy, allocating IT resources efficiently to support the 
achievement of organizational objectives and realize the value anticipated from 
IT investments, and effectively managing IT-related risk [1]. With the addition of 
performance measurement to allow organizations to assess to what extent they are 
achieving their objectives, IT governance comprises the management functions as 
depicted in Figure 2.2.
Quality
Governance
Risk
Compliance
Strategic planning
Enterprise management programs and functions
IT audit program
Process audit
Service audit
System audit
Project audit
Quality audit
Compliance
audit
Operational
audit
Security
control audit
IT audit findings and reports
IT audit
report
Operations
report
Compliance
report
Control
report
Risk
report
Service
report
FIGURE 2.1 
IT audit activities represent an integral part of several key enterprise management 
functions, which collectively contribute to the scope of the IT audit program and receive 
input from the output of audit processes.

23
IT Governance
As implemented in practice, IT governance comprises a wide range of processes 
and controls for applications, systems, networks, infrastructure, personnel, and data 
centers and other facilities, including:
●	 IT-related policies;
●	 standard operating procedures;
●	 management plans;
●	 performance monitoring and management;
●	 supervisory or oversight functions;
●	 IT controls and control monitoring;
●	 system and software development processes; and
●	 operations and maintenance activities.
The IT governance function and its associated processes and activities can apply 
at multiple levels of an organization—to internal controls, business functions and 
processes, infrastructure, system operations and maintenance, or individual pro-
jects, as well as enterprise-wide. There are a variety of governance frameworks 
available for use, including those taking an organization-wide perspective such as 
Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) or ISO/IEC 
38500. The ISO/IEC 38500 standard focuses on corporate IT governance, empha-
sizing high-level principles and recommendations that organizational executives 
or other leaders with responsibility for governance should consider. The enter-
prise perspective in ISO/IEC 38500 is consistent with COBIT 5—the most recent 
version of the framework, released in 2012—which is intended to offer a holistic 
Resource
management
Performance
measurement
Risk
management
Strategic
alignment
Value
delivery
Enterprise IT
governance
FIGURE 2.2 
The scope of IT governance comprises five key focus areas, each supported by well-
defined processes and sets of internal controls [2].
Source: COBIT 4.1, IT Governance Institute, ©2007. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

24
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
approach to governance with a single overarching framework incorporating many 
formerly separate elements. COBIT 5 expands upon the prior, similarly process-
centric approach used in version 4.1 and integrates additional guidance organized 
into seven categories of “enablers”: principles, policies and frameworks; processes; 
organizational structures; culture, ethics and behavior; information; services, infra-
structure and applications; and people, skills and competencies [3]. IT governance 
managed at the enterprise level covers the full scope of the IT audit universe—oper-
ating units, business and technical functions, processes, systems, controls, and other 
activities that represent the focus of different types of IT audits.
Sources of governance guidance focused on different organizational aspects 
below the enterprise level include:
●	 The Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) and ISO/IEC 20000 
for service management;
●	 The Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) and Projects in 
Controlled Environments version 2 (PRINCE2) for project management;
●	 Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) and ISO/IEC 15504 for 
software development processes; and
●	 The ISO/IEC 27000 series and National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) risk management framework for information security management.
External sources of guidance on governance processes, requirements, or best prac-
tices typically offer organizations models of governance that can be adopted as pub-
lished or adapted to suit an organization’s particular needs. For example, the COBIT 
5 framework describes a total of 37 IT-related processes in five categories—evalu-
ate, direct, and monitor; align, plan, and organize; build, acquire, and implement; 
deliver, service, and support; and monitor, evaluate, and assess—and specifies numer-
ous IT controls in each category. Organizations adopting COBIT are neither required 
to implement all the controls nor constrained to use only the controls in the COBIT 
framework. Instead, the framework provides a structured overarching governance 
model, that accommodates whatever governance functions and controls an organiza-
tion chooses, including controls specified in other standards and frameworks [3].
The role of IT audit in governance
Organizations do not need to follow a formally defined framework to practice effec-
tive governance. For organizations that do, the framework and its associated stand-
ards and procedures provide the foundational elements of IT audit baselines used in 
the areas covered by the governance framework. Organizations that develop their 
own governance methodologies also need to define corresponding sets of audit 
criteria. Organizations also need to support governance with an effective IT audit 
function that allows them to validate that their processes are working as intended; 
that their systems are implemented, configured, and operated correctly and effec-
tively; and that the resources they allocate to their IT initiatives are properly aligned 
to their organizational business objectives.

25
Risk Management
The variety of ways in which IT auditing contributes to the successful practice 
of IT governance activities reflects the broad scope of processes and functions IT 
governance comprises. IT governance typically comprises management processes 
and activities and the documented policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines 
the organization specifies to guide the execution of management processes and pro-
vide effective oversight of operations. Policies and procedures prescribed by the 
organization typically represent guidance intended to ensure that IT is used effec-
tively and efficiently and that established performance objectives are achieved. 
Conducting IT audits of internal operations is one way to confirm that processes 
and activities actually executed by the organization conform to policies and pro-
cedures and to identify any areas of disagreement. If an organization tracks cost 
or other IT resource allocations and has consistent performance measurement in 
place, the results of IT audits may be correlated with cost and performance data to 
provide some insight about IT operations’ contribution to achieving business objec-
tives and desired outcomes. Beyond providing information to management about 
IT operations, IT audits of this type can also offer evidence to demonstrate that 
the organization’s implemented processes indicate a level of maturity or conform 
to externally defined criteria such as those in the Software Engineering Institute’s 
CMMI or the Six Sigma process improvement methodology. IT auditing can con-
firm achievement of (or failure to achieve) organizational objectives relating to each 
of the functions as shown in Figure 2.2.
Risk management
All organizations have some exposure to risk—the potential for loss, damage, 
injury, or other undesirable outcome resulting from decisions, actions, or events. 
Risk exists because the future cannot be predicted with certainty; organizational 
plans or strategies regarding future events reflect assumptions, calculations, or esti-
mates about what will occur, but there is always a chance that events will unfold 
differently than anticipated, potentially with results less favorable than what the 
organization planned. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
defines risk simply as the “effect of uncertainty on objectives,”[4] but most sources 
of guidance on risk management characterize risk as a function of threats and vul-
nerabilities applicable to an organization, where the magnitude of risk is expressed 
Defining an organization’s audit universe—the set of things at all levels of the organization 
that may be the subject of an IT audit—is one of many responsibilities often assigned to 
the IT audit program. Organizations with established IT governance or formal risk manage-
ment programs should have available functional decompositions, asset inventories, and 
enterprise architecture artifacts that substantially describe the IT management, opera-
tions, and technical scope of the organization and thus provide a good basis for establish-
ing the IT audit universe.

26
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
in terms of the impact that could occur should a potential threat materialize and 
the likelihood of that occurrence. The scope of enterprise risk management covers 
all organizational aspects for which adverse events have the potential to affect the 
achievement of objectives and intended outcomes. The presence of risk makes it 
essential for organizations to develop the capabilities and procedures necessary for 
managing risk. Regardless of the types of risk involved, the core processes specified 
in different risk management frameworks and methodologies tend to be similar and 
include risk strategy (or planning), risk identification, risk assessment, risk monitor-
ing, and risk response [5].
Enterprise risk management in many organizations comprises not only the 
scope of IT auditing but also includes many types of risk not ordinarily addressed 
through the IT audit program. Organizations often choose to adopt risk manage-
ment practices, limited in scope to IT or information security, rather than embracing 
enterprise risk management more broadly. Focusing risk management on informa-
tion systems or security controls is the norm in many smaller organizations and in 
public sector organizations of any size where truly enterprise-wide or integrated 
risk management comprising technical and nontechnical sources of risk is rare. For 
instance, the risk management framework published by the U.S. NIST for use in 
federal government agencies addresses only information security risk [6]. When the 
Government Accountability Office (GAO) recommended in 2005 that agencies exe-
cuting homeland security missions adopt risk management practices, it then noted 
the widespread use of risk management in commercial sectors and the relative lack 
of maturity of similar processes in government organizations [7]. In these organi-
zations, the limited sphere of risk management operations may be more closely 
aligned to IT auditing practices, although organizations should be aware that IT 
audit findings may correspond to types of risk beyond IT and information secu-
rity risk. Such narrowly focused risk management programs are in stark contrast to 
those seen in many commercial organizations, particularly in regulated industries 
or among publicly traded companies where the scope of risk management covers 
IT and information security risk as well as financial, operational, strategic, market, 
supply chain, reputation, legal, or other types of business risk [8].
Enterprise risk management frameworks such as those produced by the 
Committee on Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) 
and the ISO adopt an integrated risk management perspective spanning all types of 
risk, all levels of an organization, and multiple types of organizational objectives. 
Such models typically do not enumerate specific types of risk, recognizing that 
organizations of different types or in different sectors may use specific risk catego-
rization schemes and associated risk management techniques. Some risk manage-
ment approaches address enterprise perspectives and more narrowly focused risk 
management practices with separate guidance or standards. For example, the ISO/
IEC 31000 and ISO/IEC 27005 risk management standards share the same general 
risk management concepts and prescribed processes, but ISO/IEC 31000 addresses 
all sources of risk and all organizational activities involving risk [5], while ISO/IEC 
27005 applies only to information security risk [9].

27
Risk Management
Risk management addresses strategic and operational objectives and, for 
organizations in sectors subject to oversight or regulatory requirements, also sup-
ports reporting and compliance objectives. Many organizational governance 
approaches incorporate risk management as an integral component, including the 
COBIT 5 framework described earlier in this chapter that integrates risk man-
agement processes from ISACA’s Risk IT model [3]. Different types of risk can 
impact operational, tactical, and strategic aspects of individual business units or 
entire organizations. Effective risk management often requires visibility into mul-
tiple parts of the organization and coordination of many different resources. The 
specific set of functions, personnel, and other resources allocated to enterprise risk 
management varies depending on the size and complexity of an organization and 
the maturity of its risk management approach. Comprehensive risk management 
models incorporate management, structural, and process perspectives to enable 
organizations to address all types of risk and the different elements to which that 
risk applies. As illustrated in Figure 2.3, organizational components integrated in 
COSO’s framework for enterprise risk management include [10]:
●	 Description of the internal environment, which comprises the organizational 
culture and risk management perspective for the organization, influencing both 
risk management strategy and risk tolerance;
●	 Establishment of strategic goals and objectives, which must be stated clearly in 
order for organizations to identify potential events affecting their achievement;
Internal environment
Objective setting
Event identification
Risk assessment
Risk response
Control activities
Monitoring
Information and communication
Compliance
Entity level 
Business unit
Division
Subsidiary
Operations
Reporting
Strategic
FIGURE 2.3 
The COSO’s enterprise risk management framework[10] is among the most comprehensive 
approaches to risk management due to its coverage of all levels of an organization and 
broad focus well beyond IT.
Source: Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework, Committee of Sponsoring  
Organizations of the Treadway Commission, ©2004. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

28
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
●	 Identification of internal and external threat sources or events with the potential 
to positively or negatively impact the achievement of an organization’s 
objectives;
●	 Assessment of risk, considering likelihood and impact, to support selection of 
appropriate risk responses or other approaches to managing risk;
●	 Selection of risk responses—avoidance, acceptance, mitigation, sharing, or 
transference, alone or in combination—and development of a course of action 
consistent with the nature of the risk and with the organizational risk tolerance;
●	 Creation and implementation of policies and procedures and other control 
mechanisms sufficient to ensure that risk responses are executed as planned;
●	 Information sharing and communication at all levels of the organization to 
enable all risk management stakeholders to carry out their responsibilities; and
●	 Monitoring of all relevant types and sources of organizational risk through 
ongoing operational management activities, purpose-specific evaluations, 
automated monitoring and reporting capabilities, or other means preferred by 
the organization.
Risk management components
Regardless of the scope of activities or organizational levels risk management 
addresses, most risk management approaches share the same core concepts and 
processes, although different organizations implement these common elements in 
different ways. Much of the variation in risk management across organizations—
especially in terms of risk prioritization and resources allocated to risk management 
and mitigation—is attributable to differences in risk tolerance. An organization’s 
risk tolerance (also sometimes called risk appetite or risk propensity) is the level 
of risk it is willing to accept before it takes action to mitigate or otherwise respond 
to risk. An organization that is relatively more risk averse is more likely to invest 
resources in reducing risk or to refrain from some types of activities, and may be 
inclined to evaluate risk more frequently to ensure that the risk the organization 
faces remains at or below acceptable levels. Organizations manage their risk by 
developing and executing a risk plan or risk strategy that reflects an organization-
specific perspective on the types of risk it faces and how it intends to manage that 
risk. The strategy specifies strategic planning assumptions, constraints, decision-
making criteria, and other factors influencing risk management in the organiza-
tion, including the use of risk identification and evaluation procedures such as those 
associated with IT audit functions. Once defined, organizations implement their risk 
management plans using an iterative cycle of processes and procedures, typically 
including risk identification, evaluation, response, monitoring, and review.
The information security risk management life cycle defined in NIST Special 
Publication 800-39 and recommended for use in federal government agencies is 
structurally very similar to ISO/IEC 27005, ISACA’s Risk IT, and other risk man-
agement frameworks and processes developed to support enterprise risk manage-
ment in public and private sector organizations. The core activities in the NIST risk 

29
Risk Management
management process, as illustrated in Figure 2.4, include risk framing, risk assess-
ment, risk response, and risk monitoring, all supported by information flows and 
communication across all levels of an organization and among all risk management 
processes. Similar to risk planning or risk strategy, risk framing establishes the 
scope of risk management activities, which in the case of the NIST framework is 
limited to information security risk associated with information systems and their 
operating environments. Risk assessment entails the identification of threats and 
other sources of risk and the determination of the relative magnitude of risk from 
each source. Risk response addresses what an organization chooses to do about risk 
it faces; alternative responses typically include accepting, mitigating, avoiding, or 
transferring risk. Risk monitoring involves periodic or continuous action to validate 
currently known risk sources, identify new risk sources (whether due to external 
threats or internal environmental changes), and verifying the implementation or val-
idating the effectiveness of courses of action chosen as part of risk response.
The role of IT audit in risk management
IT auditing has both dependent and supporting roles within risk management. The 
results of risk management activities influence the way the IT audit program plans 
and conducts audits, and the findings and recommendations from IT audits repre-
sent important inputs into ongoing risk planning, assessment, and response. In 
most organizations, time, money, personnel, and other resource constraints make 
it impractical or infeasible to audit everything included in the audit universe, so 
it is important to prioritize the aspects of the organization where audit program 
resources should be focused. The risk assessment processes in risk management 
Frame
Assess
Respond
Monitor
Information and
communication flows
Information and
communication flows
Information and
communication flows
FIGURE 2.4 
NIST’s risk management framework is a representative example of processes and 
methodologies that address specific types of risk, such as risk associated with operating 
information systems [6].

30
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
methodologies identify assets in an organization and identify and evaluate the threats 
and other sources of risk to those assets. Organizations may choose to prioritize IT 
audits using different risk-based criteria, such as focusing first on IT processes or 
components assessed to have the highest risk or on those considered to be of great-
est value to the organization. IT audit programs almost certainly operate under other 
drivers and constraints in addition to risk management guidance, but considering 
asset valuation and risk levels helps the organization ensure that it allocates IT audit 
resources in a manner aligned with strategic business goals and objectives.
Another area of overlap between risk management and IT auditing is in threat 
and vulnerability assessment. Identifying threats and vulnerabilities is a key part 
of risk assessment and a set of activities informed by both external and internal 
sources of information about threat sources and types of vulnerabilities. Some of 
the weaknesses or deficiencies identified in IT audits represent vulnerabilities that 
must be evaluated to determine what level of risk they expose for the organization. 
Along with routine vulnerability scanning and other functions typically performed 
as part of continuous monitoring of IT systems and infrastructure, IT audits are an 
important internal source of vulnerability information. When combined with exter-
nal information available to organizations on threats and vulnerabilities, IT audit 
findings help give risk assessors a more complete view of the range of threats 
and vulnerabilities applicable to the organization. Popular sources of vulnerabil-
ity information include the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) data-
base [11], the Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center (CERT/
CC) [12], and the U.S. Computer Emergency Response Team (US-CERT) [13]. In 
addition, publicly available information security risk management guidance often 
includes information on threats, such as the information included in International 
Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) 5310 [14] and NIST Special 
Publication 800-30 [15]. IT auditors can use this information to analyze the vulner-
abilities they find and help determine how significant a risk to the organization with 
those vulnerabilities may be.
Compliance and certification
Organizations operate under a variety of rules and requirements—some self-
imposed, some derived from laws and regulations, and others stemming from stand-
ards or certification criteria that organizations follow. Compliance activities consider 
all requirements applicable to an organization and assess the extent to which the 
In organizations with IT- or information security-focused risk management programs, IT 
auditors and risk managers alike need to be aware that some weaknesses potentially iden-
tified in IT audits correspond to types of risk beyond those related to IT. For example, 
deviations from certification or compliance criteria may be sources of legal, market, or 
reputation risk rather than (or in addition to) any IT or security risk attributed to gaps or 
weaknesses in controls.

31
Compliance and Certification
organization meets those requirements, identifying any gaps or failures to satisfy 
requirements that may exist. The rationale for engaging in compliance activities 
often includes external drivers such as regulatory requirements, but in organiza-
tions with formal governance in place, achieving and demonstrating compliance 
with internal policies, procedures, and standards may be equally important reasons. 
Compliance is one dimension of governance used to measure progress or organi-
zational maturity in terms of implementing and consistently executing specified 
processes and standards. Some professional service and product vendors refer collec-
tively to governance, risk management, and compliance (GRC) as an integrated man-
agement discipline. Compliance programs also stand on their own, providing support 
to governance and risk management but positioned separately within the organiza-
tion, particularly when their activities focus on adherence to legal requirements.
Certification is a special type of compliance. To achieve certification, organi-
zations typically adopt standard processes or methodologies in a specifically pre-
scribed manner and then have their compliance with the chosen standards evaluated 
by an external entity explicitly authorized to grant certification. Compared to gen-
eral compliance activities that may focus on internal or external drivers and evalu-
ations, formal certification almost always involves examination by an external 
party. Organizations typically know the criteria that must be satisfied to achieve 
certification, so internal self-assessments may be used to help organizations pre-
pare for certification or to validate ongoing compliance with required criteria after 
certification. Certifications are available in many different operational areas, as 
summarized in Table 2.1, including quality management, information security man-
agement, service management, and process adoption, execution, and improvement. 
Certifications for some organizational capabilities such as software development, 
IT security, service delivery, and operations control denote a maturity level the 
organization has attained. Examples of standards used in external certification and 
attestation engagements include CMMI and ISO/IEC 15504, which assess capa-
bilities and maturity levels for IT-related processes, and Statements on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements (SSAE), International Standards for Assurance 
Engagements (ISAE), and Service Organization Control (SOC) Reports used to 
certify controls implemented by service providers. More narrowly focused certi-
fications apply to specific tools, technologies, processes, or other products devel-
oped by organizations, where certification is an indication that the product meets 
or exceeds specific functional and technical standards or other criteria. These cer-
tifications include Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) specified by 
NIST, the Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG) Assisted Product 
Scheme, and the protection profiles and associated assurance levels specified under 
the common criteria framework.
Managing compliance and certification
Managing compliance and certification is an ongoing process, punctuated by exter-
nally driven deadlines or required examination frequencies, in organizations subject 

32
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
to regulatory requirements or certification criteria. Compliance and certification 
programs also typically perform self-assessments or internal evaluations sched-
uled to coincide with pending external audits or conducted on a periodic or ad hoc 
basis (such as when changes to operations, systems, or environments occur). Part 
of the process of seeking and achieving certification is ensuring that the controls, 
processes, or standards associated with the certification are actually implemented 
in the organization. For example, the maturity levels in the Software Engineering 
Institute’s CMMI process improvement framework correspond to specific processes 
that an organization is expected to use in its internal operations in order to receive 
certification at each level.
Both compliance and certification are often the subject of external audits 
intended to enable an objective determination by an outside entity of adherence 
to regulatory or industry standards or certification criteria. For some organiza-
tions compliance with regulatory requirements is audited on an annual basis, 
as is the case with internal controls for publicly traded companies subject to the 
Sarbanes–Oxley Act. Chapter  7 describes many industry-specific legislative and 
regulatory audit requirements, including those applicable to organizations in edu-
cation, financial services, health care, and government. There are also standards 
and criteria applicable to organizations in different industries or lines of business 
for which compliance reporting occurs largely through self-attestation rather than 
external audit. Until recently, this self-attestation model applied to many aspects 
of compliance in the health care industry including regulatory requirements under 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and qualification for 
Table 2.1  Types of Organizational Certifications and Standards
Certification Focus
Certifications
Quality management
●	 ISO 9001
●	 ISO 14001
Information security management
●	 ISO/IEC 27001
●	 Cybertrust
Service management
●	 CMMI for services
●	 ISO/IEC 20000
Service organization controls
●	 SSAE 16
●	 ISAE 3402
●	 SOC 2 and 3
Process improvement
●	 CMMI
●	 ISO/IEC 15504
●	 Six Sigma
Products or technologies
●	 Common criteria
●	 CESG assisted products scheme (United 
Kingdom)
●	 FIPS (United States)

33
Compliance and Certification
incentive funding programs in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009. Recent changes in federal oversight of these programs brought about through 
provisions in the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health 
(HITECH) Act introduced external compliance audits conducted by the government 
[16]. For other legal and regulatory requirements organizations are subject to selec-
tion for external audits, but actual audits are performed on a small percentage of 
organizations in a given industry or geographic area.
Organizations need their own internal processes to assess certification and com-
pliance, whether or not they expect to be audited by external parties, to help ensure 
on an ongoing basis that they conform to applicable requirements and can demon-
strate evidence of their compliance if and when they need to. Part of the focus of 
an externally administered certification or compliance audit is satisfactorily dem-
onstrating to auditors that the organization follows its own policies and procedures 
and that those are implemented in practice and not just written in official docu-
mentation. Performing regular internal audits of the extent to which an organiza-
tion actually does the things specified in such documentation is an important part of 
being ready for external certification audits and of helping to ensure that the organi-
zation realizes the benefits of the standards or methodologies against which it is 
certified.
The role of IT audit in compliance and certification
The central role of IT auditing in organizational compliance and certification is 
readily apparent from the nature of compliance activities—internal and external 
compliance evaluations alike compare organizational behavior or operational char-
acteristics to explicit sets of requirements. This procedural feature is a defining 
Much like IT auditing in general, certification against specific standards is typi-
cally evaluated and conferred against criteria representing a particular version or 
publication date of the standard in question. For example, the formal designa-
tion of most ISO standards and corresponding certifications includes the year in 
which the most recent version of the standard was officially released. Standards 
development organizations and the standards they produce are not static, how-
ever, so organizations conducting internal audits against such certification cri-
teria need to be aware when updates or other changes occur to standards that 
alter the criteria they need to satisfy to remain certified under new versions. 
Repeatedly performing internal audits to validate certification against a fixed set 
of criteria is of little value in helping the organization pass external audits if the 
internal audit uses an out-of-date or deprecated version of the standard that has 
been superseded by a new version.

34
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
characteristic of auditing. Internal compliance audits support management and 
operational oversight functions performed as part of governance, while external 
compliance audits help organizations satisfy legal, regulatory, or industry require-
ments. Even in the absence of external mandates, validating compliance using 
internal audits provides important information about many aspects of program or 
organizational effectiveness. Similarly, successfully completing an external audit is 
often a prerequisite to achieving or maintaining certification, which in turn enables 
organizations to leverage certifications for a variety of purposes, including differen-
tiating their operations from peer organizations that have not achieved certification. 
Organizations with strategic business or IT objectives that include compliance with 
external requirements can use formal internal IT auditing procedures to prepare for 
external audits, and reduce uncertainty regarding the results and improve the likeli-
hood of passing such audits. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA) provides guidance on compliance audits in its Statement on Auditing 
Standards 117 [17].
Quality management and quality assurance
Quality assurance refers to the processes associated with achieving and maintain-
ing a desired level of quality in a product or service. The closely related concept of 
quality control focuses on maintaining consistent quality over time, such as meeting 
a specific standard or producing a product with characteristics satisfying prescribed 
criteria or falling within a specified tolerance level. The more general term quality 
management comprises all coordinated activities related to quality including qual-
ity planning, quality assurance, quality control, and quality improvement [18]. Like 
governance and risk management, quality assurance methods and practices apply 
across different levels of an organization. While many organizations cite quality 
explicitly as a business goal and make decisions to adopt quality initiatives at an 
enterprise level, in practice quality assurance is most often implemented at the busi-
ness function or process level. Many commonly implemented quality management 
standards and approaches—such as ISO 9001, Total Quality Management (TQM), 
and Six Sigma—address quality management principles and practices throughout 
an organization, but certifications against such standards are conferred on specific 
processes, projects, or operating units. Other methodologies and standards apply 
quality assurance to specific business domains, such as the Software Engineering 
Institute’s IDEAL (initiating, diagnosing, establishing, acting, and learning) model 
and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard 730 for soft-
ware quality assurance [19], or to operational aspects such as service quality meas-
ured with performance frameworks like SERVQUAL [20].
Quality management as specified in leading standards and methodologies is 
an iterative set of processes intended to help organizations deliver products, ser-
vices, and other process outputs that meet applicable requirements, whether those 
requirements are driven by laws and regulations, customers, or internal business 

35
Quality Management and Quality Assurance
objectives. These quality models typically emphasize continuous improvement of 
organizational processes, an aspect of quality management that organizations must 
demonstrate explicitly in order to achieve certification against standards such as 
ISO 9001 [21]. Quality is measured using multiple dimensions and criteria, poten-
tially including internally defined specifications, customer requirements, industry 
standards, or government regulations. Effective, accurate, and consistent meas-
urement is an integral component of quality management, as illustrated in Figure 
2.5, to be able to set and adjust the quality baseline against which improvements 
in product or process quality can be compared. The collective set of policies, pro-
cesses, resources, and tools used in quality-related activities constitutes a quality 
management system (sometimes termed as quality management program) that can 
be implemented at an organization-wide level or with a scope of control more nar-
rowly defined to lines of business, functional domains, or discrete product or ser-
vice offerings.
The contributions of quality management on the field of IT auditing go far 
beyond the use of audit procedures in quality assurance activities, as the pro-
cesses specified in many governance, risk management, service management, 
and auditing methodologies share a common foundation in the plan-do-check-act 
Resource
management
Measurement,
analysis, and
improvement
Product
realization
Management
responsibility
Continual improvement of
the quality management system
Customers
Customers
Requirements
Satisfaction
Product
Input
Output
FIGURE 2.5 
The process defined in ISO 9001 uses an iterative approach and emphasizes the 
continuous improvement characteristic of quality management systems [21].

36
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
(PDCA) cyclical model generally attributed to W. Edwards Deming (the “Deming 
cycle”). Originally developed as a statistical process control and continuous qual-
ity improvement model for product manufacturing, the four-phase Deming cycle 
shown in Figure 2.6 appears explicitly in or significantly influences COBIT, ITIL, 
multiple ISO standards, and U.S. government frameworks for risk management and 
information systems auditing. The Deming cycle provided the foundation for sev-
eral quality control and process improvement approaches developed in Japan begin-
ning in the 1950s and adopted in U.S. companies beginning in the 1980s notably 
including TQM. It also features prominently in quality management and quality 
audit procedures and guidelines from standards organizations such as the ISO and 
the American Society for Quality (ASQ) [22].
What changes
might be desirable?
Are new observations
needed? If yes, plan a
change or test. 
Plan
Check
Observe the effects
of the change
or test.
Study the results.
What did we learn?
What can we predict?
Act
Do
Carry out the change
or test decided upon,
preferably on a
small scale.
FIGURE 2.6 
The PDCA cycle popularized by W. Edwards Deming arose out of quality management 
but is widely used in other management domains including IT governance, information 
security, risk management, and auditing [23].
Deming himself credited the cycle most often attributed to him to Walter Shewhart [23], 
but after the rapid adoption of the quality improvement cycle in Japan in the 1950s using 
the name “Deming cycle,” subsequent references in business literature almost invariably 
refer to the PDCA model as the Deming cycle.

37
Information Security Management
The role of IT audit in quality management
IT auditing supports organizational quality management functions by confirming 
that operational processes produce the intended result and that the outputs of those 
processes satisfy quality-related criteria. Quality management systems are also 
subject to periodic audit to determine if the system as implemented meets appli-
cable requirements (including those necessary for certification) and is properly 
operated and maintained. This means that an organization often conducts qual-
ity assurance of its internal auditing program (including IT auditing) and per-
forms internal audits of its quality management system and associated processes. 
Several types of IT audits may be used in quality management or quality assur-
ance activities, including audits of IT-related products or services, processes, or 
control systems [22]. Such audits may be conducted as part of internal or external 
audit programs, depending on the source of the requirements or quality criteria the 
organization needs to meet, the purpose for the audit, and whether the organization 
has or is seeking certification for its quality management capabilities. The results 
of IT audits performed in support of quality assurance can either confirm adher-
ence to quality criteria and achievement of quality objectives or identify deviations 
from product specifications or service levels that become targets for corrective 
action. Because IT audits emphasize compliance with quality standards and criteria, 
they are not particularly well-suited to identifying opportunities for improvement 
for processes or systems that satisfy current requirements. Available quality-centric 
methodologies used for process improvement include business process reengineer-
ing, TQM, CMMI, and Six Sigma.
Information security management
Information security is often considered a subordinate function to IT governance, 
risk management, or both, and in that respect differs from the other management 
functions described in this chapter. The current emphasis in information secu-
rity management on continuous monitoring, threat and vulnerability assessment, 
and evaluation of the implementation and effectiveness of security controls over-
laps with IT auditing practices to such a significant extent that information secu-
rity warrants separate consideration. Security controls—administrative, technical, 
and physical—are the primary focus of information security management and of 
the IT auditing or assessment activities performed in support of information secu-
rity programs. Information security management entails the selection, implemen-
tation, configuration, operation, and monitoring of security controls sufficient to 
protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information systems and the 
data they contain. Information security management is risk-based, in the sense that 
decisions to deploy security mechanisms or allocate resources to protect organiza-
tional assets must balance the cost of providing security with the level of risk to the 
organization, if threats it faces remain unaddressed. In simple economic terms, it 
does not make sense for an organization to invest more in security than the value of 

38
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
the assets under protection or the magnitude of or harm that would occur if those 
assets were lost, stolen, damaged, or compromised.
Organizations in the public sector and in many industries are subject to legal 
and regulatory requirements that mandate minimum security safeguards or pro-
tective measures. Such regulations rarely specify security products, tools, or 
explicit methods (partly in order to avoid favoring individual security vendors) 
and instead prescribe requirements, standards, or intended outcomes for security, 
leaving the choice of what specific controls to implement up to each complying 
organization. Government regulators often recommend or require organizations to 
adhere to separately developed standards. For example, Securities and Exchange 
Commission rules on the implementation of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act explicitly 
mention control frameworks and standards from the COSO and the AICPA [24] 
and in its Directive on statutory audits, the Council of the European Union specifies 
International Standards on Auditing (ISA) adopted by the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) [25]. With the exception of U.S. federal government agen-
cies—which under the authority of the Federal Information Security Management 
Act (FISMA) must comply with FIPS and associated security guidance issued by 
NIST—security regulations typically do not prescribe specific security control 
standards. To achieve the security objectives in such regulations, however, many 
organizations voluntarily choose to adopt formal security control frameworks such 
as ISO/IEC 27002, and to seek certification against these standards.
In current practice, information security management emphasizes strategies 
such as continuous monitoring of security controls and independent security con-
trol assessments to gauge the effectiveness of the controls organizations implement 
and maintain. Available standards on information security management, such as 
ISO/IEC 27001, specify the same sort of iterative, cyclical set of processes seen 
in quality management, risk management, and governance disciplines, as illus-
trated in Figure 2.7. The scope of information security management includes IT 
The term certification has two different meanings within the information security man-
agement context. In government sector environments and commercial sector organizations 
that require structured, formal procedures and approvals before putting an information 
system into production, certification refers to the self-evaluation and affirmation of the 
extent to which the security controls implemented for a system meet the system’s security 
requirements. Beyond the scope of giving formal approval (in U.S. federal government 
parlance, “authorizing to operate”) to information systems, certification typically indicates 
compliance with a specific standard or set of criteria. For instance, many organizations 
seek certification to demonstrate conformance with requirements and standards for infor-
mation security management systems, such as ISO/IEC 27001. Such certifications are 
granted by accredited registrars or other organizations explicitly approved to serve as certi-
fication bodies. To avoid potential confusion over word meanings, it is important to clearly 
specify the context when referring to security certification activities, including security-
focused IT audits.

39
Information Security Management
Establish
the ISMS 
Monitor and
review the ISMS
Implement and
operate the ISMS
Maintain and
improve the ISMS
Do
Plan
Act
Check
Information security
requirements and
expectations
Managed
information
security
FIGURE 2.7 
The ISMS process defined in ISO/IEC 27001 applies the familiar PDCA model to 
information security management [26].
audit activities—particularly audits of security controls—but also comprises many 
other types of evaluations intended to validate proper function and configuration of 
security controls, ensure the adequacy of implemented controls to satisfy security 
requirements, or determine whether those responsible for operating, maintaining, 
and securing IT do so in a way that achieves the organization’s goals and objec-
tives. Security controls assessments typically rely on assessors’ expertise to judge 
whether the security controls implemented are effective. Such judgments rely on 
reviews of evidence and examination and testing by assessors, but effectiveness is 
an inherently subjective determination influenced by accepted security best prac-
tices as well as various organization-specific factors. Some security control assess-
ments do use control frameworks or standards as points of reference for the set of 
security controls that should be implemented in a given organizational environment, 
but such assessments are still not the same as audits. Security control selection 
is a risk-based process, so the actual controls in place may differ from organiza-
tion to organization due to variations in mission and business objectives, indus-
try, threat profile, risk tolerance, or other characteristics. Internal IT audit criteria 
may be defined in a way that is organization-specific but audits against require-
ments specified in external standards should use the same set of audit criteria across 
organizations.
The role of IT audit in information security management
Information security management supports IT auditing by taking responsibility 
for implementing and correctly configuring internal controls related to security. 

40
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
Security controls are an important subject of internal controls, but still a subset, 
meaning information security does not cover the full range of IT controls in an 
organization. IT auditing also supports information security management, by pro-
viding detailed, critical examinations of internal controls implemented to achieve 
security objectives and by confirming that IT operations match organizational poli-
cies, procedures, standards, and guidelines. As noted in Chapter 6, security criteria 
apply in audits of virtually every type of IT component that might be subject to 
an IT audit. IT audit procedures are also useful for some types of narrowly scoped 
examinations, such as checking a system or network device for proper configu-
ration against a specification such as the Defense Information Systems Agency’s 
Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs) [27] or U.S. Government 
Configuration Baseline (USGCB) [28], or secure configuration guidelines provided 
by technology vendors for their products.
Information security management programs are also the subject of IT audits. 
ISO/IEC 27001 emphasizes the importance of auditing an organization’s ISMS 
using formal internal audit procedures to examine security control objectives, 
implemented controls, and processes and procedures for operating, maintaining, 
and improving the ISMS [26]. Information security programs may be subject to for-
mal review, inspection, or audit, depending on the industry and the nature of over-
sight to which an organization is subject. Examination of security controls is also 
an element of many types of internal and external audits of internal controls includ-
ing those focused on control of financial accounting and reporting systems in pub-
licly traded companies.
Relevant source material
Each of the organizational functions addressed in this chapter represent business 
disciplines that are the subject of abundant business and management literature and 
the focus of multiple professional associations, standards bodies, and other organi-
zations. Key sources of additional information include:
●	 IT governance
●	 Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) [3]
●	 COSO’s Internal Control—Integrated Framework [29]
●	 ISO/IEC 38500:2008, Corporate Governance of Information Technology [30]
●	 Web sites and online resources of the IT Governance Institute (http://www.
itgi.org) and ISACA (http://www.isaca.org)
●	 Risk management
●	 COSO’s Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework [10]
●	 ISO/IEC 31000:2009, Risk Management—Principles and Guidelines [5]
●	 NIST Special Publication 800-39, Managing Information Security Risk: 
Organization, Mission, and Information System View [6]
●	 Compliance and certification
●	 Statement on Auditing Standards 117, Compliance Audits [17]

41
References
●	 ISO online guidance on certification [31] and standards and guidance from 
the ISO Committee on Conformity Assessment (CASCO)
●	 Quality management
●	 The ASQ Auditing Handbook [22]
●	 ISO 9001:2008, Quality Management Systems—Requirements [21]
●	 IAASB Handbook of International Quality Control, Auditing Review, Other 
Assurance, and Related Services Pronouncements[32]
●	 Information security management
●	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005, Information—Security Techniques—Information 
Security Management Systems—Requirements[26]
●	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005, Information Technology—Security Techniques—Code 
of Practice for Information Security Management[33]
●	 NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls 
for Federal Information Systems and Organizations[34]
Summary
This chapter identified major organizational management functions that influence 
and are supported by IT auditing, including GRC and certification, and quality 
management. Each of these functions has a reciprocal relationship with organiza-
tions IT audit programs, helping to identify and prioritize target areas for audit-
ing and using the findings produced in IT audits as inputs. The information in this 
chapter was intended to place IT auditing in the proper context and to explain the 
nature and intent of IT audits performed in support of different management disci-
plines. This information also highlights some of the key differences between inter-
nal and external audit programs and activities which will be expanded upon in the 
next two chapters.
References
	[1]	 IT Governance Institute Board briefing on IT governance, 2nd ed Rolling Meadows 
(IL): IT Governance Institute; 2003.
	[2]	 IT Governance Institute CobiT 4.1. Rolling Meadows (IL): IT Governance Institute; 
2007.
	[3]	 ISACA COBIT 5: a business framework for the governance and management of enter-
prise IT. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2012.
	[4]	 ISO Guide 73:2009. Risk management—Vocabulary.
	[5]	 ISO/IEC 31000:2009. Risk management—Principles and guidelines.
	[6]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Managing information security risk: 
Organization, mission, and information system view. Gaithersburg (MD): National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2011 March. [spe-
cial publication 800-39].
	[7]	 Wrightson MT, Caldwell SL. Further refinements needed to assess risks and prioritize 
protective measures at ports and other critical infrastructure. Report to Congressional

42
CHAPTER 2  Auditing in Context
	
	 Requesters. Washington (DC): Government Accountability Office; 2005 December. 
[GAO Report 06-91. The GAO risk management framework is defined in Appendix A].
	 [8]	 Crouhy M, Galai D, Mark R. The essentials of risk management. New York (NY): 
McGraw-Hill; 2006.
	 [9]	 ISO/IEC 27005:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Information 
security risk management.
	[10]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission Enterprise 
risk management—Integrated framework. New York (NY): Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission; 2004.
	[11]	 Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures [Internet]. McLean (VA): The MITRE 
Corporation [updated 2013 May 16; cited 2013 June 4]. Available from: <http://cve.
mitre.org>.
	[12]	 CERT Coordination Center [Internet]. Pittsburgh (PA): Software Engineering Institute 
[cited 2013 June 4]. Available from: <http://www.cert.org/certcc.html>.
	[13]	 US-CERT—United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team [Internet]. 
Washington (DC): Department of Homeland Security [cited 2012 January 15]. 
Available from: <http://www.us-cert.gov>.
	[14]	 International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions  Information system security 
review methodology. Copenhagen (DK): INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee; 
1995. [ISSAI 5310. Appendix H].
	[15]	 Guide for conducting risk assessments. Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2012 September. Special 
Publication 800-30 revision 1. Threat sources, events, and vulnerabilities appear in 
Appendices D, E, and F, respectively.
	[16]	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, Pub. L. 
No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226 § 13411.
	[17]	 Compliance audits. New York (NY): American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants, Auditing Standards Board; 2009 December. Statement on Auditing 
Standards 117.
	[18]	 ISO 9000:2005. Quality management—Fundamentals and vocabulary.
	[19]	 IEEE P730-2002  Standard for software quality assurance processes. New York (NY): 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; 2002.
	[20]	 Parasuraman A, Zeithaml VA, Barry LL. SERVQUAL: a multiple-item scale for meas-
uring consumer perceptions of service quality. J Retailing 1988;64(1):12–40.
	[21]	 ISO 9001:2008. Quality management systems—Requirements.
	[22]	 Russell JP, editor. The ASQ auditing handbook (4th ed.). Milwaukee (WI): ASQ 
Quality Press; 2013.
	[23]	 Deming WE. Out of the crisis. Cambridge (MA): MIT Center for Advanced 
Educational Services; 1986. p. 88–89.
	[24]	 Securities and Exchange Commission. Management’s report on internal control over 
financial reporting and certification of disclosure in Exchange Act periodic reports; 
final rule. 68 Fed. Reg. 36636; 2003.
	[25]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on Statutory Audits of Annual 
Accounts and Consolidated Accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.
	[26]	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005. Information—Security techniques—Information security man-
agement systems—Requirements.
	[27]	 Security Technical Implementation Guides [Internet]. Defense Information Systems 
Agency, Information Assurance Support Environment [updated 2013 June 7; cited 
2013 June 7]. Available from: <http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/index.html>.

43
References
	[28]	 U.S. Government Configuration Baseline (USGCB) [Internet]. Gaithersburg (MD): 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Information Technology Laboratory 
[created 2010 February 19; updated 2013 June 3; cited 2013 June 7]. Available from: 
<http://usgcb.nist.gov>.
	[29]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission Internal con-
trol—Integrated framework. New York (NY): Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
of the Treadway Commission; 2013.
	[30]	 ISO/IEC 38500:2008. Corporate governance of information technology.
	[31]	 Certification—ISO [Internet]. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization 
[cited 2013 June 7]. Available from: <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/certifica-
tion.htm>.
	[32]	 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board. Handbook of international 
quality control, auditing review, other assurance, and related services pronouncements. 
New York (NY): International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board; 2012 June.
	[33]	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Information technology—Security techniques—Code of prac-
tice for information security management.
	[34]	 Security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations. 
Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2013 April. Special Publication 800-53 revision 4.

45
Internal Auditing
3
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Internal audit as an organizational capability
●	 Internal IT audit drivers and rationale
●	 Benefits of internal auditing
●	 Internal audit challenges
●	 Internal auditors
The purpose and scope of IT audits, and the procedures used to perform them, dif-
fer significantly for internal audits compared to external audits. The Institute for 
Internal Auditors includes a formal definition of internal auditing as part of its 
International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF): “Internal auditing is an 
independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and 
improve an organization’s operations. It helps an organization accomplish its objec-
tives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the 
effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes” [1]. External 
auditing also features a formally defined disciplined approach and informs risk 
management, determinations of control effectiveness, and organizational govern-
ance, but internal audits are performed by employees of the organization (or con-
tractors hired to work on the organization’s behalf) subject to the audits, following 
plans, procedures, and criteria chosen by the organization. In contrast, external 
audits are performed by auditors representing firms wholly separate from the organ-
ization being audited, typically applying regulatory or industry standards, or other 
criteria developed outside the organization.
The differences between internal and external auditing go well beyond the 
organizations and their auditors responsible for conducting audits, as a wider 
variety of motivations often drives internal auditing. Many of the same standards 
and sources of guidance influence internal and external IT auditing, but as illus-
trated in Figure 3.1 internal auditing reflects organizational policy and program 
perspectives on what to audit and how different types of audits are conducted, as 
well as subject matter knowledge applicable to each organization and the kinds of 
IT audits it performs. Broadly defined auditing standards and practices—such as 
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS) and International Standards on 
Auditing (ISA)—are just as applicable to IT auditing as they are to financial or 
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00003-1

46
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
more general operational audits. These standards establish a basic set of principles 
and audit program requirements to which organizations add industry or domain-
specific guidance as well as any internally developed procedures and criteria. This 
chapter describes the structural and operational characteristics of internal IT audit 
programs, the expectations and obligations for the organizations that maintain 
such programs, and the knowledge and skills needed by the auditors who conduct 
internal audits. It also explains common drivers and sources of motivation for inter-
nal auditing and highlights some of the primary anticipated benefits and potential  
challenges associated with internal IT auditing.
Internal audit as an organizational capability
Both external and internal IT audit practices depend on formally defined procedures 
executed by capable auditors with sufficient organizational knowledge and domain 
expertise to effectively carry out the different types of audits an organization 
needs. The key structural difference with respect to internal auditing is the need for  
an organizational component or function—typically called the internal audit  
program—responsible for conducting audits within the organization. Depending 
Procedural
guidance
Policy and program
guidance
Industry
guidance
Auditor
guidance
Technical
guidance
General and internal auditing
standards and guidance
IT
auditing
Domain
knowledge
FIGURE 3.1 
Internal IT auditing draws upon many sources of guidance informing audit program 
structure, audit procedures and protocols, areas of audit focus, and auditor practices and 
qualifications.

47
Internal Audit as an Organizational Capability
on the size and management structure of the organization, the industry in which 
it participates, and factors such as whether the organization is publicly traded, the 
internal audit program may be a large unit within the organization with resources 
dedicated only to auditing or it may be a functional capability drawing resources 
as needed from many parts of the organization. Irrespective of the specific struc-
tural features or the number of staff or other resources associated with it, an internal 
audit program needs proper authority to conduct audits, an audit strategy or plan to 
guide the program’s management and operations, and personnel qualified to per-
form the full range of audits applicable to the organization. The audit program must 
also establish and continually demonstrate independence and objectivity, for the 
program overall, the managers and executives responsible for the program, and the 
auditors who perform the audits.
Independence and objectivity
Independence is the freedom from bias, outside control, or authority that, in an 
internal auditing context, ensures that the audit program is neither responsible for 
nor beholden to the parts of the organization it audits and, similarly, that individual 
auditors do not work for projects, operational functions, or business units that they 
audit. Objectivity in audit practices connotes more than independence—an objec-
tive auditor makes judgments based on evidence, is free from conflicts of interest 
with the subjects of auditing activities, and is able to act with impartiality. Because 
employees of an organization acting as internal auditors cannot be fully independ-
ent from the organization (due among other things to the fact that they presumably 
earn a salary from the organization) in a way that external auditors can, standards 
and practices intended explicitly for internal auditors tend to emphasize auditor 
objectivity rather than independence [2,3]. Independence is a central tenet of most 
auditing standards, practice guidance, and codes of ethics specified by major audit-
related professional associations and standards development organizations. No matter 
which standards and sources of auditing guidance an organization chooses to adopt, 
independence needs to be considered. Notable examples include:
●	 The second general standard in the GAAS, dictates that “In all matters relating 
to the assignment, an independence in mental attitude is to be maintained by the 
auditor or auditors” [4].
●	 The ISA issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board 
(IAASB) emphasize the importance of maintaining both an attitude and the 
appearance of independence, as auditor independence “safeguards the auditor’s 
ability to form an audit opinion without being affected by influences that might 
compromise that opinion” [5].
●	 Attribute standard 1110 in the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) International 
Standards for the Professional Practice of Auditing stipulates that, “The internal 
audit activity must be independent, and internal auditors must be objective in 
performing their work” [2].

48
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
●	 Independence is one of the principles of auditing in ISO 19011: “Auditors should 
be independent of the activity being audited wherever practicable, and should in 
all cases act in a manner that is free from bias and conflict of interest” [6].
●	 The International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) Code of Ethics requires 
both objectivity and independence for professionals engaged in assurance 
engagements, including independence of mind “that permits the expression of a 
conclusion without being affected by influences that compromise professional 
judgment, allowing an individual to act with integrity, and exercise objectivity 
and professional skepticism” [7].
●	 ISACA’s Code of Professional Ethics requires members and holders of ISACA 
certifications to “Perform their duties with objectivity, due diligence and 
professional care, in accordance with professional standards” [3].
In practice, the prominence across so many audit standards and sources of guid-
ance means that many organizations and their auditors are obligated to ensure that 
internal audit programs reflect appropriate structural independence and levels of 
objectivity. This can be challenging for smaller organizations or organizations of 
any size that lack the resources to dedicate to auditing; the emphasis in these organ-
izations should be on demonstrating independence by making sure that no shared 
responsibility exists between audit program personnel and what they audit.
Establishing the IT audit program
The audit program is the formally defined department, business unit, or function 
within an organization responsible for planning, performing, and reporting the 
results of all internal audit activities. The scope of operations for an internal audit 
program typically comprises all types of audits the organization conducts, including 
financial and non-IT operational audits as well as audits of IT controls, procedures, 
environments, and capabilities. Large organizations or organizations of any size that 
specialize in IT-intensive operations or that provide IT services may have dedicated 
IT audit programs. In many cases, however, IT auditing is a specialized function 
within a more broadly focused internal audit program. As shown in Figure 3.2, the 
internal audit program operates under the supervision of a Chief Audit Executive 
(CAE) and reports through the CAE to the audit committee of the organization’s 
Board of Directors. The existence and exact composition of the audit committee 
depends on the type of organization, but audit committee members typically must 
not be part of the management team to ensure the committee’s independence. The 
audit committee in many large organizations is responsible for overseeing both 
external and internal audit activities, regardless of how many different business 
units or functions have responsibility for performing or supporting various types of 
auditing. The CAE (or equivalent role designated with an alternate title) is respon-
sible for the internal audit program, which typically comprises multiple audit man-
agers and groups of auditors with specialized expertise suited to conducting the 
different types of internal audits needed by the organization.

49
Internal Audit as an Organizational Capability
The general characterization of an internal audit program and its reporting struc-
ture comes primarily from the context of publicly traded companies (or, to be more 
specific, issuers of securities as these companies are referred in United States or 
European Community regulations), as current U.S. regulations applicable to such 
organizations require, as a condition of listing on a regulated exchange, the exist-
ence of an audit committee within boards of directors and mandate external and 
internal examination of internal controls with results reported to the audit commit-
tee [8,9]. While public sector organizations often do not have individual boards of 
General
Counsel
Chief Audit
Executive
Chief Information
Officer
Chief Operating
Officer
Executive management
Chief Executive
Officer
Chairman of
the Board
Chief Financial
Officer
Directors
Audit committee
Board of Directors
reports to
Internal audit program
IT Audit
Manager
Financial Audit
Manager
Internal auditors
IT audit
team
IT audit
team
oversees
Corporate governance
Directors
FIGURE 3.2 
An internal audit program works under the supervision of an audit executive or comparable 
member of the senior management team and reports to the audit committee of the 
organization’s Board of Directors.
Smaller organizations may not have boards of directors or dedicated executive oversight 
for auditing, but organizations of any size with a formal internal audit program need a 
member of the executive team with responsibility for the program and a full understanding 
of the key audiences and stakeholders for internal audits.

50
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
directors, in government agencies in the United States and many other countries the 
position of Inspector General is functionally equivalent to the CAE in a commer-
cial organization, and offices of inspectors general serve as internal audit programs. 
Not all organizations recognizing the need for or value of internal auditing have 
the same formal management and oversight, although boards of directors are typi-
cally in place in many privately held commercial firms and nonprofit organizations. 
Even without formal organization structure and reporting relationships, the func-
tional roles and responsibilities for internal auditing summarized in Table 3.1 are 
similar across most organizations. More variation exists regarding the presence of 
a dedicated IT audit function—some organizations maintain IT auditing capabili-
ties only to satisfy requirements associated with financial, operational, or compli-
ance audits, often relying on internal auditors whose skills and experience include 
IT subject areas. Organizations with formal IT governance, IT-centric risk manage-
ment, or control certification programs may be more likely to have dedicated IT 
audit programs.
Internal audit program charter
The audit program charter describes the purpose of the internal audit program, 
including external and internal needs the program is intended to address and, in 
particular, the relationship between the audit program and governance, risk man-
agement, compliance, and other enterprise management functions. No matter where 
the internal audit program is positioned within the structure of the organization, 
its existence, purpose, and authority needs to be formally documented and com-
municated throughout the organization to help ensure that internal auditing activi-
ties are viewed in the proper context. Organizations that do not communicate this 
type of information about their internal audit programs are likely to encounter 
With respect to IT auditing, the word program is often used to refer to the 
department or functional unit within an organization that performs audits. In 
some published reference books and available online sources of guidance from 
professional associations, however, the term connotes a set of explicit procedures 
for completing particular types of IT audits. This second usage of audit program 
has the same meaning as protocol, checklist, or guide in referring to step-by-step 
instructions and examination methods used in IT auditing. Internal IT auditors 
need to be aware of the correct organization-specific connotation of these terms, 
and when incorporating externally developed guidelines and materials should 
both recognize and seek to avoid the potential for confusion from different usage 
or interpretation of these terms by different sources.

51
Internal Audit as an Organizational Capability
Table 3.1  Internal Audit Roles and Responsibilities
Role
Responsibilities
CEA (alternately called Chief 
Auditor, Director of Audit, Lead 
Auditor, or equivalent title)
●	 Oversees the internal audit function with the 
organization
●	 Reports directly to the audit committee
Audit committee
●	 Subset of the Board of Directors, typically 
comprising only independent directors
●	 Provides oversight of internal and external auditing
●	 Required for public company boards of directors 
under the Sarbanes–Oxley Act
Management team
●	 Key members of the management team, such as 
the CEO, COO, and CFO, typically in consultation 
with the full Board of Directors, approve budgets 
and resource allocations for the internal audit 
program
Board of Directors
●	 Considers audit reports and recommendations 
and makes decisions regarding actions to take in 
response to audit findings
Audit Manager
●	 Responsible for ensuring the proper conduct of 
specific types of audits (financial, operational, IT) 
within the audit program
●	 Supervises one or more teams of internal auditors
Auditor
●	 Performs audits, working alone or as part of a team 
depending on the type and scope of audit activities 
needed
●	 Develops and maintains knowledge and subject 
matter expertise relevant to the types of audits 
performed
●	 Reports to the Audit Manager and/or the CAE
Operations Manager
●	 Ensures access is afforded to auditors when 
components or processes under the Manager’s 
responsibility are audited
●	 Furnishes or assigns resources as needed 
to support audits and, as applicable, provide 
information to auditors
Operations staff
●	 Supports or facilitates audits of components or 
processes operated by staff
●	 May be observed, interviewed, asked to 
demonstrate controls, or otherwise provide 
evidence to auditors

52
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
misperceptions or fear about internal audits and may find operations personnel hesi-
tant or resistant to cooperate with auditors. Audit program charter templates and 
associated guidance on creating charters are publicly available from professional 
associations such as the IIA [10] or ISACA [11]. Recommended contents for an 
audit program charter include clear statements of purpose, authority, and commit-
ment to independence and objectivity; descriptions of roles and responsibilities 
including reporting relationships within the organization; delineation of scope of 
audit program activities; explanation of basic operating structure; and any stand-
ards, frameworks, or guidelines explicitly adopted or adhered to by the audit pro-
gram. The charter also specifies the types of activities to be conducted by the audit 
program, including developing and maintaining organizational audit strategy and 
audit plans, as well as structuring and performing audits and reporting their results. 
The audit charter typically describes the roles and responsibilities for functions or 
personnel outside the audit program, including establishing points of contact for 
program communications to management and to the departments, or business units 
responsible for aspects of the organization that will be audited. In summary, the 
audit charter touches on all of the areas for which the audit program is responsible, 
including those illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Produce findings and reports
Assess and improve program quality
Conduct audits
Create
audit plans
Develop
strategy
Select tools and
protocols
Manage, train, and
assign auditors
Communicate to organization and audit committee
FIGURE 3.3 
The internal IT audit program’s responsibilities include defining strategic and operational 
planning, selecting auditing tools, procedures and resources, conducting audits and 
reporting their results, and ensuring audit program quality.

53
Internal Audit as an Organizational Capability
Internal audit program responsibilities
As the organizational function that manage and conducts IT and other types of 
audits, the responsibilities of the internal audit program include creating and 
executing the overall audit strategy for the organization and, potentially, domain-
specific strategies or plans for IT, operational, and compliance and other types 
of internal audits. The audit strategy declares goals and objectives that the inter-
nal audit program seeks to achieve and specifies outcomes or performance met-
rics against which to measure the success of the program in meeting its objectives. 
The internal audit program executes the strategy using one or more audit plans that 
define what will be audited, by whom, at what frequency, and with what proto-
cols, standards, or criteria. Both the audit strategy and audit plans typically refer 
to a formally documented audit universe—an inventory of all assets, business pro-
cesses, programs, functions, and components within the organization that may be 
subject to audit. The audit strategy may explain the process and criteria by which 
organizational decisions are made about what to audit and when. Audit plans reflect 
the application of prioritization criteria to establish the set of audit activities that 
will be undertaken during the period the plan covers. Organizations often update 
or revise their audit strategies when significant changes occur in mission focus, 
operating environment, regulatory requirements, or market conditions. Audit plans 
typically span a shorter time horizon than strategies reflecting annual or quarterly 
budgeting and investment cycles or schedules associated with major projects or 
organizational initiatives. Regardless of intended duration, audit program managers 
need to align audit plans with known or anticipated audit needs and the availability 
of program funding, auditors, or other resources.
The audit program (or different units with the program where an organization 
maintains separate audit teams to address different domains or types of audits) 
develops or selects the audit methodologies, procedures, and protocols to be used 
in each type of audit the organization needs to perform. The breadth of processes, 
operating environments, technologies, and controls potentially subject to IT audit-
ing can present many challenges, from specifying the right set of audit criteria 
to apply to ensuring the reliability and validity of audit procedures conducted by  
different teams or individuals. Defining standard audit protocols is one way to help 
ensure the quality and consistency of internal IT audits, especially for types of 
Internal IT auditing has its own domain-specific principles, practices, assumptions, and 
vocabulary, all of which may be well understood by personnel working within the audit 
program but less familiar to others in the organization who interact with auditors. Clarity 
of purpose, intent, and terminology can be just as important for operations staff and man-
agers responsible for parts of the organization subject to internal audit as they are for 
auditors. The internal audit program can facilitate such an understanding by making audit 
plans and procedures available to those in the organization who will undergo audits or will 
provide support to audit activities.

54
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
audits an organization needs to perform more than once. It can be equally impor-
tant for auditors to have explicit instructions when conducting a particular type 
of audit for the first time, to make sure the audit covers the subject matter at an 
appropriate depth and level of rigor. While organization-specific characteristics 
may justify the use of internally developed audit protocols, for a large proportion 
of IT audits there are available checklists, technical configuration specification, and 
sources of procedural guidance that organizations can use as-is or adapt to suit dif-
ferent IT audit needs. External guidance is often available addressing IT audits in 
particular industries, such as the IT Examination Handbook [12] from the Federal 
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) or the American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants’ (AICPA) guide, Reporting on Controls at a Service 
Organization [13]. In addition to purpose-specific audit protocols, an audit program 
also typically defines policies and standards addressing how auditors should per-
form their examinations, preferred testing methods for different kinds of controls, 
types of evidence required to substantiate findings, and formats and templates to 
be used to produce reports and other audit documentation. Available management 
standards used to assess the quality of internal auditing, such as ISO 19011, can 
provide guidance to organizations regarding the policies, procedures, and other  
elements the audit program should have in place [6]. Organizations seeking to  
operate their internal audit programs in accordance with relevant international 
standards should plan to undertake periodic quality audits of the audit program 
itself, following standards such as ISO 19011 or the American Society for Quality’s 
Auditing Handbook [14].
Perhaps the most obvious responsibility assigned to the internal audit pro-
gram is performing audits. Operating from its position of independence within the 
organization structure, the audit program assigns auditors and other resources fol-
lowing the audit plans it has developed and approved. The set of audit activities 
conducted in a given time frame should reflect appropriate organizational priorities 
based on criteria such as business or asset value, assessed risk, internal policies, 
or regulations or other external drivers. These priorities affect IT audits as well as 
other types of audits, although the risk factors and other drivers typically differ for 
Internal IT auditors tasked with performing audits of specific technical components or 
IT-related processes or functions can often adapt or incorporate externally defined audit 
protocols or checklists. Where suitable for meeting internal objectives, using these 
sources saves time compared to developing such protocols from scratch, and also intro-
duces a level of commonality or consistency across audits and auditors that can help 
ensure the reliability of audits performed by the internal audit program. Achieving audit 
process consistency also corresponds to a higher degree of maturity for the audit program 
through implementing well defined and proven program elements. For example, ISACA 
offers a variety of IT audit and assurance resources based on standards and guidelines in 
its IT assurance framework [15]

55
Internal Audit as an Organizational Capability
IT audits compared to financial, quality, or operational audits. The performance of 
each IT audit should follow established audit protocols, leveraging available meth-
odologies and tools as appropriate, and should result in the development and deliv-
ery of an audit report and associated supporting evidence. A thorough description 
of IT auditing appears in Chapter 8. One advantage to internal over external forms 
of auditing is the flexibility organizations often have to engage in informal or par-
tial audits when resources or audit priorities constrain the ability of the audit pro-
gram to address all desired areas. IT auditing by definition represents a formally 
structured process, but that does not mean that auditors or other personnel cannot 
conduct some types of tests or control examinations as needed, without commit-
ting to the full procedural and documentation requirements specified for formal 
audits. Informal auditing can be especially useful in situations where an organiza-
tion is working to improve operational controls or remediate weaknesses found in 
previous audits—informal audits offer an opportunity to verify if corrective actions 
have been taken and to try to determine if those actions have properly addressed the 
weaknesses and mitigated corresponding risk.
The results of internal audits are typically documented in formal reports and 
communicated to the organizational executive in charge of the audit program and 
the audit committee. The CAE is responsible for providing status reports or updates 
on internal audit activity to the audit committee to facilitate the effective monitor-
ing and oversight of the internal audit program by the committee. Where weak-
nesses and corresponding risks have been identified, the audit committee has an 
important role in reviewing and approving recommendations for corrective action. 
Members of the audit committee are typically independent directors and therefore 
may not have the familiarity with day-to-day operations needed to fully understand 
the implications of audit findings and recommendations. Determining the appro-
priate courses of action to respond to audit findings often requires collaboration 
among the audit program, operational personnel, organizational management, and 
the audit committee.
Most widely available internal audit standards and guidance approach auditing from a per-
spective that assumes certain organizational characteristics, which are common among 
large, publicly traded companies but not always present in smaller organizations or those 
in noncommercial sectors. Legislation and regulations influencing audit requirements—
including internal auditing—in force in the United States, European Union countries, and 
many other industrialized nations also focus on the creation and enforcement of rules for 
large commercial enterprises, particularly those with public stockholders. This emphasis 
does not mean that prevailing audit standards and practices do not apply to other types of 
organizations. In such organizations, however, operating internal audit programs conform-
ing to those sources of guidance may require greater adaptation or more flexible inter-
pretation to achieve audit program objectives in a manner that fits with actual resources, 
governance, and management structure.

56
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
Benefits of internal IT auditing
In contrast to the compliance focus of many types of external audits, internal audits 
are driven in large part by an organization’s desire to find operational weaknesses, 
discover any deviations from established policies or standards, assess effective-
ness, and identify opportunities to improve operational processes and capabilities 
where possible. As emphasized in Chapter 2, IT audits differ from other types of 
assessments or analyses in that an audit compares what the organization does to an 
explicitly defined set of criteria, whether those criteria represent internal policies 
and procedures, externally defined standards or certification requirements, or legis-
lated rules and regulations. Beyond mandatory internal audit requirements applica-
ble to many publicly traded companies, the rationale for establishing and operating 
internal IT audit capabilities commonly includes objectives such as:
●	 supporting corporate IT governance, risk management, and compliance 
programs;
●	 verifying adherence to organizationally defined policies, procedures, and 
standards;
●	 satisfying requirements to achieve or maintain process maturity, quality 
management, or internal control certification;
●	 adding formality to or increasing the rigor of self-assessment processes and 
activities; and
●	 preparing for or “shadowing” anticipated external audits.
Although internal IT auditing often requires a substantial investment of 
resources, in many organizations the potential benefits to be realized from conduct-
ing effective, well managed IT audits justify the resource commitment. Establishing 
an internal audit program is required for some organizations, in which case the 
desire to comply with legal or regulatory requirements may provide sufficient moti-
vation. Where internal IT auditing is discretionary rather than mandatory, organi-
zations are more likely to realize the potential benefits from audit activities if they 
have committed to enterprise management functions such as IT governance or risk 
management, both of which make use of IT auditing and audit results to inform the 
selection and operation of internal controls. Maintaining an effective internal audit-
ing program also helps organizations demonstrate adherence to the principle of due 
care by showing that they are acting in a competent and diligent manner with respect 
to operating and maintaining their internal controls. Providing evidence of due care 
offers information of potential importance to investors and business partners and 
may also offer legal protection in disputes over liability or business practices.
Compared to external auditing, organizations have more flexibility to structure 
their internal IT audit programs to suit the needs of the organization. In IT auditing 
contexts where both internal and external audits apply, some organizations may pre-
fer to forego internal auditing and instead rely on the work of external auditors to 
provide information about their IT operations, controls, or compliance. Even where 
both types of auditing address the same subject matter, there are several potential 

57
Internal Audit Challenges
advantages to using internal audits, in combination with or (where feasible) instead 
of external audits. These advantages include the ability to leverage auditors and 
other personnel who are familiar with the organization, its mission and business 
objectives, and its operations. External auditors—even those who conduct audits of 
an organization on a repeated basis—rarely develop an understanding of the organi-
zation’s processes and controls that can match the knowledge and organization-
specific experience of internal auditors. Another beneficial aspect is that internal 
auditing allows organizations to review audit results (positive or negative) and plan 
necessary responses without the outside scrutiny or publicity that might accompany 
external audits. Similarly, performing an internal IT audit to help prepare for an 
anticipated external audit often gives organizations the opportunity to implement 
corrective action to remedy weaknesses or deficiencies that would presumably have 
been identified by external auditors.
Internal audit challenges
Although many potential benefits accrue to organizations that establish effective 
internal IT audit capabilities, not all organizations have sufficient resources avail-
able to dedicate staff to auditing, or to do so in a way that covers all the areas 
within an organization that need auditing. For some organizations—notably includ-
ing many publicly traded companies—internal auditing must be in place, forcing 
such organizations to find ways to overcome the challenge of limited resources. 
The cost associated with some types of mandatory internal auditing, such as the 
internal assessment of controls over financial reporting mandated by §404 of the 
Sarbanes–Oxley Act [8], is the source of a common objection to such requirements. 
Aside from the resource costs associated with internal IT auditing, other challenges 
include the significant skills and expertise needed by internal auditors and the per-
ceived or actual lack of independence for internal audit activities, particularly in 
smaller organizations. The range of operational processes, technical components, 
and internal controls potentially subject to IT auditing is varied enough in many 
organizations, that it is unreasonable to expect that individual auditors would have 
sufficient breadth of knowledge and skills to address all of them. Even with detailed 
audit protocols in place, organizations often need to enlist the services of multiple 
auditors (possibly including outside contractors) to cover the scope of IT audits it 
wants to perform. Internal IT auditing performed by employees of the organization 
also raises potential questions regarding auditor independence and objectivity. With 
an obvious financial relationship between employer and employees, internal audit-
ing standards and guidelines emphasize the importance for auditors to work out-
side the chain of management authority over the functions or operational aspects 
they audit [6]. Organizations can address matters of auditor objectivity by sponsor-
ing or encouraging internal auditors to attend training or pursue certifications from 
organizations that prioritize objectivity and related professional practice princi-
ples among their members, such as the IIA, the American Society for Quality, and 

58
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
ISACA. Organizations and their audit program staff should also be aware of and 
able to address common sources of unintended bias in making judgments. These 
include favoring easily obtained or frequently used information; mistakes in esti-
mating chance, probability, samples, or rates of occurrence; and tendencies to seek 
information that confirms prior observations or expected results [16]. Auditors have 
the benefit of an explicit set of criteria against which to compare what is in place or 
what actually occurs in an organization; accurate audits depend on objective exami-
nations of controls, behavior, and associated evidence.
Internal auditors
Chapter 1 provided a brief description of the varied educational and professional 
backgrounds and career development paths some IT auditors follow. Internal IT 
auditors often have substantial prior work in information technology, whether their 
experience includes broad IT knowledge spanning multiple domains or more spe-
cialized areas of expertise. It is certainly possible to begin in finance, accounting, 
or other business domains associated with conventional auditing and move towards 
a specialization in IT. IT-specific knowledge is required, however, to understand IT 
audit criteria and being able to compare them to the implementation, configuration, 
and operations and maintenance details of IT systems and technologies. Additional 
IT skills may be required to correctly execute test procedures or apply examination 
methodologies used in different types of IT auditing. Common subject matter topics 
with which internal IT auditors should be familiar include:
●	 business domains and associated processes supported by IT systems;
●	 data governance, data management processes, data backup and restoration, and 
storage technologies;
●	 IT policies and procedures;
●	 operations and maintenance processes;
●	 systems development life cycle process and activities;
●	 application, systems, and security architecture;
●	 computer operating systems;
●	 IT governance and risk management processes and frameworks;
●	 internal control types and applicability;
●	 IT process management or security management models; and
●	 IT-related standards and certification criteria.
IT auditing skills can often be developed on-the-job, particularly in organiza-
tions with internal audit programs having sufficient resources to assign teams of 
auditors with multiple levels of experience to specific audit tasks. External train-
ing and certification programs are also widely available to individuals seeking to 
specialize in internal auditing, including the Certified Internal Auditor (CIA)  
credential from the IIA and the Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA) 
from ISACA. Many professional organizations and standards development bodies  
publish auditing guidance or other materials that can be used to help train or expand 

59
Relevant Source Material
the skills of audit personnel. One challenge for IT audit personnel is that much of 
the available guidance on auditing standards, principles, and practices covers inter-
nal auditing overall without addressing considerations specific to IT auditing. For 
instance, the Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS) and Statements on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements (SSAE) published by the AICPA contain extensive 
guidance on conducting audits generally, but offer little explicit information about 
IT environments or IT-related internal controls. The same is true for the different 
sets of ISA issued by the IIA and the IAASB. All of these sources of audit guidance 
acknowledge the significance of IT in auditing engagements, but none distinguish 
areas of expertise or identify skills needed for conducting IT audits. Some guidance 
from organizations focused on IT governance or assurance is specifically applicable 
to IT auditing, such as ISACA’s COBIT 5 for Assurance, published in 2013 [17].
Organizations without sufficient internal resources to staff their internal audit 
programs may find it more practical to engage the use of outside contractors than to 
recruit, hire, or train their own employees. For smaller organizations or those with 
limited IT auditing needs, outsourcing their internal auditors may be more cost effec-
tive as well, particularly if auditing activity demands less than full-time resources and 
internal-audit-focused employees cannot be assigned to other responsibilities. Despite 
the higher direct labor cost for contractors compared to employees, using auditors 
from outside sources may also enable an organization to ensure that the skills and 
experience of the contract auditors are appropriate for the type of IT audit to be con-
ducted. While contractors—much like external auditors—are unlikely to know an 
organization’s internal operating environment as well as employees, organizations 
can also specify qualifications, certifications, or domain expertise when enlisting 
the services of outside audit specialists such that hired contractors may be as well 
or more qualified as internally staffed and trained auditors would be. Organizations 
with recurring short-term internal IT audit requirements (such as annual preparation 
for an external compliance audit) can in some cases arrange for the same individual to 
perform the audit each time, building familiarity and continuity into the audit process 
in a way that provides some of the same benefits as using employees for auditing. 
Regardless of the staffing approach employed, organizations can help ensure the qual-
ity and consistency of its internal IT audits by assigning auditors with relevant experi-
ence and qualifications and by prescribing the use of formally defined audit protocols.
Relevant source material
Internal IT auditors rely on both general auditing standards and guidance and on 
IT-specific references appropriate to the subjects of the IT audits they perform 
and the approaches or organizational perspectives used by the IT audit program. 
GAAS and ISA provide principles and practices applicable to all types of auditing. 
Procedural guidance and standards specifically focused on internal auditing include:
●	 IIA’s International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing [2]
●	 ISACA’s Standards for IS Audit and Assurance [11] and guidance on audit 
programs [14]

60
CHAPTER 3  Internal Auditing
●	 FFIEC IT Examination Handbook [12]
●	 COBIT 5 for Assurance [16]
●	 ISO 19011, Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems [6]
Summary
This chapter focused on internal IT auditing, contrasting it with external auditing 
(the subject of the next chapter) and describing the structural and operational fea-
tures of internal audit programs that include IT audits within their scope. It high-
lighted the purpose, objectives, and rationale for establishing and maintaining 
internal auditing capabilities and described some of the potential benefits organi-
zations expect to realize from effectively managed internal audit programs. The 
material in this chapter explains the typical positioning of the internal audit func-
tion within the organization structure and its relation to governance bodies such as 
corporate boards of directors. It also described some of the characteristics of inter-
nal auditors and the relevant skills and experience auditors need to do their jobs 
effectively.
References
	 [1]	 Definition of Internal Auditing [Internet]. Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards-guid-
ance/mandatory-guidance/Pages/Definition-of-Internal-Auditing.aspx>.
	 [2]	 Institute of Internal Auditors  International standards for the professional practice of 
internal auditing. Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012 October.
	 [3]	 Code of Professional Ethics [Internet]. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA [cited 2013 
May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Certification/Code-of-Professional-
Ethics/Pages/default.aspx>.
	 [4]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Generally accepted auditing stand-
ards. New York (NY): American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Auditing 
Standards Board; 2001 December. [statement on auditing standards 95].
	 [5]	 International Federation of Accountants  Overall objectives of the independent auditor 
and the conduct of an audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. 
New York (NY): International Federation of Accountants; 2012. [International 
Standard on Auditing 200].
	 [6]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	 [7]	 International Ethics Standards Board  Code of ethics for professional accountants. 
New York (NY): International Ethics Standards Board; 2009 July.
	 [8]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	 [9]	 Securities and Exchange Commission. Standards related to listed company audit com-
mittees [final rule]. 68 Fed. Reg. 18788 (2003).
	[10]	 The Internal Audit Function [Internet]. Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 June 14]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards- 
guidance/topics/pages/the-internal-audit-function.aspx>.

61
References
	[11]	 Standards for IS Audit and Assurance [Internet]. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Standards/
Pages/Standards-for-IT-Audit-and-Assurance-English-.aspx>.
	[12]	 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council  IT examination handbook. 
Arlington (VA): Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council; 2012 April.
	[13]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Reporting on controls at a service 
organization relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or  
privacy. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2012 March.
	[14]	 Russell JP, editor. The ASQ auditing handbook (4th ed.). Milwaukee (WI): ASQ 
Quality Press; 2013.
	[15]	 ISACA  ITAF: a professional practices framework for IS audit/assurance, 2nd ed. 
Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2013.
	[16]	 Bazerman MH, Moore D. Judgment in managerial decision making. Hoboken (NJ): 
John Wiley & Sons; 2009.
	[17]	 ISACA  COBIT 5 for assurance. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2013.

63
External Auditing
4
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Operational aspects of external audits
●	 External IT audit drivers and rationale
●	 External audit benefits
●	 External audit challenges
●	 External auditors and audit firms
Two key characteristics distinguish external auditing from internal auditing: exter-
nal audits are performed by outside auditors and auditing firms; and the standards, 
requirements, or other audit criteria used in external audits are defined outside the 
organization being audited. Some standards bodies and professional associations 
further divide external auditing into second-party and third-party audits, the former 
conducted by customers or suppliers or others with an interest in the operations of 
the subject organization and the latter conducted by independent organizations with 
no direct interest in the organization undergoing the audit [1,2]. Aside from the fun-
damental differences in who conducts external audits and establishes the basis for 
such audits, there are many other ways in which external audits stand in contrast to 
internal auditing as described in the previous chapter. The most prominent of these 
is the more limited set of reasons organizations undergo external IT audits, includ-
ing legal and regulatory compliance, certification, quality assurance, or verifica-
tion of self-reported or attested information the organization provides for various 
purposes. Organizations have the ability to choose their external auditors for many 
types of IT audits (subject to some regulatory requirements and restrictions), pro-
viding both an opportunity and an obligation to select external auditors with the 
appropriate qualifications and capacity to perform each needed audit.
The nature of an organization’s participation in external IT audits is also quite 
different than for internal audits, as the primary responsibility of the organization 
and its personnel working in areas subject to external audit is to facilitate the work 
of the external auditors and support the accurate and efficient completion of the 
audit. External IT auditors typically require access to the organization’s facilities, 
systems, personnel, and documentation and other types of evidence evaluated in the 
course of the audit. The audit criteria against which an organization will be evalu-
ated in most external audits is available to the organization, so organizations may 
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00004-3

64
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
choose to allocate resources from their audit programs or assign operational person-
nel to review the aspects of the organization that will be audited in advance of the 
external audit itself. The audit processes, procedures, and methodologies employed 
by external auditors are also typically known to audit subjects and may be a factor 
in audit selection where organizations have the discretion to choose their external 
auditors. Organizations should consider requirements or expectations derived from 
external audit criteria when developing policies, procedures, plans, operational 
guidelines, and other types of documentation that constitute important sources of 
evidence examined by external auditors.
Operational aspects of external audits
Organizations undergo both mandatory and voluntary external IT audits, where 
mandatory audits are most commonly used to satisfy legal requirements or dem-
onstrate regulatory compliance and voluntary audits include those associated with 
certification, quality assurance, or independent validation of internal controls, pro-
cesses, or practices. Because external audits are conducted by firms and individual 
auditors from outside the organization, the nature of participation by organiza-
tional managers and staff is much different than in internal audits. In most cases, 
an organization being audited prepares materials and allocates resources intended 
to facilitate the completion of the external audit. Unlike internal audits—which 
are typically managed by a centrally organized audit program under the supervi-
sion of an audit executive—external audits involve different points of management, 
coordination, and support within an organization. In particular, different manage-
ment executives and members of the board of directors (or comparable governance 
body) have responsibility for legal and regulatory audits than is typically the case 
for other types of IT audits. As shown in Figure 4.1, the audit committee of the 
board of directors selects the external auditors engaged to examine IT and other 
internal controls used to support financial reporting, while members of the internal 
The fundamental characteristics of external audits can be illustrated through an example 
familiar to many people—Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audits of individual or business 
tax returns. In an IRS audit, the government examines tax returns completed and submit-
ted by a taxpaying entity (or tax preparer working on its behalf) to confirm that information 
on a tax return is correctly reported and accurate. The IRS establishes the basis for the 
audit (the audit criteria) using current tax laws, federal regulations, administrative rules 
and procedures, and judicial decisions addressing tax matters. The individual or organiza-
tion subject to audit receives advance notice of the audit from the IRS with details regard-
ing the taxpayer records to be examined, the examination methods to be used, and any 
expectations or obligations the taxpayer needs to satisfy as well as legal rights of appeal 
available to the taxpayer [3]. The use of externally developed audit criteria, formally speci-
fied procedures, and outside audit personnel unrelated to the audit subject are elements 
seen in virtually all types of external audits. The fact that the standards and requirements 
to which audit subjects are held are available to those subjects is also a common aspect 
of external audits for the purposes of legal or regulatory compliance or certification.

65
Operational Aspects of External Audits
management team choose external auditors to conduct certification, quality, or inde-
pendent control audits. The specific positions with this responsibility vary across 
organizations, but often include executives such as the compliance officer, general 
counsel, director of quality, chief operating officer, or chief information officer.
One of the most important organizational responsibilities for external audits is 
to prepare for and effectively support audits. Many external IT audits involve exam-
ination of numerous types of documentation and other evidence maintained by the 
organization as well as audit procedures that may include direct observation, staff 
interviews, tests of system and procedural controls, and facility inspections. The 
internal audit program has an important role in this regard, the documented results 
of internal audits represent important sources of evidence that external auditors will 
likely need to review and potentially re-perform in order to validate, in addition to 
internal audit plans, procedures, and other artifacts used when conducting inter-
nal audits. Having an established and effectively operating internal audit program 
is itself a type of internal control required for many organizations. External audi-
tors typically specify the nature and amount of evidence they need to examine in 
order to make appropriate findings and justify their determinations. Organizations 
FIGURE 4.1 
Organizational responsibility for external audits is typical divided between the independent 
audit committee of the board of directors and internal management personnel such as an 
audit executive, directory of quality assurance, or compliance officer.
General
counsel
Chief operating
officer
Compliance
officer
Chief audit
executive
Executive management
Chief executive
officer
Chairman of
the board
Chief financial
officer
Directors
Audit committee
Board of directors
reports
to
Legal and regulatory auditor 
Audit team
leader
External auditors
selects
Directors
Quality auditor
Audit team
leader
External auditors
Certification auditor
Audit team
leader
External auditors
selects

66
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
anticipating or scheduling external audits need to ensure that such evidence is avail-
able to be given to auditors at the time when an external audit begins. External 
auditors often produce binary findings (e.g., satisfactory or unsatisfactory, sufficient 
or insufficient, conforming or nonconforming, etc.), so it is incumbent upon the 
organization being audited to furnish evidence of the right type, amount, and level 
of detail to meet the external auditors’ requirements.
Internal audit programs and other parts of organizations subject to external audit 
can derive substantial value from the results of external audits, not only in the sense 
that passing audits meet regulatory requirements or business objectives but also in 
terms of using the independently determined findings of external auditors for inter-
nal purposes. When the work of external auditors addresses the same controls, 
gathers the same information, or examines the same evidence covered by internal 
audits, the extent to which external audit findings agree with comparable inter-
nal results can either validate internal audits or highlight discrepancies that indi-
cate areas of improvement for internal processes and procedures. In cases where 
organization engage external auditors that have skills or domain expertise that the 
organization’s internal auditors lack, external audit findings may substitute for or be 
incorporated in internal audit reports. Results from external audits can also serve as 
a baseline for the organization to assess corrective actions taken to remediate identi-
fied weaknesses, either in preparation for future external audits or to demonstrate 
the relevance or value of the external audit to the organization.
Roles and responsibilities for external auditing
Key roles and responsibilities in external auditing are divided among the organiza-
tion, its board of directors or other governing body, and the external audit organiza-
tions and auditors that perform audits of the organization, as summarized in Table 4.1. 
Responsibilities for different actors within the external audit process depend largely on 
the type of audit involved and, in particular, whether there are regulatory requirements 
that specify roles and assign responsibilities. For instance, external IT auditing of inter-
nal controls associated with financial reporting and accounting systems falls under the 
same regulatory authority as financial auditing more generally, and statutory provisions 
applicable in many countries mandate many of the key roles and responsibilities. Under 
both the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and Council of the European Union’s Directive 2006/43/
EC require public corporations and other organizations subject to external financial 
audit to have formal audit committees within their boards of directors comprising inde-
pendent board members as least one of which has expertise in finance and accounting 
[4,5]. The audit committee either directly selects external auditors for the organization 
or approves external auditors recommended by executive management. The audit com-
mittee is also the primary recipient of the external auditors’ report, although the full 
board of directors and the organization’s management team usually consider audit find-
ings, recommendations, and potential corrective actions. For publicly traded companies 
in the United States, Sarbanes–Oxley also requires the Chief Executive Officer and 
Chief Financial Officer to formally certify external audit reports and other official regu-
latory filings submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

67
Operational Aspects of External Audits
Table 4.1  External Audit Roles and Responsibilities
Role
Responsibilities
Executive Management
●	 Key members of the management team typically sit  
on the board of directors and as such share 
responsibility for considering and responding to  
external audit findings
●	 The CEO and CFO need to formally certify the 
accuracy of the external auditor’s report in the case of 
financial or regulatory audits
●	 The management team approves budgets and 
resource allocations for some types of external audits, 
including authorizing the organization to seek various 
kinds of certifications
Audit Committee
●	 Subset of the board of directors, typically comprising 
only independent directors
●	 Provides oversight of external auditing, especially 
auditing required for regulatory compliance
●	 Selects external auditors or approves selection 
recommendation from the management team
●	 Required for public companies under the  
Sarbanes–Oxley Act and EU Directive 2006/43/EC
Board of Directors
●	 Considers audit reports and recommendations and 
makes decisions regarding actions to take in response 
to audit findings
Chief Audit Executive
●	 Aligns the internal audit function with external auditing 
needs
●	 Reports directly to the audit committee
Compliance Officer
●	 Responsible for ensuring the achievement and 
maintenance of organizational compliance with 
applicable external standards or certifications
External Auditor
●	 Performs audits representing the selected auditing 
firm, typically as part of a team depending on the type 
and scope of audit activities needed
●	 Develops and maintains knowledge and  
subject-matter expertise relevant to the types of  
audits performed
●	 Reports to the lead auditor, audit partner, or other 
member of the external audit firm’s management
Organizational Staff
●	 Facilitates conduct of external audits provisioning 
access to auditors as needed, participating 
in interviews, and preparing and furnishing 
documentation or other evidence

68
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
External auditing of internal controls, including IT controls, receives a great 
deal of attention among many organizations, auditors, and casual observers due to 
the significant legal and regulatory provisions in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and sub-
sequent SEC rules in the United States and similar actions in international envi-
ronments. Many organizations engage in external audits driven by other regulatory 
requirements or by internally driven policies, strategies, and organizational objec-
tives. In contexts such as quality assurance or certification, external audit roles and 
responsibilities are different than in audits intended to satisfy regulatory require-
ments. As Figure 4.1 indicates, not only are different types of audit firms and audi-
tor personnel used for these other types of external audits, but executives within 
the organizational management team typically have responsibility for selecting 
external auditors and for receiving and acting upon the results of external audits. 
Organizations using external audits for multiple purposes often divide management 
responsibility based on the focus of each type of audit such as placing certification 
or voluntary compliance audits under the supervision of the organization’s direc-
tor of compliance, IT governance lead, or general counsel. There may be an oppor-
tunity in such organizations to coordinate external audit activities and analysis of 
results with the management and practices of the internal audit program and its 
designated chief audit executive (or equivalent position with another title). A key 
consideration for organizations is to ensure internal management or supervisory 
personnel have sufficient domain knowledge and relevant expertise to fully under-
stand and effectively oversee external audit engagements.
Independence in external auditing
Auditor independence—meaning independence of both the firm engaged to perform 
external audits and the individual auditors who conduct the audits–is a central facet 
of external auditing. The previous chapter emphasized the importance of auditor 
independence and objectivity to internal auditing and noted the challenge to achieve 
true independence in internal auditing when the auditors are employees of the organ-
ization being audited. Aside from the contractual and financial relationship between 
an organization and its external auditors, maintaining the independence of external 
auditors is a strict requirement in most legal and regulatory forms of auditing, espe-
cially when the subject organization is a publicly traded entity. The lack of auditor 
independence in the accounting scandals and subsequent bankruptcy of major cor-
porations including Enron and WorldCom, coupled with the subsequent dissolution 
of accounting firm Arthur Andersen, significantly influenced the inclusion of more 
stringent independence requirements in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and subsequent 
rule-making by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB). The European Commission proposed and adopted similar rules in the 
wake of both major US corporate problems and similar scandals among European 
companies including Italian food producer Parmalat and Dutch retailer Ahold. The 
net result of these major corporate audit and accounting failures is a current regula-
tory environment in which auditor independence is considered absolutely essential.

69
Operational Aspects of External Audits
Independence is not a recently introduced requirement; the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934 explicitly mandates that members of the audit committee, comprising 
members from the board of directors, be independent and that the work of auditors 
(including the delivery of reports containing their findings) be submitted directly to 
the audit committee [6]. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act greatly expanded the definition 
of independence by specifying nine types of nonaudit activities that firms engaged 
to perform external audits are prohibited from performing while under contract to 
conduct audits. Prohibited activities comprise business and information technology 
services including:
1.	 “bookkeeping or other services related to the accounting records or financial 
statements of the audit client;
2.	 financial information systems design and implementation;
3.	 appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinions, or contribution-in-kind 
reports;
4.	 actuarial services;
5.	 internal audit outsourcing services;
6.	 management functions or human resources;
7.	 broker or dealer, investment adviser, or investment banking services;
8.	 legal services and expert services unrelated to the audit;
9.	 any other service that the Board determines, by regulation, is impermissible” [5].
The SEC issued new rules updating its auditor independent requirements in a 
manner consistent with provisions in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, including prohibi-
tions on nonaudit services; the need for audit committees to preapprove any non-
audit services or exemptions to prohibitions; mandatory rotation of the lead audit 
partner at least every 5 years; and additional conflict of interest protections that 
preclude audit firms from auditing organizations whose management team includes 
members previously employed by the audit firm [7]. The PCAOB, a governing 
body established by the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, also mandates ethics and independ-
ence rules for firms registered with the Board to conduct audits of public compa-
nies. Outside the United States, the European Commission Directive on statutory 
The Enron scandal that came to light in 2001 involved audit failures at many levels by 
multiple parties, including several members of the executive management team at Enron 
and partners, auditors, and other employees at Arthur Andersen. Although the account-
ing fraud and collusion between Enron and its auditors was primarily financial, the case 
provides a clear example of the potential results when significant conflicts of interest exist 
between organizations and their auditors. It also illustrates much of the rationale behind 
provisions included in the Sarbanes–Oxley legislation enacted as a response to Enron and 
several other large-scale corporate accounting and auditing cases that the US Congress 
believed undermined confidence in American securities markets. Changes in many inter-
national legal and regulatory auditing requirements were similarly influenced by Enron and 
other American company scandals and the role of what was at the time one of the five 
largest external auditing and accounting firms.

70
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
audits [5] and the International Standards on Auditing mandated for use in that 
Directive both require independence between auditors and audit firms and the listed 
entities they audit [8].
Organizational participation in external audits
Although organizations subject to external auditing do not perform the audits, they 
participate in multiple processes and activities related to planning for, undergoing, 
approving, and responding to external audits. The representative activities shown in 
Figure 4.2 fall within three phases common to virtually all audit methodologies—
planning the audit, conducting the audit, and reporting audit results. Whether 
mandatory or voluntary, external audits are often performed at the expense of the 
organization being audited. Even in cases where audits are funded by government 
or industry regulators, audited organizations still incur substantial costs in time and 
internal resources needed to facilitate external audit activities.
To ensure proper resource allocations for external auditing, organizations need 
first to determine their audit needs, considering any applicable legal or regula-
tory requirements as well as internally driven strategic or operational objectives. 
Different types of external audits correspond to audit criteria or other requirements 
for the organization and for the audit firm and auditors who will conduct the audits. 
By developing a thorough understanding of their audit requirements, organizations 
can choose auditors with the necessary qualifications, competence, independence, 
and experience for each type of external audit and prepare internal staff and evi-
dentiary materials needed to support those audits. Once the external audits have 
been performed, the organization (or its audit committee or other governing body) 
receives the documented results and determines whether to accept the findings as 
presented or, if applicable, appeal the findings. For many types of regulatory audits, 
Auditor independence rules apply to organizations undergoing external audits 
and to the audit firms and auditors that perform external audits. Although the 
responsibility for ensuring independence is therefore shared by the organizations 
that choose their auditors and the auditors themselves, the negative consequences 
of using an external auditor with a conflict of interest or that otherwise violates 
independence are often more severe for the organization than for the auditor. 
While audit firms and individual auditors may face sanctions for violating inde-
pendence rules, organizations, their executives, directors, and employees may 
be subject to criminal and civil penalties, in addition to decreases in shareholder 
value that typically accompany public disclosure of any type of accounting or 
securities regulatory violation. This makes it imperative that organizations thor-
oughly evaluate potential auditors before engaging their services.

71
External It Audit Drivers and Rationale
one or more organizational executives need to sign off on the final audit report 
before it is submitted to regulators or other external audiences. After the external 
audit is completed, organizations respond to audit findings as necessary with cor-
rective actions to remediate any weaknesses identified in audits. For types of audits 
repeated at regular intervals (such as annually or quarterly), the process of prepar-
ing, undergoing, reviewing, and responding represents continuous cycle in support 
of governance, risk management, quality, or compliance functions. Organizations 
may treat one-time audit or infrequently repeated audits as more discrete projects 
with clearly defined initiation and completion dates.
External IT audit drivers and rationale
The full scope of external IT audits conducted for organizations comprises both 
mandatory and voluntary types of audits, each of which correspond to different 
drivers, justifications, and sources of organizational motivation. Organizations are 
typically required to undergo external IT audits intended to establish and maintain 
legal and regulatory compliance, where passing an audit is a prerequisite to operat-
ing as a going concern or participating in some markets. The mandatory nature of 
these audits provides the primary rationale, along with the set of rules and enforce-
ment mechanisms regulators or oversight bodies use to ensure compliance by 
FIGURE 4.2 
The external audit process requires significant advance planning and preparation to help 
ensure the successful completion of external audit activities.
Determine audit need
Assess audit requirements
Identify and select auditor
Prepare evidence and staff
Undergo audit process
Receive and review findings
Accept (or appeal) results
Sign off on report (if required)
Address findings as needed

72
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
organizations such as publicly traded companies. Organizations often pursue volun-
tary types of external IT audits to complement or substitute for internal audits in 
support of governance, risk, or quality management or to provide objective evidence 
of operational effectiveness that may improve competitive position within an indus-
try, strengthen market reputation, facilitate business partnerships or other opportuni-
ties, or augment shareholder value. Beyond legal and regulatory compliance, other 
common reasons influencing organizations to engage in external IT audits include 
achieving organizational certification, demonstrating the maturity of operational 
processes or capabilities, exercising due diligence, or establishing safe harbor.
Achieving certification of an organization’s internal processes, business prac-
tices, internal controls, or other capabilities offers potential benefits both internally 
in terms of confirming the organization’s operational effectiveness and externally 
by providing customers, business partners, investors, and other interested parties 
with evidence of the organization’s compliance with industry standards or frame-
works. Organizations certified against international standards such as ISO 9001, 
ISO/IEC 20000, or ISO/IEC 27001—addressing quality management, service man-
agement, and information security management, respectively—often publicize their 
certifications to enhance their standing in their industries or securities markets, in 
addition to any operational benefits they receive from actually implementing and 
executing practices conforming to applicable standards. Similarly, an organization 
that achieves independent appraisal of processes or services such as the higher lev-
els of the Software Engineering Institute’s Capability Maturity Model Integration 
(CMMI) for development, services, or acquisition theoretically enjoys the benefits 
of formally defined, well-managed operational processes and procedures, and may 
also be more attractive to prospective customers seeking to outsource or contract 
for capabilities offered by the organization.
The term due diligence generally refers to any effort that seeks to examine or 
validate the accuracy of information about a person or an organization. The concept 
applies most often in finance, securities markets, and investment analysis, where 
due diligence involves a comprehensive investigation into any or all aspects of an 
organization that issues securities to investors or that is the target of a merger, sale, 
or acquisition. Many types of audits, including IT audits, may be used to support 
investigations for due diligence. The scope of such audits can include examina-
tion of operational or management practices, adherence to policies, compliance 
with applicable laws and regulations, and provision of adequate controls for infor-
mation systems. Safe harbor is a legal principle incorporated in some laws and 
regulations which allows organizations that might not satisfy the requirements of 
the law or regulation to avoid being considered in violation if they comply with 
explicit standards and act in good faith. A notable example related to IT auditing 
is the safe harbor process negotiated between the United States and the European 
Commission regarding the Council’s data protection directive. The directive, in 
effect since 1998, generally prohibits the transfer of personal data about Europeans 
to countries outside Europe (such as the United States) that do not have equivalent 
privacy protections [9]. The safe harbor provision allows US companies to attest to 

73
External Audit Benefits
their voluntary compliance with a set of privacy principles that constitute adequate 
privacy protection. US organizations seeking safe harbor under this agreement 
either self-certify or engage a third-party auditor to assess their compliance with the 
required privacy principles.
Some types of external IT audits are conditional or represent random selection 
by regulators or external quality assurance bodies. Unlike other types of manda-
tory audits, organizations subject to these examinations usually have no say in 
which organizations get audited and are not able to choose their own auditors. For 
instance, under provisions in the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health Act, some health-care entities are subject to external audits to check 
regulatory compliance and to verify qualifications for government financial incen-
tives. Specifically, the Office for Civil Rights within the US Department of Health 
and Human Services annually audits a small number of the thousands of entities 
subject to the security and privacy requirements of the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
offers incentive payments used to purchase and implement electronic health record 
technology to eligible health-care providers, organizations, and other professionals. 
Eligible recipients must attest to their satisfaction of numerous criteria indicating 
their “meaningful use” of the technology to receive payments. CMS audits a small 
proportion (fewer than 10%) of incentive recipients, either before or after payment 
is made, to validate the accuracy of attestations and other eligibility criteria. In both 
of these health industry IT audit programs, the government organizations responsi-
ble for the programs engaged the services of external audit contractors to perform 
the audits on the government’s behalf. Although these programs apply only to some 
organizations within the health-care sector, they reflect an approach common to 
audits where regulators examine a statistical sample or other subset of all organiza-
tions covered by specific regulations or participating in a government program.
External audit benefits
External audits are a cost of doing business in many industries and sectors, for 
IT and associated controls just as they are for financial reporting and accounting 
practices. From this perspective, undergoing and passing external audits provide 
value to audited organizations simply by successfully completing the audit process 
as required. In addition to help ensure organizational compliance with applicable 
laws, regulations, and standards, external auditing offers a variety of other bene-
fits. External IT audits provide independent review and analysis of internal controls 
and operational processes that may be considered more credible than comparable 
internal audits, even when the same processes and audit criteria are used. This cred-
ibility extends to verification or validation of internal audit findings or self-attested 
results where external audits can examine the audit plans, procedures, and proto-
cols the organization uses in its internal audit program as well as the satisfaction 
of audit criteria. Organizations voluntarily choosing to seek certification for some 

74
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
aspect of their business operations often perceive substantial benefits from certifica-
tion, so external audits offer value to the extent that they help achieve or maintain 
certification. Similarly, external audits used in support of IT governance can help 
organization realize intended outcomes and objectives from adopting formal gov-
ernance processes or frameworks. Objectives and anticipated benefits from effective 
governance include operational efficiencies that yield competitive advantages over 
organizations that lack such capabilities.
Advantages compared to internal audits
There are many types of IT audits—such as those intended to determine regulatory 
compliance or achieve certification—that cannot be performed as internal audits and 
therefore must use external auditors. Even where the requirement to engage exter-
nal auditors does not exist, some organizations consider external auditing preferable 
to internal auditing due to presumed advantages about the level of organizational 
involvement required, internal resource demands, the reliability of audit findings and 
auditor skills, competence, or specialized expertise. External audits do not necessar-
ily take less time to complete than internal audits, but the roles and responsibilities of 
the organization being audited are often substantially less than they would be in an 
internal audit of comparable scope. Organizations can also rely on external auditors 
to establish the set of requirements or audit criteria to be used or to be familiar with 
requirements associated with standards or certification criteria. Whether or not they 
establish their own internal audit programs, some organizations lack the resources 
and necessary subject-matter expertise to be able to perform all types of relevant 
IT audits. Choosing an external auditor can help ensure that the audit firm and the 
individuals assigned to conduct the audit have the necessary skills and experience 
(including applicable certifications) to perform the work accurately and effectively. 
The combination of external auditor qualifications, prior experience performing simi-
lar types of audits, and the use of standards-based or other formally defined audit 
criteria can also help ensure the reliability and validity of external audit findings.
External audit challenges
Neither external nor internal IT auditing has an inherent advantage in terms of 
cost or anticipated benefits. For different types of IT audits, external and internal 
auditing approaches may be equally costly, or each may offer cost savings over 
the other in different contexts where organizations have the flexibility to choose 
how the audit will be performed; they typically need to compare the total cost of 
external or internal auditing—including personnel and other resource costs, time 
to prepare and complete the audit, and any contract or service fees that must be 
paid to auditors—and the perceived value of each approach to the organization. 
Organizations should be fully aware of the costs and benefits associated even with 
mandatory types of external auditing that offer no discretion to organizations in the 

75
External Audit Challenges
choice of audit approach. All types of external auditing present potential drawbacks 
to organizations, including substantial financial, time, resource costs; the need to 
open up the organization to outside entities; potentially less opportunity for in- 
process corrective action; and lower familiarity of external auditors with particulars 
of the organization subject to audit. External auditor expertise may be demonstra-
ble through individual and firm qualifications or certifications, but even experienced 
auditors with appropriate competence and objectivity are susceptible to overcon-
fidence, mischaracterization of related and independent events, or other forms of 
confirmation bias [10]. Organizations can, in some cases, mitigate potential mis-
interpretations by external auditors, but the emphasis on independence in external 
auditing means that organizations often must wait until findings are documented 
before raising objections or otherwise appealing the results.
Although organizations engaging external auditors delegate much of the poten-
tial complexity of structuring the audit, understanding audit criteria, and choosing 
appropriate protocols and procedures, in large organizations the scope of con-
trols, processes, operational functions, facilities, and other aspects subject to audit 
can present a significant challenge to efficient external auditing. As illustrated 
in the notional example in Figure 4.3, the need to examine multiple control and 
FIGURE 4.3 
Depending on the size, operational complexity, and provision of controls characterizing an 
organization, the scope of an external audit can include processes and controls in multiple 
locations potentially operated by different entities and may involve more than one type of audit.
Internal controls 
Control environment
Accounting 
controls
Control environment 
Reporting
controls
External environment
Service delivery
and management
Service provider
Control environment
IT and security
controls
Operational processes 
Control environment
Project
management
Control environment 
Quality
management
Control environment
System 
development
life cycle
Organizational boundary
External environment
Service delivery
and management
Service provider
External
audit
scope

76
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
operational environments—including those associated with external service provid-
ers used by an organization, if any—limits the feasibility of finding and selecting 
a single external IT auditor that can address the full set of subject areas in scope 
for a comprehensive audit. The greater the variety of environments, processes, and 
systems maintained by an organization or the more specialized those organizational 
aspects are, the more likely it is that the organization will need to subdivide the 
audit scope along functional, technical, or geographic lines and engage the services 
of multiple external auditors to address each type of examination the organization 
needs. Even smaller and less operationally diverse organization may need to seek 
specialized external IT auditing support to adequately address emerging technolo-
gies or services such as cloud computing, large-scale data analytics, and the use 
of mobile devices. For instance, many commercial providers of cloud computing 
services undergo specialized attestation engagements using standards issued by 
the American Institute for Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and resulting in 
Service Organization Control (SOC) reports that present an opinion on the effec-
tiveness of the provider’s controls related to security and privacy [11]. Service 
providers contract directly with qualified external auditors to conduct these engage-
ments and issue SOC reports, while prospective and current customers of the ser-
vice providers can leverage the information in SOC reports in their own IT audits.
External auditors
External auditing represents a distinct segment in the professional services market 
that comprises specialized organizations whose core business is providing audits 
of various types and more general services firms offering auditing as one among 
multiple lines of business. References to external auditors can also denote individu-
als working for professional services firms (or in some cases independently). In the 
context of regulatory audits, audits of large or complex organizations, or audits with 
significant scope attention often focuses on external audit firm, although audit laws 
and regulations in many countries impose requirements on both audit firms and 
the auditors that work for them. Organizations selecting external auditors typically 
evaluate candidates at the firm level but may assess the skills, experience, and qual-
ifications of individual auditors when seeking providers for specialized forms of 
external auditing, including many types of IT audits. The distinction between indi-
viduals and organizations providing external audit services is also relevant when 
discussing auditor certifications, qualifications, or other prerequisites enabling 
external auditors to perform audits on behalf of client organizations.
Some organizations’ core business is providing audits to clients, often within 
a particular industry, geographic region, or functional or technical specialization. 
It is also common to see larger or more diversified organizations that perform 
external audits in addition to a variety of other services. In heavily regulated busi-
ness domains such as publicly traded companies, current laws do not significantly 
constraint the type of organizations that conducts audits—as long as they satisfy 

77
External Auditors
applicable rules and regulatory requirements—but do limit the ability of diversi-
fied firms to engage in nonaudit services for the same organization while they are 
serving as auditors. These laws address independence for both audit firms and indi-
vidual auditors such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act requirement instance that the posi-
tion of lead partner on an external audit engagement rotate at least every 5 years 
[4]. Similar rules apply in many regulated industries, intended to prevent perceived 
or actual conflicts of interest between auditors and the organizations they audit. 
Organizations that do not perform public company audits but offer other types 
of external audit services may be less restricted in the specific activities they are 
allowed to perform for a client organization, but virtually all organizations provid-
ing certification, quality, information systems, and compliance audits follow formal 
codes of professional conduct, ethical standards, and conflict of interest mitigation 
procedures designed to maintain objectivity in external audits.
Many of the largest and best-known external audit firms provide multiple types 
of IT-related audit services, particularly including regulatory and information sys-
tems audits. Organizations providing certification, compliance, or quality audits 
typically must first be accredited to perform specific types of audits by the stand-
ards development organization or other authoritative body responsible for issuing 
and maintaining the basis for certification or compliance. Accreditation or over-
sight bodies essentially approve other organizations to conduct standards-based or 
other types of audits. For commonly sought certifications such as those associated 
with standards published by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), accreditation of certifying organizations is performed by national or regional 
accreditation bodies, not by the standards development organizations. This results 
in a multiparty relationship, as shown in Figure 4.4, between external audit firms, 
the oversight bodies that give external auditors the authority to perform specific 
types of audits, and the organizations engaging the services of external auditors.
As is the case for internal auditors, there are multiple sources of education, 
expertise, and prior experience that provide appropriate backgrounds for individuals 
working as external auditors. Many external IT auditors gain experience performing 
multiple aspects of regulatory audits, which typically emphasize financial or opera-
tional controls and address IT controls within those broader contexts. For this rea-
son, individual auditors working for external audit firms often seek Certified Public 
Accountant (CPA) certification (a credential many large audit firms require of their 
senior auditors and engagement partners). The AICPA specifies a broad set of com-
petencies senior-level auditors should possess, including [12]:
●	 understanding the role of quality control and standards of professional conduct;
●	 Understanding the service to be performed including the performance, 
supervision, and reporting aspects of the engagement;
●	 technical proﬁciency in applicable professional and industry standards and the 
nature of the transactions or other business processes the client organization 
executes;
●	 familiarity with the industry in which a client operates;

78
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
●	 the ability to exercise professional judgment;
●	 understanding the organization’s IT systems.
Many specialized certifications and associated training programs are available 
to external audit professionals seeking to bolster their qualifications to perform spe-
cific types of IT audits. Table 4.2 provides examples of the types of auditor and 
audit firm qualifications that organizations consider when selecting external audi-
tors. Beyond most domain-specific certifications (e.g., quality, IT controls or infor-
mation systems, and process maturity), there are numerous specializations for 
specific industries or types of controls.
Regulatory auditors
In many countries, external audit firms performing regulatory audits (also called 
statutory audits) on publicly traded companies must register with and be approved 
by a national-level governing and oversight body as a prerequisite to organizations 
engaging them as external auditors. Once registered, organizations seeking external 
auditor can use public registries to locate registered firms such as the registry main-
tained by the PCAOB in the United States [13] or the Register of Statutory Auditors 
in the United Kingdom [14]. As illustrated in Figure 4.4, external audit firms submit 
applications to the appropriate oversight body (or bodies, if they intend to perform 
audits in more than one country) and the oversight bodies evaluate whether apply-
ing firms meet applicable legal requirements to audit publicly traded companies. 
FIGURE 4.4 
Organizations subject to audit often select their own auditors, in many cases, choosing external 
audit firms registered, accredited, or otherwise approved to perform specific types of audits.
Externally audited
organizations 
External
auditing firms
Oversight
bodies
Apply to oversight 
body to qualify to 
perform audits 
Register (or accredit)
qualified external
auditing firms 
Select one (or more)
registered external
auditing firms 
Inspect registered
firms that issue
audit reports
Specify standards
for use by registered
audit firms
Audit organizations
and deliver
audit reports
Maintain registration
(file annual reports
and pay fees, if any)
Determine need
for external auditing
Receive, review, 
and respond to 
audit reports

79
External Auditors
Oversight bodies typically operate under explicit legal authority with jurisdiction 
including the country or countries where registered firms will perform audits. For 
example, the PCAOB’s authority comes from the Sarbanes–Oxley Act [4] while the 
recognized supervisory bodies in the United Kingdom and other European Union 
nations comes from Directive 2006/43/EC [5]. Public sector organizations or pri-
vate sector entities receiving funding from or otherwise participating in govern-
ment programs may be subject to audit, but in the government arena, organizations 
being audited typically do not have the discretion to choose their own auditors. 
Government agency or program audits may be performed by designated govern-
ment audit organizations, such as members of the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions, or by third-party external auditors awarded contracts to 
conduct specific types of audits.
Table 4.2  External Auditor Qualifications for Different Types of Audits
Qualifications
Audit Type
Audit Firm
Individual Auditors
Internal Financial Controls
Registration with auditor 
oversight body such 
as PCAOB or EGAOB 
members
Certification in applicable 
auditing standards and 
regulations such as CPA
Quality Assurance
Accreditation as certifying 
entity by national 
accreditation body or other 
authority
Certification in managing 
or auditing quality such as 
CQA
Certification
Accreditation as certifying 
entity for specific 
certifications by national 
accreditation body or other 
authority; adherence to 
ISO 17021
Certification-specific 
credentials such as 
certified Auditor or 
Lead Auditor; subject-
matter certifications for 
certification standards
Process Maturity
Certification as an 
appraiser by SEI or other 
authority
Process improvement 
certification such as CMMI 
or SCAMPI Lead Appraiser
IT Controls
(Optionally) Registration 
with national oversight 
body or third-party 
accreditation for IT-related 
standards or services
Certification in information 
security or systems 
auditing such as CISA or 
GSNA
Government Organizations 
or Programs
Designation as national 
authorized audit institution; 
adherence to standards 
such as International 
Standards of Supreme 
Audit Institutions 
Standards (ISSAI)
Government-specific 
auditing certification such 
as CGAP

80
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
Certifying organizations
Organizations conducting external audits intended to grant or maintain certifica-
tion for other organizations need, at a minimum, sufficient knowledge of the under-
lying standards or certification criteria to make an accurate determination that an 
organization merits certification. With few exceptions, standards development 
organizations or other organizations responsible for the creation and maintenance 
of certification standards do not directly perform audits of organizations seeking 
certification. Instead, certification audits are performed by third parties specifically 
authorized to conduct audits and grant certification to organizations that success-
fully meet certification requirements. Such authorization is either given to quali-
fied organizations by official national accreditation bodies or by the organization 
responsible for the certification standard. For instance, national bodies accredit 
external auditors to certify organizations for various ISO standards, while the 
Software Engineering Institute designates its own partner organizations to conduct 
CMMI appraisals of organizations seeking certification at different CMMI matu-
rity levels. Organizations seeking certification select their certification auditors, 
typically choosing from among auditors accredited for specific standards by the 
national accreditation body where the organization operates. The criteria used to 
accredit certification auditors vary to some extent and whether standards develop-
ment organizations specify any minimum requirements. The ISO recommends that 
organizations seeking certification against its standards choose accredited auditors 
that implement ISO/IEC 17021, which specifies requirements for organizations that 
audit and certify management systems [15].
Relevant source material
External IT auditors work from a foundation of general auditing standards and 
guidance, including procedures and guidelines used in conventional financial and 
operational audits. In addition to Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and 
International Standards on Auditing (ISA), guidance widely used in external audit-
ing includes the Statements on Auditing Standards and Statements on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements issued by AICPA [16] and ISA and International 
Standards for Attest Engagements (ISAE) published by the International Federation 
Organizations needing to find an external IT auditor, for regulatory, certification, or quality 
auditing or almost any other purpose, can typically leverage online registries of approved 
or accredited firms. The register maintained by the PCAOB [13], for example, includes 
over 1000 audit firms based in a large number of countries. With respect to certifica-
tion auditors, the national accreditation bodies in many countries also provide public list-
ings of accredited certifying organizations, often organized by specific standard or by the 
domain to which the standard applies.

81
References
of Accountants [17]. Procedural guidance and standards specifically focused on 
external auditing applicable to IT audits include:
●	 ISO 19011, Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems [1].
●	 Guidance from AICPA on Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization 
[18,19].
●	 ISAE 3402, Assurance Reports on Controls at a Service Organization [20].
●	 ISACA’s Standards for IS Auditing [21].
Summary
External IT audits share many similarities with internal IT audits, but external 
auditing differs significantly in some structural and procedural aspects that require 
organizations to approach and support external auditing in ways quite distinct from 
the internal audit program operations described in the previous chapter. In many 
respects, organizations have less control and flexibility when it comes to external 
audits, although as noted in this chapter, many organizations voluntarily engage 
external auditors to help demonstrate compliance with quality standards or other 
certification criteria and thus support achievement of IT governance and operational 
goals and objectives. Organizations rarely have any ability to specify or influence 
the criteria used in external IT audits, but , in many cases, have some discretion in 
choosing outside firms to perform different types of audits. The explicit purposes 
for which most external audits are conducted typically result in formally defined 
and publicly available audit criteria that organizations can use to set expectations 
for audit requirements and to prepare adequately to produce needed evidence and 
otherwise support the external audit process. Organizations can use this knowledge—
and any experience they have gained through the operation of their internal audit 
functions—to inform the selection of external auditors and ensure audits are per-
formed with appropriate competence, independence, and objectivity.
References
	[1]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[2]	 Russell JP, editor. The ASQ auditing handbook (4th ed.). Milwaukee WI: ASQ Quality 
Press; 2013.
	[3]	 Examination of returns, appeal rights, and claims for refund. Washington (DC): Internal 
Revenue Service; 2008 May. IRS Publication 556.
	[4]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	[5]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on statutory audits of annual 
accounts and consolidated accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.
	[6]	 Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Pub. L. No. 73-291, 48 Stat. 881.
	[7]	 Securities and Exchange Commission; Strengthening the Commission’s requirements 
regarding auditor independence; final rule. 68 Fed. Reg. 6006 2003.

82
CHAPTER 4  External Auditing
	 [8]	 Overall objectives of the independent auditor and the conduct of an audit in accord-
ance with international standards on auditing. New York (NY): International 
Federation of Accountants; 2012. International Standard on Auditing 200.
	 [9]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individu-
als with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such 
data, Directive 95/46/EC; 1995 October.
	[10]	 Bazerman MH, Moore D. Judgment in managerial decision making. Hoboken NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons; 2009.
	[11]	 Service Organization Control (SOC) Reports [Internet]. Durham (NC): American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://
www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/Pages/SORHome.
aspx>.
	[12]	 A firm’s system of quality control. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants; 2012. Statement on Quality Control Standards 8.
	[13]	 Registered Firms [Internet]. Washington (DC): Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board; [cited 2013 Jul 9]. Available from: http://pcaobus.org/Registration/Firms/Pages/
RegisteredFirms.aspx.
	[14]	 Register of Statutory Auditors [Internet]. Edinburgh (UK): Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Scotland; [updated 2013 Jul 8; cited 2013 Jul 9]. Available from: 
<http://www.auditregister.org.uk/Forms/Default.aspx>.
	[15]	 ISO/IEC 17021. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing audit 
and certification of management systems.
	[16]	 Audit and Attest Standards, Including Clarified Standards [Internet]. Durham (NC): 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; [cited 2013 June 14]. Available 
from <http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/audit%20and%20
attest%20standards.aspx>.
	[17]	 Accounting Standards | Governance | Publications and Resources [Internet]. New York 
(NY): International Federation of Accountants; [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: 
<http://www.ifac.org/publications-resources>.
	[18]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. Reporting on controls at a ser-
vice organization relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, 
or privacy. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2012 
March.
	[19]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Service organizations: reporting on 
controls at a service organization relevant to user entities’ internal control over finan-
cial reporting. Durham NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2013.
	[20]	 Assurance reports on controls at a service organization. New York (NY): International 
Auditing and Assurance Standards Board; 2011. International Standards for Assurance 
Engagements 3402.
	[21]	 Standards for IS Auditing [Internet]. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA [cited 2013 
May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Standards/Pages/
Standards-for-IT-Audit-and-Assurance-English-.aspx>.

83
Types of Audits
5
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Financial audits
●	 Operational audits
●	 Certification audits
●	 Compliance audits
●	 IT-specific audits
Information technology (IT) auditing is both a stand-alone activity and a core 
component of many other types of audits. Organizations performing IT audit-
ing need to understand the full extent to which IT supports, drives, or otherwise 
contributes to different business and operational functions. Internal and external 
IT auditors must be aware of the organizational context to which a given type of 
audit applies and the set of IT-related internal controls or activities that need to be 
addressed when conducting audits that are not limited to IT. Among the major types 
of audits that typically include IT systems, processes, and associated controls are 
financial audits, operational audits, and certification, compliance and quality audits 
(which may represent a subset of operational, certification, or compliance activi-
ties) as illustrated in Figure 5.1. In these audit domains IT auditors may not have 
a leading role, but the pervasive use of IT across a wide range of organizational 
activities means that IT auditing skills and expertise are needed to fully address the 
scope of most internal and external audits. There are also many types of IT-specific 
audits, especially those intended to support IT governance, risk management, and 
standards certification and compliance. This chapter describes different types of IT 
audits commonly undertaken by private and public sector organizations. It empha-
sizes the role of IT auditing (whether leading or supporting) in each audit context 
and describes the primary objectives, participants, organizational responsibilities, 
and standards and guidance associated with different types of audits. Table 5.1 sum-
marizes the primary areas of emphasis and objectives for each type of audit covered 
in this chapter.
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00005-5

84
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
Table 5.1  Emphasis and Objectives for Different Types of Audits
Type of 
Audit
Areas of Emphasis
Key Objectives
Performed 
by
Financial
Accounting practices, 
financial reporting
Confirm appropriate 
practices and internal 
control effectiveness
External 
auditors
Operational
Management practices, 
processes, and 
procedures
Review operational 
efficiency and 
effectiveness in meeting 
objectives
Internal or 
external 
auditors
Certification
Industry, quality, or 
management standards 
or other certification 
requirements
Judge satisfaction of 
certification criteria; 
grant (or deny) 
certification
External 
auditors 
(accredited to 
certify others)
Compliance
Legal, regulatory, 
or contractual 
requirements
Verify adherence to 
requirements and 
fulfillment of obligations
Internal or 
external 
auditors
IT/information 
systems
Controls for systems or IT 
development, operations 
and maintenance, security 
and privacy
Validate control, 
configuration, 
sufficiency, and 
effectiveness
Internal or 
external 
auditors
Financial auditing
Operational auditing
Certification auditing
Compliance auditing
IT-specific
auditing
FIGURE 5.1 
IT auditing has a role in financial, operational, certification, and compliance audits, but 
also constitutes a specific auditing domain on its own, focusing on IT-specific assets, 
processes, and controls.

85
Financial Audits
Financial audits
Financial auditing primarily addresses accounting practices and compliance with 
financial reporting requirements of many different types of organizations, particu-
larly companies that issue securities to be exchanged in public markets and pri-
vately held or nonprofit organizations subject to legal or regulatory requirements 
about financial management. This type of auditing has long focused not only on 
what financial information organizations record and report, but also on how 
organizations maintain the completeness, accuracy, and integrity of that informa-
tion [1]. The examination of internal controls in audits of finance and accounting 
practices predates the widespread use of technology, but since the advent of elec-
tronic data processing in the late 1950s and its application to accounting systems, 
IT has played a significant supporting role in accounting and financial reporting. 
In modern organizations, it is virtually impossible to audit internal financial con-
trols without examining IT. The Sarbanes–Oxley Act increased the emphasis on 
including formal examinations of internal controls in audit reports. Section 404 of 
the law makes organizational management responsible for assessing and attesting to 
the effectiveness of its internal controls over financial reporting and requires exter-
nal auditors to include the assessment of internal controls in their audit reports [2]. 
Financial management and accounting systems represent an important subset of 
internal controls, as they help automate, standardize, and secure organizational 
financial information, accounting processes, and transactions. IT auditing in con-
ventional financial accounting focuses on the systems, software, security controls, 
and operational environments that organizations establish and maintain to use in 
financial recordkeeping and reporting.
Financial auditing in many organizations is part of both internal and external 
audit activity, but for publicly traded companies and other organizations in regu-
lated industries financial audits performed by external auditors receive the most 
attention. Whether auditing is conducted by members of the internal audit team 
or by external auditors hired by the organization, primary responsibility rests with 
the organization to ensure that its financial management and accounting practices 
and internal controls over those functions are implemented, maintained, and effec-
tive. Financial auditors—including IT auditors examining systems, technologies, or 
technical procedures supporting accounting and financial reporting—are respon-
sible for making an objective determination that the organization meets statutory 
requirements and applicable standards or for identifying and reporting weaknesses, 
deficiencies, or failures to meet requirements. Almost all aspects of financial 
audits in publicly traded organizations, government agencies, nonprofit organiza-
tion, and many other entities—including reviews of IT-related controls and related 
processes—are driven by legislative and regulatory requirements. These require-
ments include the frequency required for financial audits and filings of audit results 
(such as annual or quarterly) and often specify an explicit time period covered by 
each audit (such as a fiscal year). Financial auditors follow professional practices, 
standards, procedures, and other guidance such as Generally Accepted Auditing 

86
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
Standards (GAAS), International Standards on Auditing (ISA), and Standards for 
Attestation Engagements (SSAE).
Although organizations operating in different countries are bound by national laws and 
regulations, prevailing United States and international laws on financial audits of pub-
licly traded companies (also called “statutory audits” or “audits in the public interest”) 
have many common provisions. Auditors examining these organizations also adhere to 
substantially similar standards and audit guidance and often serve as members of the 
same professional associations and certifying organizations. The regulatory similarities 
and international audience for much of the information produced or sponsored by the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), International Federation of 
Accountants (IFAC), and Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) results in remarkably consist-
ent financial audit practices performed in many countries.
Cost accounting
In addition to statutory requirements for financial reporting, audits of account-
ing and financial management practices often examine the accounting methods 
adopted by different organizations, seeking to validate the appropriateness of the 
approaches used and to verify information such as asset valuation or cost alloca-
tion. Many financial practices involve cost estimation or the assignment of value 
to organizational assets, particularly including capital assets carried as expenses on 
balance sheets. Asset valuation is also a key step in quantitative risk assessment, 
as organizations need to know the value of the assets they hold—and the costs 
incurred to the organization if those assets are lost, stolen, or otherwise compro-
mised—in order to determine what level of protective measures to implement. 
Financial assets of cost accounting provide an independent review of resource 
cost allocations and asset valuation, potentially including comparing an organiza-
tion’s costing approach to industry or market norms or authoritative third-party 
cost data. The primary intent of this type of financial audit is to ensure that asset 
values and assigned costs are accurate, consistent, and adequately supported 
by evidence. In some cases this type of audit overlaps with operational audits 
(described later in this chapter), at least to the extent that the functional decom-
position of organizational activities incorporates cost allocation information. For 
example, organizations using activity-based costing in their approach to financial 
management and accounting first identify all activities the organization performs 
and then measure the use of resource associated with each activity used to deter-
mine its cost. The accuracy of such accounting methods relies on an organization’s 
ability to correctly and consistently calculate direct and indirect costs of resources, 
including assets such as equipment, raw materials, and IT hardware, software, and 
infrastructure.

87
Operational Audits
Programmatic audits
Another kind of financial auditing distinct from procedures used in audits driven by 
regulatory requirements is the examination of program or project financial infor-
mation. Program-level financial audits typically focus on comparing proposed or 
budgeted spending to actual time, personnel, materials, and other resource costs. 
Organizations adopting program management approaches such as the Project 
Management Institute’s (PMI), Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK), 
or adhering to standards for earned value management (EVM) closely track program 
schedule and cost information. Audits of programs managed in this way examine—
among other performance metrics—actual costs incurred as compared to planned or 
budgeted values and consider program outputs in terms of the resources allocated to 
produce them. Enabling this form of program management requires an accounting 
system capable of recording and tracking programmatic activities, associated direct 
and indirect costs, and performance measures [3]. IT-related elements of program 
audits therefore include technology supporting detailed program cost accounting and 
earned value analysis. This type of auditing emphasizes cost and schedule perfor-
mance and in that respect is distinct from operational or IT-specific audits that focus 
on the effective execution of program or project management tasks.
Operational audits
Operational audits examine management practices and operational processes and pro-
cedures to determine how effectively or efficiently organizations are meeting their 
objectives. Such analysis presumes that organizations have explicitly stated busi-
ness objectives, have developed an inventory of business processes and supporting 
Organizations transitioning some or all of their internally managed IT operations 
to external service providers often need to modify their cost accounting meth-
ods to properly reflect processes and activities that use infrastructure, hardware, 
or other assets that the organization does not own. Organizations typically treat 
the costs associated with outsourced IT services such as cloud computing as 
operational expenses, with little or no capital expenditures or underlying asset 
valuation. Internal IT operations, in contrast, generally include significant capi-
tal investments and corresponding accounting procedures, presenting a challenge 
when making direct comparisons of IT costs. The use by an organization of 
alternative cost accounting methods, such as activity-based costing, can enable 
consistent allocation of resource costs between internally and externally pro-
vided IT services.

88
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
administrative and technical functions, and have aligned their operational activi-
ties to the objectives they intend to achieve. As illustrated in Figure 5.2, the scope of 
operational IT audits may include the entire organization, one or more business units, 
organizational processes, and the systems that support those processes and organiza-
tional structures. In contrast to the retrospective perspective characterizing most finan-
cial audits, operational audits adopt a more future-oriented perspective by identifying 
operational strengths and weaknesses and using those findings to target opportunities 
for improvement. The IT perspective in operational audits considers the alignment of 
systems, infrastructure, and IT processes and procedures in supporting the achieve-
ment of organizational objectives. The range of objectives addressed in operational 
IT audits include IT-centric goals for IT governance, risk mitigation, certification, or 
compliance as well as mission and business objectives that IT capabilities are designed 
to enable or support. Like other types of audits, operational audits may address all 
activities performed by an organization, a subset of processes corresponding to a given 
business area, or a single administrative, technical, or business process. Operational 
audits may be performed by internal or external auditors, but in either case the accu-
racy and reliability of the audit results depend on auditors’ thorough understanding 
of the organization’s objectives in addition to relevant subject matter expertise in the 
operational areas being audited. The scope of an operational audit is typically defined 
in terms of the policies, processes, and procedures to be examined, whether those ele-
ments may be considered on their own, within the broader context of an organization’s 
internal controls, or as applied to a specific business unit, program, or project.
Process
Process
Process
Process
Process
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
System
Business
unit
Business
unit
Business
unit
Business
unit
Enterprise/Organization
Facility
Facility
FIGURE 5.2 
Different types of IT audit activities apply at multiple organizational levels, ranging from the 
broadest enterprise-wide perspectives to more audits with scope more narrowly focused on 
individual processes or systems.

89
Operational Audits
Operational audits of internal controls
In an operational audit context, internal controls represent a focal point of both 
internal and external audits. The emphasis on internal controls is not unique to 
operational auditing, but operational audits consider internal controls from two dis-
tinct perspectives: first, to determine whether appropriate controls are in place to 
enable the efficient and effective execution of the business processes under exami-
nation and second, that the controls implemented by organizations function prop-
erly. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) defines internal control as a process “designed to provide reasonable assur-
ance regarding the achievement of objectives” related to operational efficiency and 
effectiveness, reliability of reporting, and legal and regulatory compliance [4]. Fully 
auditing an organization’s internal control capabilities therefore involves opera-
tional, financial, and compliance auditing, respectively. As described in Chapter 9 
(and as illustrated in Figure 9.1), the COSO’s internal control framework comprises 
five key components: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, infor-
mation and communication, and monitoring. With the sponsoring role the AICPA 
and IIA have in COSO and the references to the integrated control framework by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in rules and guidance implement-
ing provisions of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act [5], COSO influences many external 
and internal auditors performing operational audits. The full scope of the COSO 
framework applies most directly to operational audits of corporate and IT govern-
ance activities, but both the control environment and control activities components 
emphasize factors consistent with the focus of operational auditing. Specifically, 
these two elements address the organizational policies, processes, procedures, and 
standards used to enable achievement of business objectives applicable throughout 
an organization and its business processes.
Audits of policies, processes, and procedures
Organizational policies, processes, and procedures are the core focus of opera-
tional auditing. To develop an appropriate organizational audit strategy and 
operational audit plans, organizations need to identify and categorize the set of 
operational activities they perform. This business process inventory provides the 
foundation for an operational audit universe of potential subject areas to be exam-
ined. Different organizations may choose to categorize their operational activities 
in different ways. The representative listing in Table 5.2 uses a functional classifi-
cation according to mission and business areas, administrative domains, and tech-
nical capabilities typical of many large organizations. Not all of these activities are 
applicable to all organizations or relevant for the purposes of operational audit-
ing. To conduct an operational audit focused on a given subject area, an organiza-
tion needs to perform the activity in question and be able to align or correlate the 
activity to organizational objectives. Many organizations routinely conduct inter-
nal audits of many types of processes and activities, comparing their demonstrated 
performance to capabilities needed to achieve organizational objectives or bench-
marking process execution against industry standards, competitors, or exemplary 

90
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
models established for each type of activity. With respect to IT processes, gov-
ernance frameworks like the Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology (COBIT) [8] specify processes and corresponding controls for many 
aspects of organizational IT management. Such IT governance models focus not 
on business activities, but on the functional and technical processes that enable IT 
to effectively support the achievement of mission and business objectives.
Operational IT audits often focus on the policies, processes, and procedures 
associated with organizations’ technical activities, but IT auditors may also have 
a role in audits of business or administrative functions because IT systems, infra-
structure, and staff provide support for most of those functions. IT audits in this 
context focus on the extent to which IT-related capabilities operate as intended and 
therefore deliver the expected business value or contributed to other outcomes. 
Operational audits of some processes and procedures may overlap substantially 
with certification audits, particularly in the areas of quality management, service 
management, software development, technical support, and information security 
management.
Table 5.2  Categorization of Organizational Activities for Operational Audits[6,7]
Category
Activities
Mission and business
●	 Strategic and tactical planning
●	 Corporate governance
●	 Finance and accounting
●	 Budgeting and investment
●	 Sales and marketing
●	 Research and development
●	 Manufacturing, production, and distribution
●	 Program management
Administration and support
●	 Customer support
●	 Contracting
●	 Asset management
●	 Acquisition and procurement
●	 Supply chain management
●	 Service management
●	 Quality management
●	 Change management
●	 Human resources
Technical
●	 IT governance
●	 IT project management
●	 Enterprise architecture
●	 Risk management
●	 Software development
●	 Operations and maintenance
●	 Technical support
●	 Information security management

91
Certification Audits
Program or project-focused operational audits
Operational auditing can also be used to evaluate programs or projects established 
by an organization, examining management and operational characteristics in the 
context of meeting defined performance metrics, realizing program- or project-
specific outcomes, and achieving business objectives or anticipated benefits con-
sistent with expectations set at the time the programs or projects were initiated. A 
program or project audit generally has a more narrowly defined scope than other 
types of operational audits, in part, due to the tendency in many organizations to 
establish programs and projects for specific functional areas or to achieve a dis-
crete purpose. Operational audits of programs and projects focused on deploying, 
managing, monitoring, or supporting IT capabilities have a clear IT audit need, but 
the same is true for less IT-centric initiatives that depend on program- or project-
specific or enterprise-wide IT. Operational IT auditing activities in these contexts 
often focus on adherence to standard processes for software development, imple-
mentation, operations and maintenance, and other system development life cycle 
(SDLC) phases. The technical focus of audits addressing these IT-related processes 
is described in detail in Chapter 6. Depending on an organization’s approach to IT 
governance and use of technical project management models or standards, points 
of reference for operational audits of IT programs or projects may include process 
or service frameworks such as COBIT or Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL) and process standards from the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 
and the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University.
Certification audits
Certification audits are formal evaluations of one or more aspects of an organiza-
tion’s operational capabilities against explicit requirements associated with exter-
nally defined standards or methodologies. Achieving certification provides an 
external endorsement that an organization meets the criteria specified for a given 
standard. Successfully attaining certification is not an indication that an organiza-
tion is performing in an optimal manner or in a way superior to other organiza-
tions; instead, certification represents an independent form of assurance that an 
organization satisfies at least a minimum set of requirements. Most certifications 
must be granted by authorized certifying bodies external to the organization seek-
ing certification, meaning certification audits are typically performed by external 
auditors. Information on certification in Chapter 2 highlights some of the reasons 
why organizations pursue certification and describes the wide range of certifica-
tion types available to organizations (see Table 2.1). Organizational responsibilities 
for achieving certification (and maintaining it once achieved) include making the 
management decision to pursue certification and to commit the internal resources 
necessary to bring the organization to conformance with certification criteria and to 
maintain conformance on an ongoing basis.

92
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
Organizations also must identify, select, and pay for the services of an author-
ized certifying body that performs the certification audit. As noted in Chapter 4, the 
responsibility for authorizing external audit firms to perform specific types of certifi-
cation audits typically belongs to national accreditation bodies rather than standards 
development organizations. These national entities often give those seeking certifica-
tion a consolidated source of information about available certifications and certifying 
bodies accredited to conduct certification audits and award certification to qualified 
organizations. Standards development organizations, industry associations, govern-
ment agencies, and other entities responsible for the standards or methodologies on 
which certification is based typically make publicly available their certification crite-
ria and expectations for organizations seeking certification, affording organizations 
an opportunity to become familiar with requirements and prepare for certification, 
potentially including conducting internal self-assessments against published criteria.
Organizations looking for appropriately qualified external auditors to perform certification 
audits can often find directories of certifying bodies through national accreditation author-
ities in the countries where the organization operates, such as the American National 
Accreditation Board (ANAB), Japan Accreditation Board (JAB), and United Kingdom 
Accreditation Service (UKAS). There are also online resources available through organiza-
tions such as standards.org, which maintains a searchable directory of certification bodies 
located throughout the world [9].
Service management
There is no single standard approach for structuring organization, business units, or 
operational capabilities. Different organizations establish management and govern-
ance structures according to their business functions and associated processes and 
activities, the market segments in which they participate, the products or services 
they create or sell, or the geographic regions in which they operate. Many organiza-
tions that have implemented service-oriented operating structures—particularly for 
IT-related services—pursue certification of their service management or delivery 
capabilities as an indicator of effectiveness or other quality measures and, in the 
case of services offered externally, to improve the marketability or attractiveness of 
their services to customers or business partners. There are many service manage-
ment frameworks which the organizations often use as a basis for designing and 
operating service-based operations, including the ITIL, Microsoft’s Operations 
Framework (MOF), and some aspects of COBIT 5, which includes services related 
to infrastructure and applications among its key enablers of IT governance [8]. 
Organizations implementing service management processes and capabilities cannot 
be certified in their use of these or other frameworks, but they can seek certification 
for satisfying the requirements of ISO/IEC 20000, a family of standards addressing 
requirements for planning, implementing, operating, monitoring, maintaining, and 
reviewing and improving formal IT service management systems in organizations 

93
Certification Audits
[10]. The scope of ISO/IEC 20000 certification can be limited to a discrete set of 
IT-related services (such as application management or technical support) or can 
encompass all services provided by an organization. The SEI has a service certifi-
cation standard for organizations—the Capability Maturity Model Integration for 
Services (CMMI-SVC)—that aligns to ISO/IEC 20000 and many IT service man-
agement frameworks but which applies to all types of service providers and to ser-
vice delivery in more general contexts in addition to IT services [11].
Security management
Organizations invest significant resources in security controls to safeguard the con-
fidentiality, integrity, and availability of their enterprise assets including informa-
tion systems and the information they contain. Although organizations in many 
sectors and industries are subject to legal and regulatory requirements for security 
and privacy, even organizations not legally bound by such obligations still have a 
strong interest in establishing and maintaining effective security protections, includ-
ing security management capabilities. Government agencies and commercial organ-
izations in specific regulated industries—such as financial services firms, health 
care entities, and providers of critical infrastructure—focus much of their security 
management attention on regulatory compliance, so may be less inclined to pur-
sue explicit security certification. Among the most commonly sought certification 
is ISO/IEC 27001, a standard that specifies requirements for information secu-
rity management systems and is typically implemented using the security control 
framework defined in the related security code of practice in ISO/IEC 27002. These 
standards address a broad set of information security management practices, objec-
tives and controls; the ISO/IEC 27000 series of standards is described in detail in 
Chapter 9. Many more narrowly defined security standards and associated certifica-
tions apply to specific IT processes or types of systems. These include:
●	 The Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (known 
formally as ISO/IEC 15408), [12] used to certify the relative security of 
different computer products, applications, or systems using protection profiles 
corresponding to levels of assurance requirements;
●	 The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) Resilience Management 
Model (RMM) [13], which provides the basis for appraisals of the maturity of 
organizations’ processes for risk management, security, business continuity, and 
IT operations;
●	 The International Society for Automation (ISA) standard 62443 [14], which 
specifies security requirements for industrial automation and control systems;
●	 Service Organization Control (SOC) reports [15], issued as the result of specialized 
third-party attestation engagements that examine the controls implemented by 
service providers—SOC 2 reports are delivered to audited organizations for 
internal consumption only, while SOC 3 certification is a publicly available 
verification of the organization’s successful completion of SOC 2 process.

94
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
As with other types of certification audits, organizations must first establish the 
business value or other justification for pursuing certification, implement the appro-
priate standards or methodologies in a way that satisfies certification requirements, 
and identify and engage the services of a certifying body authorized to conduct the 
certification audit.
Quality management
Quality certifications represent a somewhat broader category than certifications in 
other subject areas, because quality management is a domain in which organiza-
tions can be certified but the achievement of many process-centric certifications is 
also considered as an indicator of quality for the certified organization. Maturity 
models such as CMMI, service management certifications such as ISO/IEC 
20000, and certification of compliance with standards for various types of man-
agement systems all provide evidence that organizations conduct their operations 
in ways conforming to established frameworks and processes explicitly designed 
to be effective or efficient when implemented properly. Similar to service manage-
ment, organizations may seek to certify the quality of specific business functions 
or operational capabilities or to certify their overall approach to quality manage-
ment. Organizations adopting quality management or quality improvement meth-
odologies such as Total Quality Management (TQM) or Six Sigma can have 
individual employees attain various types of quality certifications, but there is no 
corresponding organizational-level certification. Organizations that seek certifica-
tion to demonstrate their commitment to quality management practices capabilities 
typically do so with widely recognized standards-based certifications such as ISO 
9001. Broad standards such as those collectively organized under ISO 9000 address 
many aspects of quality management, including requirements for quality manage-
ment systems, recommendations for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of 
such systems, and guidance on conducting audits of quality management systems 
[16]. Many industry-specific standards for quality management systems also exist, 
such as ISO 13485 on the manufacture of medical devices [17], ISO Technical 
Specification 16949 on quality in automotive production [18], and ISO 29001 
on quality in oil and gas production [19]. Audits for quality certification involve 
both accredited certifying bodies and, in many cases, individual external auditors 
holding quality-related certifications such as Certified Quality Auditor (CQA) or 
Certified Lead Auditor for any of the ISO standards related to quality management 
systems.
Compliance audits
Compliance audits comprise a wide range of externally and internally driven exami-
nations of an organization’s fulfillment of legal or regulatory requirements, industry 
standards, licensing terms, contractual commitments, or other formal obligations. 

95
Compliance Audits
Compliance audits overlap conceptually with financial, operational, and certification 
audits in the sense that those types of audits often address standards, practices, or 
legal provisions that constitute mandatory requirements for organizations. As a cat-
egory, compliance auditing applies more broadly than other types in terms of who 
performs such audits, the purpose for conducting compliance audits, and the organ-
izational elements or subject areas that provide the scope for audits. Compliance 
audits driven by needs to demonstrate adherence to legal provisions or regulations 
(including those conducted as part of formal investigations) are most commonly 
performed by external auditors. Audits of organizational fulfillment of licensing 
terms, service level agreements, or other contractual obligations are usually con-
ducted by the legal or contracting functions of one or both parties bound by the 
contract. Audits that verify compliance with organizationally specified policies, 
procedures, standards, and guidelines typically fall within the purview of internal 
auditing programs. The standards and methodologies used in compliance auditing 
vary according to the context of the audit and the organization or legal entity that 
has the responsibility to verify compliance. As is the case with many other types of 
external auditing, the audit criteria used to determine compliance with externally 
defined requirements are often available to organizations, facilitating their prepara-
tion for external audits and enabling organizations to conduct internal self-assess-
ments if they choose to do so.
The organizational requirements underlying compliance audits come from many 
different external sources, in addition to internal policies and governance objectives. 
Organizations in many industries are subject to both government regulations and 
commercial standards, each corresponding to different sets of audit criteria. In the 
United States and many other countries, organizations that operate in regulated indus-
tries or that participate in government-sponsored programs must undergo compli-
ance audits. Unlike the securities and financial management laws and regulations that 
apply to all publicly traded companies and result in all such organizations performing 
mandatory audits, other types of legal requirements obligate covered organizations to 
comply but may only formally audit compliance of a small proportion of organiza-
tions, selected at random or in response to suspicions, complaints, or prior noncom-
pliant behavior. Examples include audits of small businesses, federal grant recipients, 
and health care providers. Similar approaches to compliance auditing apply to many 
industry and commercial requirements, including audits of IT and security standards 
for organizations in financial services, insurance, energy, and retail.
Compliance audits conducted on an ad hoc or one-time basis rather than as a routine 
or recurring process can sometimes identify serious deficiencies or systemic problems 
within an organization. For example, for its services acquisition program U.S. Department 
of Veterans Affairs (VA) has in place small business contracting rules that give prefer-
ence to veteran-owned businesses. A 2010 audit by the VA’s Office of Inspector General 
of the Department’s small business programs found that as many as three-quarters of 
the small businesses registered with the VA for participation in the program were in fact 
ineligible, due to what the Inspector General cited as deficient oversight and verification 

96
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
Legal compliance
Legislation and legislatively mandated rules and regulations are significant sources 
of compliance requirements. Organizations falling under the jurisdiction of various 
national, state or provincial, or local laws are obligated to comply with the man-
datory provisions in the laws and may be subject to audit to verify their compli-
ance. Many legal audit drivers and their corresponding requirements for subject 
organizations are described in Chapter 7. Not all laws include audits as a mecha-
nism for checking compliance, but audit procedures are often found where legal 
provisions include penalties for noncompliance. Few laws and regulations apply to 
all organizations, so organizations in different industries, markets, and geographic 
areas need to be aware of what laws and regulations apply to them, which require-
ments may be subject to validation through compliance auditing, and what criteria 
need to be satisfied if and when the organization is audited. Compliance activi-
ties in many organizations extend beyond formal audits, as even in the absence of 
financial or other penalties for noncompliance some organizations need to perform 
self-assessments of compliance and report the results to external oversight bod-
ies. Organizations also may focus internal audit program resources on maintain-
ing and reviewing evidence of compliance that might need to be provided if the 
organization is chosen for a random audit or becomes the subject of civil or crimi-
nal litigation.
The need to maintain awareness of legal audit requirements applicable to each 
organization includes keeping abreast of changes in compliance or enforcement 
policies related to legal requirements. For instance, many U.S. organizations in 
the health care industry are subject to security and privacy provisions in the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [21]. For several years after 
those requirements went into effect, each covered organization was obligated to 
satisfy applicable security and privacy requirements but did not undergo auditing 
or any formal evaluation of its compliance unless someone filed a complaint with 
the government claiming the organization violated the law. The Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act added an audit 
requirement to the regulations originally enacted in HIPAA, under which the gov-
ernment selects a small number of covered organizations to audit [22]. This change, 
coupled with a provision requiring organizations to self-report breaches of pro-
tected health information, gives covered organizations an added incentive to ensure 
their compliance with the law, in addition to any internal goals and objectives to 
operate in compliance with applicable rules and regulations.
practices [20]. The contracting rules favoring veteran-owned businesses implemented leg-
islative previsions enacted in 2006 and first examined by the Government Accountability 
Office (GAO) in 2009, but the 2010 Inspector General audit was the first the Department 
conducted on its own veteran-preference contracting programs.

97
Compliance Audits
Compliance with industry standards
Organizations operating in specific industries may be subject to standards devel-
oped, implemented, and maintained by government authorities, industry groups 
or associations, or standards development organizations. Organizations obligated 
to comply with these requirements often incorporate them in their internal poli-
cies, procedures, and standards and validate compliance through internal compli-
ance audits, alone or in addition to external audits performed by appropriately 
qualified and authorized auditors. Organizations may also adopt voluntary technical 
standards developed with specific industry applicability in mind, such as HL7 for 
health care, point of sale (POS) standards in retail, or the industry-specific subsets 
of ANSI X12 standards. As with commercial standards, verifying or demonstrat-
ing compliance with voluntary industry standards may help organizations achieve 
greater levels of technical interoperability with peer organizations. In the United 
States, European Union member nations, and other countries, multiple government 
and industry oversight organizations have responsibility for standards applicable to 
financial services institutions. With the intent of ensuring consistency in regulatory 
compliance and oversight, the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council 
(FFIEC) issues standards—including IT audit standards—for use by different U.S. 
government entities with responsibility for supervising financial institutions. In 
many industries organizations are subject to multiple regulations administered and 
overseen by different types of organizations, potentially presenting a challenge in 
terms of evaluating compliance with all applicable requirements in a single audit. 
For instance, the North American Electricity Reliability Corporation (NERC) main-
tains reliability standards for energy companies operating in the United States, 
Canada, and Mexico. U.S. energy companies are also subject to regulations from 
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and, in the case of companies 
producing electricity with nuclear power, to additional regulations and standards 
from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
Commercial standards
Distinct from industry-specific compliance requirements, commercial standards 
apply to many organizations based on the types of business functions or transac-
tions they perform or the way in which they perform those functions. Organizations 
also often choose to implement voluntary standards, particularly in IT domains, 
to help ensure interoperability with customers or business partners or to enable 
use of different vendor products or technologies in their environments. Voluntary 
standards are typically not subject to required compliance audits, but organiza-
tions may perform their own compliance verification activities to be able to publi-
cize their use of or support for standards. For instance, the Open Source Initiative 
encourages the adoption of open source technologies and facilitates interoperabil-
ity among such technologies with two designated levels of compliance, one self-
attested and the other based on a review of conformance to explicit open standards 

98
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
requirements [23]. A well-known example of mandatory commercial standards is 
the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards (PCI DSS), which prescribe 
requirements for organizations that accept payment cards (such as credit, debit, or 
prepaid cards) and handle cardholder information in the course of doing business. 
The standards are sponsored by major commercial electronic payment processors 
including VISA, MasterCard, and American Express and are mandatory for all 
organizations that process, store, or transmit cardholder data [24]. Large merchants 
are subject to mandatory PCI compliance audits and can, in cases of repeated non-
compliance, face significant fines and potentially lose their ability to process trans-
actions using cards branded by the sponsors.
IT-specific audits
IT auditing has a significant role in each of the audit types described so far in this 
chapter, but there are additional audits that focus explicitly on various aspects of IT. 
Many IT audits are intended to achieve outcomes similar to those anticipated from 
other types of audits, including demonstrating compliance or achieving certification 
against specific standards. Chapter 6 provides a detailed breakdown of the techni-
cal components and organizational elements often addressed through IT auditing, 
while Chapter 2 established the broader organizational context for many kinds of IT 
audits. The information in this section briefly describes common IT-centric audits 
and the subject areas they address, in recognition of the differences in approach, 
sources of guidance, and necessary skill sets associated with IT-specific auditing.
IT process maturity
The effectiveness and efficiency with which organizations implement and execute 
IT processes is often expressed in terms of process maturity, a relative measure of 
how well processes are fully defined, documented, implemented, and optimized 
for use in an organization. Appraisals of an organization’s process maturity exam-
ines the specific steps and activities the organization performs in a given business 
or technical domain and the extent to which the organization standardizes its pro-
cesses to achieve more repeatable, predictable, and reliable results. The standards 
or normative references used to evaluate maturity specify process areas—categories 
of related practices and activities that collectively enable process improvement in a 
given domain—represent processes that organizations are expected to perform. To 
achieve specific maturity levels against these reference models, organizations must 
demonstrate that they have implemented and follow the processes included in each 
process area. Two of the most widely used process maturity models—the SEI’s 
CMMI and the Object Management Group’s Business Process Maturity Model 
(BPMM)—both define five-level maturity models with corresponding process areas 
at each level, as listed in Table 5.3. The number and type of processes specified in 
CMMI varies somewhat across the different versions of the model for acquisition, 

99
IT-specific Audits
development, and services. All versions of the CMMI also include capability levels, 
where level zero means “incomplete” or not performed and levels one through three 
indicate “performed,” “managed,” and “defined” capabilities, respectively [25].
Models such as CMMI and BPMM apply broadly across many functional 
domains and sets of operational processes. Organizations wanting an objective 
determination of their process maturity can, under the CMMI appraisal program, 
pursue certification by an authorized third party. As part of improving internal pro-
cesses and moving to higher levels of maturity, many organizations adopt standard 
processes or methodologies that prescribe accepted industry practices, such as the 
software life cycle processes defined in ISO/IEC 12207 [28]. Other relevant IT pro-
cess standards include ISO/IEC 15504 on IT process assessment [29] and ISO/IEC 
15026 on systems and software engineering and assurance [30].
Provision of IT services
Organizations that structure their IT operations to reflect the services they perform 
or offer to users—whether those users are service consumers internal or external 
to the organization that provides IT services—often conduct IT auditing to support 
the measurement and achievement of internal objectives related to governance or 
operational effectiveness. Such organization may also seek certification of their IT 
service management capabilities against standards such as ISO 20000 [10]. For pur-
poses of implementing, operating, or improving IT services, many organizations 
rely on externally developed service management frameworks such as the ITIL or 
relevant aspects of COBIT. ISO/IEC 20000 certification requirements are consist-
ent with the practices organizations adopt when they implement IT service manage-
ment frameworks; while it is not required that organizations commit to an external 
service management models, following such frameworks can facilitate achieving 
certification. Auditing IT processes or services present some potential challenges 
compared to examinations of other types of IT controls, as it may be impractical 
for auditors to directly observe the full execution of processes executed or services 
delivered by an organization. Audits of IT processes and services are performed by 
Table 5.3  Levels of Process Maturity in Commonly Used Models
Level
CMMI 
[11,25,26]
No. of CMMI Processes 
(ACQ/DEV/SVC)
BPMM [27]
No. of 
BPMM 
Processes
One
Initial
0
0
0
Initial
0
Two
Managed
9
7
8
Managed
9
Three
Defined
9
11
12
Standardized
10
Four
Quantitatively 
managed
2
2
2
Predictable
5
Five
Optimized
2
2
2
Innovating
6

100
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
both external and internal auditors whose qualifications may include general audit-
ing credentials such as CPA or IIA in addition to IT domain certifications or spe-
cialized subject matter expertise.
Organizations implementing IT services management certification such as ISO/
IEC 20000 or acquiring services provided by such organizations should be aware 
that framework-specific certifications like ITIL and COBIT can only be attained 
by individuals (including IT auditors), not by organizations. Whether or not they 
adopt or publicize their adherence to formally specified service management 
frameworks like ITIL, only certifications like ISO/IEC 20000 or SOC designa-
tions are relevant organization-level qualifications for service providers.
In many organizations, IT operations comprise a wide range of IT processes 
and services performed on behalf of business units or process owners outside the IT 
function. Services delivered in this model commonly include application manage-
ment and monitoring, systems operation and maintenance, and network, telecom-
munications, and infrastructure services. The technical capabilities, of personnel, 
and physical resources needed to deliver these and other IT services are typically 
consolidated in dedicated data center facilities or dedicated areas of more general-
purpose facilities. The “customers” served by IT may include other parts of the 
same organization or service users in external organizations. With the advent of IT 
outsourcing, software-as-a-service delivery models, cloud computing, and other 
forms of externally hosted systems and infrastructure, the field of IT auditing 
increasingly needs to address IT services. Data center operators and cloud comput-
ing vendors are specialized types of IT service providers whose internal controls 
are audited using available SSAE and related guidance on preparing reports on ser-
vice organization controls [31,32]. As illustrated in Figure 5.3, the control reports 
resulting from external audits of service providers are often directed both at internal 
and external audiences with an interest in the effectiveness of the service provider’s 
controls. For example, SOC reports have different numerical designations indicat-
ing both the scope of the underlying audit and the intended use of the report, where 
SOC 2 reports are intended for internal use by service providers and SOC 3 reports 
are available to external audiences, including prospective users of the providers’ 
services. The information in SOC 3 reports may be reviewed by an organization 
prior to using an external provider and by the user organization’s auditor as part of 
examining the full set of controls applicable to the user organization.
Information systems controls
Organizations focus significant IT audit attention on information systems and 
the different types of controls implemented to help ensure the efficient, effective, 

101
IT-specific Audits
and secure operation of their systems. System-level audits are commonly per-
formed as part of internal auditing, often in support of IT governance, risk man-
agement, or information security programs. The opposite is true in commercial 
organizations in some industries and public sector organizations such as govern-
ment agencies, which are subject to external system audits by government over-
sight agencies. For instance, external IT audit guidance from the FFIEC applies 
to banks and other financial institutions under the supervisory authority of regula-
tors such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or the Consumer 
Finance and Protection Bureau (CFPB). Many organizations in industries, not oth-
erwise addressed by regulations on audits, may nonetheless face audits related to 
investigations by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission or European Commission. 
Government agencies are subject to laws and regulations that do not apply to non-
government entities, including many that mandate IT management practices, infor-
mation security provisions, and privacy protections. Maintaining compliance with 
these requirements drives substantial internal IT auditing activity in government 
agencies, in addition to external audits performed by authorized oversight bodies, 
such as the U.S. GAO. Public sector audits of information systems in the United 
States and many other countries follow specific procedures and methodologies 
User organization
User auditor
Service provider
Provider auditor
Implement
controls
Audit
provider controls
Issue
SOC reports
Publish
SOC 3 report
Identify
service provider
Audit
user controls
Review
SOC 3 report 
Select
service provider
Produce
audit report
Implement
controls
Determine
outsourcing need
Review
SOC 2 report
Review
audit report
FIGURE 5.3 
External providers of hosting or other outsourced IT services are subject to specialized IT 
control audits and reports used by both service providers and service consumers.

102
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
such as those specified in the Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual 
(FISCAM) [33] and the Information System Security Review Methodology pub-
lished by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions [34].
Relevant source material
Much of the audit industry standards and guidance cited earlier applies to some or 
all of the types of auditing described in this chapter. In particular, GAAS and ISA 
principles and requirements are echoed or incorporated by reference into audit pro-
cedures and codes of conduct by most standards development organizations and 
certification bodies. Of the audit types included in this chapter, the most extensive 
guidance is available for financial auditing practices, in the form of United States 
and international auditing standards including:
●	 Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS);
●	 Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE);
●	 International Standards on Auditing (ISA);
●	 International Standards for Attest Engagements (ISAE).
Available frameworks on internal controls and IT governance provide sub-
stantial information relevant to operational auditing, notably including the COSO 
Internal Control—Integrated Framework [4] and ISACA’s COBIT 5: A Business 
Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise IT [8]. Resources 
for certification and compliance auditing tend to be more narrowly focused on 
the standards, regulations, or other basis of examination. Generally applicable 
guidance for these types of auditing include ISO 19011, Guidelines for Auditing 
Management Systems [35] and the ISO 9000 and ISO/IEC 20000 families of stand-
ards on quality management and service management, respectively. Applicable 
sources of information and auditing guidance for IT-specific auditing also vary 
widely depending on the technical subject matter, but in general include:
●	 ISACA’s Standards for IS Audit and Assurance [36].
●	 ISO/IEC 15504, Information Technology—Process Assessment [29].
●	 ISO/IEC 27007, Information—Security Techniques—Guidelines for Information 
Security Management Systems Auditing [37].
●	 Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE) No. 16, Reporting 
on Controls at a Service Organization [31].
●	 International Standards for Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3402, Assurance 
Reports on Controls at a Service Organization [32].
Summary
This chapter differentiated among major types of auditing, highlighting the sig-
nificant role of IT and IT auditing practices in financial, operational, certifica-
tion, and compliance audits and describing common forms of IT-specific auditing. 

103
References
Understanding the similarities and differences among various types of auditing 
clarifies the contexts in which IT auditing is often performed, and explains the 
tendencies of certain types of audits to be conducted by internal or external audi-
tors. The areas of commonality or overlap described in this chapter should also 
help reinforce the idea that auditing in most organizations has multiple justifica-
tions, serves multiple purposes, and produces a variety of potential outcomes and 
benefits. The information in this chapter brings into alignment many of the topic 
areas addressed in the subsequent chapters, including the decomposition of IT audit 
subjects in Chapter 6, the key audit drivers presented in Chapter 7, the audit meth-
odologies and frameworks described in Chapter 9, and many of the organizations, 
standards, and certifications listed in Chapter 10.
References
	 [1]	 Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Pub. L. No. 73-291, 48 Stat. 881.
	 [2]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	 [3]	 Electronic Industries Alliance  Earned value management systems. Arlington (VA): 
Electronic Industries Alliance; 1998. [ANSI/EIA 748].
	 [4]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission  Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Internal control—Integrated 
framework. New York (NY): Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission; 2013.
	 [5]	 Securities and Exchange Commission. Management’s report on internal control over 
financial reporting and certification of disclosure in Exchange Act periodic reports. 
[final rule]. 68 Fed. Reg. 36636; 2003.
	 [6]	 Chambers A, Rand G. The operational auditing handbook: auditing business and it 
processes. West Sussex (UK): John Wiley & Sons; 2010.
	 [7]	 Senft S, Gallegos F, Davis A. Information technology control and audit, 4th ed. Boca 
Raton (FL): CRC Press; 2013.
	 [8]	 ISACA  COBIT 5: a business framework for the governance and management of enter-
prise IT. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2012.
	 [9]	 Certification Body Directory [Internet]. London: Standards.org [cited 2013 July 14]. 
Available from: <http://www.standards.org/certification_bodies/>.
	[10]	 ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 1: 
Service management system requirements.
	[11]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for services, version 1.3. Pittsburgh (PA): 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010 November.
	[12]	 ISO/IEC 15408: 2009. Information technology—Security techniques—Evaluation cri-
teria for IT security.
	[13]	 Software Engineering Institute  CERT resilience management model, version 1.0. 
Pittsburgh (PA): Software Engineering Institute; 2010 May.
	[14]	 International Society for Automation  ISA 62443/IEC 62443-1. Security for industrial 
automation and control systems. Research Triangle Park (NC): International Society 
for Automation; 2007.
	[15]	 Service Organization Control (SOC) Reports [Internet]. Durham (NC): American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://
www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/Pages/SORHome.aspx>.

104
CHAPTER 5  Types of Audits
	[16]	 ISO 9000:2005. Quality management—Fundamentals and vocabulary.
	[17]	 ISO 13485:2003. Medical devices—Quality management systems—Requirements for 
regulatory purposes.
	[18]	 ISO/TS 16949:2009. Quality management systems—Particular requirements for the 
application of ISO 9001:2008 for automotive production and relevant service part 
organizations.
	[19]	 ISO/TS 29001:2010. Petroleum, petrochemical and natural gas industries—Sector-
specific quality management systems—Requirements for product and service supply 
organizations.
	[20]	 Department of Veterans Affairs  VA Office of the Inspector General. Audit of veteran-
owned and service-disabled veteran-owned small business programs. Washington 
(DC): Department of Veterans Affairs; 2011 July. [Available from: <http://www.
va.gov/oig/52/reports/2011/VAOIG-10-02436-234.pdf]>.
	[21]	 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 
Stat. 1936.
	[22]	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, Pub. L. 
No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226.
	[23]	 Open standards compliance [Internet]. Palo Alto (CA): Open Source Initiative [cited 
2013 July 14]. Available from: <http://opensource.org/osr-compliance>.
	[24]	 PCI SSC Data Security Standards overview [Internet]. Wakefield (MA): PCI Security 
Standards Council [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.pcisecurity-
standards.org/security_standards/index.php>.
	[25]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for acquisition, version 1.3. Pittsburgh (PA): 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010 November.
	[26]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for development, version 1.3. Pittsburgh (PA): 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010 November.
	[27]	 Object Management Group  Business process maturity model, version 1.0. Needham 
(MA): Object Management Group; 2008 June.
	[28]	 ISO/IEC 12207:2008. Systems and software engineering—Software life cycle processes.
	[29]	 ISO/IEC 15504:2004. Information technology—Process assessment.
	[30]	 ISO/IEC 15026:2011. Systems and software engineering—Systems and software assurance.
	[31]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Reporting on controls at a service 
organization. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2011. 
[Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16].
	[32]	 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board  Assurance reports on con-
trols at a service organization. New York (NY): International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards Board; 2011. [International Standards for Assurance Engagements 3402].
	[33]	 Government Accountability Office  Federal information system controls audit manual 
(FISCAM). Washington (DC): Government Accountability Office; 2009 February.
	[34]	 INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee  International Organization of Supreme 
Audit Institutions. Information system security review methodology. Copenhagen 
(DK): INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee; 1995. [ISSAI 5310].
	[35]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[36]	 Standards for IS Audit and Assurance [Internet]. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Standards/
Pages/Standards-for-IT-Audit-and-Assurance-English-.aspx.
	[37]	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011. Information—Security techniques—Guidelines for information 
security management systems auditing.

105
IT Audit Components
6
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
●	 Establishing the scope of IT audits
●	 Types of controls
●	 Auditing IT assets
●	 Auditing procedural controls or processes
Regardless of the type of IT audit performed or their underlying purpose, IT audits 
share a common attribute: the need to examine different IT components and the 
controls associated with them. The scope of IT auditing includes both technical and 
nontechnical components, requiring different auditor skill sets and involving differ-
ent audit procedures and standards to effectively address administrative and physi-
cal as well as technical controls. The range of controls potentially in scope for a 
given IT audit covers a wide variety of technologies, processes, and procedures, 
organizational assets, operational capabilities, and management and oversight func-
tions as illustrated in Figure 6.1. Previous chapters in this book have described dif-
ferent types of internal and external audits with an emphasis on the rationale and 
expected benefits or other outcomes. This chapter focuses specifically on the con-
trols and other subject matter addressed across all types of IT audits and describes 
the areas of emphasis for auditors examining different IT components.
Establishing the scope of IT audits
The key prerequisites to an organizational audit program are determining what 
types of audits are needed and identifying what must be or could be audited. 
Developing an inventory of potential audit subjects—sometimes termed the audit 
universe—leverages business process decomposition, asset management, enterprise 
architecture, governance frameworks, or any other approach that helps identify the 
constituent elements of an organization. Organizations then conduct risk assess-
ments on each item included in the audit universe to inform the prioritization of 
audit subjects, considering factors for each item such as the relative magnitude of 
risk (an estimate based on likelihood and impact), its importance to the organiza-
tion, or the potential benefits to the organization from performing an audit. Audit 
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00006-7

106
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
prioritization reflects the practical reality that organizational resources available 
to support audit activities are not unlimited and helps ensure that the most sig-
nificant auditable aspects of the organization are adequately addressed. Large or 
complex organizations may find it challenging to produce a comprehensive inven-
tory covering all business units, operational functions, and assets unless they have 
also established formal governance or enterprise risk management functions. Both 
of these organizational domains emphasize asset identification and valuation as a 
basis for structuring management activities and allocating organizational resources. 
An alternative approach advocated by the Institute of Internal Auditors [1], among 
others, begins with the identification and analysis of enterprise risk and focuses 
resources—including audit and other control resources—on the organizational 
areas associated with the greatest sources of risk.
Applications
Interfaces
Telecommunications
Network
Hardware
Storage
Databases
Operating systems
Plans, policies, & procedures
Governance, risk, & compliance
Quality management
Monitoring & assessment
Technical controls
Administrative controls
Physical controls
Fixed assets, property, & equipment
Data centers, buildings, & other facilities
Business continuity & disaster recovery
Personnel
FIGURE 6.1 
The range of potential IT audit subjects spans all types of physical, administrative, and 
technical controls implemented at any level of granularity within an organization.

107
Establishing the Scope of IT Audits
Developing and maintaining the audit universe
The structure of the audit universe in each organization typically reflects the way 
the organization itself is structured and managed. The audit universe may be 
arranged or categorized by business unit hierarchy, enterprise architecture, busi-
ness process model, governance framework, service catalog, or any other functional 
decomposition that best matches the way organizations view their operations and 
assets. Regardless of how the organization describes the different structural, func-
tional, or technical elements corresponding to items in the audit universe, there 
is almost always some level of common overarching entity-level controls subject 
to audit. As described later in this chapter, audits of entity-level controls often 
required the use of multiple audit approaches because they usually span many dif-
ferent types of internal controls. The broad scope of these audits and their appli-
cability at all organizational levels also means that entity-level audit reports have 
a wider audience than those produced in other types of audits. In addition to 
enterprise-wide controls used throughout an organization, the inventory of con-
trols and auditable items in the audit universe can also identify common controls 
shared across business units, facilities, operating environments, processes, or sys-
tems. Auditors performing audits at any level below the entire organization need to 
ensure that the scope of their audits includes entity-level and other shared controls 
as well as those implemented specifically for components the audit examines.
Most organizations have too many auditable elements to make it feasible to pro-
duce an audit universe as a simple list; instead, organizations need some sort of 
categorization or organizing scheme to align the audit universe with governance 
and risk management functions and facilitate the use of the information in audit 
planning and prioritization. In addition to categorizing auditable elements by busi-
ness or technical function, location, control type, purpose, or other attributes, many 
source of guidance on internal controls also recommend distinguishing among 
the different levels within organizations at which controls apply. For instance, 
the Internal Control—Integrated Framework published by the Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) categorizes inter-
nal control components by purpose (operational, reporting, or compliance) and by 
applicability (entity level, division, operating unit, or function) [2].Organizational 
elements typically included in the audit universe include:
●	 units of organizational structure such as business units, operating divisions, 
facilities, or subsidiaries;
●	 accounting structures such as cost centers, lines of business, or process areas;
●	 strategic goals, objectives, and outcomes, which are evaluated in part by 
auditing the resources allocated for their achievement;
●	 mission and business processes, services, and operational functions executed by 
the organization;
●	 assets—including IT assets—the organization owns, operates, manages, or 
controls;

108
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
●	 programs, projects, and investments to which the organization commits funding 
or other resources;
●	 internal and external controls implemented by the organization or on its behalf;
●	 management functions or programs such as governance, risk management, 
quality assurance, certification, and compliance as well as internal auditing.
Internal controls explicitly itemized in the audit universe or implicitly refer-
enced through their implementation with other organizational elements may be fur-
ther categorized by type and subject area in a manner conceptually similar to the 
decomposition shown in Figure 6.1. Organizations also try to align assets identi-
fied in the audit universe with similar asset inventories developed in support of risk 
management activities, since risk assessment results strongly influence the prioriti-
zation of elements the audit universe includes.
Governance, risk, and compliance drivers
IT auditing has a strong supporting role in organizational governance, risk manage-
ment, and compliance functions, and in initiatives such as certification and quality 
assurance. To the extent that organizations establish and maintain formal programs 
in these areas, the need to assess their effectiveness and measure the achievement 
of program objectives influences the scope and frequency of IT audits and the 
procedures, standards, and criteria used in internal IT auditing. Governance, risk, 
and compliance (GRC) activities in particular help define and prioritize the audit 
universe, especially when organizations adopt formal management frameworks 
or enabling technologies that integrate the management and monitoring of these 
operational activities. Although governance and risk management frameworks and 
methodologies rarely specify a sufficiently broad set of elements to provide a full 
inventory of potential audit subjects, they offer a strong foundation, particular for 
IT-related components and controls in the audit universe. For instance, the widely 
used version 4.1 of the Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology 
(COBIT) includes 34 processes in four key governance domains and defines more 
than 200 control objectives associated with those processes [3]. COBIT 5 expanded 
the process reference model to 37 processes among five domains, replacing con-
trol objectives with recommended governance and management practices and bas-
ing audit criteria on seven enablers, similar to audit universe categories: principles, 
policies, and frameworks; processes; organizational structures; culture, ethics, and 
behavior; information; services, infrastructure, and applications; and people, skills, 
and competencies [4].
Enterprise risk management drives audit universe development and IT audit 
scope by identifying organizational assets at risk and specifying the types of risk 
applicable to different components or operational aspects of the organization. While 
the magnitude of risk associated with different audit subjects helps prioritize audit-
ing resources, considering all applicable types of risk can affect the scope of IT 
audits, e.g., by highlighting ancillary processes or support functions that need to 

109
Types of Controls
be addressed in addition to IT assets and controls. Compliance programs have a 
similar dual influence on IT auditing, where the need to meet compliance objectives 
or requirements (such as legal and regulatory mandates) is a key factor in prioritiza-
tion and the criteria used as a basis for demonstrating compliance set the minimum 
scope for IT audits conducted to support compliance.
Audit strategy and prioritization
Chapter 3 emphasized the importance of the audit strategy to organizations and their 
internal audit programs. The audit strategy is a key driver determining the type, 
scope, and frequency of IT audits an organization conducts and defining the criteria 
organizations use to prioritize the items in the audit universe. Organizations follow 
procedures in the audit strategy to assign audit priorities and use those determina-
tions to allocate internal auditing resources. In the hypothetical case where an organ-
ization had only voluntary internal audit drivers, resources available for auditing 
might be determined first, after which the organization would begin with the high-
est priority audits and continue until allocated resources were exhausted. In most 
organizations, however, the need to satisfy mandatory external and internal audit 
drivers means that the scope of the audit program must, at a minimum, include all 
required auditing activities. The corresponding audit plans specify the resources the 
organization must allocate to be able to comply with mandatory requirements and 
any additional discretionary audit objectives or requirements. Many organizations 
assign high-priority ratings to audit activities that support legal or regulatory compli-
ance, such as the report on internal controls required of publicly traded companies 
under section 404 of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act [5]. Failure to comply with manda-
tory requirements is one of several types of risk organizations face that can result in 
adverse impacts measured directly in financial terms or indirectly from damage to 
reputation, negative publicity, legal sanctions, or other potential outcomes.
Types of controls
Among different elements subject to audit, business operations, IT assets, and sup-
porting resources constitute the functional capabilities of an organization, while 
controls on those capabilities include management structures, processes and proce-
dures, and technical measures that provide operational efficiency and effectiveness, 
compliance, reliability, and assurance. In a governance or risk management context, 
controls are any measures such as actions, policies, processes, procedures, prac-
tices, devices, or organizational structures—used to manage or mitigate risk. The 
set of individual controls (both internal and external) implemented by an organiza-
tion stand in contrast to the governance process of internal control, which exists 
to help an organization achieve management objectives related to strategy, opera-
tions, legal or regulatory compliance, quality, security, or risk management [2]. 
Controls—especially internal controls—are the primary focus of many types of IT 

110
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
audits, whether performed by internal or external auditors. One or more types of 
controls typically apply to all the items in an organization’s audit universe. As illus-
trated in Figure 6.1, the controls applicable to an organization’s information tech-
nology include not only technical controls, but also the administrative controls used 
by the processes that leverage or support IT and the physical controls associated 
with people, facilities, equipment, and infrastructure. Organizations and IT auditors 
need a broad understanding of different types of controls and their intended purpose 
and applicability to be able to properly plan for and conduct audits of an organiza-
tion’s controls and to align the types of controls in use with their auditors’ compe-
tencies, skills, and prior experience.
Control categorization
Organizations typically maintain a large number and wide variety of controls and 
select those controls from an equally broad or broader array of candidate con-
trols considered for implementation. Just as the items in the audit universe can 
be arranged or categorized in multiple ways, many different control categoriza-
tion approaches are used in available frameworks, methodologies, and guidance. 
Common organizing schemes for controls include those based on purpose, objec-
tive, function, nature of implementation, or level of applicability within the organi-
zation. Table 6.1 provides a list of representative control categorization approaches 
using different bases of categorization.
Control categorization is primarily intended to introduce consistency in the way 
controls are referenced and applied in different contexts and for different purposes. 
As Table 6.1 implies, there is no single accepted standard for categorizing controls, 
so organizations can select or adapt an approach specified in an external frame-
work or methodology, develop their own categorization, or follow standards set in 
legal, regulatory, or policy requirements the organization must satisfy. The security 
regulations promulgated under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (known collectively as the HIPAA Security Rule) for example, sep-
arate requirements into administrative, technical, and physical safeguards, so 
Table 6.1  Control Categorization Approaches
Basis
Representative Categorizations
Control purpose
●	 Preventive, detective, corrective
Control objective
●	 Operations, reporting, compliance
●	 Governance, risk management, compliance
Control function
●	 Administrative, technical, physical
●	 Management, operational, technical
Nature of implementation
●	 Centralized, shared, decentralized
Level of applicability
●	 Organization, division, business unit, function
●	 Program, project, system, component

111
Organizational controls
Organizational controls are selected and implemented once with applicability 
across the entire enterprise. Entity-level controls are important as a focus area for 
internal and external audits because they provide the foundation for how organi-
zations manage control-supported functions. Entity-level controls are also incor-
porated by reference into many types of audits performed at other levels of the 
organization, as business units, programs and projects, and technology assets all 
leverage different types of entity-level controls. Figure 6.2 shows different major 
categories of entity-level controls and the kinds of controls within each category 
IT
Governance
Personnel
Oversight
Common
Controls
Policies and
Procedures
Core IT Processes and Supporting Functions
 Environment
 Building access
 
 Physical security
 Data stewardship
 Security and privacy
 Remote access
Media handling
 Human resources
 Background checks
 Awareness and training
 Separation of duties
 Skills assessment
 Organization structure
 Strategy
 Risk management
 Certification 
 Quality assurance
 
 Performance 
 Control policies
 Guidelines
 Standards
 Compliance 
Procurement
Asset management
Change management
Configuration management
Capacity planning
Incident response
Business continuity
Disaster recovery 
Monitoring
Reporting
Software development
 Data and system backup 
Patch management
 System administration
User management
FIGURE 6.2 
Entity-level controls include any policies, processes and procedures, standards, or 
measures specified for organization-wide use.
Control frameworks intended for use in specific domains often reflect one or more of the 
categorization approaches listed in Table 6.1, but they also further decompose sets of 
controls corresponding to the functions they support. Taking information security control 
frameworks as an example, the information security management code of practice in ISO/
IEC 27002 identifies 39 control objectives and well over 100 controls grouped into 12 
security domains [6]. The guidance for US federal government agencies in NIST Special 
Publication (SP) 800-53 describes over 400 controls, enhancements, and objectives 
organized into 18 control “families” that are further designated as belonging to manage-
ment, operational, or technical control categories [7].
organizations covered by the law might find that using a similar categorization 
approach for internal controls facilitates compliance.
Types of Controls

112
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
that may be implemented and subject to audit in different organizations. Audits 
of entity-level controls differ to some extent from examinations focused at more 
narrowly defined elements within organizations. The effectiveness of entity-level 
controls depends in part on the extent to which the organization establishes control 
authority and implements each control in a manner that pervades the entire organi-
zation. From this perspective, audits of entity-level controls essentially examine the 
organization’s management and governance capabilities, including the structure of 
the organization, alignment of business and IT objectives, and existence and use 
of strategic and operational planning activities and artifacts. These control ele-
ments help ensure that the controls an organization specifies in policies are actu-
ally implemented and used to support the achievement of the organization’s control 
objectives.
Prominent governance and risk management frameworks emphasize the impor-
tance of establishing entity-level controls and seem to assume that virtually all 
organizations recognize the value of implementing these types of controls [2,8,9]. 
Such assumptions stem in part from the large proportion of publicly traded compa-
nies or organizations in regulated industries or operating environments that make 
up the intended audience of guidance on governance, risk management, compli-
ance, and auditing. Most organizations implement some controls at an enterprise-
wide level, but the types of entity-level controls they implement vary substantially 
among different organizations, even within the same sector or industry. The catego-
ries of controls shown in the upper half of Figure 6.2—IT governance, policies and 
procedures, common controls, and personnel oversight—each reflect at least some 
functions or management activities that are likely to be performed similarly across 
different business units or operational areas. Greater variation may be expected for 
core IT processes and support functions in organizations with different data centers, 
facilities, service providers, or types of systems, or in organizations with decentral-
ized management structures. The capability to implement and leverage entity-level 
controls offers potential benefits to organizations from financial and administrative 
efficiency and also in terms of enabling more effective execution of enterprise IT 
governance, risk management, and compliance activities.
Auditing different IT assets
Many types of IT audits require the examination of IT assets and associated tech-
nical controls, either as a primary focus in IT-centric auditing or in the context of 
auditing management functions, business processes, and operational programs and 
projects supported by IT assets. Auditors tasked with examining specific technolo-
gies and technical controls need to select the appropriate audit procedures and, in 
many cases, tailor their audit approach to reflect particular characteristics of differ-
ent types of IT assets. The questions IT auditors seek to answer also vary accord-
ing to the type of audit to be conducted, so auditors must have applicable technical 

113
Auditing Different IT Assets
knowledge about the IT components and technical controls they audit. They also 
need sufficient understanding of the context in which IT assets are used or the busi-
ness processes and control objectives they support to be sure; relevant evidence is 
gathered and appropriate examination procedures are used. Auditors examining 
multiple IT components within the scope of a single audit balance technology-
specific criteria and audit procedures with the need for a consistent approach to col-
lecting and analyzing information and reporting audit findings. Across most types 
of IT assets, there are common areas of focus or audit procedures that can help pro-
vide this consistency, as summarized in Table 6.2. Collectively, these procedures 
highlight the combined use of documentation, inquiry, observation, and direct test 
methods to provide the evidence necessary to support audit findings.
Table 6.2  IT Audit Procedures Used Across Subjects or Components
IT Audit 
Focus
Audit Procedures
Technical 
architecture
Review existing architecture documentation and diagrams to 
understand the operating environment, infrastructure, and hardware 
and software associated with the audit subject
Product 
versions
Establish current versions for all products and components (whether 
commercially acquired or internally developed) and compare actual 
versions to applicable policies, standards, and license agreements
Patch 
management
Review procedures for maintaining awareness of patches or 
upgrades and processes for implementing them, including 
prerequisite unit and regression testing
Necessary 
services
Scan or query to identify all services enabled, compare actual 
services to policy specifications, and confirm no additional 
unnecessary services are running
Configuration
Scan or otherwise analyze asset configuration and compare actual 
configuration to policy, approved baselines, and standards
Logging and 
monitoring
Confirm logging is enabled at an appropriate level of detail and that 
log output is monitored and regularly reviewed or analyzed
Account 
provisioning
Review processes and procedures for creating, updating, and 
removing accounts and, where applicable, confirm provisioned 
accounts reflect valid current users
Access control
Review policies, procedures, and mechanisms for controlling access 
to the audit subject, including granting and revoking access privileges 
and authenticating and authorizing access
Capacity 
utilization
Compare resource needs and corresponding resource allocation to 
actual usage of the audit subject and review policies and procedures 
for expanding or reducing capacity as required
Performance 
measurement
Review practices for measuring and reporting performance to support 
findings related to meeting efficiency and effectiveness targets or 
other objectives

114
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
IT component decomposition
Organizations can facilitate planning and efficient performance of IT audits by 
clearly identifying IT assets and technical controls to be addressed within each type 
of audit. Decomposing IT audit subject areas into individual technologies helps to 
more accurately determine the scope of each audit, the skill sets and competen-
cies needed by the auditors, and the level of resources necessary to complete the 
audit process. IT audit plans reflect the type of audit and its intended purpose, the 
IT components it will examine, and the procedures, protocols, standards, or criteria 
auditors will use. Decomposing the IT assets and corresponding controls included 
in an audit is analogous to the business-centric process of clearly defining the organ-
izational level (e.g., enterprise, business unit, operational function, and project) to 
which the audit applies. Many approaches to information technology decomposi-
tion use architectural frameworks or reference models to categorize different tech-
nologies and determine the appropriate audit procedures to use for each component 
under examination. Such frameworks typically distinguish among IT systems, the 
environments in which those systems operate, and models or views describing the 
details of underlying technology components and their interaction [10].
There is no single standard or “best” method to evaluating systems or techni-
cal environments. One approach involves decomposing a system into its constituent 
parts and auditing each component individually, applying similar audit protocols 
across all major elements but also using technology-specific procedures or check-
lists where appropriate. Organizations may use their own system architecture stand-
ards or models as a guide for decomposing their systems in a consistent manner or 
follow available external standards applicable to the types of systems they maintain. 
Commonly used models for system decomposition include the seven-layer Open 
Systems Interconnection model described in ISO/IEC 7498-1 [11], the software 
architecture design specified in ISO/IEC 12207 [12], or other systems and soft-
ware architecture description languages conforming to ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 [10]. 
To audit a typical n-tier architected system, for example, an auditor using such an 
approach might separately examine the web server, application server, database, 
middleware or other integration technology as well as the administrators, support 
personnel, and end users who access the system. An alternative approach to audit-
ing systems at the individual component level considers all components, points of 
integration, and data flows together as the basis for an end-to-end examination, 
sometimes called path analysis (or critical path analysis, or transaction path analy-
sis). As illustrated in Figure 6.3, this approach—informed by methods used in var-
ied contexts such as network traffic analysis and behavioral analytics—defines the 
system scope by tracing the flow of information from initiation by a user or other 
system through all points of interaction. Path analysis may offer a more appropriate 
audit approach for transactional systems or those supporting processes with clearly 
correlated inputs and outputs.
Common categories or IT components representing audit subject areas include 
the eight IT elements shown in the center of Figure 6.1. Some special audit 

115
considerations also apply in certain types of operating environments such as cloud 
computing or other uses of server virtualization technology, and system or applica-
tion access using web browsers, mobile devices, or other types of client applica-
tions and interfaces. The following sections briefly describe the context and audit 
considerations applicable to different IT components.
Systems and applications
The terms system and application are used interchangeably in many organizations 
to refer to the software and computing capabilities that perform specific functions 
in support of business processes. The diverse nature of systems or applications and 
underlying technologies implemented in many organizations poses a challenge to 
defining and auditing systems in a uniform manner. Systems and applications vary 
in characteristics such as technical architecture, operating systems, programming 
languages, points of integration, and intended function. The choice of appropriate 
audit procedures for systems and applications depends on their architecture and 
the different types of technical components deployed for each system or applica-
tion subject to examination. For example, auditors apply different criteria, tests, and 
audit procedures to client–server systems than to web-based applications relying 
on web servers, web browser–based access, and corresponding protocols and com-
munication channels. Organizations often focus on auditing systems and applica-
tions that are fully operational, but they may also be audited during other phases of 
the system development life cycle. Auditors apply different criteria for systems or 
applications undergoing planning, design, or development than for those in produc-
tion operation. System or application audits focus on functional and nonfunctional 
capabilities and controls. Functional concerns include ensuring that what the organ-
ization puts into operation meets specified requirements. Nonfunctional aspects 
include performance, usability, reliability, and security, where auditors often test for 
or review evidence demonstrating the implementation of controls appropriate for 
the intended use of the system or application and the ways in which users will inter-
act with it. For example, audits of web-based applications often examine the use of 
controls to guard against known vulnerabilities, misconfiguration, and unauthorized 
disclosure of sensitive information.
User
Boundary
router
Firewall
Firewall
Database
Web
server
Application
server
Internet
Request
Response
FIGURE 6.3 
One approach to auditing IT systems focuses on the end-to-end flow of information 
associated with a transaction or other type of user or system interaction.
Auditing Different IT Assets

116
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
Databases
The term database generically means any collection or repository of information 
maintained by an organization, but in practice most often connotes a specific type 
of technology that stores and provides access to data in support of one or more 
applications and business processes. Databases house many types of information, 
often including information considered highly sensitive such as personal informa-
tion about individuals, intellectual property, transactional records and other finan-
cial data, and confidential or proprietary internal information about an organization. 
Databases represent a specialized type of application software, subject to many of 
the same audit procedures and examination criteria as applications and systems. 
The nature and sensitivity of the data stored in organizational databases influ-
ences the criteria used to audit them, particularly with respect to examining secu-
rity or privacy controls such as data encryption, access control, and data backup 
and recovery. Auditors may examine databases in isolation or in the broader context 
of the applications, systems, or business processes that rely on the information the 
databases contain. Database audits typically focus on controls that help ensure cur-
rent, accurate information is available to the organization and that the confidential-
ity, integrity, and availability of information in databases is protected by appropriate 
security and privacy safeguards.
Operating systems
Modern organizations often use multiple operating systems to support different 
systems and computing needs, most commonly including Microsoft Windows, 
various versions of Unix or Linux, and vendor- and platform-specific alternatives 
such as z/OS for IBM mainframe computers. Operating systems are highly cus-
tomizable and can be implemented differently across organizations or within the 
same organization. To improve maintainability, administration, security, and sup-
port, organizations often standardize operating system configurations for servers, 
desktop and laptop computers, and mobile devices. Many operating system vendors 
offer configuration recommendations intended to optimize security or suitability for 
different uses. In the United States, both the military and civilian branches of gov-
ernment maintain secure configuration standards for specific operating system ver-
sions and publish configuration specifications that any organization can use [13,14]. 
Operating system audits confirm the use and appropriate configuration of operating 
systems on different computing platforms deployed within organizations.
Hardware
Hardware comprises the physical devices used to build networks, telecommuni-
cations infrastructure, computer systems, end-user computing clients, and many 
components of physical security. In many technical architecture decompositions, 
hardware connotes the servers, desktop and laptop computers, and mobile devices 
organizations deploy as well as the routers, switches, firewalls, and other compo-
nents used in networks. Audits of hardware IT assets typically focus on consist-
ent and correct configuration and adherence to internal policies and standards. 

117
Compared to software, a greater proportion of an organization’s IT hardware is 
likely to be acquired commercially, so hardware audits also consider the vendors 
and internal processes used to acquire hardware.
Networks
Networks provide connectivity and enable communications and information 
exchange for most if not of an organization’s IT assets. Networks comprise hard-
ware assets such as routers, hubs, switches, and firewalls that enable the flow of 
information between IT components and communications and security controls 
that protect the quality of service in network communications and the confidenti-
ality, integrity, and availability of data traversing network infrastructure. Network 
audits examine the implementation and configuration of hardware devices, services 
and protocols running on the network, and security controls such as firewalls and 
network intrusion detection systems. These audits also consider the nature of the 
communication within the network so that auditors can select appropriate audit 
procedures to address the use of wireless, satellite, cellular, frame relay, and other 
network technologies. The specific audit procedures used to examine networks 
depend on the types of hardware, services, security controls, and telecommunica-
tions infrastructure implemented by an organization and on the scale of the network 
in terms of its geographic reach and the number and variety of systems and facili-
ties connected to it. While much of the underlying technology is substantially simi-
lar regardless of the scale of a network, there are practical differences in auditing 
conventional or virtual local area networks deployed in a single physical location 
versus wide area networks spanning multiple sites.
Storage
Although organizations store substantial amounts of data in relational databases, 
content and document management systems, and similar IT components, the 
increasingly pervasive use of dedicated storage technologies makes storage plat-
forms, networks, and infrastructure a distinct subset of IT subject to audit. Storage 
solutions use specialized hardware, software, communication protocols, and data 
storage and access methods, although the areas of emphasis for storage audits over-
lap substantially with those for databases. Audit procedures and criteria for storage 
depend both on the specific types of storage technology used by an organization 
and the nature and sensitivity of the data housed in storage environments. Storage 
may be audited in isolation or in a broader operational context—such technology is 
typically provisioned as a supporting component of data centers or other technical 
operating environments, where a single storage infrastructure can receive data from 
multiple systems. Depending on the systems operation and maintenance procedures 
organizations follow and the security control standards or regulations that apply to 
them, the scope of storage technology subject to audit may include alternate data 
storage locations or third-party providers of off-site data backup services. These 
external storage facilities, services, and technical mechanisms need to be included 
within the scope of IT audits addressing storage.
Auditing Different IT Assets

118
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
Data centers
As the facilities in which many IT systems, hardware, network infrastructure, and 
associated technologies reside, data centers provide an essential foundation for IT 
operations. In addition to serving as the physical location for many IT components, 
data centers are also the point of execution for many IT processes, procedures, 
and support functions. Organizational IT assets typically rely on a wide variety of 
common controls implemented at the data center level and shared or inherited by 
the systems and technologies that operate in data center environments. Examples 
include physical and environmental controls—such as backup power generation, 
fire suppression, building access control, security guards, and telecommunica-
tions—and disaster recovery and business continuity, including services and capa-
bilities provided through the use of redundant or alternate processing facilities. 
Audits of data center facilities focus on these specialized types of controls and the 
operational support processes, resources, and personnel that ensure that IT compo-
nents residing in the data center operate normally to support the business processes 
and functions that depend on IT. Whether owned and managed by an organization 
or by third parties, data centers are often considered service providers and are there-
fore subject to explicit standards prescribed for auditing service organizations [15].
Virtualized environments
Virtualization technology provides an alternative technical approach to delivering 
infrastructure, platforms and operating systems, servers, software, and systems and 
applications. Most virtualized computing environments have much in common with 
conventional data centers, but employ high-performing hardware and specialized 
software that enables a single physical server to function as multiple concurrently 
running instances. This approach increases capacity utilization and, in IT service-
based models such as cloud computing, allows organizations to make more efficient 
use of their IT resources by scaling up or down as business needs warrant. Auditing 
virtualized computing environments uses many of the same procedures and criteria 
used for data center audits, with additional emphasis on the provisioning, deprovi-
sioning, management, and maintenance of multiple virtual servers that share com-
puting, network, and infrastructure resources.
The use of cloud computing and associated third-party service providers is 
becoming sufficiently common that IT audits may address such services distinct 
from other audited components. In many respects—including significant use of 
virtualization technology—cloud computing services are quite similar to conven-
tional outsourced application hosting and managed infrastructure services long used 
by some organizations. Distinctions emphasized by cloud service vendors include 
on-demand service provisioning, ubiquitous network access, resource pooling, 
elastic capabilities and services, and metered usage and associated billing and pay-
ment models. The anticipated growth in cloud computing is one factor motivating 
the development of cloud-specific control frameworks, intended in particular to 
address concerns about information security in cloud computing. Available frame-
works include the Cloud Controls Matrix )[16] developed by the nonprofit Cloud 

119
Auditing Procedural Controls or Processes
Security Alliance and the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program 
(FedRAMP) [17] administered by the General Services Administration for use by 
cloud service providers serving US government agencies. These control frame-
works offer IT auditors additional points of reference on the types of controls that 
should be present in cloud computing environments.
Interfaces
Interfaces are points of integration or connectivity mechanisms among two or 
more IT components, enabling the transmission of information between systems or 
exposing services or functional capabilities from one system or application to oth-
ers. Organizations often use many different types of interfaces, each of which may 
have different communication methods, technical protocols, or standards associated 
with it. As a subject for IT audit, key considerations for interfaces include confirm-
ing that system interconnections are authorized, conform to technical specifications, 
and satisfy functional and technical requirements. Auditors often emphasize the 
security measures implemented to protect information in transit across interfaces 
and to control access to interfaces exposed by each system. Interface audits rely on 
both documentation such as formal interface specifications and tests that demon-
strate the correct function of each interface, taking into consideration the intended 
purpose, information flows, technical access mechanisms, and user- or system-level 
authentication and authorization processes.
Auditing procedural controls or processes
The scope of information technology auditing is every bit as broad and varied in as 
the domain of organization IT itself, encompassing a wide range of technologies, 
technical capabilities, and controls as well as the policies, processes, and proce-
dures associated with operational and governance functions. Depending on the type 
and scope of IT audits planned by an organization, auditors may examine process-
based or procedural controls in conjunction with the IT assets and components 
that support them, or separately in process-specific audits. The relative emphasis 
an organization places on auditing IT processes is influenced to some extent by 
the governance, risk, compliance, and IT management frameworks it chooses to 
implement. Popular governance frameworks such as COBIT and the Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) are largely process-oriented, while enter-
prise architecture and information security management frameworks align more 
closely to organizational descriptions or decompositions that are more techni-
cal in nature. Many types of external audits—including those intended to achieve 
certification or demonstrate regulatory compliance—require auditors to consider 
administrative, technical, and physical controls within the scope of the same audit. 
Organizations typically have more discretion to plan, define the scope of, and con-
duct internal audits in ways that separate audits of processes and procedural con-
trols from audits of IT assets, systems, and technologies. There are many reasons 

120
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
to pursue such an approach, including the ability to more closely match skills and 
competencies of auditors to the subject matter of the audits they conduct.
IT operations
As noted in Chapter  5, operational IT audits focus on processes and procedures 
executed by an organization and the alignment of those activities with the systems, 
infrastructure, and other information technology resources. Internal audits under-
taken to support IT governance also emphasize the operational processes or ser-
vices implemented by an organization and the extent to which those operational 
aspects comply with policies, standards, and other requirements [8]. To success-
fully perform these types of audits, organizations need to develop an inventory of 
the processes and procedural controls it uses (or identify this information within 
existing documentation of its audit universe) and prepare an audit strategy and cor-
responding audit plans similar to those used in other types of IT audits. Relevant 
processes for examination include those in both IT-specific and more general busi-
ness areas, including:
●	 Strategic and tactical planning
●	 Risk management
●	 Quality management
●	 Financial management
●	 Human resources management
●	 Acquisition or procurement
●	 Supply chain management
●	 Program and project management
●	 Change management
●	 Service management
●	 Customer and technical support
●	 Security management
●	 Facilities management
●	 Vendor management
Operational processes and procedural controls are also subject to prioritization 
so that audit resources can be allocated effectively. Prioritization in this context 
considers criteria such as the level of resources involved, complexity, dependent 
relationships with other processes, and the criticality of each process to the organi-
zation overall or to the mission or business functions it supports.
As an alternative to developing an organizational process inventory from scratch, organi-
zations may choose to use available process reference models as a basis for their own. 
The wide variety of existing process reference models apply to broadly defined enterprise 
perspectives as well as more narrowly focused IT domains. Examples include models in 
COBIT 5 [8] for IT governance, ITIL [18] or CMMI [19] for service management, and the 
US Federal Enterprise Architecture [20] for government sector organizations.
Process audits can present a challenge for organizations in that, unlike other 
aspects of IT operations, there is no established set of audit standards to guide the 
conduct of process audits. Many standards and documented best practices define 
process expectations or describe characteristics or metrics associated with effec-
tive and efficient process execution, where processes under examination represent 

121
security provisions or other types of internal controls, numerous sources exist to 
guide their implementation and assessment. Organizations also have the bene-
fit of abundant guidance on effective management of many types of processes—
including those leveraged in IT governance and internal control frameworks—and 
on process improvement, process maturity, and other aspects of quality manage-
ment. Organizations seeking to use these sources to guide process auditing efforts 
must first transform model processes or recommendations into explicit criteria 
auditors can use as a baseline to compare actual organizational processes as imple-
mented. More prescriptive sources of guidance apply to types of IT processes 
addressed in formally specified standards such as ISO/IEC 20000 for IT service 
management or any of the many standards on systems and software engineering.
Program and project management
The sphere of IT operations in most organizations includes many ongoing purpose-
specific activities, known generally as programs or projects. Although these terms 
are often used interchangeably, standards and guidance on managing these activi-
ties typically distinguish between them in terms of scope, duration, and results, 
where programs comprise one or more projects, have less discretely defined time 
frames, and are intended to achieve one or more long-term outcomes, projects are 
more narrowly focused, temporary endeavors with clearly defined starting and end-
ing points intended to produce a specific product or service [21–23]. Organizations 
often manage IT programs and projects using formal plans that specify the alloca-
tion of organizational resources and the roles and responsibilities of personnel that 
execute applicable processes and activities. Programs and projects may be subject 
to operational audits; audits associated with certification, compliance, or quality 
assurance; or IT-specific audits focused on technologies, systems, infrastructure, 
or processes that support effective program or project execution. IT audits of pro-
grams or projects conducted from an IT governance perspective focus on effective 
resource allocation, satisfaction of requirements, and the achievement of expected 
outcomes. Because many IT projects follow standard systems or software develop-
ment life cycle methodologies, project-focused IT audits may also examine aspects 
of the project corresponding to the life cycle phase or stage of completion the pro-
ject has attained at the time of audit. Auditors conducting audits of this type typi-
cally base audit criteria at least in part on the expectations established in life cycle 
methodologies or standards that the organizations define or adopt, such as those 
listed in Table 6.3.
Although many IT programs and projects focus on the deployment and opera-
tion of systems, software, or other technologies, program or project audits are con-
cerned with effective management, not on the operational or technical aspects of 
the information technology. These characteristics fall within the scope of system-
specific or IT component audits described previously in this chapter. Program and 
project audits, in contrast, center on the processes, controls, and artifacts produced 
in the course of executing program or project activities and the compliance of those 
Auditing Procedural Controls or Processes

122
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
activities with organizational policies, standards, and requirements. Auditors focus-
ing on IT audits of this type tend to rely on examination of documentary evidence, 
direct observation, and interviews with program or project staff, as testing meth-
ods are less applicable to management activities. Some examination of program 
and project management capabilities is often included in operational or compliance 
audits, or in certification audits addressing standards for quality, service manage-
ment, or process maturity.
System development life cycle
IT projects in many organizations conform to phased sets of processes and activi-
ties known as a system (or software) development life cycle (SDLC). As the project 
moves through different phases of the SDLC, the project team undertakes different 
activities, produces different outputs, and satisfies requirements or criteria neces-
sary to complete one phase and move on to the next. There is surprisingly little 
uniformity in the SDLC methodologies employed by different organizations, with 
wide variation in the number of life cycle phases and the names and expected dura-
tions of those phases, even among SDLC standards. From a holistic perspective, 
however, most SDLC models comprise similar activities and objectives. Whether 
organizations use as few as four phases or as many as 10 (or more), essentially 
all SDLCs include activities corresponding to project initiation, preimplementa-
tion design and development, operations and maintenance, and project termina-
tion. Organizations adopting a single, standard SDLC may nonetheless adapt the 
life cycle phases to address distinct needs, such as projects intended to select and 
implement commercially available software or technical solutions versus those 
involving design, development, and implementation of custom solutions. Audits 
of IT projects may be conducted at any point in the life cycle—or potentially 
span multiple life cycle phases for large or complex projects or those using itera-
tive methodologies—meaning IT auditors must adapt their examination criteria 
to reflect the different activities, outputs, and intended accomplishments of each 
phase. The following sections follow the system life cycle phase names specified in 
Table 6.3  Life Cycle Processes in Commonly Used Project Methodologies
ISO 12207 [12]
ISO 15288 [24]
SP 800-64 [25]
PMBOK [21]
Software 
development
System 
development
System  
development
Project 
management
Acquisition
Concept
Initiation
Initiating
Supply
Development
Development/acquisition
Planning
Development
Production
Implementation/assessment
Executing
Operation
Utilization
Operations and 
maintenance
Monitoring and 
controlling
Maintenance
Support
Disposal
Retirement
Disposal
Closing

123
ISO/IEC 15288 [24] and illustrated in Figure 6.4, but the IT audit points of empha-
sis apply to similar phases in other methodologies, notably including the software 
development-focused life cycle in ISO/IEC 12207 [12].
Concept
Every IT project begins with an idea, suggestion, requirement, or other recog-
nized organizational need. The project concept or initiation phase starts when an 
organization identifies a need for a new or enhanced capability and begins to deter-
mine how it might meet that need. During the concept phase, an organization may 
identify and evaluate multiple alternatives, considering technical and nontechni-
cal characteristics such as cost, complexity, time frame, acquisition strategies, and 
feasibility. Projects require commitment of budgetary and other resources, so the 
concept phase may also include the development of a business case, cost/benefit 
analysis, or other means of justifying the investment required by the organization 
to move forward with a proposed project. Audits of IT projects in the concept 
phase typically examine project management processes, standards, and methodol-
ogies to ensure they conform to organizational policies and standards and verify 
the completeness and approval (where required) of necessary project documenta-
tion such as a project charter project management plan, business case, alternatives 
analysis, and project schedule. The concept phase may also result in functional 
and technical requirements specifications, high-level solution designs, initial con-
trol selection, and drafts of project artifacts to be completed in later phases such 
as a security plan, risk management plan, contingency plan, or quality assurance 
Acquisition
Supply
Development
Operation
Maintenance
Disposal
Concept
Production 
Support
Retirement
System development life cycle
Software development life cycle
Utilization
Development
FIGURE 6.4 
Project audits vary in scope and focus depending on the project phase when the audit is 
conducted and the type of IT project under examination.
Auditing Procedural Controls or Processes

124
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
plan. Organizations may require an audit at the concept phase as a prerequisite for 
approving a project’s transition to the development phase.
Development
The development phase encompasses a wide range of activities intended to sat-
isfy the full set of requirements specified for a system, software application, or 
other solution. Many SLDC methodologies divide the single development phase 
defined in ISO/IEC 15288 into several more narrowly defined phases for require-
ments analysis and design in addition to development. Whether spanning one phase 
or several, the key intended outputs from the development phase include complete 
functional and nonfunctional requirements specifications, detailed design documen-
tation addressing all components within the scope of the project, test plans, and the 
delivery of software code, acquired technology, or other solution elements ready for 
integration, testing, control evaluation, and related predeployment activities. During 
development, the project team also identifies expected operational needs in terms 
of infrastructure, hardware and network capacity, computing platforms, and oper-
ations, maintenance, and support needs. Audits of IT projects in the development 
phase focus on the accuracy and completeness of documentation and key artifacts, 
ensuring that the approved design meets all requirements, includes sufficient inter-
nal controls, and complies with applicable internal and external standards and crite-
ria. Audits of IT projects using commercially acquired technology seek to confirm 
that the intended use of the technology conforms to licensing terms, contractual 
obligations, or service-level agreements. For projects involving custom software 
development, the scope of an IT project audit may include code reviews or other 
software quality control processes. Regardless of the source or type of technology 
used in the project, at the conclusion of the development phase, all design docu-
mentation, integration interfaces, and technical specifications must be complete and 
system components or software applications need to be ready for evaluation and 
approval prior to full deployment.
Production
The term production as used in ISO/IEC 15288 corresponds to a set of activi-
ties intended to test a technical solution or confirm the organization’s capability 
to deliver the product or service resulting from the project. For projects deploy-
ing systems or software applications, the scope of the production phase comprises 
performing unit, integration, and acceptance testing to confirm that the technology 
satisfies functional requirements; verifying the implementation and proper configu-
ration of internal controls; and assessing security and privacy protective measures 
necessary to receive approval for the system or software to go into full operation. IT 
project audits during the production phase examine testing plans and procedures to 
ensure that testing activities are sufficient to determine the satisfaction of require-
ments. Because production is the last phase before a system or software application 
is deployed for use, auditors also check that the project has received all necessary 
approvals, potentially including functional test results, user acceptance, system 

125
integration, environmental readiness, risk acceptance, and authorization to operate. 
To the extent that administrators or support resources require training to support 
the system or software application once it is operational, project auditors may also 
verify the allocation of adequate resources with sufficient skills and capabilities to 
support the project.
Utilization
In the utilization phase, the system or services the project is intended to deliver are 
available for use, where the focus of the project shifts from preparing for deploy-
ment to actively operating and maintaining the system in a manner that continu-
ously satisfies user needs. A system in the utilization phase is typically subject to 
routine operational audits to evaluate the ongoing efficiency and effectiveness of 
the system and the business processes it supports. Organizations may also perform 
a variety of IT-specific audits addressing the system overall or any of its compo-
nents. In contrast, audits of IT projects in the utilization phase focus on verifying 
that the system when deployed will provide the intended functionality and comply 
with applicable technical requirements and standards, relying on documented evi-
dence such as test results, control assessments, and approvals from authorized per-
sonnel within the organization. Project audits at this phase also seek to ensure that 
the resources specified and provisioned for the operational system are correct and 
sufficient and that necessary support functions are in place so that administrative 
and support responsibilities can successfully be transitioned.
Support
For an operational system, support comprises monitoring, technical administration, 
troubleshooting and problem resolution, and routine maintenance activities such as 
backup, configuration control, patch management, and upgrade and release man-
agement for software or other technical components. Depending on organizational 
policies, procedures, and standards, support may also include information security 
management activities such as vulnerability analysis, automated or manual verifi-
cation of configuration settings, and security information and event management. 
The support phase of an IT project typically runs in parallel with utilization; phases 
analogous to support in many SDLC methodologies are termed maintenance, 
with the combination of utilization and support known collectively as operations 
and maintenance. Audits of IT project support activities examine technical docu-
mentation such as administrative manuals and system configuration information; 
adherence of the project’s support processes to organizational policies, procedures, 
standards, and guidelines; and the ability of support resources allocated to the pro-
ject to satisfy service-level agreements or other performance objectives specified 
for operational systems and services. An organization’s technical support capabili-
ties have a direct impact on the operational effectiveness of its systems, so although 
support-phase activities can be audited in isolation, the scope of audits focusing on 
the utilization phase often includes support functions.
Auditing Procedural Controls or Processes

126
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
Retirement
Projects by definition have a well-defined end point, typically coinciding with an 
organization’s decision to decommission or replace a system or service. The retire-
ment phase of the project life cycle involves activities necessary to remove an oper-
ational capability and to ensure the proper disposition of equipment, hardware and 
software, data, and other resources previously allocated to operating and support-
ing the system. Key priorities for the retirement phase align directly to the areas of 
emphasis for audits of IT projects that reach this final phase: disposing of or repur-
posing technology assets; releasing resources committed to the system so that they 
can be applied elsewhere within the organization; and sanitizing fixed and remova-
ble storage media to ensure that no residual data remains on decommissioned com-
ponents. IT auditors examining projects in the retirement phase look for thorough 
documentation detailing the disposition of project resources and IT assets and for 
authorized approvals of such documentation that typically constitute a prerequisite 
for formally closing out a project.
Under the umbrella function of continuous monitoring used in many organizational IT 
environments, capabilities such as intrusion detection and incident response are often 
performed for the organization as a whole rather than for specific projects or programs. 
Similarly, organizations that have standardized on particular hardware, software, operating 
systems, or other technologies may have a centralized function for managing updates, cor-
recting vulnerabilities, or making other changes. Project-specific responsibilities in these 
support areas may be limited to ensuring that appropriate changes have been made and 
that technical documentation has been updated accordingly to accurately reflect the oper-
ational status of each system.
The acronym SDLC can refer to either system or software development life cycle, 
raising the potential for confusion when auditing IT projects when the focus of 
the life cycle methodology is not clearly specified. Prevailing life cycle standards 
do little to resolve this ambiguity in terminology, as the names assigned to SDLC 
phases in standards such as ISO/IEC 15288, ISO/IEC 12207, and the PMI Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) are quite similar. IT auditors deter-
mine at the outset of a project audit the scope and focus of the project, precisely 
what methodology is being followed, the phase of the project within the SDLC, 
and the expectations or implications corresponding to that phase.
Relevant source material
Guidance and useful references for identifying, categorizing, and auditing differ-
ent IT components include IT governance and management frameworks such 
as COSO’s Internal Control—Integrated Framework[2] and ISACA’s COBIT 

127
Relevant Source Material
model [8]. Relevant standards and guidance on decomposing IT architecture, sys-
tems, processes, or capabilities include:
●	 ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010, Systems and Software Engineering—Architecture 
Description [10].
●	 ISO/IEC 7498-1, Open Systems Interconnection [11].
●	 ISO/IEC 12207, Systems and Software Engineering—Software Life Cycle 
Processes [12] and ISO/IEC 15288, Systems and Software Engineering—System 
Life Cycle Processes [24].
Information technology auditing in many organizations encompasses a very 
broad scope of subject areas, controls, components, and other elements subject 
to examination. This chapter reiterated the critical importance of inventorying IT 
assets and defining an audit universe to use as the basis for prioritizing audit activi-
ties and associated resource commitments. It presents an overview of key organi-
zational, architectural, and technological components to highlight similarities and 
differences in the ways different IT elements are used and audited within organiza-
tions. Influenced by standards and frameworks from IT governance and risk man-
agement as well as from internal auditing, this chapter identified relevant standards, 
processes, and tools used to audit various IT-related processes, systems, and com-
ponents, whether organizations approach such audits from process-centric, techni-
cal, or hybrid perspectives.
References
	 [1]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission  Enterprise 
risk management—Integrated framework. New York, NY: Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission; 2004.
	 [2]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission  Internal con-
trol—Integrated framework. New York, NY: Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
of the Treadway Commission; 2013.
	 [3]	 IT Governance Institute  COBIT 4.1. Rolling Meadows, IL: IT Governance Institute; 
2007.
	 [4]	 ISACA  COBIT 5 for assurance. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA; 2013.
	 [5]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	 [6]	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Information technology—Security techniques—Code of prac-
tice for information security management.
	 [7]	 Security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations. 
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security 
Division; 2013 April. Special Publication 800-53 revision 4.
	 [8]	 ISACA  COBIT 5: a business framework for the governance and management of enter-
prise IT. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA; 2012.
	 [9]	 Managing information security risk: organization, mission, and information system 
view. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2011 March. Special Publication 800-39.

128
CHAPTER 6  IT Audit Components
	[10]	 ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011. Systems and software engineering—Architecture 
description.
	[11]	 ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. Information technology—Open systems interconnection—
Basic reference model: the basic model.
	[12]	 ISO/IEC 12207:2008. Systems and software engineering—Software life cycle 
processes.
	[13]	 Security Technical Implementation Guides [Internet]. Defense Information Systems 
Agency, Information Assurance Support Environment [updated 2011 February 14; 
cited 2012 February 18]. Available from: <http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/index.html>.
	[14]	 U.S. Government Configuration Baseline (USGCG) [Internet]. Gaithersburg, MD: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Information Technology Laboratory 
[created 2010 February 19; updated 2013 June 3; cited 2013 June 7]. Available from 
<http://usgcb.nist.gov>.
	[15]	 See for example and Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16, 
International Standard on Auditing 402, or International Standards for Assurance 
Engagements 3402.
	[16]	 Cloud Controls Matrix version 1.4. Seattle, WA: Cloud Security Alliance; 2013.
	[17]	 FedRAMP Security Controls Baseline version 1.1. Washington, DC: General Services 
Administration; 2012.
	[18]	 Orr AT  Introduction to the ITIL service life cycle. London, UK: Cabinet Office; 2011.
	[19]	 CMMI for services, version 1.3. Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute; 2010 
November.
	[20]	 FEA consolidated reference model version 2.3. Washington, DC: Office of 
Management and Budget; 2007 October.
	[21]	 Project Management Institute  A guide to the project management body of knowledge, 
4th ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute; 2008.
	[22]	 Guidance on Exhibit 300—Planning, budgeting, acquisition, and management of IT 
capital assets. Washington, DC: Office of Management and Budget; 2011 August.
	[23]	 ISO/IEC TR 24748-1:2010. Systems and software engineering—Life cycle management.
	[24]	 ISO/IEC 15288:2008. Systems and software engineering—System life cycle processes.
	[25]	 Kissel R, Stine K, Scholl M, Rossman H, Fahlsing J, Gulick J. Security considera-
tions in the system development life cycle. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2008 October. Special 
Publication 800-64 revision 2.

129
IT Audit Drivers
7
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Laws and regulations
●	 Certification standards
●	 Operational effectiveness and governance
●	 Quality and process improvement
The rationale for IT auditing reflects externally driven requirements as well as 
internal organizational objectives. Some audit drivers—particularly external sources 
such as regulatory requirements and certification standards—explicitly obligate 
organizations to conduct formal auditing activities. The success of organizational 
programs described in Chapter 2 such as IT governance, risk management, compli-
ance, and quality assurance depends to some extent on periodically performing IT 
audits, even where such examinations are not absolutely required. Organizations are 
often subject to multiple internal and external drivers, making more complex the 
prospect of satisfying audit needs and potentially presenting a challenge to main-
taining awareness of all applicable external drivers and corresponding audit require-
ments. Many parts of this book highlight reasons organizations choose to conduct 
or are required to undergo audits. This chapter summarizes IT audit drivers appli-
cable to most types of organizations, including legal and regulatory requirements, 
certification standards and criteria, operational effectiveness and governance objec-
tives, and quality management and process improvement. As illustrated conceptu-
ally in Figure 7.1, these different categories of drivers influence organizations’ IT 
audit strategies for both external and internal auditing. Few, if any, of these driv-
ers affect every organization, as the applicability of many drivers varies by size 
and type of organization, ownership, industry, operating environment, and geo-
graphic location. Most of the drivers presented in this chapter impose many types 
of requirements or sources of behavioral motivation on organizations; the emphasis 
here is on describing their impact on IT auditing.
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00007-9

130
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
Laws and regulations
The set of laws and regulations influencing IT audit activities are numerous, vary-
ing significantly across sectors, industries, and countries but generally including 
requirements related to financial management and accounting, organizational and 
IT management, and privacy and information security. Multiple management func-
tions or organizational units often need to maintain awareness of and compliance 
with applicable laws and regulations, separately or through efforts coordinated 
under a centralized compliance or internal auditing program. The descriptions of 
legal and regulatory audit drivers listed below include brief summaries of their pur-
pose or intent, types of organizations subject to them, and provisions or require-
ments addressed through internal or external audits. Table 7.1 summarizes major 
laws and their applicability in terms of sector or industry specificity (if any) and 
subject matter. There are no international laws or regulations that are universally 
applicable to organizations in all countries, but strong similarities exist among 
audit-related provisions in many laws and regulations in the United States, the 
European Community (EC), and industrialized nations including China, Japan, 
India, Canada, Australia, and Russia. Substantial areas of commonality exist for 
international regulatory treatment of specific types of organizations, especially with 
respect to issuers of securities to be traded in public markets.
IT
auditing
Laws
and
Regulations
Process
improvement
Operational
effectiveness and
governance
Certification
standards
Sarbanes–Oxley
Directive 2006/43/EC
Graham–Leach–Bliley
HIPAA and HITECH
Directive 95/46/EC
COBIT 5
ISO/IEC 38500
ISO/IEC 31000
ITIL 2011
MOF
ISO 9001
ISO 14001
ISO/IEC 20000
ISO/IEC 27001
SSAE 16/SOC
CMM
Six SigmaI
Total Quality Management
Plan–Do–Check–Act
External
Internal
FIGURE 7.1 
Multiple factors drive the need for IT audits and influence the ways organizations conduct 
internal and external IT auditing.

131
Laws and Regulations
Securities industry laws and regulations
Laws and regulations applicable to issuers of securities (commonly known as pub-
licly traded organizations) are one of the most prominent sources of audit require-
ments. Securities-related regulations influence internal and external IT audits as 
well as many other types of auditing because they impose requirements on organ-
izations and their auditors in terms of auditor independence, mandatory use of 
standards, and qualifications and competencies needed for auditors, audit firms, and 
the organizational stakeholders that select auditors and receive and respond to audit 
Table 7.1  Legal Audit Drivers and Organizational Applicability
Law
Applicability
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 
(SOX)
Regulates public companies and their auditors; 
applies to all issuers of securities exchanged in US 
markets
European Council Directive 
2006/43/EC
Sets standards for auditors and audits in the public 
interest; applies to organizations subject to statutory 
audit requirements
Graham–Leach–Bliley Act of 
1999 (GLBA)
Enabled consolidation of different types of financial 
services firms within a single holding company; 
applies to financial institutions
Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA)
Protects the privacy and security of health-related 
personal information; applies to health-care 
providers, plans, and clearinghouses
Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical 
Health Act of 2009 (HITECH)
HIPAA-covered entities, business associates, and 
contractors and subcontractors
European Council Directive 
95/46/EC
Protects personal data privacy; applies to all 
organizations in European Union countries
Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act of 1986
Criminalizes unauthorized access or damage to 
protected computers; applies to all computing 
devices used in interstate or international commerce 
or communications
Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA)
Protects the content of personal communications; 
applies to electronic communications service 
providers, government organizations
Federal Information Security 
Management Act of 2002 
(FISMA)
US federal executive agencies; applies to systems 
and information operated by the government or on 
the government’s behalf
The Privacy Act of 1974
US federal executive agencies; protects personally 
identifiable information for US citizens and legal 
resident aliens
State Privacy and Security 
Breach Notification Laws
Requires protection of personal information about 
state residents; in many states laws apply to 
organizations operating within or outside state 
borders whose customers include state residents

132
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
results. Laws such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act in the United States, the European 
Council Directive on statutory audits, and comparable legislation in other coun-
tries also explicitly include internal controls over accounting and financial report-
ing within the scope of audit reports to which organizations must attest. The set 
of internal controls encompasses IT infrastructure, systems, operational processes, 
and security mechanisms implemented to protect the confidentiality and integrity of 
corporate financial data and other information assets.
Securities and Exchange Commission laws and regulations
Participation of organizations in the US securities markets is regulated by the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under authority granted by the 
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 [1]. The regulations stemming from this law, 
the Securities Act of 1933 that preceded it, and subsequent legislation including 
the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, impose requirements on the behavior of publicly 
traded companies and many types of financial institutions. The SEC prescribes 
the implementation of many provisions in securities industry law, providing more 
explicit guidance and compliance criteria than the text of the legislation enacted by 
Congress. With respect to auditing, the key organizational aspects addressed in leg-
islation, regulations, and SEC rules include requirements on the maintenance, dis-
closure, and mandatory reporting of financial information; the conduct of audits of 
public companies, and the use of generally accepted auditing standards. Securities 
regulations apply to organizations that participate in US securities markets, includ-
ing foreign-based and multinational firms as well as domestic companies. Many 
countries outside the United States have similar securities laws governing participa-
tion in national securities exchanges.
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002
Enacted to reform accounting and financial reporting practices in publicly traded 
organizations and to restore public confidence in the wake of several high-profile 
instances of corporate and accounting fraud, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 ini-
tiated sweeping changes in corporate governance and financial accounting prac-
tices in US companies [2]. The law established the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board and required all firms performing audits of US companies to reg-
ister with the Board. It included provisions to help ensure auditor independence, 
assigned greater responsibility to executives and directors of public companies, and 
revised the reporting requirements for financial transactions. All of these provisions 
significantly affect auditing practice for public companies and other securities- 
issuing organizations. Many of the key requirements in Sarbanes–Oxley do not 
apply to privately held organizations, although nonpublic organizations that may 
consider issuing securities in the future or engaging in a major financial transaction 
such as a sale or acquisition may voluntarily adopt some or all of the law’s require-
ments. From an IT auditing perspective, the most significant part of the law is the 
requirement that organizations maintain internal controls over financial reporting 
and audit the effectiveness of those controls.

133
Laws and Regulations
European Council Directive 2006/43/EC
Organizations that issue securities for sale to the public in EC nations are subject 
to both country-specific legislation and laws and regulations established by the 
European Parliament that harmonizes statutory audit requirements in EC mem-
ber countries. Directive 2006/43/EC established new minimum qualifications for 
auditors and audit firms and requires all such firms to register with the appropri-
ate oversight authority in the country or countries where they perform audits. The 
directive emphasizes auditor independence, objectivity, ethical behavior, educa-
tion and testing standards, and theoretical and practical knowledge that collectively 
seek to ensure that auditors have knowledge and competence to effectively conduct 
audits [3]. In addition to delegating member countries the responsibility for auditor 
quality assurance, Directive 2006/43/EC mandates that statutory audits follow inter-
national auditing standards. Similar to the provision in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, the 
European Council Directive requires that the scope of statutory audits include for-
mal audit of the effectiveness of internal controls, internal audit function, and risk 
management. EC member countries use the requirements in Directive 2006/43/EC 
and other EC policies and guidance to structure national laws applicable to publicly 
traded companies and to implement requirements such as registries of audit firms 
and national oversight bodies.
Graham–Leach–Bliley Act
The Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999 [4], known more commonly as 
the Graham–Leach–Bliley Act (GLBA) after its major sponsors, removed long-
standing regulatory barriers to consolidation of different types of financial services 
firms and specified new requirements for bank holding companies and other com-
bined services entities. The law and the rules and regulations established to imple-
ment its provisions apply only to certain types of financial institutions. GLBA 
requires annual independent audits of the 12 Federal Reserve banks and explicitly 
emphasizes the use of external audit reports, attesting to compliance with internal 
risk management and control objectives, to satisfy bank holding company super-
vision requirements. Audits of GLBA compliance are one of several supervi-
sory and oversight functions that use Federal Financial Institutions Examination 
Council (FFIEC) principles, standards, and reporting guidance such as the FFIEC 
IT Examination Handbook.
Health industry-specific laws
Organizations operating in the health-care industry need to comply with a variety 
of laws and regulations in areas such as patient safety, meaningful use of health 
information technology, information security, patient privacy, and compliance with 
laboratory and medical device standards. Affected organizations include hospitals 
and other provider organizations, insurance carriers, health-care plans, billing and 
claims processors, and many types of health service providers. Many of the laws 

134
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
obligating health industry organizations to conduct internal audits or undergo exter-
nal audits leverage formal auditing practices as a means of demonstrating or veri-
fying compliance with legal or regulatory requirements. Because the health-care 
delivery and administration generally entails the use of health-related personal 
information about patients or insurance plan beneficiaries and personal health data 
is usually considered especially sensitive, health industry organizations in many 
countries are subject to regulations intended to protect the privacy and security of 
personal health information.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) was 
enacted in part to protect health insurance coverage for employees of US compa-
nies when they are no longer employed by an organization that provides their health 
insurance. The law also mandates the use of a variety of technical standards used in 
electronic health-care transactions and established a set of requirements for protect-
ing the privacy and security of health data. Only specific types of organizations are 
subject to HIPAA privacy and security regulations: health-care providers, health-
care plans, and health-care clearinghouses, collectively known as “covered enti-
ties,” as well as business associates that provide services to those covered entities. 
The legislative requirements for privacy and security contained in Title II of HIPAA 
were implemented as federal regulations known as the HIPAA Privacy Rule and the 
HIPAA Security Rule, which took effect in 2003 and 2005, respectively. HIPAA’s 
privacy and security requirements apply to protected health information, which is 
any information transmitted or maintained electronically or in any other medium 
about the health of an individual, health care provided to an individual, or payment 
for health care provided to an individual [5]. The US Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR) is responsible for enforc-
ing compliance with HIPAA privacy and security requirements, which since 2012 
includes operating a formal auditing program that proactively examines the compli-
ance of a small number of HIPAA-covered entities.
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
Enacted as Title XIII of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, the 
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act 
strengthened many HIPAA regulations, including making changes to enforcement 
guidelines and increasing the civil and criminal penalties that may be imposed on 
entities found to be in violation of HIPAA security and privacy rules [6]. The law 
expanded the set of organizations subject to HIPAA regulations, making business 
associates and contractors of covered entities directly responsible for compliance. 
HITECH also mandated new practices among covered entities, business associates, 
and contractors requiring notification and public disclosure of breaches of protected 
health information. The federal health data breach standards complement the laws 
in place in the vast majority of US states addressing breaches of personal informa-
tion (including but not limited to personal health data) and preempt contradictory 

135
Laws and Regulations
state laws. The HIPAA audit program established by the HHS OCR implements a 
HITECH requirement that OCR perform periodic audits of organizations’ compli-
ance with the HIPAA privacy, security, and breach notification regulations.
The HIPAA compliance audit program mandated by HITECH and initiated in 2012 by the 
HHS OCR examines covered entities and business associates for compliance with HIPAA 
requirements, including requirements added or amended by the HITECH Act. Although 
many HIPAA regulations have been in force for more than 10 years, prior to 2012 audits 
of HIPAA compliance were only performed when the government initiated an investigation 
into an organization’s practices following a formal complaint or other notification to OCR 
alleging a HIPAA violation. To help covered entities and business associates prepare for 
potential audits under the new program, OCR publishes the complete audit protocol used 
in HIPAA compliance audits [7]. This provides organizations potentially subject to audits 
detailed information about each audit criterion, including how auditors will assess criteria 
and the specific audit procedures to be used.
International health data privacy protection laws
Following provisions in the European Council Directive on personal data protec-
tion [8], many European countries have laws constraining the collection, use, and 
disclosure of many types of personal data, including health data. The processing 
or use of health data is often subject to explicit requirements and protective meas-
ures such as the special considerations for processing health data included in the 
EC data protection directive and the General Data Protection Regulation proposed 
to replace the existing 1995 regulations. Not all countries enact legislation explic-
itly to address protection of health data, but most countries with any type of data 
protection laws include health data within their statutory definitions of sensitive 
personal data that warrants special attention under the law. Many countries in all 
regions of the world have data privacy laws, the majority of which impose restric-
tions on when and under what circumstances organizations may collect sensitive 
information such as personal health data, the purposes for which it can be used, 
and whether or not individuals first need to give consent before their personal data 
can be stored, processed, or disclosed. While relatively few national laws require 
formal audits to determine compliance with privacy protection requirements, audits 
are often used in support of investigations into regulatory violations and, in some 
countries, government oversight bodies or other authorities have the right to con-
duct audits of organizations within their jurisdictions [9]. The scope of such audits 
typically includes information technology resources, making IT auditing directly 
relevant to compliance and enforcement of data privacy laws in many countries.
Security and privacy laws
Outside the public sector, most organizations are not subject to legal or regula-
tory requirements about information technology management or other aspects of 

136
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
business operations. Organizations are generally free to perform their IT processes 
and functions in whatever manner they find most effective, whether they choose 
to adopt externally developed models, frameworks, or practices or to design and 
implement their own. Similarly, most organizations have wide latitude to select 
and implement the internal controls they determine to be adequate to achieve gov-
ernance, risk management, and compliance objectives. Security and privacy laws 
represent important exceptions to organizational discretion, as many organizations 
are legally obligated to implement specific types of controls to protect confiden-
tiality, integrity, and availability of their information technology systems, infra-
structure, and data. Security and privacy legislation rarely specifies technologies 
or standards within the text of enacted laws, and most rules and regulations prom-
ulgated to implement or explain provisions in the laws similarly emphasize types 
of controls that should be used or security objectives that the laws are intended to 
achieve. Organizations choose specific controls, including security-related products, 
processes, standards, and technologies and rely on internal or third-party IT 
audits to determine if controls are correctly implemented and effective in meeting 
objectives.
In addition to types of security and privacy controls specified in legislation and regula-
tions or explicit security and privacy objectives that should be achieved, organizations 
need to consider standards of due care when determining what controls to implement. 
With a series legal precedents (in the United States) dating back more than 80 years, the 
standard of due care in American tort law says that organizations can be held liable if they 
fail to implement readily available technologies or practices that could mitigate or prevent 
loss or damage. A 1932 federal appeals court ruling held that owners of two tugboats 
conveying barges that sank in a storm were liable for the loss of the cargo the barges were 
carrying because the tugboats were not equipped with radios that could have been used 
to alert the tugboat pilots to the impending storm [10]. The same federal judge, delivering 
the court’s opinion on a subsequent case in 1947, also involving cargo lost when a barge 
sank, introduced a formula for determining liability: if the probability of loss times the 
magnitude of loss is greater than the burden of providing adequate protection against the 
loss, the standard of care has not been met [11]. This formula (known in legal contexts as 
the “Hand rule” after its author, Justice Learned Hand) is pervasive in risk-based manage-
ment models, which generally state that the cost of mitigating a risk should not be greater 
than the negative impact to the organization associated with the risk.
European Council Directive 95/46/EC
Privacy of personal information in member countries of the European Union 
is addressed primarily through European Council Directive 95/46/EC, which 
addresses “protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal 
data and on the free movement of such data [8].” The rules in the directive reg-
ulate all processing of personal data in member countries, where processing is 
defined broadly to encompass essentially all actions taken on covered information, 

137
Laws and Regulations
including collection, organization, storage, alteration, retrieval, disclosure, dissemi-
nation, and destruction. Like other European Council Directives, the provisions in 
the Data Protection Directive do not directly apply to individuals and organizations 
in member countries until each country enacts its own legislation reflecting the 
requirements in the directive. The Data Protection Directive works from the per-
spective that no processing of personal data should be allowed unless appropriate 
conditions are met, making it much more restrictive by default than privacy regu-
lations in the United States and many other countries. It also prescribes rules for 
sending data to countries outside the EC jurisdiction, in general prohibiting trans-
fers of personal data to non-EC countries unless the country where the recipient 
is located provides comparable privacy protections. To enable personal data trans-
missions between EC countries and the United States, the directive allowed for the 
establishment of a safe harbor process under which organizations in the United 
States can attest to and certify their adherence to adequate privacy protection prin-
ciples to satisfy EC requirements on an organization-by-organization basis. The EC 
has proposed a new General Data Protection Directive to replace Directive 95/46/
EC as early as 2014, which is intended to unify personal data protection across all 
member countries under a single, central authority and set of rules [12]. It will also 
apply to organizations outside the European Union if they process personal data 
about residents of member countries. In this respect, the new proposed directive is 
similar to the personal data security laws in many US states that apply based on 
the residency of individuals whose personal information an organization collects or 
uses rather than the state in which the organization operates.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 makes it a crime for anyone to access 
without authorization a computer or computer system used by a financial institu-
tion, US government agency, or any organization or individual involved in interstate 
or foreign commerce or communication. In addition to criminalizing many forms 
of computer hacking, intrusion, or actions that exceed authorized use, the law also 
addresses computer espionage, computer trespassing, committing fraud using a 
computer, or causing or threatening to cause damage to a computer [13]. Although 
the law focuses on behavior by outsiders against an organization or its computing 
infrastructure, it highlights the need for organizations to establish effective secu-
rity controls and to monitor their own environments to protect against outside 
attacks and to ensure that none of its own computing resources are used in ways 
that would violate the law. The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act has been amended 
several times by subsequent legislation, increasing the number and types of actions 
considered crimes under the law and resulting in a broader definition of computers 
subject to its provisions. Because the statutory definition of “protected computer” 
includes any computing device used in interstate or international communication, 
the law can be interpreted to include mobile equipment such as cellular phones or 
other devices capable of Internet connectivity.

138
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
Public and private sector organizations in many countries are subject to restric-
tions on intercepting or recording telephone communications with other par-
ties. In the United States, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 
1986 extended such restrictions to cover electronic data transmissions, and the law 
imposes strict constraints on the storage and disclosure of electronic communica-
tions and the ability of government agencies to access the contents of those com-
munications [14]. Under the provisions of the Stored Communications Act (Title II 
of ECPA), organizations that provide electronic communications services to con-
sumers must safeguard the privacy of the contents of any communications, both 
while in transit and while stored by the service provider, and must not disclose the 
contents of such communications without the consent of the sender (subject to sev-
eral exceptions such as when the disclosure is previously authorized, directed to 
the recipient, incidental to the provision of the service, or for law enforcement pur-
poses). Complying with ECPA regulations requires organizations subject to the law 
to implement strong operational and technical controls to prevent the unintended or 
unauthorized disclosure of information they hold. Covered organizations use inter-
nal IT audits to assess their own compliance and ensure the continual effectiveness 
of the internal controls protecting communications data.
State security and privacy laws
In the United States, the vast majority of states have enacted laws imposing secu-
rity and privacy protection requirements on organizations operating with particular 
states or maintaining business relationships with state residents. Many state laws 
and regulations focus on protecting personal information, with provisions including 
mandatory security practices and safeguards to prevent inadvertent or unauthorized 
disclosure of personal information and requirements for notifying affected indi-
viduals (and state or national authorities) when such breaches occur. The personal 
data protection provisions in state laws are substantially similar, with many adopt-
ing language following the example of the California Security Breach Information 
Act often cited as the first state law to address security breach notification [15]. To 
focus this and other similar state laws require that organizations disclose breaches 
of personal information unless the information is rendered unusable through mech-
anisms such as encryption. Subsequent state data breach laws, such as 201 CMR 17 
enacted in Massachusetts in 2010, mandate the use of various types of security con-
trols to protect personal information from unauthorized access or disclosure [16]. 
There is no federal law requiring nongovernment organizations generally to protect 
the security or privacy of personal information (although data breach notification 
regulations exist in specific industry sectors such as health care), so organizations 
operating in the United States or conducting business with or maintaining personal 
information on customers in the United States need to look at individual state regu-
lations when determining requirements and ensuring compliance.

139
Laws and Regulations
Government sector laws
Government organizations in the United States, Canada, European Union mem-
ber nations, and many other countries are subject to separate security, privacy, 
and information technology management laws that strongly influence their inter-
nal and external IT auditing activities. Legislation focused on IT management or 
operations, such as the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 
in the United States, emphasizes the effective allocation of government resources 
in acquiring, implementing, operating, maintaining, and disposing of information 
technology [18]. The same IT governance and service management frameworks 
used in commercial organizations are available for use in the public sector (indeed, 
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) was originally developed 
by an agency of the government of the United Kingdom), but in many countries 
formal implementation of such frameworks in government agencies is uncom-
mon. Instead, many government organizations develop and implement informa-
tion resources management strategies seeking to increase the efficiency of IT 
operations, particularly by reducing duplication of IT investment across mul-
tiple agencies where government-wide laws or regulations do exist, agencies’ IT 
management practices are subject to both internal examination and external audit 
by designated national oversight authorities or “supreme audit institutions” such 
as the US Government Accountability Office, Canada’s Office of the Auditor 
General, China’s National Audit Office, India’s Comptroller and Auditor General, 
and Russia’s Accounts Chamber [19]. Government organizations in many coun-
tries are also subject to explicit public sector security and privacy legislation that 
gives special emphasis to protecting government infrastructure and information 
systems and safeguarding information collected, used, or held by government about 
their citizens.
Organizations operating in or conducting business with customers in the United 
States need to consider state security laws and regulations when assessing com-
pliance. According to information aggregated by the National Conference of 
State Legislatures, in the United States, security breach notification laws have 
been enacted in 46 states, the District of Columbia, and the territories of Guam, 
Puerto Rico, and the US Virgin Islands [17]. Most of these laws center on the 
residency of the individuals affected by a breach rather than the location in 
which an organization suffering a breach operates. This means that an organiza-
tion offering products or services to customers in multiple states is likely sub-
ject to multiple similar but not identical sets of requirements specifying how they 
must respond to a breach of personal information.

140
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
Federal Information Security Management Act
FISMA, enacted in the United States as part of the E-Government Act of 2002, 
requires federal executive branch agencies to implement, maintain, and continu-
ously monitor controls sufficient to provide security protection commensurate 
with the risk to agencies from the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability 
of information. The law mandates compliance with federal information processing 
standards and associated guidance issued by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), including selecting security controls from an extensive frame-
work defined in NIST Special Publication 800-53, Recommended Security Controls 
for Federal Information Systems and Organizations[20]. Government agencies 
must provide detailed documentation of the security measures taken to protect 
their information systems and provide regular reports on security practices to the 
Office of Management and Budget and Department of Homeland Security. Among 
other provisions, FISMA requires agencies to undergo annual independent evalua-
tions of their information security programs, where such evaluations are conducted 
by agency Inspectors General or, for agencies without that position, by an exter-
nal auditor [21]. Agency information systems are also subject to audit, alone or as 
part of a broader performance or financial audit, by the Government Accountability 
Office, which uses a standard audit methodology documented in the Federal 
Information System Controls Audit Manual [22]. Although compliance with FISMA 
is mandatory for federal agencies and contractors that operate IT systems or infra-
structure on their behalf, there are no civil or criminal penalties for violating the 
law’s provisions. The consequences for failing to comply with FISMA or for weak-
nesses or deficiency findings in audit reports may include greater scrutiny of an 
agency’s IT or information security management practices or conditioning approval 
of budget requests on adequate remediation of noncompliant controls or practices.
The Privacy Act
The Privacy Act of 1974 codified a set of fair information practices originally issued 
by the US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in 1973. These practices 
provide the basis for a variety of privacy guidelines and regulatory schemes found 
in other laws, including the ability for individuals to prevent the use of their per-
sonal information for purposes other than which it was originally collected. The 
The range of sector-specific laws imposing operational requirements or audit needs 
on organizations means that large or complex organizations with operations that cross 
industries are subject to multiple, potentially overlapping, sets of laws and regulations. 
For example, publicly traded diversified services companies like AXA Group, Cigna, and 
UnitedHealth Group operate as financial services and health insurance firms, subject 
to laws including Sarbanes–Oxley, GLBA, and HIPAA. Similarly, a government agency 
involved in health-care delivery or administration is subject to HIPAA in addition to the 
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), the Privacy Act, and other laws 
applicable only to government agencies.

141
Certification Standards
core provisions in the Privacy Act reflect the fair information principles incorporated 
in widely followed international privacy frameworks such as the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy 
and Transborder Flows of Personal Data [23]. The Privacy Act applies to all fed-
eral agencies and covers personally identifiable information about US citizens and 
resident aliens. The Privacy Act is also voluntarily followed by some states and 
other nonfederal government authorities. The law requires agencies to provide pub-
lic notice before collecting personal information from individuals and before imple-
menting any system containing personally identifiable information about individuals 
(technically called a “system of records”) from which information is retrieved using 
the name or other identifying attribute of individuals [24]. The Privacy Act is not 
sector-specific; it covers all types of personal information collected, stored, used, 
or disclosed by government agencies. The implementation of a US privacy law 
with jurisdiction only over government agencies differs from the approach taken in 
other countries, such as Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic 
Documents Act [25] or European Council Directive 2006/43/EC [3], both of which 
cover private sector as well as public sector personal data protection practices.
Certification standards
Certification is a formal process conducted by a qualified, independent external 
auditor intended to confirm compliance with a standard or prescribed set of crite-
ria. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) highlights the value of 
certification to organizations by giving assurance that its management practices or 
other aspects of its operations conform to applicable standards. Certification “pro-
vides independent demonstration that the management system of the organization 
conforms to specified requirements, is capable of consistently achieving its stated 
policy and objectives, and is effectively implemented [26].” Certification standards 
often do not constitute audit drivers by themselves, but the need for certification 
to meet internal organizational objectives or to satisfy external requirements has 
the effect of making the corresponding standards important audit drivers for certi-
fication-seeking organizations. As noted in previous chapters, organizations often 
pursue certification for a variety of business reasons that include enhancing market 
positioning or establishing competitive advantage, or to support the achievement 
of internal objectives for governance, operational effectiveness, quality manage-
ment, or process maturity. In some cases, organizations may need to achieve cer-
tification in order to gain access to business opportunities. For instance, some 
solicitations for IT outsourcing or contracts for IT-related services may require 
responding organizations to have achieved a specified capability maturity model 
level. Similarly, manufacturing processes or technical capabilities organizations 
offered to external consumers or business partners may need to be ISO 9001 or 
ISO/IEC 20000 certified. Table 7.2 summarizes common certification standards and 
the subject areas to which they apply.

142
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
Quality certification
Organizations implement quality management programs to satisfy a range of inter-
nal objectives, including process improvement and performance enhancement to 
increase operational efficiency and effectiveness. For organizations offering prod-
ucts or services to customers, quality management is an important component of 
customer satisfaction, where customer requirements are incorporated into product 
or service specifications and organizations’ ability to meet those requirements is 
reflected in customer acceptance, sales, and market share. Modern business envi-
ronments and markets change frequently, leading organizations to implement 
quality management to help them adapt to drivers such as changes in customer 
requirements, market competition, and advancing technological capabilities [27]. 
Organizations have many alternatives when consider ways to implement qual-
ity management and choosing externally developed methodologies and standards. 
Quality is both an explicit goal and process area emphasis in IT governance frame-
works such as COBIT and ITIL, and is the focus of dedicated business methodolo-
gies such as Six Sigma and Total Quality Management. None of these sources of 
guidance on quality are subject to organizational-level certification.
The most prominent certification standard in the area of quality management is 
ISO 9001, which specifies requirements for quality management systems focused 
on delivering products that meet customer requirements while also satisfying appli-
cable legal and regulatory requirements. The emphasis in ISO 9001 is on estab-
lishing and maintaining a quality management system that supports continuous 
improvement that includes [28]:
●	 determining the processes needed for quality management and the scope of their 
application;
●	 determining the sequence and points of interaction among quality management 
processes;
●	 determining operational and control effectiveness criteria and evaluation 
methods;
Table 7.2  Organizational Certifications and Associated Subject Areas
Certification
Subject Area
CMMI for Services
Maturity of service provider capabilities and processes
ISO 9001
Quality management systems
ISO 14001
Environmental management systems
ISO/IEC 15408
IT security evaluation of computer systems and software
ISO/IEC 20000
IT service management
ISO/IEC 27001
Information security management systems
Service Organization 
Control (SOC) Reports
Security, privacy, and system controls implemented by 
service providers

143
Certification Standards
●	 providing resources and information necessary to support operation and 
monitoring of quality management processes;
●	 monitoring, measuring, and analyzing quality management processes;
●	 taking necessary actions to achieve desired results and enable continuous 
process improvement.
ISO 9001 is explicitly intended for use in certification, where accredited certify-
ing bodies use the requirements in the standard as a basis for assessing an organi-
zation’s ability to meet external legal and customer requirements as well as the 
organization’s internal requirements.
Information security
Organizations implement a wide range of security controls to achieve governance, 
risk management, and compliance objectives associated with IT systems, infra-
structure, and operational processes, including complying with security and privacy 
laws and regulations such as the ones described previously in this chapter. With the 
exception of demonstrating compliance, examinations of security-specific IT con-
trols tend to focus on assessing the effectiveness of implemented security meas-
ures and their ability to reduce or mitigate risk to a level that an organization finds 
acceptable. Although there are many voluntary and mandatory security standards 
affecting organizations’ selection of security controls, compliance to most security 
standards is determined through internal audit or assessment. Formal certification 
by third-party auditors is available for relatively few security standards. With the 
exception of ISO/IEC 27001, organizational certification of compliance with secu-
rity standards typically focus on a narrowly defined scope of operations such as the 
Service Organization Control Reports used to attest to the security controls imple-
mented in data centers or other types of IT service providers. Organizations still 
look to standards and externally developed frameworks and methodologies to help 
establish and maintain effective information security management programs and 
supporting processes.
Publicly available standards such as NIST Federal Information Processing 
Standards and ISO/IEC 15408 (familiarly known as Common Criteria) are required 
only for certain types of organizations—such as government agencies—but poten-
tially offer useful guidance to any organization. One of the most widely applica-
ble voluntary security standards is the ISO/IEC 27000 series, which focuses on 
formal establishment of an information security management system (ISMS) and 
many related aspects of organizational security. For the ISO/IEC 27000 series of 
standards, organizations can only achieve certification against the ISO/IEC 27001 
standard for ISMS requirements, but this standard is rarely adopted in isolation. 
In particular, the code of practice and corresponding security controls defined in 
ISO/IEC 27002 is often implemented in conjunction with the ISMS. What are now 
published separately as ISO/IEC 27001 and 27002 were previously designated as 
two parts of the same standard, ISO/IEC 17799. Although nothing in the current 

144
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
ISMS requirements mandates the use of ISO/IEC 27002 or any other specific secu-
rity control framework [29], many organizations choose to implement ISO/IEC 
27001 and 27002 together. In addition to these standards, the 27000 series includes 
separate standards for implementing ISMS (ISO/IEC 27003), measuring informa-
tion security management (ISO/IEC 27004), information security risk manage-
ment (ISO/IEC 27005), and information security governance (ISO/IEC 27014). 
Standards with specific applicability to auditing including ISO/IEC 27007 and 
27008 on auditing ISMS and information security controls, respectively, and ISO/
IEC 27006 that specifies requirements for ISMS auditors and certification bodies.
Service management
Organizations structuring their operations using service-based models such as ITIL 
or Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) for Services describe and man-
age their business processes and operational capabilities in terms of the services 
they provide for internal and external customers. Many organizations believe that 
the customer-centricity of service-oriented management models is aligned more 
closely to quality management and process improvement objectives and facilitates 
effective governance by ensuring organizational resources are allocated appropri-
ately to meet service delivery needs. Organizations can certify their IT service man-
agement capabilities using the ISO/IEC 20000 standard, which addresses the initial 
establishment of service management capabilities as well as service operations, 
maintenance, and improvement [30]. ISO/IEC 20000 certification can provide an 
independent evaluation of an organization’s implementation of an external service 
management framework such as ITIL or of the compliance (and presumed effec-
tiveness) of internally developed capabilities. Certification based on the Software 
Engineering Institute’s CMMI for Services model appraises the relative maturity of 
a service provider’s processes and capabilities for delivering services to internal or 
external customers [31].
Operational effectiveness
In contrast to legal and regulatory requirements and certification of compliance 
with standards, operational effectiveness objectives represent primarily internal 
drivers for organizations. Operational effectiveness is a core objective of enter-
prise and IT governance where organizations seek to maximize the efficient use 
of resources in their business operations and to improve quality, productivity, or 
competitive positioning in markets in which they participate. Many well-accepted 
organizational management theories consider an organization’s ability to effec-
tively use resources to be a source of competitive advantage, particularly where 
operational effectiveness includes capabilities enabling an organization to rapidly 
adapt to changing customer requirements or environmental factors [32,33]. These 
and other motivations lead organizations to establish formal governance, quality 

145
Relevant Source Material
management, and process improvement functions, each of which relies to some 
extent on effective internal IT auditing. Organizations often pursue operational 
effectiveness by following governance frameworks such as COBIT or quality man-
agement approaches such as Six Sigma, Total Quality Management, or activities 
described in standards such as ISO 9004 [34] and ISO 15504 [35].
Quality assurance and continuous improvement
Quality management initiatives such as quality assurance, quality control, and con-
tinuous improvement represent significant internal drivers for many organizations. 
In an IT management context, organizations can apply general quality manage-
ment guidance and standards to help them establish and operationalize effective 
approaches to quality. Leading quality management methodologies emphasize the 
importance of implementing formally documented, repeatable IT processes based 
on accepted standards and practices and of consistently following those processes 
throughout the organization. Detailed standards and guidance are available for 
many core IT functions and processes, including ISO/IEC standards for systems 
and software engineering life cycle processes and assurance [36,37]. In addition to 
broad-based quality management standards such as ISO 9001 that help guide qual-
ity management practices, organizations can also leverage standards and guidance 
specific to conducting internal or external quality audits, such as ISO 19011 [38] 
and ISO/IEC 17021 [39]. The American Society for Quality provides detailed guid-
ance on implementing and operating quality audit programs in its ASQ Auditing 
Handbook [40]. Collectively, IT-focused quality standards and guidance provide 
organizations a foundation for developing and maintaining IT processes and capa-
bilities that conform to accepted practices and influence the internal execution of IT 
quality audits.
Relevant source material
As the information in this chapter demonstrates, IT auditing in many organizations 
is influenced by a wide variety of external and internal drivers. Relevant sources of 
information about external drivers such as laws and regulations listed in Table 7.1 
include the text of laws themselves and analyses or interpretations of those laws. 
The most comprehensive information on standards providing the basis for certifi-
cation, such as those in Table 7.2, comes from the specifications published by the 
respective standards development organizations and the information they provide 
on certification [41]. Many accredited certifying bodies also offer guidance on 
standards and the process of achieving certification, in part to establish their cred-
ibility to perform certification audits to organizations that need to engage the ser-
vices of external auditors. Applicable guidance on service management includes 
major frameworks and process models such as ITIL and CMMI for Services and 

146
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
certification requirements for IT service management in ISO/IEC 20000. In addi-
tion to requirements and performance considerations described in the ISO 9000 
series of quality standards, prominent professional associations and standards 
organizations publish detailed guidance on quality management and quality-
focused auditing, including handbooks from the ASQ [40] and the International 
Audit and Assurance Standards Board [42].
Summary
This chapter identified and explained major external drivers of IT auditing, par-
ticularly legal and regulatory requirements, as well as internal drivers related to 
organizational strategic goals and management objectives including operational 
effectiveness, quality assurance, and process improvement. Collectively, these driv-
ers influence the ways in which organizations structure and operate their internal 
auditing programs, prepare for and actively participate in external audits, and use 
both internal and external forms of IT auditing to support organizational objectives 
focused on governance, certification, regulatory and standards compliance, and pro-
cess improvement or other forms of quality management. The categories of driv-
ers addressed in this chapter apply to international and multinational organizations 
across public and private sector contexts. Where relevant, the information presented 
highlights both similarities and differences in the applicability of different drivers 
and corresponding requirements to various types of organizations operating in dif-
ferent countries and industries.
References
	[1]	 Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Pub. L. No. 73-291, 48 Stat. 881.
	[2]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	[3]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on statutory audits of annual 
accounts and consolidated accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.
	[4]	 Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338.
	[5]	 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 
Stat. 1936.
	[6]	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, Pub. L. 
No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226.
	[7]	 Audit Program Protocol [Internet]. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights [cited 2013 July 18]. Available from <http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/enforcement/audit/protocol.html>.
	[8]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, 
Directive 95/46/EC; 1995 October.
	[9]	 Examples include Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents 
Act (PIPEDA) and India’s Information Technology Rules for reasonable security prac-
tices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information.

147
References
	[10]	 The T.J. Hooper (1932) 60 F.2d 737.
	[11]	 United States v. Carroll Towing (1947) 159 F.2d 169.
	[12]	 Proposal for a regulation of the European parliament and of the council on the pro-
tection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation). COD 2012/0011; 2012 
December.
	[13]	 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-474, 100 Stat. 1213.
	[14]	 Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-508, 100 Stat. 1848.
	[15]	 California Security Breach Information Act, S.B. 1386; 2002.
	[16]	 Standards for the protection of personal information of residents of the common-
wealth, 201 CMR 17.00; 2010.
	[17]	 State security breach notification laws [Internet]. Washington, DC: National Conference 
of State Legislatures [updated 2012 August 20; cited 2013 July 18]. Available from: 
<http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/telecom/security-breach-notification-laws.aspx>.
	[18]	 Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-106, 110 
Stat. 679.
	[19]	 INTOSAI.org: Membership List [Internet]. Vienna: International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.intosai.
org/organisation/membership-list.html>.
	[20]	 Recommended security controls for federal information systems and organizations. 
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security 
Division; 2009 August. Special Publication 800-53 revision 3.
	[21]	 Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 
2946. §3545.
	[22]	 Federal information system controls audit manual (FISCAM). Washington, DC: 
Government Accountability Office; 2009 February.
	[23]	 OECD Guidelines on the protection of privacy and transborder flows of personal 
data. Paris, France: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; 1980 
September 23.
	[24]	 Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, 88 Stat. 1896.
	[25]	 Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, S.C. 2000, c.5; 2000.
	[26]	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of management systems.
	[27]	 ISO 9000:2005. Quality management—Fundamentals and vocabulary.
	[28]	 ISO 9001:2008. Quality management systems—requirements.
	[29]	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005. Information—Security techniques—Information security man-
agement systems—Requirements.
	[30]	 ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 1: 
Service management system requirements.
	[31]	 CMMI for services, version 1.3. Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute; 2010 
November.
	[32]	 Barney JB, Clark DN. Resource-based theory. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 
2007.
	[33]	 Teece D. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2009.
	[34]	 ISO 9004:2009. Managing for the sustained success of an organization—A quality 
management approach.
	[35]	 ISO/IEC 15504:2004. Information technology—Process assessment.

148
CHAPTER 7  IT Audit Drivers
	[36]	 ISO/IEC 12207:2008. Systems and software engineering—Software life cycle processes.
	[37]	 ISO/IEC 15026:2011. Systems and software engineering—Systems and software 
assurance.
	[38]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[39]	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of management systems.
	[40]	 Russell JP, editor. (4th ed.). Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press; 2013.
	[41]	 Certification—ISO [Internet]. Geneva: International Organization for Standardiza- 
tion [cited 2013 June 7]. Available from: <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/ 
certification.htm>.
	[42]	 Handbook of international quality control, auditing review, other assurance, and 
related services pronouncements. New York, NY: International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards Board; 2012 June.

149
IT Audit Processes
8
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
●	 Audit planning
●	 Preparation and evidence collection
●	 Audit performance
●	 Reporting findings
●	 Responding to audit results
●	 Process life cycles and methodologies
Organizations invest substantial time and resources to identify their IT auditing 
needs, establish their audit programs, choose auditors, and prioritize audit activities. 
All of this effort leads to the process of conducting IT audits, which is the subject 
of this chapter. Organizations use a variety of audit methodologies, frameworks, 
and standards, often following different processes for different types of audits or 
to guide the conduct of internal versus external audits. Despite the many available 
sources of guidance, the core process steps and activities performed in IT auditing 
are generally quite similar, comprising stages focused on audit planning, audit per-
formance or execution, reporting findings, and remediating findings with corrective 
action. Regardless of the names used to designate these steps in different methodol-
ogies, the nature of activities performed and their intended outcomes can be traced 
back to the Deming cycle and its four-stage (plan-do-check-act or PDCA) process 
for continuous improvement. This model, described in Chapter 2 and illustrated in 
Figure 2.6, is pervasive in quality management methodologies and also provides 
the basis for numerous management standards, including the auditing guidelines 
prescribed in ISO 19011 [1]. Variations on the PDCA process life cycle sometimes 
simplify the process to just three steps or expand it to half a dozen or more, but for 
audit practitioners and organizations and personnel undergoing IT audits, the exact 
number or names of major process stages is less important than understanding the 
activities and expectations for the process as a whole. Figure 8.1 provides a con-
ceptual representation of the audit process as described in this chapter, using audit-
relevant labels for the major steps: “plan,” “perform,” “report,” and “respond.”
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00008-0

150
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
Successfully implementing IT audit processes depends to a large extent on 
organizational commitments and the existence of a structural foundation supporting 
audit activities. For external audits, such commitments consist of executive deci-
sions to engage outside auditors, allocate necessary financial resources, and receive 
and appropriately respond to audit findings. With respect to internal auditing, an 
organization’s internal audit program provides the primary structure and direction 
for conducting internal audits. The internal audit program formulates the organiza-
tion’s audit strategy and develops audit plans for each type of IT audit to be per-
formed by internal auditors. Audit plans developed at the program level define the 
scope, priority, frequency, and anticipated resource requirements for each type of 
audit, and often recommend or specify audit protocols and sources of audit criteria 
internal auditors will use. This information is incorporated as a starting point and 
refined, expanded, or adapted to meet the contextual requirements and constraints 
specific to each IT audit the organization performs. Tailoring relevant audit plans 
produced by the organizational audit program to reflect the needs of a particular 
audit is the focus of audit planning, the first step in the IT audit process.
P
l
a
n
 
R
e
s
p
o
n
d
 
P
e
r
f
o
r
m
R
e
p
o
r
t
• 
De
te
rm
in
e 
sc
op
e 
an
d 
ob
je
cti
ve
s
• 
As
si
gn
 a
ud
it 
re
so
ur
ce
s
• 
G
at
h
er
 d
at
a 
to
 s
u
p
p
or
t 
a
u
di
t 
• 
C
h
o
os
e 
or
 d
es
ig
n 
a
u
di
t 
pr
oc
e
d
ur
es
• 
De
te
rm
in
e 
re
sp
on
se
 t
o 
fin
di
ng
s
• 
D
ev
el
op
 c
or
re
ct
iv
e 
ac
ti
on
 p
la
n
• 
C
o
n
d
u
ct
 f
ol
lo
w
-u
p 
(r
e
a
u
di
t)
 
• 
M
o
ni
to
r 
co
rr
ec
ti
ve
 a
ct
io
n 
ac
ti
vi
ti
es
IT audit
process
• 
An
al
yz
e 
in
fo
rm
ati
on
 a
nd
 id
en
tif
y i
ss
ue
s
• 
Ev
al
ua
te
 c
on
tr
ol
s 
(o
bs
er
ve
 a
nd
 t
es
t)
• 
E
x
a
m
in
e 
d
o
c
u
m
e
nt
at
io
n 
• 
C
ol
le
ct
 a
n
d 
re
vi
e
w 
ev
id
e
nc
e
• 
Fi
na
liz
e 
an
d 
de
liv
er
 f
or
m
al 
au
dit
 r
ep
or
t
• 
R
ec
o
m
m
en
d 
co
rr
ec
ti
ve
 a
ct
io
ns
• 
P
re
p
ar
e 
a
n
d 
d
o
c
u
m
e
nt
 f
in
di
n
g
s 
• 
Pr
e
p
ar
e 
a
u
di
t 
w
or
kp
a
p
er
s 
FIGURE 8.1 
Most IT audit approaches include one or more activities conducted within the process 
areas of audit planning, audit performance, audit reporting, and responding to audit 
findings and recommendations.

151
Audit Planning
Audit planning
Audit planning encompasses all the activities necessary to ensure that a specific 
audit—whether performed by internal or external auditors—can be executed com-
pletely and efficiently to satisfy the organization’s audit objectives. Planning an 
audit is conceptually similar to planning IT projects or other discretely defined 
initiatives, in that an audit typically has intended start and finish dates, requires 
organizations to assign appropriate personnel and sufficient resources, and produces 
tangible outputs in the form of documentation, findings, and recommendations. 
Planning an individual audit is informed by, but separate from, the broader activ-
ity of developing audit plans within the internal audit program. In a single-audit 
context, the need for an audit has already been determined, as has its relative pri-
ority, so planning emphasizes the preparatory activities that, when done properly, 
facilitate the successful achievement of the organization’s objectives and ensure 
that the audit team has everything it needs to begin executing the audit. Single-audit 
planning also takes general guidelines and inputs about scope, resource require-
ments, timelines, protocols, and supporting information into consideration and 
determines explicit needs, deadlines, audit criteria, and evidentiary and procedural 
requirements. During audit planning, organizations also set expectations about audit 
reports or other work products that will be delivered by the end of the audit.
Audit preparation
Organizations with established audit programs assess mission and business pro-
cesses, operational capabilities, and IT assets to develop the audit universe, com-
prising all aspects of the organization potentially subject to audit, and align the 
contents of the audit universe to the most applicable audit types or approaches. 
Each type of IT audit has different sources of motivation, expected outcomes, and 
organizational objectives. Many audits also have explicit criteria, standards, or pro-
tocols associated with them. These factors collectively drive the definition of the 
audit scope. As part of audit planning, audit program personnel refer to the organ-
izational audit strategy and identify audit-specific needs to explain in detail what 
will be examined during the audit and what the organization hopes to achieve by 
performing the audit. With a clearly defined scope and set of objectives, the audit 
team and the people within the organization who will support the audit process can 
prepare for audit execution by identifying and assigning necessary auditors and 
other resources, reviewing the relevant existing controls and information that will 
be used during the audit, and determining the appropriate procedures, standards, 
and protocols to be followed.
Resource allocation
Depending on the scope and complexity of the audit being conducted, IT audits can 
be very resource-intensive. Organizations assign auditors and allocate resources 
sufficient to support each audit based on the scope and type of audit, the nature of 

152
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
the examination required for different assets, processes, or controls, and the time-
line for completion. Audit plans should establish the intended start and finish dates 
for an audit as well as any interim milestones or checkpoints required during the 
project. If audit results must be delivered by a specific date to the audit commit-
tee, executive management, or external audiences such as regulatory authorities, 
then the assignment of resources should prioritize finishing the audit within the 
time available to satisfy internally or externally specified deadlines. When operating 
under less strict time constraints, organizations may be able to schedule audits or 
allocate resources based on the availability of auditors with the requisite skills and 
experience. Many organizations develop formal project plans to manage IT audits, 
itemizing all tasks, activities, and milestones with scheduled start and finish dates 
and personnel and other resources assigned to each item. Establishing a project 
baseline allows audit managers or team leaders to track the completion of tasks, 
determine the level of effort needed to complete the remaining work, and adjust 
staff or resourcing as necessary.
Preliminary data gathering
Evidence collection is a primary focus of performing IT audits, but organiza-
tions can help ensure timely and effective audit execution by gathering informa-
tion during the planning stage that auditors will need to examine during the audit. 
Depending on the type and scope of the audit, relevant sources of information typi-
cally include:
●	 policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines;
●	 system or application documentation, including operational manuals;
●	 configuration settings for servers, devices, or technology components;
●	 descriptions of implemented controls, including security controls; and
●	 audit reports and corrective action plans from previously completed audits.
To the extent that the organization knows the audit procedures and specific audit 
criteria to be applied by the auditors, the outputs of audit planning can include 
preliminary summaries of evidence needs or audit checklists. Personnel with sup-
porting roles for the audit can use this information to prepare readily available 
information and to ensure that necessary logistical arrangements have been made, 
such as provisioning facility or system access rights, for auditors and designating 
and providing contact information for personnel that will serve as resources for 
auditors during the performance of the audit.
Audit procedures and protocols
Audits by definition differ from assessments and other more general types of 
reviews, in that they compare organizational characteristics with formal audit cri-
teria. Whether specified in published standards, rules, or regulations or developed 
internally, audit criteria must be explicitly defined and documented so that audi-
tors can use them as the basis for examining processes, controls, capabilities, or 
organizational behavior falling within the scope of an audit. The selection of audit 

153
Audit Planning
criteria used for a given audit depends on the type of audit, its intended purpose 
or outcomes, and the set of subjects to be examined. Similarly, the choice of audit 
procedures and protocols that auditors will use reflects the type and purpose of the 
audit and what is being audited. Table 8.1 identifies some prominent sources of 
audit procedures for different major types of audits. The definition of audit scope 
and objectives during audit planning typically correlates to the audit criteria that 
auditors will apply to the applicable procedures and protocols. In an internal audit, 
the organization’s audit program personnel generally have the discretion to deter-
mine procedures and protocols best suited to their audit objectives. When engaging 
the services of external auditors, organizations are less likely to dictate audit proce-
dures, although recommended or proposed procedures may be among the criteria 
organizations consider when selecting external auditors.
Table 8.1  Sources of Audit Procedures and Protocols for Major Audit Types
Audit Type
Audit Procedures and Protocols
Financial audits
●	 Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS) [2]
●	 Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements 
(SSAE) [3]
●	 International Standards on Auditing (ISA) [4]
●	 International Professional Practices Framework (IIPF) [5]
Operational audits
●	 Standard Audit Program Guides [6]
Certification audits
●	 ISO/IEC 17021 [7]
●	 ISO 19011 [1]
Quality audits
●	 ASQ Quality Auditor Body of Knowledge [8]
Information systems audits
●	 ISACA IT Audit Framework [9]
●	 ISO/IEC 27006 [10], 27007, [11] and 27008 [12]
●	 Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual 
(FISCAM) [13]
When performing certain types of IT audits, such as those intended to achieve or maintain 
certification or demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements, an organization’s 
choice of audit procedures and protocols may be constrained by the need to conform 
to externally specified standards. External audits performed by accredited certifying  
bodies—or internal audits used by organizations to self-assess their qualifications for 
certification—are in many cases subject to additional standards about how audits are  
performed [1,7]. Organizations need to ensure that their audits are conducted in compliance 
with such standards to have confidence in the reliability and validity of the audit results.
Planning internal and external audits
In organizations with established audit programs, planning for internal audits ben-
efits from the consideration given in organizational audit strategy to audit scope, 

154
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
objectives, priority, resource requirements, and scheduling. The reliance on inter-
nal auditors and resources means that audit managers responsible for assigning and 
overseeing personnel and audit performance can leverage knowledge about differ-
ent auditors’ qualifications and backgrounds to make sure each audit team includes 
the skills and abilities necessary to successfully conduct the audit. For types of 
audits an organization performs repeatedly audit managers can also use prior expe-
rience and audit results to identify relevant sources of information and to gauge the 
procedure and protocols that will be most effective in future iterations. In many 
cases organizations have the ability to choose their auditors—designating employ-
ees from the internal audit program for internal audits, and selecting audit firms 
for external audits. Where possible, organizations can improve overall prospects for 
successful audit engagements by choosing auditors with whom the organization has 
a collaborative, rather than adversarial, working relationship. Planning for external 
audits differs in many respects from planning internal audits. Organizations often 
have the flexibility to select their external auditors (from among a pool of qualified 
firms), but may have little or no role in assigning individual auditors or audit team 
leaders other than specifying necessary qualifications. External audit firms typically 
bring audit procedures, protocols, and tools to audit engagements, reflecting their 
own preferences or prior experience. With respect to preliminary data gathering, 
the primary focus for organizations working with external auditors is to ensure that 
the organization can furnish all necessary information at (or before) the point in 
the audit when the information is needed. From this perspective, one measure of 
success for external audit planning is what proportion of documentation or other 
evidentiary information required by auditors the organization can provide at the 
beginning of audit execution.
Engaging the services of an external auditor generally involves a formal contractual agree-
ment between the audit firm and the audited organization that sets expectations and obli-
gations for the resources and kinds of support each party contributes to the audit process. 
Organizations typically have a vested interest in ensuring that external audits proceed as 
planned, fully address all aspects within their scope, and conclude within the time frame 
specified. Many types of internal audits produce findings or other results that external 
auditors use as evidence of the relative effectiveness of internal controls. Organizations 
can more effectively support external audit activities if they plan their internal audits to 
deliver audit reports prior to the start of external audit engagements.
Audit performance
Audit performance is the stage in the audit process in which the audit team executes 
the plan developed for the audit and conducts a detailed examination of processes, 
IT assets, and controls, comparing evidence collected about the organization and 
its capabilities and practices to the requirements specified in audit criteria, rel-
evant protocols, or applicable standards. The activities associated with performing 

155
Audit Performance
an IT audit include the examination by auditors of all documentation and contex-
tual information available about the subject of the audit, the collection of evidence 
through observation, interviews, and tests, and the analysis of that evidence to iden-
tify weaknesses, control deficiencies, or other issues. The nature of many audit 
performance tasks often requires auditors to be physically present at one or more 
locations maintained by the organization undergoing the audit. Working on-site 
facilitates interaction with organizational personnel supporting the audit or respon-
sible for furnishing information to auditors and enables direct access to and obser-
vation of IT assets and associated controls examined within the scope of the audit. 
During the audit performance part of the process the audit team and organizational 
personnel involved in the audit meet to kick off the audit, set expectations about 
what will be examined and when, and explain the audit methods to be used with the 
relevant information and sources of evidence. Audit performance comprises both 
the collection and analysis of evidence, as auditors may need to iterate these tasks 
multiple times, to ensure that sufficient evidence is reviewed to substantiate audit 
findings.
Evidence collection
Auditors rely on evidence collected from the organization to determine the extent to 
which the elements examined in the audit satisfy specified criteria. Audit standards 
distinguish between information provided by an organization or gathered by audi-
tors and evidence, the latter consisting of information that auditors are able to verify 
using methods appropriate for the scope, objectives, and criteria of the audit and for 
the type of information under examination [1]. In IT audits, key evidence collec-
tion activities typically include those shown in Figure 8.2: reviewing documentation 
provided by the organization or gathered from interviews with personnel, observ-
ing operational procedures or activities, testing controls, and checking technical 
configuration settings for IT components. Sources of information therefore become 
sources of evidence when and if auditors are able to fully evaluate the information, 
confirm its accuracy and completeness, and correlate it to audit criteria. Evidence 
collected by auditors provides the basis for audit findings, including indications of 
insufficient or ineffective controls or determinations of conformity. Auditors record 
the types of information they examine and the methods they use to collect evidence 
in work papers that—separate from audit findings that result from evidence collec-
tion and analysis—document the procedural steps each auditor follows. Describing 
the audit process in detail, in this manner, helps ensure the reliability and validity of 
the audit results by enabling review of each auditor’s work by the audit manager or 
other auditors on the team.
Relevant sources of IT audit evidence vary among different types of audits and 
their purposes and objectives. To fully examine a process, system, or environment 
that implements administrative, technical, and physical controls, auditors typi-
cally need to consider a wide range of criteria corresponding to many sources of 
information and evaluation methods. The audit guidelines provided in ISO 19011 

156
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
identify many information sources auditors may select depending on audit scope, 
complexity, and the criteria that must be satisfied, including [1]:
●	 documents such as policies, plans, procedures, standards, guidelines, technical 
specifications, contracts, licenses, and service level agreements;
●	 interviews with organizational personnel responsible for operating or managing 
the subject under examination;
●	 direct observation of activities occurring in the organizational environment;
●	 applications, databases, user interfaces, and other technical components;
●	 performance data such as customer and supplier satisfaction ratings or quality 
reports produced by third parties; and
●	 simulated or actual control testing, modeling, or exercises.
When conducting audits of large or complex organizations or subject matter, the 
volume of information auditors must consider in the evidence collection process may 
exceed the capacity of the audit team. In such cases auditors may engage in informa-
tion sampling, applying audit methods to a subset of the available information, and 
using the results to perform analysis and develop audit findings. The use of sampling 
Documentation
Configuration
Observation
Audit findings
Evidence collection
and analysis
Information sources
Testing
FIGURE 8.2 
IT auditors collect evidence from multiple sources using a variety of methods, examining 
procedural and technical documentation, observing process execution and personnel 
behavior, testing controls, and checking system and environment configuration settings.

157
Audit Performance
can improve the feasibility and cost effectiveness of an audit, but imposes additional 
procedural requirements on auditors to make sure that sampling methods used in an 
audit are sound, appropriate for the type of audit, and statistically valid and that the 
sample taken is representative of the entire set of information.
Analysis of evidence
The primary purpose of collecting evidence is to enable auditors to correlate the evi-
dence to applicable audit criteria and analyze the evidence to determine the extent to 
which those criteria are satisfied. Practices for analyzing audit evidence encompass a 
broad range of methods; auditors select the most appropriate methods based on the 
type of control under examination and the type of audit and its purpose and objec-
tives. Available guidance on analyzing evidence recommends different methods, 
used alone or in combination, for evaluating administrative, technical, and physical 
controls. Table 8.2 lists representative methods and the sources of evidence to which 
they apply. Terminology varies across standards and sources of guidance, but com-
monly described methods include examination or review of documentation-based 
evidence; interviews with operations or supervisory personnel; observation of organ-
izational practices and personnel behavior; and testing implemented controls [14,15]. 
The choice of audit methods also takes into account the amount and quality of inter-
action between the auditor and personnel in the organization being audited, the level 
of access the auditor has to IT components or other audit subjects, and the location 
of the auditor (e.g., on-site or off-site) during the examination [1]. Analytical meth-
ods can also be performed at different levels of rigor; audit objectives and require-
ments regarding the use of audit results drive the comprehensiveness of examination 
or testing activities. Auditors are responsible for describing the specific analytical 
procedures they use in work papers or other documentation which are made availa-
ble to audit managers and organizational executives to help substantiate audit quality.
Table 8.2  Applicability of Audit Methods for Different Types of Evidence
Methods
Applicability
Examination
●	 System documentation, specifications, diagrams
●	 Plans, policies, procedures, instructions, guidelines
●	 Standards, frameworks, methodologies
Interviewing
●	 Employees with operational responsibility for audit subjects
●	 Managers responsible for governance, risk, and compliance
●	 Customers, support personnel, system end users
Observation
●	 Software or hardware functionality
●	 Operational activities, processes, practices, exercises
●	 Personnel behavior
Testing
●	 Technology components
●	 Hardware devices
●	 Application software and systems
●	 Procedural controls and technical capabilities

158
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
Criteria used in IT auditing typically include requirements that can be deter-
mined objectively as well as those that involve the judgment of the auditors who 
collect and analyze the evidence. Auditors consider both the type of evidence and 
its source to judge its reliability and sufficiency to support audit findings. External 
auditors often give more credence to evidence collected through direct observation 
or analysis or produced by qualified third parties than for internal information and 
evidence provided by the organization undergoing the audit. The focus of IT audits 
often includes technical characteristics, such as system and device configuration 
and control implementation, that can be confirmed through automated testing meth-
ods. Examining these elements requires auditors to have sufficient knowledge of 
applicable testing procedures and tools, but the interpretation of results generally 
entails an objective comparison between test results and audit criteria. In contrast, 
auditors reviewing documentation or analyzing information gathered through inter-
viewing or observation need to exercise judgment to evaluate evidence, consistent 
with professional practice standards for objectivity, competence, and due care [14].
Reporting findings
Audit findings result from comparing evidence to audit criteria. Depending on the 
type of audit and its objectives, reported findings may address all criteria or only 
those elements the auditors determine to be deficient or insufficiently supported by 
evidence. Almost all audit methodologies emphasize the importance of reporting 
findings of weaknesses or nonconformity to audit criteria, as these areas represent 
the sources of risk to which the audited organization needs to respond. Depending 
on the audit objectives and the intended audience for the audit report, the contents 
of the report may include satisfactory findings and areas of conformance as well as 
weaknesses or deficiencies. For example, audit protocols for compliance and certifi-
cation audits often entail the use of checklists or requirements templates with which 
auditors record the organization’s satisfaction or failure-to-satisfy of all compliance 
requirements or certification criteria. The specific format and content required in an 
audit report—which influence the level of detail the report includes—are driven by 
the purposes for which the report will be used and the internal and external stake-
holders with whom it will be shared. As the primary output from an audit engage-
ment, the audit report needs to provide enough information to stand on its own as 
an artifact. Full details of the audit process are captured in audit work papers, which 
provide an accounting of the evidence each auditor considered, the criteria to which 
it applied, and the audit methods used. The level of detail reflected in work papers 
is rarely included in audit reports, but this supporting documentation may be refer-
enced from the audit report if necessary. In addition to an overall summary of the 
audit and its results, an audit report typically contains information including [1]:
●	 purpose and objectives for performing the audit;
●	 audit scope, including organizational, functional, or technical elements to which 
the audit applies;

159
Reporting Findings
●	 identification of the audit client;
●	 identification of audit participants, including auditors and those subject to the 
audit;
●	 time frame during which the audit took place;
●	 locations where auditing occurred, including organization facilities and auditor 
work sites outside the organization, if any;
●	 criteria specified for the audit;
●	 audit findings and supporting evidence;
●	 audit conclusions, including auditor recommendations; and
●	 audit results, potentially including overall success or failure determination or the 
extent to which the organization satisfies the audit criteria.
Most audit methodologies and guidance distinguish between audit findings 
and audit conclusions—findings correspond directly to audit criteria and indicate 
whether or not the subject of the audit satisfies each criterion, while conclusions 
are evidence- and experience-based opinions from auditors regarding the impli-
cations of the findings to the organization. Conclusions may include inferences 
about why different findings occurred, recommendations for mitigating risk or 
remediating deficiencies indicated in findings, whether audit objectives have been 
achieved, or the effectiveness of the organizational capabilities under examination. 
Organizational objectives for IT audits do not always include corrective actions 
or identifying opportunities for operational improvement, particularly if a deter-
mination of “success” for the organization does not require a response to audit 
findings. Prevalent auditing standards and guidance for internal auditors empha-
size the importance not only of making recommendations for corrective action to 
resolve audit findings, but also to verify that corrective actions are taken [2,7,9]. 
Many types of external audits include recommendations for corrective action and 
responses from the audited organization’s management, such as concurrence or dis-
agreement with recommendations and commitments to implement plans of action 
to remediate weaknesses.
Audit findings describe in detail control weaknesses, operational deficiencies, and 
other sources of risk to an organization. Audit reports often include sensitive or 
confidential information that the subject organization does not want to be made 
public or disclosed to competitors, customers, business partners, or to regulators 
or oversight authorities unless such disclosure is explicitly required. Organizations 
need to ensure that audit reports and work papers detailing auditor findings are 
strictly access controlled to limit disclosure to only those authorized and with a 
legitimate need to have the information, such as members of the audit committee 
and others, with fiduciary responsibilities to the organization. Audited organiza-
tions typically execute confidentiality agreements with their external auditors to 
protect internal information, but once audit reports are delivered the organization 
has the primary responsibility to ensure that only authorized parties have access.

160
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
Using information in audit reports
At the conclusion of the audit process, the auditors finalize the audit report and 
deliver it to the audited organization. Primary recipients of the audit reports pro-
duced in both internal and external audits include the audit committee and execu-
tive management of the audited organization. The results of external audits must be 
typically communicated to authorized third parties such as regulators, but the infor-
mation distributed outside the organization may not include the entire audit report. 
One key objective for external audits is achieving a successful result, where success 
may mean an audit that addresses all elements defined within its scope, that pro-
duces few or no significant findings warranting corrective action, or that improves 
on prior audit outcomes in terms of the number or significance of findings and 
recommendations. Organizations completing audits that endorse their operational 
effectiveness, business processes, or internal controls may publicize the overall 
results or, in the case of publicly traded companies, summarize the results in regula-
tory filings. Some specialized types of IT audits produce reports intended for pub-
lic, rather than internal, consumption, such as the Trust Services Report for Service 
Organizations issued to organizations by external auditors following the Statements 
on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE) No. 16 [16]. Audit reports from 
internal audits may also be provided to regulators or external auditors as evidence 
to support external audits. In addition to delivering audit results to external stake-
holders to support compliance and oversight requirements, organizations use the 
information in internal audit reports to make improvements in the effectiveness of 
their operational capabilities and correct weaknesses or areas of nonconformance.
Organizational control weaknesses, deficiencies, or areas of nonconformity identified in 
audit findings present some level of risk. Organizations need to understand the severity of 
the impact that could occur or the magnitude or risk associated with each finding to deter-
mine the most appropriate response. In some types of IT audits, auditors provide a risk 
estimate or assign relative levels (e.g., high, moderate, low) to risk or determining factors 
such as likelihood and impact. Accurately characterizing risk for a given organization, how-
ever, typically requires detailed knowledge of the organization’s assets and control objec-
tives as well as its risk tolerance—the level of risk the organization is willing to accept. 
Internal auditors may therefore be better positioned than external auditors to assess risk 
for audit findings. Both internal and external auditors often need to work collaboratively 
with risk managers and the organizational personnel responsible for audited systems, IT 
assets, and business processes to accurately assess the risk posed by audit findings.
Responding to audit results
Audits reports with findings and conclusions warranting corrective action, moni-
toring, or follow-up by the audited organization become a significant input to the 
process of planning and executing appropriate organizational responses. The best-
case scenario for an organization undergoing IT audits in conjunction with finan-
cial, compliance, or certification audits is that the auditors will determine the 

161
Process Life Cycles and Methodologies
organization is compliant with requirements or certify (or recertify) its adherence to 
applicable criteria. Operational or quality audits have similar desired outcomes, in 
that organizations typically would not welcome results showing extensive areas of 
nonconformity to standards or inefficient processes. One fundamental principle in 
continuous improvement, however, is that there are always ways to perform better, 
so organizations engaging in these types of audits are motivated at least in part by 
the need to identify opportunities to improve. Beyond increasing the level of con-
formance with audit criteria or the standards and practices they represent, organi-
zational improvements can come from a variety of sources, potentially including 
business process reengineering or optimization, or the introduction of new tech-
nologies or procedural controls to existing operational processes. Organizations can 
also plan improvements in capabilities or processes by aligning their internal prac-
tices to maturity models such as Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) 
where the adoption and effective management of standard processes and procedures 
corresponds to higher levels of maturity.
Audit findings of control weakness or organizational nonconformance repre-
sent some level of risk to the organization if they do not resolve identified issues. 
Organizations need to assess the risk associated with audit findings and determine 
the best response to that risk. Just as risk assessment—within the broader con-
text of risk management—helps organizations prioritize their audit activities, risk 
assessment of threats or vulnerabilities associated with audit findings supports the 
prioritization of risk responses. The set of possible responses to risk include miti-
gation, avoidance, transference, or acceptance. Risk transference and acceptance 
require no direct changes to the organization’s operations or controls, but mitigation 
and avoidance both require changes in controls or operational capabilities imple-
mented by organizations. Mitigation reduces or eliminates risk through the addi-
tion or enhancement of controls, while avoidance limits or removes functions the 
organization performs so that excessively risky activities are no longer within its 
sphere of operations. Corrective actions organizations intend to take to respond to 
audit findings and mitigate risk are documented in a remediation plan—known in 
information security management as a plan of actions and milestones (POA&M)—
that enumerates what and when the organization will do and assigns responsibility 
within the organization seeing each action is through to completion. Organizations 
need to track their responses to audit findings through monitoring and follow-up 
activities, to ensure that they fulfill commitments documented in final audit reports 
or remediation plans and to provide information to subsequent audit teams about 
changes implemented since the prior audit.
Process life cycles and methodologies
Although individual audit engagements typically have a defined scope, set of 
objectives, and initiation and completion dates, few audits are truly isolated events. 
Whether or not an organization achieves its intended objectives from an IT audit, 

162
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
from the findings and conclusions in the audit report it learns aspects of its con-
trols or capabilities that are not operating as intended, fail to conform to applicable 
standards or criteria, or are insufficient or ineffective to support the organizational 
purposes for which they are intended. Such findings represent opportunities for 
improvement as well as potential focus areas for subsequent audits covering the 
same controls or capabilities. With the possible exception of audits conducted as 
part of an investigation, virtually all types of IT audits are conducted more than 
once in an organization, at regular intervals specified in laws, regulations, or cer-
tification requirements or at a frequency determined by organizations in their 
internal audit strategies. The cyclical and iterative nature of most audit processes 
reflects an expectation that audits will be repeated. This repetition is a defining 
characteristic of continuous improvement initiatives and corresponding meth-
odologies, notably including the PDCA cycle on which many auditing processes  
are based.
The PDCA model attained prominence as a central element of a theory of man-
agement in manufacturing companies and firms in service industries that empha-
sized continuous improvement and highlighted the benefits to organizations from 
effecting change that leads to higher quality products or services [17]. Although the 
process in practice can be applied to almost any type of organizational change, it 
is particularly well suited to auditing and other types of assessments that identify 
areas of relative weakness or inefficiency that, if corrected, can result in gains in 
productivity, operational efficiency and effectiveness, market position, or competi-
tive advantage. An organization’s ability to realize these outcomes on an ongoing 
basis rests on its execution of the “check” and “act” phases of the process, in which 
it analyzes results such as IT audit findings and commits to corrective action not 
only to mitigate risk, but also to improve operational quality and enhance the value 
IT delivers to the organization in supporting the achievement of mission and busi-
ness objectives. Beyond its pervasive use in quality management standards and 
methodologies, the PDCA process cycle features prominently in governance, risk, 
and compliance frameworks and in control evaluation and assessment methodolo-
gies, particularly for information security management.
Available methodologies and guidance on auditing offer many process life 
cycles to organizations that differ in terms of the number of steps they include and 
their areas of emphasis, but these alternatives feature more similarities than differ-
ences, in part, due to their reliance on similar standards and foundational concepts. 
For instance, ISO 19011, Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems, applies the 
PDCA life cycle model to the process of managing an audit program and prescribes 
a six-step process for performing individual audits [1]. Both of these elements are 
incorporated by reference into other standards, including those addressing require-
ments for auditors providing certification audits and [7] and audits of information 
security management systems [11]. Not all audit methodologies explicitly include 
steps for closing out the audit and following up on audit findings and corrective 
actions, but both audit-specific and more general control assessment processes 

163
Relevant Source Material
specify activities for planning, performing, and reporting the results of formal eval-
uations such as IT audits. Relevant examples include:
●	 The Institute of Internal Auditors’ (IIA) International Professional Practices 
Framework (IPPF) specifies performance standards for planning and performing 
audit engagements and communicating results of such engagements [5];
●	 The American Society for Quality’s ASQ Auditing Handbook describes a four-step 
audit process including preparation, performance, reporting, and follow-up [6];
●	 ISACA’s IT Audit Framework defines information system audit and assurance 
guidelines in three major categories: general (preparatory), performance, and 
reporting [9];
●	 The Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM) used in 
audits of U.S. government agencies defines an audit methodology organized 
into the three core steps of plan, perform, and report [13];
●	 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) special publication 800-
30, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, prescribes a three-step process of 
preparing, conducting, and maintaining assessments [18]; and
●	 ISACA’s COBIT 5 for Assurance approach includes three primary phases: 
determining the scope of, performing, and communicating about an assurance 
initiative [19].
Chapter 9 provides more detailed descriptions of major frameworks and methodolo-
gies used in auditing, IT governance, risk management, and security control assessment.
Relevant source material
Key sources of guidance on audit processes include major governance and risk 
management methodologies as well as audit-specific standards and protocols. Many 
of these sources implicitly or explicitly reference the PDCA model, providing some 
consistency for organizations considering or incorporating multiple sources. In 
addition to the sources of audit and assessment process life cycles described in the 
previous section, relevant procedural guidance comes from auditing standards and 
the process and system management guidelines and methodologies that incorporate 
those auditing standards. These include:
●	 ISO 19011:2011, Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems [1].
●	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011, Conformity Assessment—Requirements for Bodies 
Providing Audit and Certification of Management Systems [7].
●	 ISO/IEC TR 27008:2011, Information Technology—Security Techniques—
Guidelines for Auditors on Information Security Controls [11].
●	 ISO 9001:2008, Quality Management Systems—Requirements [20].
More prescriptive guidance is also available to organizations on perform-
ing individual process steps and activities related to audit execution, analysis of 

164
CHAPTER 8  IT Audit Processes
findings, and development of audit reports. Relevant sources include audit proce-
dures and protocols defined in the IPPF [4] and standards and guidance for devel-
oping reports in the Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS) [2] and International 
Standards on Auditing (ISA) [3].
Summary
This chapter described the overall audit process and the primary phases or steps 
found in most major audit methodologies and life cycles. The audit process covers 
all activities from the point at which an organization makes a decision to conduct a 
particular audit through to the delivery of findings and formulation and initiation of 
plans for corrective action, compliance, operational effectiveness, or business pro-
cess improvement. It addresses key activities and roles and responsibilities for IT 
auditors as well as those subject to or tasked with supporting audits, distinguishing 
where applicable between internal and external audit perspectives. The chapter also 
highlights the similarities among processes specified in different governance, risk 
management, quality management, and audit-specific frameworks, methodologies, 
and standards. Many of these sources of process guidance on IT auditing share a 
common foundation, making the choice of methodology among different organiza-
tions somewhat less important than the understanding of the end-to-end process life 
cycle and the expectations or obligations associated with key activities performed 
as part of essentially all types of audits.
References
	 [1]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	 [2]	 Statements on Auditing Standards [Internet]. Durham (NC): American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.
org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SAS.aspx>.
	 [3]	 Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements [Internet]. Durham (NC): 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SSAE.aspx>.
	 [4]	 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board  Handbook of international 
quality control, auditing review, other assurance, and related services pronouncements. 
New York (NY): International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board; 2012 June.
	 [5]	 Institute of Internal Auditors  International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) 
2013 Edition. Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2013.
	 [6]	 Chambers A, Rand G. The operational auditing handbook: auditing business and IT 
processes. West Sussex (UK): John Wiley & Sons; 2010.
	 [7]	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of management systems.
	 [8]	 Russell JP, editor. The ASQ auditing handbook (4th ed.). Milwaukee (WI): ASQ 
Quality Press; 2013.

165
References
	 [9]	 ISACA  ITAF: a professional practices framework for IS audit/assurance, 2nd ed. 
Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2013.
	[10]	 ISO/IEC 27006:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Requirements 
for bodies providing audit and certification of information security management 
systems.
	[11]	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011. Information—Security techniques—Guidelines for information 
security management systems auditing.
	[12]	 ISO/IEC TR 27008:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Guidelines 
for auditors on information security controls.
	[13]	 Government Accountability Office  Federal information system controls audit manual 
(FISCAM). Washington (DC): Government Accountability Office; 2009 February.
	[14]	 Institute of Internal Auditors  International standards for the professional practice of 
internal auditing. Altamonte Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012 October.
	[15]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Guide for assessing the security con-
trols in federal information systems and organizations. Gaithersburg (MD): National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2010 June. [spe-
cial publication 800-53A revision 1].
	[16]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Reporting on controls at a service 
organization. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2011. 
[Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16].
	[17]	 Deming WE. Out of the crisis. Cambridge (MA): MIT Center for Advanced 
Educational Services; 1986.
	[18]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Guide for conducting risk assess-
ments. Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2012 September. [special publication 800-30 revision 1].
	[19]	 ISACA  COBIT 5 for assurance. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2013.
	[20]	 ISO 9001:2008. Quality management systems—Requirements.

167
Methodologies and 
Frameworks
9
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
●	 Audit-specific methodologies and frameworks
●	 IT governance and management frameworks
●	 Government-focused audit methodologies
●	 Security control assessment frameworks
Consistency and reliability are the hallmarks of a well-functioning internal audit 
program. With few exceptions, organizations are typically not obligated to use an 
externally developed or standards-based framework or set of procedures to conduct 
audits. Even when organizations develop their own approaches and methodologies, 
however, they should be well defined so that different auditors can follow the same 
processes and procedures, document their findings and results the same way, and 
make their results usable for other auditors and examiners working in the organiza-
tion and for the audit committees, executive management, regulators, or other audi-
ences for audit reports. Fortunately for organizations lacking the interest, capability, 
or expertise to develop their own audit methodologies—or those in closely regu-
lated industries or subject to a high level of oversight or scrutiny regarding their IT 
operations—there are many frameworks and methodologies available from leading 
audit, governance, and IT management standards bodies, professional associations, 
and other organizations. This chapter introduces and describes the key features and 
benefits of some of the most widely used and influential frameworks and method-
ologies. Table 9.1 lists the frameworks and methodologies covered in this chapter 
and the source, type, and focus of each.
Not all of the frameworks and methodologies applicable to IT auditing are 
explicitly designed for audit purposes; some specify controls applicable to pro-
cess or service management, IT governance methods, or IT asset and component 
management that organizations may use to try to more efficiently manage their IT 
operations or to establish effective IT governance or process orchestration. Auditing 
against these IT control frameworks offers some consistency and conceptual align-
ment between the audit approach and the way the organizations view and structure 
their IT operations. Other frameworks presented here are designed specifically 
for auditing and describe methods auditors can use to critically examine different 
aspects of IT operations and internal IT assets.
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00009-2

168
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Audit-specific methodologies and frameworks
Given the breadth of IT auditing, the large number of organizational elements 
potentially subject to audits, and the many types of audit procedures, designing, 
implementing, and operating an effective audit capability presents a challenge for 
many organizations. Although many types of audits can be performed satisfactorily 
using internally developed or externally sourced auditing processes, not all organi-
zations have the capacity or the understanding to design their own audit programs 
and structures. A common alternative to developing unique internal processes or 
relying on ad hoc approaches is to identify and adopt suitable audit methodologies 
or frameworks offered by prominent professional associations or standards bodies, 
such as those described below.
Table 9.1  Methodologies and Frameworks Covered in This Chapter
Methodology/Framework
Source
Type
Focus
Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards (GAAS)
AICPA
Auditing
External 
audits
International Standards on  
Auditing (ISA)
IFAC/IAASB
Auditing
External audit
Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework
COSO
Internal 
controls
Internal audit
International Professional Practices 
Framework (IPPF)
IIA
Auditing
Internal audit
ISO 19011
ISO
Auditing
Management 
systems
ISO/IEC 27007
ISO and IEC
Auditing
ISMS
Control Objectives for Business 
and Related Information 
Technology (COBIT)
ISACA
IT governance
Processes 
controls
Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
Cabinet Office 
(UK)
IT service 
management
Service 
controls
ISO/IEC 38500
ISO and IEC
IT governance
Corporate 
governance
ISO/IEC 20000
ISO and IEC
Service 
management
Service 
processes
Federal Information System 
Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM)
GAO (US)
System 
auditing
Government 
organizations
Information System Security 
Review Methodology (ISSAI 5310)
ISSAI
System 
auditing
Government 
organizations
ISO/IEC 27001 and 27002
ISO and IEC
Security 
controls
ISMS
Special Publication 800-53A
NIST (US)
Security control 
assessment
Government 
organizations

169
Audit-Specific Methodologies and Frameworks
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS) are a set of principles and require-
ments that provide the basis for how an auditor prepares for, performs, and reports 
the results of audits. Originally developed and issued by the American Institute 
of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) in 1972, the current GAAS comprises 
10 standards with which AICPA member auditors are required to comply. In its 
Statement on Auditing Standards No. 95, the AICPA’s Accounting Standards 
Board distinguishes between auditing standards and audit procedures by stating 
that “Auditing procedures are acts that the auditor performs during the course of an 
audit to comply with auditing standards” [1]. From this perspective, auditing stand-
ards in general and the GAAS in particular apply to any type of audit or audit meth-
odology executed by auditors who choose or are obligated to follow the GAAS. 
Although the AICPA is an American organization, its membership comprises audi-
tors in many different countries; as these members agree to follow GAAS as part 
of adhering to the AICPA’s code of professional conduct, the GAAS is in practice 
a global framework for auditing. Auditors typically use the GAAS as a minimum 
baseline for auditing activities, recognizing that depending on the country, indus-
try, type of audit, and auditor affiliations, there may be multiple other principles or 
requirements an auditor needs to satisfy.
The 10 standards in the GAAS are grouped into three categories: general stand-
ards, standards of field work, and standards of reporting. These standards appear in 
Table 9.2.
In addition to the GAAS, the AICPA’s Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS) 
provide more detailed guidance to member auditors on many more specific ele-
ments of auditing and audit procedures, including several directly applicable to IT 
auditing, summarized in Table 10.1. Some SAS documentation imposes additional 
auditing requirements in addition to providing explicit instructions regarding audit 
planning, performance, and reporting. AICPA offers additional prescriptive guid-
ance in the form of statements on standards for attestation engagements (SSAE) 
for use with different types of organizations and audit environments, such as the 
Service Organization Control (SOC) assessments described in Chapter  5. Where 
such standards apply to a particular audit, adherence to GAAS and the AICPA Code 
of Professional Conduct generally means following all applicable SAS guidance.
International Standards on Auditing
International Standards on Auditing (ISA), developed by the independent 
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) under the author-
ity of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), specify auditor objectives 
and responsibilities related to conducting financial audits. Much like the GAAS, 
the directives in the ISA apply to the individual auditors that conduct audits, rather 
than to the organizations the auditors represent or that are the subject of an audit. 
Numerous ISA documents provide additional objectives and requirements related 

170
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
to various aspects of performing audits which should apply to an auditor seeking to 
comply with the ISA when conducting any type of audit. IAASB specifies the core 
objectives and requirements for auditors complying with International Standards 
on Auditing in ISA 200, Overall Objectives of the Independent Auditor and the 
Conduct of an Audit in Accordance with International Standards on Auditing. 
Under ISA, an auditor’s overarching objectives are first “to obtain reasonable assur-
ance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material mis-
statement,” and second, “to report on the financial statements, and communicate as 
Table 9.2  Generally Accepted Auditing Standards [1]
Category
Standards
General
1.	The audit is to be performed by a person or persons 
having adequate technical training and proficiency as an 
auditor.
2.	In all matters relating to the assignment, an independence 
in mental attitude is to be maintained by the auditor or 
auditors.
3.	Due professional care is to be exercised in the 
performance of the audit and the preparation of 
the report.
Standards of Field Work
1.	The work is to be adequately planned and assistants, if 
any, are to be properly supervised.
2.	A sufficient understanding of internal control is to be 
obtained to plan the audit and to determine the nature, 
timing, and extent of tests to be performed.
3.	Sufficient competent evidential matter is to be obtained 
through inspection, observation, inquiries, and 
confirmations to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion 
regarding the financial statements under audit.
Standards of Reporting
1.	 The report shall state whether the financial statements 
are presented in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles (GAAP).
2.	 The report shall identify those circumstances in which 
such principles have not been consistently observed in 
the current period in relation to the preceding period.
3.	 Informative disclosures in the financial statements are to 
be regarded as reasonably adequate unless otherwise 
stated in the report.
4.	 The report shall contain either an expression of opinion 
regarding the financial statements, taken as a whole, 
or an assertion to the effect that an opinion cannot 
be expressed. When an overall opinion cannot be 
expressed, the reasons therefore should be stated. In 
all cases where an auditor’s name is associated with 
financial statements, the report should contain a clear-cut 
indication of the character of the auditor’s work, if any, 
and the degree of responsibility the auditor is taking.

171
Audit-Specific Methodologies and Frameworks
required by the ISAs, in accordance with the auditor’s findings” [2]. ISA guidance 
requires auditors who cannot satisfy these objectives to refuse to render an opinion 
or to withdraw from the audit engagement. Auditors following ISA are subject to 
10 requirements related to auditor behavior and to conducting audits in accordance 
with the International Standards, as listed in Table 9.3.
In contrast to the SAS, none of the current ISA documentation explicitly 
addresses IT auditing, although ISA 402, Audit Considerations Relating to an Entity 
Table 9.3  Auditor Requirements Under International Standards on Auditing [2]
Category
Standards
Ethical 
Requirements
●	 The auditor shall comply with relevant ethical requirements, 
including those pertaining to independence, relating to financial 
statement audit engagements.
Professional 
Skepticism
●	 The auditor shall plan and perform an audit with professional 
skepticism recognizing that circumstances may exist that cause 
the financial statements to be materially misstated.
Professional 
Judgment
●	 The auditor shall exercise professional judgment in planning and 
performing an audit of financial statements.
Audit Evidence  
and Risk
●	 To obtain reasonable assurance, the auditor shall obtain sufficient 
appropriate audit evidence to reduce audit risk to an acceptably 
low level and thereby enable the auditor to draw reasonable 
conclusions on which to base the auditor’s opinion.
Conducting  
Audits
●	 The auditor shall comply with all ISAs relevant to the audit. An 
ISA is relevant to the audit when the ISA is in effect and the 
circumstances addressed by the ISA exist.
●	 The auditor shall have an understanding of the entire text of an 
ISA, including its application and other explanatory material, to 
understand its objectives and to apply its requirements properly.
●	 The auditor shall not represent compliance with ISAs in the 
auditor’s report unless the auditor has complied with the 
requirements of this ISA and all other ISAs relevant to the audit.
●	 To achieve the overall objectives of the auditor, the auditor 
shall use the objectives stated in relevant ISAs in planning and 
performing the audit.
●	 The auditor shall comply with each requirement of an ISA unless, 
in the circumstances of the audit, the entire ISA is not relevant; or 
the requirement is not relevant because it is conditional and the 
condition does not exist.
●	 In exceptional circumstances, the auditor may judge it 
necessary to depart from a relevant requirement in an ISA. In 
such circumstances, the auditor shall perform alternative audit 
procedures to achieve the aim of that requirement.
●	 If an objective in a relevant ISA cannot be achieved, the auditor 
shall evaluate whether this prevents the auditor from achieving the 
overall objectives of the auditor and thereby requires the auditor, 
in accordance with the ISAs, to modify the auditor’s opinion or 
withdraw from the engagement.

172
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Using a Service Organization, addresses the use of external services provided as 
part of an entity’s financial management and reporting systems [3]. ISA 402 is com-
parable in focus and intent to the AICPA’s Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70, 
Service Organizations, although the ISA guidance only considers matters related to 
auditing financial statements, not to IT, management, or information security con-
trols more generally. For this reason, auditors may find SAS guidance more applica-
ble to many types of IT audits than ISA guidance. Audit professionals who represent 
members of IFAC are required under the Federation’s Statement of Membership 
Obligations to “adopt and implement” IAASB standards including the ISA [4].
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations integrated framework
The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) is a collaborative body focused on understanding, analyzing, and develop-
ing and disseminating guidance on effective organizational governance. Originally 
established in 1985 to sponsor the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial 
Reporting, COSO gets its current familiar full name in part by association with its 
first commissioner, James Treadway. The sponsoring organizations COSO com-
prises include the American Accounting Association, the American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants, Financial Executives International, the Institute of 
Internal Auditors, and the Institute of Management Accountants. With the active 
participation of many private sector firms in accounting, investment banking, secu-
rities trading, and financial services, COSO develops management frameworks and 
industry guidance on internal controls, fraud deterrence, and enterprise risk man-
agement. The Commission has published formal guidance on all three subjects, 
including the Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework referenced in 
Chapter 2, two research studies on fraud in financial reporting, and multiple guid-
ance documents on internal controls. COSO’s most significant internal control 
guidance is its Internal Control—Integrated Framework, first published in 1992 and 
significantly updated in 2013, which defines a structured framework and set of pro-
cesses for implementing, managing, and overseeing an enterprise-wide system of 
internal controls [5]. The internal control framework provides both a foundation for 
effective operational management and a basis for auditing internal controls imple-
mented in an organization, including those related to information technology.
The COSO internal control framework begins with a focus on organizational 
objectives for operations, reporting, and compliance and identifies five compo-
nents of internal control—a control environment, risk assessment, control activi-
ties, information and communication, and monitoring activities—that support the 
achievement of those objectives. Consideration of these objectives and components 
occurs not only at the enterprise level, but also at the level of subsidiaries, divisions, 
operating units, and business or functional areas of operation. COSO’s framework 
integrates the three dimensions of objectives, components, and organizational struc-
ture, represented graphically in the multilevel cube shown in Figure 9.1 and consid-
ers the relationships among these elements.

173
Audit-Specific Methodologies and Frameworks
Beneath this conceptual view of the framework, COSO defines 17 principles 
of internal control associated with each component and 81 attributes of the con-
trol principles. Audits of internal controls in an organization that has adopted the 
COSO framework focus on evaluating the extent to which the organization effec-
tively implements and operationalizes the control principles. To do so, auditors look 
for evidence of each attribute associated with a given control principle to arrive at a 
subjective but evidence-based opinion as to the effectiveness of each internal con-
trol, the five control components, and the overall system of organizational internal 
controls. The principles associated with each internal control component are listed 
in Table 9.4.
International Professional Practices Framework
The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) consolidates a large volume of standards 
and guidance for auditing in its International Professional Practices Framework 
(IPPF). This conceptual framework offers a point of reference for internal auditors 
about expectations and obligations for professionals engaged in auditing, includ-
ing requirements for auditors certified by IIA or other individual members of the 
organization. (Nonmembers are not bound by the same obligation to follow the 
standards and code of ethics in the IPPF, but may choose to do so.) It also provides 
detailed guidance on conducting different kinds of audits and on the relationship 
Monitoring activities
Control activities
Risk assessment
Control environment
Information and communication
Entity level 
Operating unit
Division
Function
Operations
Reporting
Compliance
FIGURE 9.1 
The COSO Internal Control Integrated Framework [5] reflects the close interrelationship 
among control objectives and components and organizational structure.
Source: Internal Control — Integrated Framework, Committee of Sponsoring Organizations  
of the Treadway Commission, ©2013. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

174
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Table 9.4  COSO Internal Control Components and Associated Principles [5]
Component
Principles
Control 
Environment
	 1.	The organization demonstrates commitment to integrity and 
ethical values.
	 2.	The Board of Directors demonstrates independence of 
management exercises oversight for the development and 
performance of internal control.
	 3.	Management establishes, with board oversight, structure, 
reporting lines, and appropriate authorities and responsibilities in 
the pursuit of objectives.
	 4.	The organization demonstrates a commitment to attract, 
develop, and retain competent individuals in alignment with 
objectives.
	 5.	The organization holds individuals accountable for their internal 
control responsibilities in the pursuit of objectives.
Risk 
Assessment
	 6.	The organization specifies objectives with sufficient clarity to 
enable the identification and assessment of risks relating to 
objectives.
	 7.	The organization identifies risks to the achievement of its 
objectives across the entity and analyzes risks as a basis for 
determining how the risks should be managed.
	 8.	The organization considers the potential for fraud in assessing 
risks to the achievement of its objectives.
	 9.	The organization identifies and assesses changes that could 
significantly impact the system of internal control.
Control 
Activities
10.	The organization selects and develops control activities that 
contribute to the mitigation of risks to the achievement of 
objectives to acceptable levels.
11.	The organization selects and develops general control activities 
over technology to support the achievement of objectives.
12.	The organization deploys control activities as manifested 
in policies that establish what is expected and in relevant 
procedures to effect the policies.
Information and 
Communication
13.	The organization obtains or generates and uses relevant, quality 
information to support the functioning of other components of 
internal control.
14.	The organization internally communicates information, including 
objectives and responsibilities for internal control, necessary to 
support the functioning of other components of internal control.
15.	The organization communicates with external parties regarding 
matters affecting the functioning of other components of internal 
control.
Monitoring 
Activities
16.	The organization selects, develops, and performs ongoing and/
or separate evaluations to ascertain whether the components of 
internal control are present and functioning.
17.	The organization evaluates and communicates internal control 
deficiencies in a timely manner to those parties responsible for 
taking corrective action, including senior management and the 
board of directors, as appropriate.

175
Audit-Specific Methodologies and Frameworks
between internal auditing practices and different governance and operations pro-
cesses such as risk management and quality assurance. The IPPF includes some 
guidance designated as mandatory—the IIA definition of internal auditing, the 
code of ethics, and the international standards in the framework—and additional 
“strongly recommended” guidance including position papers, practice advisories, 
and practice guides. The guidance the IPPF comprises is summarized graphically in 
Figure 9.2.
The IPPF mandates a set of International Standards for the Professional Practice 
of Internal Auditing, comprising attribute, performance, and implementation 
standards for both assurance and consulting services. Attribute standards specify 
characteristics or aspects of individual auditors and organizations that conduct 
internal audits, while performance standards describe audit activities and perfor-
mance criteria used to measure quality (of the audit services performed, not the 
organization being audited). Many attribute and performance standards are further 
decomposed into implementation standards that specify requirements used in assur-
ance or consulting audit services. According to the IIA, the purpose of the inter-
national standards in the IPPF is to “delineate basic principles that represent the 
practice of internal auditing; provide a framework for performing and promoting 
a broad range of value-added internal auditing; establish the basis for the evalu-
ation of internal audit performance; and foster improved organizational processes 
  
 
M
a
n
d
a
t
o
r
y
 
g
u
i
d
a
n
c
e
  
  
  
  
 
S
t
r
o
n
g
l
y
 
r
e
c
o
m
m
e
n
d
e
d
 
g
u
i
d
a
n
c
e
Definition
Code of
ethics
International
standards
Practice
advisories
Practice
guides
Position
papers
FIGURE 9.2 
The International Professional Practices Framework comprises both mandatory standards 
and practice expectations and strongly recommended guidance in the form of several 
types of documentation [6].
Source: IPPF, Institute of Internal Auditors ©2013. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

176
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
and operations” [7]. With 18 attribute standards, 33 performance standards, and 
53 implementation standards (32 assurance and 21 consulting), listing all of them 
here is impractical due to space constraints; Table 9.5 lists the major categories of 
attribute and performance standards in the IPPF, with the subordinate standards and 
implementation standards designations associated with each.
Individual auditors and organizations seeking to conduct audits following 
the IPPF may be primarily interested in the international standards prescribed in 
Table 9.5  IPPF International Standards [7]
Primary Standards
Subordinate
Implementation
1000—Purpose, Authority, 
and Responsibility
1010
1000.A1, 1000.C1
1100—Independence 
and Objectivity
1110, 1111, 1120
1110.A1
1130—Impairment to 
Independence or Objectivity
None
1130.A1, 1130.A2, 
1130.C1, 1130.C2
1200—Proficiency and Due 
Professional Care
1210, 1220, 1230
1210.A1, 1210.A2, 
1210.A3, 1210.C1, 
1220.A1, 1220.A2, 
1220.A3, 1220.C1
1300—Quality Assurance and 
Improvement Program
1310, 1311, 1312, 1320, 
1321, 1322
None
2000—Managing the Internal 
Audit Activity
2010, 2020, 2030, 2040, 
2050, 2060, 2070
2010.A1, 2010.A2,  
2010.C1
2100—Nature of Work
2110, 2120, 2130
2110.A1, 2110.A2,  
2120.A1, 2120.A2,  
2120.C1, 2120.C2,  
2120.C3, 2130.A1,  
2130.C1
2200—Engagement Planning
2201, 2210, 2220, 
2230, 2240
2201.A1, 2201.C1,  
2210.A1, 2210.A2,  
2210.A3, 2210.C1,  
2210.C2, 2220.A1,  
2220.A2, 2220.C1,  
2220.C2, 2240.A1,  
2240.C1
2300—Performing the 
Engagement
2310, 2320, 2330, 2340
2330.A1, 2330.A2,  
2330.C1,
2400—Communicating Results
2410, 2420, 2421, 2430, 
2431, 2440, 2450
2410.A1, 2410.A2,  
2410.A3, 2410.C1,  
2440.A1, 2440.A2,  
2440.C1, 2440.C2
2500—Monitoring Progress
None
2500.A1, 2500.C1
2600—Communicating 
the Acceptance of Risks
None
None

177
Audit-Specific Methodologies and Frameworks
the framework and the available practice guides. The position papers in the IPPF 
describe the role and importance of internal auditing in the broader context of 
risk management and governance. Practice advisories directly correlate to many 
of the international standards mandated under the IPPF, providing clarification 
and offering instruction on the proper use of those standards. Practice advisories 
are identified using the same numbering scheme as the International Standards for 
the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing. Practice guides offer detailed guid-
ance to help auditors correctly perform audit activities, with explicit procedures, 
recommended tools and techniques, and sample outputs. In addition to 16 Global 
Technology Audit Guides (GTAG) intended to address IT management, controls, 
and information security, the IPPF includes some two dozen additional practice 
guides covering a wide range of auditing and risk management topics.
International Organization for Standardization
The broad scope of activities and domains covered by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and its global sphere of influence make 
it a bit challenging to categorize the entire organization and its contributions to 
methodologies and frameworks applicable to IT auditing. Various ISO standards 
address quality management, environmental management, information security 
management, risk management, and IT governance. ISO also publishes standards 
related to auditing, including ISO 19011 on auditing management systems and 
ISO/IEC 27007 on auditing information security management systems (ISMS). 
ISO auditing standards can be used generally to support audits of many types of 
organizational systems, but they apply most directly to organizations implement-
ing or operating systems complying with requirements for explicit types of systems 
specified in other ISO standards. For instance, the ISO 19011 standard is included 
in packaged ISO guidance for quality management systems and environmental 
management systems, requirements for which appear in ISO 9001 and ISO 14001, 
respectively. Similarly, ISO/IEC 27007 aligns directly to the ISO requirements 
for ISMS prescribed in ISO/IEC 27001. (Further details about the ISMS and the 
security control framework addressed in ISO/IEC 27001 and 27002 appears later in 
this chapter.)
Both ISO 19011 and ISO/IEC 27007 provide a general foundation for conduct-
ing audits, grounded in a set of audit principles and working from an expectation 
that organizations have established or will establish a formal, repeatable audit pro-
gram. ISO audit standards also emphasize the importance of establishing criteria to 
assess auditor competence and using evidence that demonstrates such competence, 
including prior experience, completion of relevant training, and achievement of 
appropriate certifications attesting to the auditor’s knowledge and expertise [8,9]. 
Activities performed as part of an ISO-defined audit include overall audit program 
management as well as discrete phases for initiating, planning, conducting, report-
ing, completing, and following up on audits, as reflected in Figure 9.3.

178
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
IT governance and management frameworks
IT auditing plays an essential supporting role in IT governance by helping organi-
zations, their executive management teams, and their boards of directors ensure that 
IT assets, processes and services, and management functions operate as intended 
and in accordance with the IT goals and objectives established by the organiza-
tion [10]. The interdependent relationship between IT auditing and governance, 
described in some detail in Chapter 2, extends to the internal controls implemented 
in an organization to enable effective IT governance. Although all organizations 
arguably perform at least some degree of IT governance, not all organizations 
choose to standardize governance through the use of formal frameworks. IT audi-
tors working for or evaluating organizations that adopt formal IT governance or 
IT management frameworks can use the structure defined by those frameworks to 
facilitate establishing the scope and relative priority of IT audit activities and identi-
fying the relevant set of business processes and internal controls to be audited.
Control Objectives for Business and Related Information Technology
The Control Objectives for Business and Related Information Technology 
(COBIT®), originally developed by ISACA in 1996 and updated several times, 
most recently in 2012, is among the most widely used models for IT governance 
and management, including the management of internal controls used to satisfy 
Manage audit program
      Create program
      Set objectives
      Establish program
      Implement program
      Monitor and update
      Review and improve
I
n
it
i
a
t
e
P
l
a
n
F
o
ll
o
w
-
u
p
  
 
C
o
m
p
l
e
t
e
  
  
C
o
n
d
u
c
t
  
  
R
e
p
o
rt
FIGURE 9.3 
The ISO auditing process defines six sequential steps in addition to overall audit program 
management [8,9].

179
IT Governance and Management Frameworks
legal and regulatory requirements such as those mandated under Sarbanes–Oxley 
and Directive 2006/43/EC. Its primary focus is on good governance practices, 
rather than audit or compliance, but its detailed hierarchy of principles, enablers, 
and processes provides a basis for conducting IT audits of organizations that 
implement COBIT. Two versions of COBIT are widely used in organizational 
governance programs: the current COBIT 5 framework and the 4.1 version that 
preceded it. COBIT 5 reflects an integrated approach combining key principles 
and objectives from version 4.1 with several other ISACA domain-specific frame-
works—including Val IT (focused on business investments), Risk IT (focused on 
IT risk management), the Business Model for Information Security (BMIS), and 
the IT Assurance Framework (ITAF)—and elements of Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL®) and several ISO standards [11].
COBIT 4.1 remains applicable to IT auditing because many organizations that 
implemented the governance framework since its release in 2005 did so to help 
achieve compliance with requirements in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act and associated 
rules, and continue to describe their operations in terms of the processes and con-
trol objectives COBIT 4.1 defined. Those control objectives, while not included 
in COBIT 5, help define the scope for audits of processes in the COBIT frame-
work. COBIT 5 also identifies seven categories of enablers—principles, policies, 
and frameworks; processes; organizational structures; culture, ethics, and behav-
ior; information; services, infrastructure, and applications; and people, skills, and 
competencies—each of which could represent subject areas for IT audits. COBIT 
4.1 also emphasizes the cyclical pattern of executing governance processes in each 
domain, shown in Figure 9.4, reflecting the familiar plan–do–check–act (PDCA) 
pattern used in audits of governance, risk, and compliance functions, information 
security management, and quality management.
As a governance framework, COBIT first considers the business goals of an 
organization and the IT goals, objectives, and processes that support those business 
goals. The COBIT 5 framework is organized around five main principles [11]:
1.	 Meeting stakeholder needs
2.	 Covering the enterprise end-to-end
3.	 Applying a single integrated framework
4.	 Enabling a holistic approach
5.	 Separating governance from management.
COBIT 5 emphasizes core governance activities of setting enterprise goals and 
objectives, prioritizing IT investments, making strategic decisions to further pro-
gress toward those goals and objectives, and assessing performance in their achieve-
ment. From the IT auditor’s perspective, COBIT 5 offers less explicit direction than 
version 4.1, in large part because auditing is not a primary focus of the newer guid-
ance. ISACA publishes several more specialized documents providing guidance 
to organizations on applying COBIT 5 in different governance contexts, including 
assurance, information security, and assessment [13]. The enterprise-level perspec-
tive COBIT 5 uses also come into play when evaluating entity-level controls, as 
those controls typically include governance processes. COBIT is a process-based 

180
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
governance framework organized into five distinct yet related domains: evalu-
ate, direct, and monitor; align, plan, and organize; build, acquire, and implement; 
deliver, service, and support; and monitor, evaluate, and assess. Each domain con-
tains multiple processes. For each process, COBIT offers a description and guidance 
on assessment, the latter derived in large part from ISO/IEC 15504. The COBIT 5 
structure comprises the five domains and 37 processes listed in Table 9.6.
Acquire and
implement
Plan and
organize
Monitor and
evaluate
Deliver and
support
Governance objectives
Business objectives
• Effectiveness
• Efficiency
• Confidentiality
• Integrity
• Availability
• Compliance
• Reliability
• Applications
• Information
• Infrastructure
• People
IT resources
Information
criteria
PO1   Define a strategic IT plan.
PO2   Define the information architecture.
PO3   Determine technological direction.
PO4   Define the IT processes, organization and relationships.
PO5   Manage the IT investment.
PO6   Communicate management aims and direction.
PO7   Manage IT human resources.
PO8   Manage quality.
PO9   Assess and manage IT risks.
PO10 Manage projects.
AI1 Identify automated solutions.
AI2 Acquire and maintain application software.
AI3 Acquire and maintain technology infrastructure.
AI4 Enable operation and use.
AI5 Procure IT resources.
AI6 Manage changes.
AI7 Install and accredit solutions and changes.
ME1 Monitor and evaluate IT performance.
ME2 Monitor and evaluate internal control.
ME3 Ensure compliance with external requirements.
ME4 Provide IT governance.
DS1   Define and manage service levels.
DS2   Manage third-party services.
DS3   Manage performance and capacity.
DS4   Ensure continuous service.
DS5   Ensure systems security.
DS6   Identify and allocate costs.
DS7   Educate and train users.
DS8   Manage service desk and incidents.
DS9   Manage the configuration.
DS10 Manage problems.
DS11 Manage data.
DS12 Manage the physical environment.
DS13 Manage operations.
COBIT 4.1
FIGURE 9.4 
The COBIT 4.1 framework defines an interrelated set of processes and control objectives 
for use in IT governance [12].
Source: COBIT 4.1, IT Governance Institute, © 2007. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

181
IT Governance and Management Frameworks
Table 9.6  COBIT 5 Domains and Processes [11]
IT Domain
Processes
Evaluate, Direct, and 
Monitor
EDM01 Ensure Governance Framework Setting and 
Maintenance
EDM02 Ensure Benefits Delivery
EDM03 Ensure Risk Optimization
EDM04 Ensure Resource Optimization
EDM05 Ensure Stakeholder Transparency
Align, Plan, and 
Organize
APO01 Manage the IT Management Framework
APO02 Manage Strategy
APO03 Manage Enterprise Architecture
APO04 Manage Innovation
APO05 Manage Portfolio
APO06 Manage Budget and Costs
APO07 Manage Human Resources
APO08 Manage Relationships
APO09 Manage Service Agreements
APO10 Manage Suppliers
APO11 Manage Quality
APO12 Manage Risk
APO13 Manage Security
Build, Acquire, and 
Implement
BAI01 Manage Programs and Projects
BAI02 Manage Requirements Definition
BAI03 Manage Solutions Identification and Build
BAI04 Manage Availability and Capacity
BAI05 Manage Organizational Change Enablement
BAI06 Manage Changes
BAI07 Manage Change Acceptance and Transitioning
BAI08 Manage Knowledge
BAI09 Manage Assets
BAI10 Manage Configuration
Deliver, Service, and 
Support
DSS01 Manage Operations
DSS02 Manage Service Requests and Incidents
DSS03 Manage Problems
DSS04 Manage Continuity
DSS05 Manage Security Services
DSS06 Manage Business Process Controls
Monitor, Evaluate, and 
Assess
MEA01 Monitor, Evaluate, and Assess Performance and 
Conformance
MEA02 Monitor, Evaluate, and Assess the System of Internal 
Control
MEA03 Monitor, Evaluate, and Assess Compliance with 
External Requirements

182
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Information Technology Infrastructure Library
The ITIL® is a governance model for IT service management developed by the gov-
ernment of the United Kingdom that defines an end-to-end life cycle and integrated 
set of practices and guidance in the areas of service strategy, service design, service 
transition, service operation, and continual service improvement. In the ITIL con-
text, a service is defined as “A means of delivering value to customers by facili-
tating outcomes customers want to achieve without the ownership of specific costs 
and risks” [14] where outcomes are the result of executing processes or support-
ing activities to achieve a specific objective or produce specific outputs. Although 
ITIL covers many of the same business domains and operational processes as other 
governance and control frameworks, its service orientation differentiates ITIL from 
COBIT, ISO standards, and most IT management frameworks. Presenting a detailed 
comparison of process versus service orientations in IT governance is beyond the 
scope of this book, but auditors and others working with organizations adhering 
to ITIL should recognize that its service-based perspective impacts the nature and 
suitable approaches for IT audits in those organizations.
Since its initial development more than 20 years ago, ITIL has undergone sev-
eral major revisions, first using numbered versions and now designated by the year 
in which updates are published. The most current version is ITIL 2011, although it 
is common to see references to ITIL v3 and ITIL 2007 (both designations refer to 
the same version), as the core structure of the framework has remained the same 
since ITIL v3. The ITIL framework defines a service life cycle comprising the five 
main practices illustrated in Figure 9.5. For each phase of the service life cycle, 
ITIL defines key processes and activities, their inputs and outputs, and roles and 
responsibilities integral to successfully executing those processes. Table 9.7 lists the 
processes defined for each service phase in ITIL.
ITIL also includes four functions within service operations: application manage-
ment, technical management, IT operations management, and service desk. Some 
references to ITIL also include service measurement and service reporting within 
the continuous service improvement phase; these processes were part of ITIL 2007 
but are not so designated in ITIL 2011. In organizations adopting ITIL, the service 
Although ISACA is responsible both for the COBIT framework and the Certified Information 
Systems Auditor (CISA) certification; CISA-certified auditors are not obligated to follow 
COBIT. CISAs use ISACA’s audit standards and guidelines, in much the same way that 
membership in some other professional organizations comes with a requirement to use 
the organization’s audit standards, but COBIT is aimed at a different level. Implementing 
COBIT is an organizational decision about governance, and the governance domains 
described in the framework apply to organizations and their IT processes, not to individu-
als. Auditors with the CISA credential may assess the information system controls of an 
organization following any governance approach, formal or otherwise, so while the CISA 
auditing and governance processes align well to COBIT, their applicability is not limited to 
organizations using COBIT.

183
IT Governance and Management Frameworks
Service
strategy
Service
transition
Service
design
Service
operation
C
o
n
ti
n
u
o
u
s
S
e
r
v
i
c
e
I
m
pr
o
ve
m
e
nt
FIGURE 9.5 
ITIL approaches effective IT management through a formal services life cycle emphasizing 
continuous improvement [16].
catalogue—which lists all services defined and offered by the organization— 
provides an important point of reference for developing the IT audit universe and 
for establishing the scope of specific types of IT audits.
The term “ITIL certification” applies only to individuals, not to organizations. Several 
levels of ITIL certification are available to individuals, denoting increasing knowledge of 
and expertise in ITIL-based service management best practices. These include foundation, 
intermediate, expert, and master qualifications. Organizations cannot be “ITIL certified” 
although they can pursue and achieve IT service management certification against the 
ISO/IEC 20000 standard.
International Organization for Standardization
As noted previously in this chapter, ISO publishes standards applicable to many 
different aspects of IT implementation, operations, and management, including 
those directly related to IT governance, risk management, service management, 
and information security management and associated controls. With respect to IT 
governance and management, the most relevant standards include ISO/IEC 38500 
addressing corporate governance of IT and the ISO/IEC 20000 family of stand-
ards on IT service management. The ISO/IEC 38500 standard offers guidance to 

184
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
organizational leaders on using information technology effectively and efficiently 
and in a manner that support regulatory compliance and other governance objec-
tives. The corporate governance framework in ISO/IEC 38500 provides definitions 
of key terms and offers six core principles for good governance: responsibility, 
strategy, acquisition, performance, conformance, and human behavior [17]. In 
contrast to detailed governance models like COBIT and ITIL, ISO/IEC 38500 
emphasizes guidance for how those responsible for governance should act when 
evaluating, directing, and monitoring the use of IT in their organizations. This 
Table 9.7  ITIL 2011 Service Lifecycle Phases and Processes [15]
Phase
Processes
Service Strategy
●	 Strategy Management
●	 Service Portfolio Management
●	 Financial Management
●	 Demand Management
●	 Business Relationship Management
Service Design
●	 Design Coordination
●	 Service Catalogue Management
●	 Service Level Management
●	 Availability Management
●	 Capacity Management
●	 IT Service Continuity Management (ITSCM)
●	 Information Security Management
●	 Supplier Management
Service Transition
●	 Transition Planning and Support
●	 Change Management
●	 Service Asset and Configuration Management (SACM)
●	 Release and Deployment Management
●	 Service Validation and Testing
●	 Change Evaluation
●	 Knowledge Management
Service Operation
●	 Event Management
●	 Incident Management
●	 Request Fulfillment
●	 Problem Management
●	 Access Management
Continuous Service 
Improvement
●	 Service Improvement:
1.	 Define what to measure
2.	 Define what can be measured
3.	 Gather the data
4.	 Process the data
5.	 Analyze the data
6.	 Present and use the information
7.	 Implement corrective action

185
Government-Focused Audit Methodologies
high-level perspective makes the standard complementary to more finely grained, 
prescriptive frameworks.
ISO/IEC 20000, published in five parts, specifies requirements for service man-
agement systems, including those service providers need to satisfy “to plan, estab-
lish, implement, operate, monitor, review, maintain and improve” their service 
management systems [18]. It also defines a process reference model for service 
management, describing processes necessary to deliver the requirements in Part 1 
of the standard and the purpose and intended outcomes for each process. ISO/IEC 
20000 groups processes into four primary categories: service delivery, relationship, 
resolution, and control. The reference model is also intended to provide a basis 
for process assessment to support performance measurement and continuous ser-
vice improvement. The processes defined in ISO/IEC 20000 overlap substantially 
with those in ITIL 2011, as should be evident from comparing the ISO processes in 
Table 9.8 with the ITIL processes in Table 9.7.
Government-focused audit methodologies
Although the basic processes and procedures used in IT auditing are much the same 
across industries, sectors, and even countries, there are considerations unique to 
government organizations that some organizations address through government-
specific methodologies. In contrast to the broad scope of IT governance and inter-
nal control frameworks described previously in this chapter, formal government 
audit methodologies tend to focus more narrowly on controls for information sys-
tems, particularly including security controls. This topical concentration—and 
the explicit focus on government organizations and auditors—does not mean that 
Table 9.8  ISO/IEC 20000 Processes by Category [19]
Process Category
Processes
Service Delivery
●	 Capacity Management
●	 Services Continuity and Availability Management
●	 Service Level Management
●	 Service Reporting
●	 Information Security Management
●	 Budgeting and Accounting for Services
Relationship
●	 Business Relationship Management
●	 Supplier Management
Resolution
●	 Incident and Services Request Management
●	 Problem Management
Control
●	 Configuration Management
●	 Change Management
●	 Release and Deployment Management

186
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
federal-specific guidance has no value for other types of organizations, although 
some of the assumed objectives and priorities underlying the frameworks may not 
resonate in commercial enterprises. Government auditing standards and guidance 
also include position descriptions and personnel qualification requirements for IT 
auditors [20], including those performing specialized audits such as those for com-
puter network defense [21]. Another point to consider is that, at least in the United 
States, government-produced guidance and standards tend to be available to anyone 
free of charge.
Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual
The US Government Accountability publishes the Federal Information System 
Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM) [22], which prescribes a simple, three-step 
process for auditing information system controls and provides detailed guidance 
for evaluating and testing two major types of controls—general controls and busi-
ness process application controls. General controls include five categories: secu-
rity management, access control, configuration management, segregation of duties, 
and contingency planning. Business process application controls span four catego-
ries: application level general controls, business process controls, interface con-
trols, and data management system controls. For each control category, FISCAM 
identifies critical elements considered essential to implementing adequate con-
trols and achieving control objectives, as well as recommended control techniques 
and procedures for auditing each element. As a US government audit manual, 
the guidance in FISCAM conforms to the Government Auditing Standards (com-
monly known as the Yellow Book) [20] and to the audit standards specified by the 
AICPA. The control hierarchy in FISCAM closely aligns to the federal security and 
privacy control framework defined by the US National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) in its Special Publication 800-53 Revision 3, Recommended 
Security Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations. This frame-
work is also the basis for security control assessments required for federal infor-
mation systems subject to FISMA and associated regulations, but in contrast to 
assessment procedures, FISCAM is explicitly intended to facilitate information sys-
tem control audits.
The audit process defined in FISCAM, shown in Figure 9.6, comprises just 
three steps: plan the information system controls audit, perform information system 
control audit tests, and report audit results. The manual includes detailed guidance 
on a set of activities prescribed within each process step and listed in Table 9.9.
As might be expected for a government audit manual, the primary intended 
use of FISCAM is to support audits of information systems performed in accord-
ance with the Government Auditing Standards. Auditors or organizations not 
subject to these standards and not committed to some other control frame-
work may find FISCAM guidance useful to help understand the general IT audit 
process and determine potential methods to use to test various information system 
controls.

187
Government-Focused Audit Methodologies
FISCAM
P
l
a
n
 
c
o
n
t
r
o
l 
a
u
d
i
t
 
R
e
p
o
r
t
 
a
u
d
i
t
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
P
e
r
f
o
r
m
 
c
o
n
t
r
o
l 
a
u
d
i
t
I
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
 
s
y
s
t
e
m
 
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
s
F
e
d
e
r
al
 
a
g
e
nc
y 
e
n
vi
r
o
n
m
e
nt
FIGURE 9.6 
The FISCAM process involves three iterative phases—plan, perform, and report—and a set 
of audit activities within each phase [22].
Table 9.9  FISCAM Audit Processes and Activities [22]
Process Step
Activities
Plan the 
Information 
System 
Controls Audit
●	 Understand the overall audit objectives and related scope of the 
information system controls audit
●	 Understand the entity’s operations and key business processes
●	 Obtain a general understanding of the structure of the entity’s 
networks
●	 Identify key areas of audit interest
●	 Assess information system risk on a preliminary basis
●	 Identify critical control points
●	 Obtain a preliminary understanding of information system controls
●	 Perform other audit planning procedures
Perform 
Information 
System Control 
Audit Tests
●	 Understand information systems relevant to the audit objectives
●	 Determine which IS control techniques are relevant to the audit 
objectives
●	 For each relevant IS control technique determine whether it is 
suitably designed to achieve the critical activity and has been 
implemented
Report Audit 
Results
●	 Evaluate the effects of identified IS control weaknesses
●	 Consider other audit reporting requirements and related reporting 
responsibilities

188
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
Among the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) issued 
by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions, the standard most 
directly applicable to auditing IT controls is ISSAI 5310, Information System 
Security Review Methodology. Like other INTOSAI publications, ISSAI 5310 
addresses government institutions and their information systems. This guidance 
document provides two distinct methodologies: a “top-down” approach and a more 
finely grained detailed assessment approach [23]. The former uses qualitative risk 
management practices to prioritize auditor activities on information systems based 
on their value to the organization, threats to the system, and the potential adverse 
impact if threats materialize. The detailed information system security approach 
relies on asset valuation and quantitative risk analysis to attempt to place a mon-
etary value on impacts to systems and the organizations they support. To many 
observers, the security assessment process in ISSAI 5310 will seem more like 
conventional information security risk management than an audit methodology, 
as its prescribed steps mirror well-known risk management approaches. The pro-
cess entails the development of a sensitivity statement, a business impact assess-
ment, a threat and risk assessment, an exposure assessment (a function of impact 
and probability), and a decision regarding what security provisions to implement 
or other actions to take to mitigate exposure risk [23]. The ISSAI 5310 guidance 
includes an appendix describing numerous threats and countermeasures relevant 
to many types of government information systems, similar to information pro-
vided in NIST Special Publication 800-30 Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk 
Assessments[24]. These risk-centered methodologies may help IT auditors deter-
mine the extent to which organizations have accurately identified and addressed 
threats to their systems and other IT assets.
Security control assessment frameworks
IT audits assess the proper and effective implementation and operation of internal 
controls and the extent to which controls implemented by an organization achieve 
their intended objectives. Information security—the protection of information and 
assets from harm due to a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability—is an 
important control objective in virtually all organizations, making the assessment 
of security controls a key component of many IT audits. Organizations in many 
industries and both public and private sector contexts are also subject to a variety 
of legal, regulatory, and policy requirements related to security. Such organizations 
often implement security control standards or frameworks intended to help achieve 
compliance with applicable requirements and to demonstrate the use of indus-
try best practices, provision of adequate security, or fulfillment of the principle of 
due care. Auditors working in organizations that manage their information security 
using formal control frameworks can leverage the underlying control structures 

189
Security Control Assessment Frameworks
(and, typically, associated documentation) to guide IT audit activities. In many 
cases, the control frameworks also include or make reference to explicit assessment 
procedures, testing methods, and other guidance that help auditors accurately evalu-
ate implemented security controls.
ISO/IEC 27000 series
The ISO and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) jointly publish a set 
of standards describing organizational ISMS and the security controls such systems 
contain. In the ISMS context, the word system denotes a set of explicit, standard, 
repeatable processes and activities for security management, not a type of technol-
ogy solution. Originally created in 1995 as British Standard 17799, this framework 
was revised in 1998 and adopted by the International Standards Organization in 
1999 as ISO 17799. After being significantly revised again in 2005, the 17799 stand-
ard was formally converted to two related ISO/IEC standards, 27001 and 27002, and 
became the cornerstone of a broader set of information security management stand-
ards collectively known as the 27000 series. ISO/IEC 27001 specifies requirements 
for an information security management system, while ISO/IEC 27002 provides the 
security control framework. ISO/IEC 27001 incorporates the PDCA process flow 
introduced in Chapter 2, adapted to become an ISMS life cycle [25]:
●	 Plan → Establish the ISMS
●	 Do → Implement and operating the ISMS
●	 Check → Monitor and review the ISMS
●	 Act → Maintain and improve the ISMS
ISO/IEC 27002 specifies a security control hierarchy comprising 11 main secu-
rity “clauses,” 39 security categories, and 133 distinct security controls. Table 9.10 
lists the security categories in the framework, grouped by clause.
From an auditing perspective, the ISO/IEC security management standards 
have a role in both internal and external audits. In internal audits, organizations that 
implement ISMS conforming to the ISO/IEC standards can use the standards as a 
baseline for evaluating security controls as implemented in the organization. Some 
organizations choose to seek ISO/IEC 27001 certification of their ISMS—essentially 
an objective determination that their ISMS satisfies the requirements in ISO/IEC 
27001. To achieve such certification, an organization needs to have its ISMS evalu-
ated (i.e., audited for compliance) by an external organization with the authority to 
award certification. These certifying bodies must be accredited by ISO, a prerequisite 
that invokes compliance with other standards, including ISO/IEC 27006 and ISO/
IEC 17021, both of which specify requirements for organizational entities perform-
ing audit and certification of management systems [27,28]. ISO/IEC 17021 is more 
general, covering all types of management systems (quality, environmental, etc.), 
while ISO/IEC 27006 explicitly covers ISMS.

190
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Table 9.10  ISO/IEC 27002 Security Clauses and Categories [26]
Security Clause
Security Categories
Security Policy
●	 Management Direction
Organizing Information 
Security
●	 Internal Organization
●	 External Parties
Asset Management
●	 Responsibility for Assets
●	 Information Classification
Human Resources 
Security
●	 Prior to Employment
●	 During Employment
●	 Termination of Employment
Physical and 
Environmental Security
●	 Secure Areas
●	 Equipment Security
Communications 
and Operations 
Management
●	 Operational Procedures and Responsibilities
●	 Third Party Service Delivery Management
●	 System Planning and Acceptance
●	 Protection Against Malicious and Mobile Code
●	 Back-up
●	 Network Security Management
●	 Media Handling
●	 Exchange of Information
●	 Electronic Commerce Services
●	 Monitoring
Access Control
●	 Business Requirement for Access Control
●	 User Access Management
●	 User Responsibilities
●	 Network Access Control
●	 Operating System Access Control
●	 Application and Information Access Control
●	 Mobile Computing and Teleworking
Information Systems 
Acquisition, 
Development and 
Maintenance
●	 Security Requirements of Information Systems
●	 Correct Processing in Applications
●	 Cryptographic Controls
●	 Security of System Files
●	 Security in Development and Support Processes
●	 Technical Vulnerability Management
Information Security 
Incident Management
●	 Reporting Information Security Events and Weaknesses
●	 Management of Information Security Events and 
Improvements
Business Continuity 
Management
●	 Information Security Aspects of Business Continuity 
Management
Compliance
●	 Compliance with Legal Requirements
●	 Compliance with Security Policies and Standards, and 
Technical Compliance
●	 Information Systems Audit Considerations

191
Security Control Assessment Frameworks
NIST security control assessment guidance
Under authority delegated by a provision of the Federal Information Security 
Management Act (FISMA), the NIST develops and publishes numerous stand-
ards and guidance documents on information security and privacy management 
for use by federal government agencies. The security control framework mandated 
for use in agencies subject to FISMA is documented in Special Publication 800-
53 (SP 800-53) [29], which specifies different sets of controls to be used to safe-
guard federal information systems. NIST also publishes guidance for conducting 
security control assessments of information systems and the organizations that own 
or operate them in SP 800-53A [30]. As the similar document numbers imply, the 
assessment guidance in SP 800-53A matches the structure of the control framework 
defined in SP 800-53, making it an obvious choice for evaluating security con-
trols in government agencies or other organizations that choose to adopt the NIST 
control framework. The security control assessment procedures in SP 800-53A 
are organized to match the 18 control families and 198 controls in the framework 
defined in SP 800-53. The SP 800-53 control families appear in Table 9.11 along 
with counts of the controls and control enhancements defined within each family.
When discussing ISO/IEC 27001 certification, it is important to distinguish the subject 
of the certification to avoid potential confusion. Organizations can seek ISO/IEC 27001 
certification for their ISMS through an evaluation process conducted by a certifying body 
accredited by ISO. Separate from any organizational designation, individuals can obtain 
professional certifications related to the standard, such as ISO/IEC 27001 Lead Auditor or 
ISO/IEC 27001 Lead Implementer, which attest, respectively, to knowledge and qualifica-
tions related to auditing organizations for compliance against the standard or implement-
ing ISMS in conformance with the standard.
NIST released the latest update to the framework in SP 800-53 in April 2013 with 
Revision 4, reflecting significant changes in some structural aspects as well as adding 
many controls and control enhancements and removing or consolidating some others. 
The most current version of the SP 800-53A assessment guidance was published in June 
2010 and so aligns to Revision 3 of the security control framework. The 18 control fami-
lies remain the same, but the set of controls within some families has changed in the 
latest revision to SP 800-53. From a practical perspective, federal agencies and other 
organizations using the framework as a control reference are unlikely to transition fully to 
the new version until an matching update to 800-53A occurs.
Not all controls and control enhancements addressed in SP 800-53A are 
required; the specific requirements for a given system under evaluation depend 
on its assigned security categorization, organizational policy, and the perceived 
risk to the system. For a system categorized at a “high” impact level, a full assess-
ment using SP 800-53A would cover 167 controls and 161 control enhancements 

192
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
or 328 discrete items to be assessed [30]. For each item to be assessed, NIST 
guidance specifies assessment methods (examine, interview, and test) and the 
subjects of those assessment methods (specifications, mechanisms, activities, indi-
viduals, and groups). This guidance includes optional controls and control enhance-
ments as well, with a total of over 600 assessment procedures documented in SP 
800-53A [30]. The clear benefit to an IT auditor evaluating controls implemented 
according to NIST guidance is a detailed, prescriptive set of instructions intended to 
help assess the extent to which each security control effectively satisfies its control 
objectives.
Security control frameworks like ISO/IEC 27002 and SP 800-53 are incomplete 
if the goal is to assess all IT controls; security controls are vitally important to 
IT, but do not represent the full set of controls applicable to IT operations and 
governance. Security control frameworks remain both relevant and beneficial 
given the emphasis in many IT audits on evaluating the compliance or effective-
ness of security controls, but they are insufficient foundation for comprehensive 
IT auditing.
Table 9.11  NIST Controls and Control Enhancements by Control Family [29]
Control Family
Number of 
Controls
Number of 
Enhancements
Access Control
19
65
Awareness and Training
5
3
Audit and Accountability
14
29
Security Assessment and Authorization
6
7
Configuration Management
9
32
Contingency Planning
9
34
Identification and Authentication
8
25
Incident Response
8
14
Maintenance
6
17
Media Protection
6
13
Physical and Environmental Protection
19
29
Planning
5
3
Personnel Security
8
4
Risk Assessment
4
9
System and Services Acquisition
14
27
System and Communications Protection
34
61
System and Information Integrity
13
41
Program Management
11
0
Total
198
413

193
Relevant Source Material
Relevant source material
Each of the methodologies and frameworks described in this chapter is available 
as documentation in electronic and, in most cases, published hard-copy formats. 
Information on downloading or otherwise obtaining such documentation is avail-
able on the web sites of the organizations responsible for each document or set of 
documents. Readers should be aware that while a great deal of information is typi-
cally publicly available about methodologies, frameworks, and associated standards 
and guidance, obtaining complete versions often requires purchasing the documen-
tation. Some organizations make information available free or at a reduced cost to 
members or to individuals willing to register with them. Of the information covered 
in this chapter, documentation published by government agencies or government-
focused organizations is generally available publicly at no cost, with the excep-
tion of ITIL. Relevant source material on major audit-relevant methodologies and 
frameworks includes:
●	 Statement on Auditing Standards 95, Generally Accepted Auditing Standards [1]
●	 IAASB’s International Standards on Auditing, available individually as 
downloads from http://www.ifac.org or consolidated in the annually updated 
Handbook of International Quality Control, Auditing Review, Other Assurance, 
and Related Services Pronouncements [31]
●	 COSO’s Internal Control—Integrated Framework [5]
●	 IIA’s International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) [6]
●	 ISACA’s COBIT 4.1 [12] and COBIT 5 frameworks [11]
●	 Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) Service Lifecycle, 
available for purchase at http://www.best-management-practice.com
●	 ITIL Service Strategy
●	 ITIL Service Design
●	 ITIL Service Transition
●	 ITIL Service Operation
●	 ITIL Continuous Service Improvement
●	 ISO and ISO/IEC Standards, available for purchase at http://www.iso.org/ or 
through national standards bodies
●	 ISO 19011:2011, Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems [8]
●	 ISO/IEC 20000:2011, Information Technology Service Management [18]
●	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005, ISMS Requirements [25]
●	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005, Code of Practice for Information Security 
Management [26]
●	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011, Guidelines for ISMS Auditing [9]
●	 ISO/IEC 38500:2008, Corporate Governance of Information Technology [17]
●	 GAO’s Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM) [22]
●	 ISSAI 5310, Information System Security Review Methodology [23]
●	 NIST Special Publication 800-53A, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls 
in Federal Information Systems and Organizations [30]

194
CHAPTER 9  Methodologies and Frameworks
Summary
This chapter identified and briefly described the major methodologies and frame-
works available to assist auditors and organizations effectively conduct different 
types of audits, including audits of internal controls, information technology, secu-
rity controls, and processes and services used in IT management and governance. 
With many alternative frameworks, approaches, and sources of information avail-
able, organizations that look externally for guidance can choose the methodology 
(or methodologies) that best suit the organization, the types of audits it needs to 
perform, and its audit objectives.
References
	 [1]	 Generally Accepted Auditing Standards. New York, NY: American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants, Auditing Standards Board; 2001 December. Statement 
on Auditing Standards No. 95.
	 [2]	 Overall objectives of the independent auditor and the conduct of an audit in accord-
ance with International Standards on Auditing. New York (NY): International 
Federation of Accountants; 2012. International Standard on Auditing 200.
	 [3]	 Audit considerations relating to an entity using a service organization. International 
Standard on Auditing 402. New York (NY): International Federation of Accountants; 
2012.
	 [4]	 Board of the International Federation of Accountants. Statement of membership obli-
gations. New York (NY): International Federation of Accountants; 2012 November.
	 [5]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Internal con-
trol—Integrated framework. Durham (NC): American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants; 2013.
	 [6]	 International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) 2013 Edition. Altamonte 
Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2013.
	 [7]	 International standards for the professional practice of internal auditing. Altamonte 
Springs (FL): Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012 October.
	 [8]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	 [9]	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011. Information—Security techniques—Guidelines for information 
security management systems auditing.
	[10]	 IT Governance Institute. Board briefing on IT governance. 2nd ed. Rolling Meadows 
(IL): IT Governance Institute; 2003.
	[11]	 ISACA. COBIT 5: A business framework for the governance and management of 
enterprise IT; Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA; 2012. IT Governance Institute. COBIT 
4.1. Rolling Meadows (IL): IT Governance Institute; 2007.
	[12]	 IT Governance Institute. COBIT 4.1. Rolling Meadows (IL): IT Governance Institute; 
2007.
	[13]	 COBIT 5 Product Family [Internet]. Rolling Meadows (IL): ISACA [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/Product-Family.aspx>.
	[14]	 ITIL glossary and abbreviations. London (UK): Cabinet Office; 2011.
	[15]	 Orr AT. Introduction to the ITIL service lifecycle. London (UK): Cabinet Office; 2011.

195
References
	[16]	 Cartlidge A, Hanna A, Rudd C, Macfarlane I, Windebank J, Rance S. An introduc-
tory overview of ITIL® V3. Wokingham (UK): IT Service Management Forum, UK 
Chapter; 2007.
	[17]	 ISO/IEC 38500:2008. Corporate governance of information technology.
	[18]	 ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 1: 
Service management system requirements.
	[19]	 ISO/IEC 20000-4:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 4: 
Process reference model.
	[20]	 Government auditing standards. Washington (DC): Government Accountability Office; 
2011 December.
	[21]	 Information assurance workforce improvement program. Washington (DC): 
Department of Defense; 2005 December 19. DoD Manual 8570.01-M.
	[22]	 Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM). Washington (DC): 
Government Accountability Office; 2009 February.
	[23]	 International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions. Information system security 
review methodology. Copenhagen (DK): INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee; 
1995. ISSAI 5310.
	[24]	 Guide for conducting risk assessments. Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2012 September. Special 
Publication 800-30 revision 1.
	[25]	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005. Information—Security techniques—Information security man-
agement systems—Requirements.
	[26]	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Information technology—Security techniques—Code of prac-
tice for information security management.
	[27]	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of management systems.
	[28]	 ISO/IEC 27006:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Requirements 
for bodies providing audit and certification of information security management 
systems.
	[29]	 Recommended security controls for federal information systems and organizations. 
Gaithersburg, (MD): National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2009 August. Special Publication 800-53 revision 3.
	[30]	 Guide for assessing the security controls in federal information systems and organiza-
tions. Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2010 June. Special Publication 800-53A revision 1.
	[31]	 Handbook of international quality control, auditing review, other assurance, and 
related services pronouncements. New York (NY): International Auditing and 
Assurance Standards Board; 2012 June.

197
Audit-Related 
Organizations, Standards, 
and Certifications
10
CHAPTER 
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
●	 National and international perspectives
●	 Audit-focused standards and certification organizations
●	 Organizations offering IT-related assessment or audit guidance
As should be clear from the information in the preceding chapters, there are many 
dimensions to IT auditing organizations should consider and there is no sin-
gle “right” or “best” auditing approach or strategy that will work effectively for 
all organizations. No single authoritative standard or source of IT audit knowl-
edge exists, even within one country, sector, or operational domain; instead there 
are many, stemming from organizations focused on IT assurance as well as more 
general accounting and financial management, quality management, IT manage-
ment, software engineering, and information security. The large number and variety 
of sources of audit information, guidance, and professional expertise can be both 
a help and a hindrance to organizations trying to determine the most appropriate 
approach for their IT auditing. The optimal approach for a given organization is a 
function of many factors, including the nature of the organization, its business func-
tions, and its information systems and infrastructure; the industry in which it par-
ticipates; its regulatory environment and the extent to which it is subject to external 
audits; the sphere of its geographical locations and operations; the importance the 
organization places on IT governance, risk management, and auditing; and the 
maturity of its internal processes including the audit function. With some or all of 
these factors in mind, organizations may structure their own audit programs in a 
way that tries to align available audit processes, standards, and guidance with the 
organization’s specific audit needs.
While some organizations may prefer to focus on a single auditing framework 
and corresponding set of audit standards and procedures, others find it more effec-
tive to distinguish different audit needs and areas of emphasis and choose spe-
cialized auditing approaches for each subject area. For organizations that have 
standardized on a particular governance, IT management, or service delivery 
framework—such as COSO, COBIT, ITIL, or other models described in the 
The Basics of IT Audit. DOI: 
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417159-6.00010-9

198
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
previous chapter—it often makes most sense to structure their auditing in a way 
that closely aligns to the framework to which they have committed. The alterna-
tive strategy of using multiple audit approaches can result in a single organization 
employing many different standards and approaches to cover the full scope of its 
audit universe. Numerous organizations provide standards, assessment frameworks, 
and audit guidance relevant to different types of IT auditing, so the development of 
an organizational audit strategy should involve some level of research or investiga-
tion into available materials and methods that organizations can apply to their own 
audit programs.
The flexibility to tailor audit performance in this manner is typically greater 
for internal auditing than it is for external auditing, as the policies, rules, regula-
tions, or standards underlying external audit requirements often dictate the stand-
ards and processes to be employed. Any organization seeking to be successful 
with its internal audit program needs to understand very well the nature of the IT 
assets, functional processes, technical characteristics, and other aspects of its opera-
tions that need to be evaluated so that it can determine the appropriate manner in 
which to conduct audits. Organizational strategic goals, governance objectives, risk 
tolerance, and compliance needs also motivate IT auditing and influence the pri-
oritization of audit subjects. Organizational choices for selecting audit procedures, 
protocols, and methodologies to use for performing internal audits, including speci-
fying their own audit standards and criteria and audit processes instead of adopting 
externally defined alternatives. External auditors hired by or assigned to evaluate 
different types of organizations typically follow specific regulatory or organization-
adopted standards and use audit personnel with certifications corresponding to 
those standards.
Similarly, when selecting personnel to perform internal audits—either assign-
ing employees or choosing individuals or firms outside the organization—organiza-
tions try to ensure that the people conducting audits have the necessary knowledge, 
skills, and qualifications to do the job correctly. If a given standard or formal 
approach applies to an audit, then the auditors should be able to demonstrate famili-
arity with the standard to be used, either through prior experience, through a rele-
vant certification or similar credential, or both. Certifications give those performing 
or undergoing audits confidence that the personnel doing the audits have sufficient 
expertise to accurately and efficiently complete the task. Certification alone is no 
guarantee of competency, as organizations issuing certifications or other credentials 
have varying certification requirements and levels of rigor in the process through 
which they award professional credentials. Most of the best-regarded certifications 
relevant to IT auditing are conferred by organizations that require demonstrated 
relevant work experience and education in addition to passing a certification exam 
against an explicit body of knowledge. Whether hiring new employees to perform 
audits, training existing staff to develop auditing skills, or evaluating proposed con-
tractors or audit firm personnel, organizations need to be aware of professional cer-
tifications to assess their value in determining auditor qualifications and to decide 

199
National And International Perspectives
whether to mandate specific credentials as a prerequisite for individuals who will 
perform audits on an organization’s behalf.
This chapter identifies and briefly describes the major organizations responsi-
ble for producing IT audit standards and related guidance and for offering certifi-
cation programs for individuals who might perform audits. Earlier chapters of this 
book make frequent reference to many of the organizations mentioned in this chap-
ter, particularly those responsible for producing or maintaining commonly used IT 
management, governance, risk management, and audit frameworks. The focus of 
the material presented in this chapter is on standards and guidance relevant to vari-
ous aspects of IT auditing that can be incorporated into more than one auditing pro-
cess or framework, and on certifications and corresponding skill sets for auditors 
that may be valuable when conducting specific types of audits.
National and international perspectives
There are organizations that publish standards and offer certifications intended to 
apply internationally; organizations whose focus is on regional or national appli-
cability but that conform to international principles or standards; and organizations 
that operate with a more explicitly limited geographic or industry scope. Many 
IT-focused management frameworks and standards, such as Information Systems 
Audit and Control Association (ISACA)’s COBIT, are intended to be used glob-
ally, typically with little local adaptation in different countries. Other international 
audit standards, such as the Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS) prom-
ulgated by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB), are 
adapted for local use in different regions or countries by national standards organ-
izations. International organizations also may choose to develop and disseminate 
standards, practices, and guidance or produce such information by incorporating, 
aggregating, or aligning standards and practices developed by other organizations 
that have a narrower scope. For example, the International Organization of Supreme 
Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) comprises nearly 200 national-level audit institutions 
responsible for external government audits and authorizes, endorses, and dissemi-
nates audit standards and best practices guidance developed in national-level mem-
ber organizations and in collaboration with other international auditing standards 
bodies. Similarly, the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) comprises 
more than 165 organizations in over 125 countries develops and promotes interna-
tional standards that its members commit to implement. There are also examples of 
what are now international standards that were originally created at a national level, 
such as the ISO 27001 and 27002 information security management standards that 
began as British Standards before being adopted and enhanced for international 
consumption. In general, IT auditing standards and practices and related guidance 
often have multinational or global applicability, while audit standards focused on 
ensuring legal or regulatory compliance tend to be country- or region-specific.

200
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards
Auditing in many countries adheres to broad standards and principles collectively 
known as GAAS, analogous conceptually to the Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP) used in financial accounting and auditing. Despite the names 
of these standards and the work of international organizations to achieve some 
level of cross-national consensus on the standards, the specifics of what con-
stitutes “generally accepted” varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, with the 
result that there is no single authoritative agreed-upon source of audit stand-
ards. Instead, leading national standards organizations in many countries work to 
develop standards that embody GAAS and promulgate those standards in their 
own countries. Such organizations often contribute or make available their stand-
ards and guidance for use or adaptation by auditing organizations in other coun-
tries. Some international standards organizations develop standards for general 
availability, giving authorities and individual organizations in multiple coun-
tries the option to use or adapt those standards if they choose. For example, the 
IAASB, part of the IFAC, produces numerous International Standards on Auditing 
(ISAs) that audit organizations in different countries (or multinational jurisdic-
tions such as the European Community) adopt and mandate for organizations con-
ducting audits subject to their jurisdiction. In the United States, the Statements 
on Auditing Standards (SAS) issued by the American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA) serve as GAAS for audits (especially external audits) in US 
organizations.
Auditing for legal or regulatory compliance
International auditing standards are least likely to be found in contexts driven by 
statutory requirements, even in industries in which organizations from many 
countries participate, as the criteria for demonstrating regulatory or legal compli-
ance are typically dictated by national (or state or provincial) laws that have no 
international jurisdiction. Some of the most significant legislation affecting the 
conduct of audits—such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 in the United States 
or the 2006 Directive on Statutory Audits in the European Community—only 
affects organizations operating within the countries covered by the laws. Despite 
sharing some common audit needs, operational characteristics, and types of infra-
structure, organizations in the same industries operating in different countries are 
typically subject to national regulatory requirements instead of or in addition to 
international standards. This sort of national regulatory variation exists in many 
industries, including financial services, health care, petroleum production, nuclear 
energy, and manufacturing. For some multinational corporations, this means that 
facilities and operations in different geographic areas are likely subject to different 
audit requirements and relevant standards to achieve and maintain compliance in all 
locations.

201
Audit-focused Standards and Certification Organizations
Audit-focused standards and certification organizations
Not all standards and personnel certifications applicable to IT auditing come from 
auditing-specific disciplines but external and internal auditing in virtually all 
organizations is influenced to some degree by standards, principles, and guidance 
developed by audit-focused organizations or by more broadly focused standards 
development organizations that produce audit-specific standards and professional 
certification.
Having a certification or other credential alone is not reliable evidence of quali-
fications to perform an audit task or do a specific job effectively. A sort of infor-
mal hierarchy among different certifications and certifying organizations exists 
in the industry, but hiring or contract managers evaluating an individual’s cre-
dentials may not have sufficient familiarity with all the certifications to deter-
mine their relative merit. To use possession of a credential to help assess a 
candidate’s skills and qualifications, anyone evaluating the individual needs to 
understand the criteria for attaining the certification, including any education or 
prior work experience requirements.
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
The AICPA is one of the most prominent US organizations focused on the 
accounting profession and is a leading authority of many types of audit guidance. 
Although its focus is setting professional and ethical standards for accountants 
working in the United States and developing and maintaining audit standards for 
use in external audits of US organizations, AICPA has nearly 400,000 members 
in more than 125 countries [1], and contributes best practices, expertise, and other 
information to several international bodies. AICPA is perhaps best known gener-
ally for its administration of the Certified Public Accountant (CPA) credential, a 
prerequisite for becoming licensed as an accountant in the United States. For more 
than 40 years, the AICPA also has issued numerous SAS, which for auditors work-
ing in the United States constitute authoritative guidance on generally accepted 
auditing standards (GAAS). It is also one of the sponsoring organizations of the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission respon-
sible for the COSO Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control integrated 
frameworks.
Audit standards
The SAS published by the AICPA cover all aspects of auditing and the professional 
practice of auditors. As of January 2013, there were 127 statements issued by the 

202
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
Auditing Standards Board of the AICPA, although the total set of useful standards is 
somewhat less because newly issued statements often update, amend, or replace pre-
viously issued ones so some of the earliest SAS guidance has been withdrawn. With 
IT auditing in mind, the most relevant SAS include those enumerated in Table 10.1.
Recognizing the importance of attestation in many types of audits, the AICPA 
also issues Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE). SSAE 
guidance is particularly relevant to IT auditing controls implemented by service 
organizations (addressed in SAS No. 70), including providers of IT outsourcing, 
system or application hosting, cloud computing, and data centers and related envi-
ronments. In current practice, SSAE No. 16, Reporting on Controls at a Service 
Organization, and its three types of Service Organization Control (SOC) reports 
has largely superseded SAS No. 70 as the basis for service providing organiza-
tions to report on their internal controls. SOC reports can be used by organizations 
Table 10.1  SAS Applicable to IT Audits [2]
SAS
Title
Published
1
Responsibilities and Functions of the Independent Auditor
1972
25
The Relationship of Generally Accepted Auditing Standards 
to Quality Control Standards
1979
39
Audit Sampling
1981
56
Analytical Procedures
1988
70
Service Organizationsa
1992
73
Using the Work of a Specialist
1994
88
Service Organizations and Reporting on Consistency
1999
95
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards
2001
102
Defining Professional Requirements in Statements on 
Auditing Standards
2005
103
Audit Documentation
2005
105
Amendment to SAS No. 95: Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards
2006
106
Audit Evidence
2006
108
Planning and Supervision
2006
109
Understanding the Entity and its Environment and Assessing 
the Risks of Material Misstatement
2006
110
Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks 
and Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained
2006
111
Amendment to SAS No. 39, Audit Sampling
2006
114
The Auditor’s Communication with Those Charged with 
Governance
2006
117
Compliance Audits
2009
aSAS 70 was superseded by SSAE 16 in 2011 but remains familiar to many auditors.

203
Audit-focused Standards and Certification Organizations
seeking services from providers to evaluate the relative completeness or strength of 
the service providers’ controls. SOC reports include [3]:
●	 SOC 1, Report on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to User Entities’ 
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
●	 SOC 2, Report on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security, 
Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality or Privacy
●	 SOC 3, Trust Services Report for Service Organizations
AICPA certifications
The CPA designation is both an indication that an individual has successfully 
passed the AICPA’s Uniform CPA Examination and met other certification perqui-
sites and a necessary qualification for individuals to be licensed to provide audit-
ing opinions on financial statements of entities operating in the US states. The CPA 
credential requires formal education in accounting and successful completion of the 
four-part CPA exam. Specific education, work experience, and other requirements 
for CPAs to become licensed vary by state, but passing the CPA exam is required 
in all US jurisdictions [4]. The four CPA exam sections are auditing and attesta-
tion; business environment and concepts, financial accounting and reporting, and 
regulation.
The Certified Information Technology Professional (CITP) is a specialty creden-
tial offered by AICPA to already certified CPAs who possess and can demonstrate 
expertise in information technology management and information assurance [5]. 
The CITP program uses an explicit body of knowledge comprising risk assess-
ment; fraud considerations; internal control and its general controls; evaluate, test 
and report, and information management and business intelligence. In addition to 
holding a current CPA license and successfully passing the CITP exam, the program 
requires a minimum of 1000 h of relevant work experience and at least 75 h of con-
tinuing professional education in the 5 years preceding a candidate’s application for 
the certification.
Institute of Internal Auditors
The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) is, like the AICPA, a very large US-based 
professional association with thousands of active members globally and an authori-
tative source of standards, procedures, and guidance on internal auditing, risk 
management, governance, and IT audit. As its name implies, the IIA’s focus is 
on internal audit practices, including advocating for the profession and its value 
to organizations; providing professional education and certification programs; 
researching and publishing internal auditing best practices and their effective appli-
cation in governance, risk, compliance, and controls; and sponsoring conferences 
and other knowledge-sharing and collaborative opportunities for internal auditors 
worldwide [6].

204
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
Audit standards
The IIA develops and disseminates a broad range of internal auditing standards and 
guidance, organized through the International Professional Practice Framework 
(IPPF) described in Chapter 9. Mandatory guidance within the IPPF is treated as 
prescriptive for internal auditors—at least those who are members of IIA—and is 
complemented by additional recommended guidance in the form of position papers, 
practice advisories, and practice guides. The IIA’s documented IT audit guidance is 
made available to members and for sale to nonmembers in the form of 16 Global 
Technology Audit Guides, covering topics from general information technology 
controls (GTAG 1) and management of IT auditing (GTAG 4) to more narrowly 
focused IT domains including identity and access management (GTAG 9), business 
continuity (GTAG 10), and IT outsourcing (GTAG 7).
Certifications
The IIA offers five IT audit-related certifications, including the prominent Certified 
Internal Auditor (CIA) credential first established in 1973. In addition to success-
fully passing a comprehensive certification exam, qualifications for the CIA include 
minimum postsecondary education of a 4-year degree or equivalent, a character ref-
erence from a current IIA credential holder, at least 2 years of work experience as 
an internal auditor (or 1 year for candidates with a master’s degree), and a commit-
ment to abide by the IIA’s code of ethics and to satisfying continuing professional 
education requirements once certified [7]. In addition to the CIA, the IIA offers 
four more specialized certifications:
1.	 Certification in Control Self-Assessment (CCSA)
2.	 Certified Government Auditing Professional (CGAP)
3.	 Certified Financial Services Auditor (CFSA)
4.	 Certification in Risk Management Assurance (CRMA).
These credentials do not require candidates to attain the CIA, but have substan-
tially the same eligibility requirements in terms of education, demonstrated prior 
work experience, character endorsement, successful exam completion, and adher-
ence to the code of ethics and continuing education requirements.
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions
The International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) is both 
an autonomous international body focusing on external audits of government 
institutions and an umbrella organization representing national-level government 
audit institutions in approximately 190 countries. Established in 1953, it offers a 
framework for “supreme” (meaning primary or authoritative) government audit 
institutions to develop and facilitate knowledge sharing and dissemination of best 
practices, improve the quality and effectiveness of government auditing activities, 
and promote the capacities, position, and influence of its member organizations. By 
way of example, in the United States, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) 

205
Audit-focused Standards and Certification Organizations
is considered the supreme audit institution, while European member organizations 
include the European Court of Auditors (representing the EC), the National Audit 
Office in the United Kingdom, the Court of Audit (Cour de Comptes) in France, 
the Federal Court of Auditors (Bundesrechnungshof) in Germany, and the Accounts 
Chamber (Schetnaya Palata) of the Russian Federation. The World Bank and IIA 
are INTOSAI associate members [8].
Audit standards
INTOSAI does not offer individual certifications for auditors, but it does produce 
a series of audit guidance known as the International Standards of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (ISSAI). Many of the guidance documents available as ISSAI are sub-
stantially the same as artifacts produced by other audit standards bodies, such as 
IFAC’s ISAs and AICPA’s SAS. With respect to IT auditing, the most relevant ISSAI 
guidance is ISSAI 5310, Information System Security Review Methodology[9], 
which INTOSAI characterizes as its only IT audit-specific guidelines.
International Federation of Accountants
The IFAC is a global organization focused on the accounting profession that devel-
ops, through several independent accounting standards boards, ISAs and assurance, 
public sector accounting, accounting education, and ethics [10]. With members in 
more than 125 countries, IFAC and the standards it approves and endorses influ-
ence accounting practices worldwide and its governance—at the organizational 
level and through the Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB)—contribute to 
increased credibility of accounting practitioners and public confidence in auditing 
activities. Prominent national and regional accounting organizations with IFAC 
membership include the AICPA in the United States, the Confederation of Asian 
and Pacific Accountants, the Fédération des Experts Comptables Européens (FEE), 
the Interamerican Accounting Association, and the Pan African Federation of 
Accountants. In contrast to organizations like AICPA, IIA, and ISACA, IFAC mem-
bers are professional accounting organizations, not individuals.
The independent standards-setting boards established by IFAC include 
the IAASB, the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board, the 
International Accounting Education Standards Board, and the International Ethics 
Standards Board for Accountants. The work of the IAASB is most directly relevant 
to IT auditing, as the IAASB both sets international standards for auditing—incor-
porating or assimilating national standards where appropriate—and promotes audit 
quality and uniformity of practice among countries that adopt its standards. The 
IAASB follows a formal process for developing its standards and other published 
guidance, gathering input national auditing standards organizations, IFAC member 
organizations, regulatory and oversight bodies, accounting firms, government agen-
cies, and the public. By following a transparent and repeatable process the IAASB 
seeks to maximize the relevance of its standards in a way that is consistent with the 
practice of accounting and auditing in the public interest [11].

206
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
Audit standards
The primary output of the IAASB is the ISAs, a set of documents issued by IFAC 
on a wide range of issues and subjects related to financial auditing. While none of 
the ISAs are focused specifically on IT auditing, many of the standards address 
aspects of audit practices that are directly relevant to IT audits as well as other 
types. ISAs are numbered according to seven subject area: responsibilities, audit 
planning, internal control, audit evidence, using the work of external experts, audit 
reports, and specialized areas. In an effort to make ISAs as understandable and 
therefore as usable as possible, the IAASB in engaged in a project from 2003 to 
2008 to improve the clarity of its standards documentation, during which time it 
redrafted and reissued a majority of the ISAs [12]. The ISAs are required for use 
in some national and multinational jurisdictions, notably including the European 
Community, which in 2006 mandated the use of International Standards on 
Accounting for statutory audits in member countries [13].
Information Systems Audit and Control Association
ISACA is an independent global organization focused on developing and dissemi-
nating standards, practices, and domain knowledge about information systems, 
particularly including governance, risk management, security, audit, and assur-
ance. Originally established in 1969 as the Electronic Data Processing Auditors 
Association (EDPAA) and currently officially known only by its acronym, ISACA 
is the most prominent professional association dedicated explicitly to managing 
and auditing information systems and related technology [14]. Although its activi-
ties and publications span a wide range of subjects, ISACA is best known globally 
for its Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) frame-
work and for administering the certification program for the Certified Information 
Systems Auditor (CISA) credential, which is among the most respected and sought 
after qualification for individuals engaged to perform IT audits.
Audit standards
As described in more detail in Chapter 9, the COBIT framework is designed to help 
organizations effectively manage their information technology, by describing nearly 
three dozen core processes organized into the four domains of plan and organize, 
acquire and implement, deliver and support, and monitor and evaluate. This frame-
work provides the structure against which organizational processes and controls 
can be evaluated, but it is not explicitly designed to support or facilitate auditing. 
ISACA’s Professional Standards Committee publishes Standards for IT Audit and 
Assurance (listed in Table 10.2), completely updated and re-released in 2013, that 
offer explicit requirements for various aspects of auditing practice, and another 19 
IT Audit and Assurance Guidelines. ISACA considers its standards to be manda-
tory, while its guidelines and supporting tools and techniques are recommended for 
consideration by auditors but not required.

207
Audit-focused Standards and Certification Organizations
Certifications
The CISA designation, first awarded by ISACA in 1978 and now held by more than 
100,000 individuals, is intended for professionals engaged in auditing or assessing 
information systems and related technology. The credential applies to those con-
ducting either internal or external audits in a variety of operating environments and 
IT management or governance contexts. The CISA is highly regarded as an audi-
tor credential and is commonly stated as a required qualification for organizational 
employees or contractors hired to perform information systems audits [16]. To 
qualify for the CISA, candidates must pass a comprehensive examination assessing 
knowledge of five practice domains: Auditing Information Systems; Governance 
and Management of IT; Information Systems Acquisition, Development and 
Implementation; Information Systems Operations, Maintenance and Support; and 
Protection of Information Assets. Applicants for the CISA must also provide evi-
dence of 5 years of relevant prior work experience (or a combination of work expe-
rience and completion of higher education in a related field) and commit to uphold 
ISACA’s Code of Professional Ethics, comply with information systems auditing 
standards, and maintain the credential through continuing professional education. 
As an indication of ISACA’s global scope for the CISA, exam preparation materials 
and the exam itself are available in 11 languages.
Table 10.2  Standards for IT Audit and Assurance [15]
Standard
Title
1001
Audit Charter
1002
Organizational Independence
1003
Professional Independence
1004
Reasonable Expectation
1005
Due Professional Care
1006
Proficiency
1007
Assertions
1008
Criteria
1201
Engagement Planning
1202
Risk Assessment in Planning
1203
Performance and Supervision
1204
Materiality
1205
Evidence
1206
Using the Work of Other Experts
1207
Irregularity and Illegal Acts
1401
Reporting
1402
Follow-up Activities

208
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
In addition to the CISA, ISACA offers three other certification programs: 
Certified Information Systems Manager (CISM), Certified in the Governance of 
Enterprise Information Technology (CGEIT), and Certified in Risk and Information 
Systems Control (CRISC). Each of these credentials requires relevant prior work 
experience in addition to the successful completion of a certification exam. Readers 
should note that ISACA offers a “grandfathering” program for its credentialing pro-
grams when newly established, in which some candidates are able to qualify for the 
credential without taking an exam by submitting evidence and attestation of signifi-
cant relevant experience. Both the CISA and CISM are accredited under ISO/IEC 
17024 [17], an international standard specifying criteria for individual certification 
programs. The CGEIT and CRISC are the most recently launched ISACA certifi-
cations, developed partly as a result of ISACA’s increased focus on standards and 
practices for IT governance and risk management.
Individuals certified by more than one organization may be obligated to follow differ-
ent audit standards or requirements to meet the expectations of the credential-issuing 
body. For example, someone holding a CIA from IIA and a CISA from ISACA is ostensibly 
required to use both IIA’s mandatory guidance within the IPPF and ISACA’s IT Audit and 
Assurance Guidelines. Fortunately for such individuals, the audit standards and guidance 
published by many of the leading organizations overlap significantly and have more in 
common than in conflict, due in part to efforts of the standards development organizations 
to adhere to GAAS.
International Organization for Standardization
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is the largest standards 
development organization in the world, having published nearly 20,000 standards 
in its 65-year history covering a vast array of scientific, technical, and business 
subjects [18]. The ISO is an independent organization with membership composed 
of national standards bodies of more than 160 countries (including the American 
National Standards Institute, the British Standards Institute, the Standards Council 
of Canada, and Standards Australia). The full scope of the ISO’s standards develop-
ment activities is beyond the scope of this book, but it oversees over 250 technical 
committees organized by subject matter that work to develop, refine, and promote 
ISO standards. Joint Task Committee 1 focuses on standardization in information 
technology and is responsible for ISO standards relevant to IT auditing, information 
security, risk management, and quality management.
Audit standards
ISO’s 27000 series of standards address various aspects of information secu-
rity management, particularly including a comprehensive control framework used 
by organizations in a variety of industries and sectors and referenced in leading IT 
management frameworks such as COBIT and COSO. ISO/IEC 27001 specifies 

209
Audit-focused Standards and Certification Organizations
an information security management system (ISMS) in the form of 12 sets of cat-
egorized security requirements that organizations adopting the ISMS must imple-
ment [19]. The ISMS defined in ISO/IEC 27001 is a not a technical system at all, 
but an integrated set of management processes and a framework for developing secu-
rity requirements and selecting security controls to satisfy those requirements. The 
information security management code of practice described in ISO/IEC 27002, 
which identifies 133 controls across organized into 11 clauses (categories) collec-
tively define information security practices relevant to a system or an organization 
[20]. ISO/IEC 27007 provides guidelines for auditors evaluating organizations’ 
ISMSs against ISO/IEC 27001 [21]. ISO publishes two separately numbered but 
substantially similar standards on risk management: ISO/IEC 27005, which explic-
itly addresses information security risk management [22], and ISO 31000, a group of 
standards representing a structure and associated processes and guidance for organi-
zation-wide risk management [23]. Many organizations follow ISO standards related 
to quality management, most familiarly including the ISO 9000 family of standards 
and particularly ISO 9001 for quality management systems [24] and ISO/IEC 20000 
for service management systems [25]. ISO 19011 provides guidelines for auditing 
quality management systems such as those organizations implement following ISO 
9001 [26].
Government Accountability Office
The US GAO is an independent, nonpartisan agency positioned within the legis-
lative branch of government that serves as the authoritative American institution 
auditing government organizations. Its work focuses on reviewing government 
spending and the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of various government programs 
and agencies, including auditing agency operations to assess whether federal fund-
ing is being used properly, cost-effectively, and efficiently [27]. The GAO conducts 
reviews, investigations, audits, and other investigations at the request of Congress 
or to satisfy legal requirements. With specific respect to auditing government agen-
cies, GAO develops and maintains authoritative Government Auditing Standards 
(GAS) [28]—familiarly known as the Yellow Book—as well as formal audit pro-
cedures for government information systems and their controls through the Federal 
Information System Control Audit Manual (FISCAM) [29].
Audit standards
The generally accepted government auditing standards described in the Yellow 
Book provide a structural framework and explicit standards for conducting financial 
or performance audits of government organizations and nongovernment entities that 
receive government awards. The general accounting standards include four general 
standards—independence, professional judgment, competence, and quality control 
and assurance—and specify additional standards for financial audits, performance 
audits, attestation engagements, audit field work, and reporting [28]. While these 

210
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
standards have much in common with practices and guidance produced by nongov-
ernment-focused national and international standards bodies, the GAS are rarely 
applied outside government-focused audits.
Auditors’ oversight bodies
The increased scrutiny associated with auditing and financial accounting related 
to public companies led to the creation of oversight bodies responsible for ensur-
ing the integrity of audit and accounting practices in countries under their jurisdic-
tion. The two most prominent examples of these bodies are the US Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) and the European Community’s European 
Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies (EGAOB). The EGAOB has responsibility for 
all member countries in the European Union and coordinates the oversight activi-
ties of statutory audit firms. It also provides input to the European Commission on 
implementation aspects of the 2006 Directive on Statutory Audits.
Created as a provision of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, the PCAOB is a US 
nonprofit corporation that oversees auditing of public companies by monitoring 
auditing firms that perform public company audits and by promoting accurate and 
independent audit reports [30]. Consistent with the language in the Sarbanes–Oxley 
Act, the PCAOB emphasizes external oversight and insists on auditor independ-
ence. The PCAOB has five members, appointed by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (under whose jurisdiction the PCAOB falls) in consultation with 
the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and the Treasury Secretary. In order to 
conduct audits of publicly traded firms, accounting firms must register with the 
PCAOB. The Board maintains a publicly accessible registry of accounting firms 
that have applied for registration.
Audit standards
The EGAOB endorsed the ISAs for use in statutory audits of companies within the 
European Community. The PCAOB adopted 16 auditing standards and a variety 
of interim standards for use in audit activities for which the Board has oversight 
authority. The auditing standards have been formally approved by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC), while the interim standards comprise a set of GAAS 
identify by the AICPA in its SAS No. 95. None of the auditing standards or interim 
standards specifically addresses information technology auditing, but in general 
these standards apply to all types of auditing conducted on public companies.
A significant proportion of prominent audit standards and guidance is freely available to 
individuals and organizations that want to use it. Organizations interested in adopting 
cohesive or comprehensive sets of audit standards for some standards organizations may 
find however that more recent publications must be purchased. Individual or corporate 
membership in many of these organizations offers access to a much wider array of stand-
ards and documentation, typically at no additional cost or at reduced rates for members.

211
Standards, Guidance, or Certifications Relevant to IT Auditing
Organizations offering standards, guidance, or certifications 
relevant to IT auditing
Consistent with the idea proposed in Chapter 1 that capable and effective IT audi-
tors may come from a variety of functional and technical backgrounds, many IT 
standards, practices, and certifications not explicitly about auditing are nonetheless 
relevant to IT audits and may be useful to organizations considering different audit 
approaches or evaluating the qualifications of personnel to perform audits. The 
organizations listed below develop and disseminate various types of IT standards, 
practices, procedures, and guidelines and operate certification programs covering 
skills and subject areas applicable to different kinds of IT audits.
SANS Institute
The SANS Institute is an information security-focused (the name SANS stands for 
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security) research and education organization that 
offers extensive training classes and a wide range of technical certifications, most 
organized under the Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) program. 
Its training programs include workshops and multiday courses targeted at profes-
sional education and two information security focused master’s degree programs. 
The organization also conducts ongoing security research and operates an Internet 
monitoring program known as the Internet Storm Center. SANS also contributed 
to a collaborative effort with the US Department of Defense and National Security 
Agency and numerous public and private sector organizations to identify and prior-
itize the most effective security controls from among the hundreds defined in fed-
eral guidance and control frameworks. The result of this effort was a recommended 
list of 20 security controls, originally known as the Consensus Audit Guidelines 
and currently published as the Twenty Security Controls for Effective Cyber 
Defense [31]. The use of the term audit to describe these security controls stems 
from their applicability to formal security control assessments required for federal 
information systems. The 20 controls include:
  1.	 Inventory of Authorized and Unauthorized Devices
  2.	 Inventory of Authorized and Unauthorized Software
  3.	 Secure Configurations for Hardware and Software on Mobile Devices, 
Laptops, Workstations, and Servers
  4.	 Continuous Vulnerability Assessment and Remediation
  5.	 Malware Defenses
  6.	 Application Software Security
  7.	 Wireless Device Control
  8.	 Data Recovery Capability
  9.	 Security Skills Assessment and Appropriate Training to Fill Gaps
10.	 Secure Configurations for Network Devices such as Firewalls, Routers, and 
Switches

212
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
11.	 Limitation and Control of Network Ports, Protocols, and Services
12.	 Controlled Use of Administrative Privileges
13.	 Boundary Defense
14.	 Maintenance, Monitoring, and Analysis of Audit Logs
15.	 Controlled Access Based on the Need to Know
16.	 Account Monitoring and Control
17.	 Data Loss Prevention
18.	 Incident Response and Management
19.	 Secure Network Engineering
20.	 Penetration Tests and Red Team Exercises
Certifications
SANS offers training and certification in subject areas including security adminis-
tration, audit, forensics, management, software security, legal, and advanced secu-
rity expertise. The certification most directly relevant to IT auditing is the GIAC 
Systems and Network Auditor (GSNA), which focuses on technical knowledge 
and procedural capabilities necessary to perform information system audits. GIAC 
credentials are also available in several specialized technical domains, including 
assessing and auditing wireless networks, penetration testing, computer forensics, 
and ISO 27000 implementation and compliance.
Software Engineering Institute
The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) is a research and development organi-
zation within Carnegie Mellon University that focuses on improving techni-
cal and procedural aspects of software engineering and information systems. The 
SEI’s work spans a variety of technology, computing, performance, management, 
and infrastructure domains, producing solutions in acquisition, process manage-
ment, risk management, security, software development, and system design [32]. 
Organizations seeking guidance related to risk management or technical process 
improvement or looking to have the maturity of their internal capabilities assessed 
may find SEI’s work highly applicable, particularly its capability maturity model 
integration (CMMI). CMMI is a five-level model measuring the extent to which an 
organization’s processes operate effectively or can be improved. The SEI performs 
CMMI appraisals that assign a maturity level ranging from 1 to 5, corresponding 
to ratings of “initial,” “repeatable,” “defined,” “quantitatively managed,” and “opti-
mizing.” SEI uses a standardized appraisal methodology to perform organizational 
assessments, known as the standard CMMI appraisal method for process improve-
ment (SCAMPI). These appraisals constitute a form of external audit, where the 
focus of the audit can be a single project or an entire organization (CMMI maturity 
levels are typically assigned at the organization level). SEI also trains and certifies 
individuals to be CMMI instructors, team leads, and appraisers.

213
Standards, Guidance, or Certifications Relevant to IT Auditing
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is a global nonprofit 
professional organization focused on technological innovation that conducts 
research and disseminates research results and other information through journal 
and magazine publication and through conferences and other knowledge-sharing 
events. The IEEE also develops and publishes technical standards on a variety of 
topics through the IEEE Standards Association.
Table 10.3 lists IEEE standards applicable to different types of IT auditing or 
audit-related processes such as system engineering, configuration management, 
quality assurance, and independent verification and validation.
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium
The International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC)2 
is a global, nonprofit professional association with more than 90,000 members 
focused on training and certifying information security professionals [34]. The con-
sortium’s focus is on information security education and information dissemination, 
centered around the (ISC)2 Common Body of Knowledge and, especially, the 10 
security domains serving as the foundation for the Certified Information Systems 
Security Professional (CISSP)—access control; telecommunications and network 
security; information security governance and risk management; software develop-
ment security; cryptography; security architecture and design; operations security; 
business continuity and disaster recovery planning; legal, regulations, investigations 
and compliance; and physical and environmental security. Knowledge and experi-
ence in these subject areas provides substantial support for various aspects of IT 
auditing, particularly with respect to information systems security assessments.
Table 10.3  IEEE Standards Applicable to IT Audits [33]
Standard
Title
Date
730
Standard for Software Quality Assurance Plans
2002
828
Standard for Configuration Management in Systems and 
Software
2012
829
Standard for Software and System Test Documentation
2008
1012
Standard for System and Software Verification and Validation
2012
1028
Standard for Software Reviews and Audits
2008
1074
Standard for Developing a Software Project Life Cycle Process
2006
1220
Standard for Application and Management of the Systems 
Engineering Process
2005
16085
Standard for Software Engineering—Software Life Cycle 
Processes—Risk Management
2006

214
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
Certifications
The CISSP credential offered by (ISC)2 is widely recognized in IT and information 
security management and was the first certification from a commercial organization 
to be accredited under the ISO 17024 standard for personnel certification in security. 
The strong industry standing of the CISSP credential derives in part from the exam’s 
reputation for difficulty and from the requirement that candidates have a minimum 
of 5 years demonstrated work experience in at least two of the security domains 
the CISSP covers [35]. In addition to the CISSP, (ISC)2 offers three specialty cer-
tifications—in architecture, management, and engineering—intended to indicate 
advanced knowledge in each concentration beyond the level required to attain the 
CISSP. It also offers the Systems Security Certified Practitioner (SSCP) credential 
as a sort of stepping stone to the CISSP; the SSCP requires less professional experi-
ence than the CISSP and covers 7 of the 10 CISSP security domains. The (ISC)2 
certifies individuals in more narrowly focused security process areas, including the 
Certified Secure Software Lifecycle Professional (CSSLP) related to security in soft-
ware development, the Certified Cyber Forensics Professional (CCFP) for computer 
forensics, and the Certified Accreditation Professional (CAP) focused on informa-
tion systems risk management and formal certification and accreditation of systems. 
Individuals with certifications such as these may be able to contribute to or even lead 
certain types of IT audits, particularly those focused on validating the effectiveness 
of system-level controls or security provisions.
American Society for Quality
The American Society for Quality (ASQ) is a US-based global organization that 
promotes all aspects and many types of practices related to quality, including qual-
ity control, business process improvement, quality management systems, and qual-
ity assessment and auditing. Its activities focus on advancing professional quality 
practices, developing individual and organizational capabilities related to quality 
management, delivers training on quality, and issues a variety of quality-related 
professional credentials and certifications. ASQ advocates the cause of quality 
through education and contributions to standards development, including support-
ing various national and international standards development organizations [36]. 
ASQ works with the ISO on quality standards such as ISO 9001 on quality man-
agement systems and ISO 14001 on environmental management systems, both of 
which are covered in the ISO 19011 guidelines for auditing management systems 
[26]. Practices such as quality assurance, quality management, and quality control 
applied to information technology and systems differ in explicit focus and areas of 
emphasis from IT auditing, but the underlying processes, standards, and guidelines 
used by quality assessors or auditors have much in common with prominent inter-
nal audit and IT audit standards. Evaluating quality—particularly with respect to 
processes or operational outcomes—is relevant to many types of IT audits and even 
where quality is not a primary audit criterion, many quality analysis, engineering, 
inspection, and audit principles apply to IT auditing practices.

215
Standards, Guidance, Or Certifications Relevant To IT Auditing
Certifications
The ASQ offers a wide range of quality-related audit and management certifications 
ordered in an implied hierarchy based on the work experience required for each cer-
tification in addition to passing the appropriate certification exam. These credentials 
range from the Certified Quality Improvement Associate, Certified Quality Process 
Analyst, and Certified Quality Inspector (2 years’ experience); to Certified Quality 
Technician (4 years’ experience); to Certified Quality Engineer, Certified Software 
Quality Engineer, Certified Reliability Engineer, and Certified Quality Auditor 
(CQA) (8 years’ experience) [37]. ASQ substitutes higher education achievements 
for part of the work experience requirements with many of its certifications. The 
CQA credential reflects many of the same skills and expectations of conventional 
IT audit or internal audit certifications, with a scope that typically includes system- 
and process-level audit procedures.
Open Web Application Security Project
The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is an international techni-
cal organization focused on research, testing, and information dissemination related 
to application security. It maintains many ongoing research efforts, among which 
are two flagship projects closely related to application software and systems audit 
and analysis—the Application Security Verification Standard (ASVS) and the 
Software Assurance Maturity Model (SAMM) [38]. ASVS is intended to support 
application testing and security and to provide information to application software 
developers to encourage appropriate and effective security controls to be designed 
and built in to applications and systems. SAMM provides a framework and a set of 
resources enabling organizations to evaluating their own software security practices 
and develop software security assurance programs and capabilities. OWASP also 
researches, regularly updates, and publishes information on the most prevalent web 
application vulnerabilities in its Top Ten Project. These projects—and more spe-
cifically their associated guidance to organizations—can help organizations design 
more thorough IT audit strategies for assessing custom or commercially developed 
application software deployed within their operating environment.
Other standards and certifications
In addition to the standards and certifications described above, there are additional 
credentials, supporting technical information, standards, and guidance that organi-
zations may find valuable to assist in conducting specific types of IT audits or secu-
rity assessments, depending on the operational characteristics of the organization 
and the types of business processes it performs. For example, organizations that 
process credit card transactions are subject to the Payment Card Industry (PCI) 
Data Security Standards (DSS) issued by the PCI Security Standards Council. 
These mandatory standards specify data handling procedures and security controls 
with which organizations must comply or be subject to penalties including fines or 

216
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
even loss of the ability to process credit card transactions (and therefore to accept 
credit cards from customers) [39]. Organizations covered by PCI DSS are also sub-
ject to compliance assessments—a specialized type of external audit performed by 
qualified security assessors designated by the PCI Security Standards Council.
Computer forensics and penetration testing
The disciplines of computer forensics and penetration testing incorporate numerous 
systems, network, software, and technical evaluation tools and procedures that IT 
auditors can often use when evaluating information systems or other components in 
their organizations. Organizations offering training and certification in these areas 
include:
●	 The International Council of E-Commerce Consultants (EC-Council), 
which administers the Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH), one of the best-
known penetration testing credentials, and the Computer Hacking Forensic 
Investigation (CHFI) credential.
●	 The Information Assurance Certification Review Board (IACRB), which 
offers several information security-related certifications including the Certified 
Penetration Tester (CPT), Certified Expert Penetration Tester (CEPT), Certified 
Application Security Specialist (CASS), and Certified Computer Forensics 
Examiner (CCFE).
●	 The International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners (ISFCE), which 
offers the Certified Computer Examiner (CCE) credential.
●	 The International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (IACIS), 
which offers the Certified Forensic Computer Examiner (CFCE) credential.
●	 Offensive Security offers several security certifications, including the Offensive 
Security Certified Professional credential in penetration testing, that require 
candidates to successfully complete hands-on exercises in a live testing 
environment rather than the multiple-choice question format typical of most 
certification exams.
While penetration testing is increasingly used as part of periodic security assess-
ments or continuous monitoring activities, forensic investigations typically occur 
only after some sort of security incident, intrusion, or compromise. Depending on 
the scope and level of rigor sought for system-level IT audits, the tools and tech-
niques used in computer forensics and penetration testing may help auditors 
assess the effectiveness of security controls and identify weaknesses that would be 
reported in audit findings.
Relevant source material
The most easily accessible information on most standards development and 
certification organizations is the web sites of the respective organizations. To 
obtain standards and guidelines and related documentation for use in their own 

217
References
environments, organizations can typically find most or all of the information they 
need in electronic document form at little or no charge, although some organiza-
tions limit free distribution to members of their organizations and others, like the 
ISO, typically charge fees for their standards. The price to obtain standards doc-
umentation may be easy for organizations to justify when compared against the 
time, material, and resource costs for their IT audit activities. Leading sources of IT 
audit-related standards and guidance include:
●	 AICPA Statements on Auditing Standards [2].
●	 IIA International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing [40].
●	 INTOSAI International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions [41].
●	 IFAC/IAASB Accounting Standards [42].
●	 ISACA Standards for IT Audit and Assurance [15].
Summary
This chapter identified and summarized some of the major organizations engaged in 
standards development and audit guidance used in IT auditing and in offering pro-
fessional or technical certifications in auditing and related domains. Recognizing 
that there is a wide variety of potential sources of standards, documentation, and 
personnel to perform IT auditing activities, the information presented in this chap-
ter should help organizations determine the most applicable standards and person-
nel qualifications for their IT audit needs and should serve as a reference to helpful 
sources of guidance.
References
	[1]	 About the AICPA [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Auditors 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/About/Pages/About.aspx>.
	[2]	 Statements on Auditing Standards [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of 
Certified Public Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/
Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SAS.aspx>.
	[3]	 Service Organization Control (SOC) Reports [Internet]; Durham, NC: American 
Institute of Certified Public Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.
aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/Pages/SORHome.aspx>.
	[4]	 Become a CPA [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Auditors 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/BecomeACPA/Pages/
BecomeaCPA.aspx>.
	[5]	 The CITP Credential [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public 
Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/
InformationTechnology/Membership/Pages/CITPOverview.aspx>.
	[6]	 About the Institute of Internal Auditors [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of 
Internal Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/about-us/
Pages/About-The-Institute-of-Internal-Auditors.aspx>.

218
CHAPTER 10  Audit-Related Organizations, Standards, and Certifications
	 [7]	 CIA Eligibility Requirements [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/certification/CIA-
Certification/Pages/Eligibility-Requirements.aspx>.
	 [8]	 INTOSAI.org: About Us [Internet]; Vienna: International Organization of Supreme Audit 
Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.intosai.org/about-us.html>.
	 [9]	 International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. Information system security 
review methodology. Copenhagen, DK: INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee; 
1995. ISSAI 5310.
	[10]	 Organization Overview | IFAC [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation of 
Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/about-ifac/
organization-overview>.
	[11]	 About IAASB [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation of Accountants [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/auditing-assurance/about-iaasb>.
	[12]	 Clarity of IAASB Standards [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation 
of Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/
auditing-assurance/projects/clarity-iaasb-standards-completed>.
	[13]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on Statutory Audits of Annual 
Accounts and Consolidated Accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.
	[14]	 About ISACA [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.isaca.org/about-isaca/Pages/default.aspx>.
	[15]	 Standards for IS Auditing [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. 
Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Standards/Pages/Standards-
for-IT-Audit-and-Assurance-English-.aspx>.
	[16]	 ISACA Certification: IT Audit, Security, Governance and Risk [Internet]; Rolling 
Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/
CERTIFICATION/Pages/default.aspx>.
	[17]	 ISO/IEC 17024:2012. Conformity assessment—General requirements for bodies oper-
ating certification of persons.
	[18]	 About ISO [Internet]; Geneva: International Organization for Standardization [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/about.htm>.
	[19]	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005. Information—Security techniques—Information security man-
agement systems—Requirements.
	[20]	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Information technology—Security techniques—Code of prac-
tice for information security management.
	[21]	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011. Information—Security techniques—Guidelines for information 
security management systems auditing.
	[22]	 ISO/IEC 27005:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Information 
security risk management.
	[23]	 ISO/IEC 31000:2009. Risk management—Principles and guidelines.
	[24]	 ISO 9001:2008. Quality management systems—requirements.
	[25]	 ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 1: 
Service management system requirements.
	[26]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[27]	 About GAO [Internet]; Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.gao.gov/about/index.html>.
	[28]	 Government Auditing Standards. Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office; 
2011 December.

219
References
	[29]	 Federal information system controls audit manual (FISCAM). Washington, DC: 
Government Accountability Office; 2009 February.
	[30]	 About the PCAOB [Internet]; Washington, DC: Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://pcaobus.org/About/Pages/default 
.aspx>.
	[31]	 CSIC: Twenty Critical Security Controls [Internet]; Bethesda, MD: SANS Institute 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.sans.org/critical-security-controls/>.
	[32]	 About Us | Overview [Internet]; Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/about>.
	[33]	 The IEEE Standards Association [Internet]; Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from http://standards.ieee.org
	[34]	 About (ISC)2 [Internet]; Vienna, VA: International Information Systems Security 
Certification Consortium [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.isc2.org/
aboutus/default.aspx>.
	[35]	 CISSP—Certified Information Systems Security Professional [Internet]; Vienna, VA: 
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <https://www.isc2.org/cissp/default.aspx>.
	[36]	 About ASQ [Internet]; Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <http://asq.org/about-asq/who-we-are/index.html>.
	[37]	 Quality Certification [Internet]; Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://prdweb.asq.org/certification/control/index>.
	[38]	 Category: OWASP Project [Internet]; Bel Air, MD: OWASP Foundation [cited 2013 
May 4]. Available from: <https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:OWASP_Project>
	[39]	 PCI SSC Data Security Standards Overview [Internet]; Wakefield, MA: PCI Security 
Standards Council [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.pcisecurity-
standards.org/security_standards/index.php>.
	[40]	 International standards for the professional practice of internal auditing. Altamonte 
Springs, FL: Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012 October.
	[41]	 International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) [Internet]; Vienna: 
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.issai.org/composite-347.htm>.
	[42]	 Accounting Standards | Governance | Publications and Resources [Internet]; New 
York, NY: International Federation of Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: 
<http://www.ifac.org/publications-resources>.

221
References
Legislation and Statutes
	 [1]	 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 115.
	 [2]	 California Security Breach Information Act, S.B. 1386; 2002.
	 [3]	 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-474, 100 Stat. 1213.
	 [4]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individu-
als with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such 
data, Directive 95/46/EC; 1995 October.
	 [5]	 Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on statutory audits of annual 
accounts and consolidated accounts, Directive 2006/43/EC; 2006 May.
	 [6]	 E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899.
	 [7]	 Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-508, 100 Stat. 1848.
	 [8]	 Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 
2946.
	 [9]	 Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338.
	[10]	 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 
Stat. 1936.
	[11]	 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, Pub. L. 
No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226.
	[12]	 Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-106, 110 
Stat. 679.
	[13]	 Inspector General Act of 1978, Pub. L. No. 95-452, 92 Stat. 1101.
	[14]	 Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, S.C. 2000, c.5; 2000.
	[15]	 Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, 88 Stat. 1896.
	[16]	 Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the pro-
tection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation), COD 2012/0011; 2012 
December.
	[17]	 Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745.
	[18]	 Securities and Exchange Commission; Management’s report on internal control over 
financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act periodic reports; final 
rule. 68 Fed. Reg. 36636; 2003.
	[19]	 Securities and Exchange Commission; Standards related to listed company audit com-
mittees; final rule. 68 Fed. Reg. 18788; 2003.
	[20]	 Securities and Exchange Commission; Strengthening the Commission’s requirements 
regarding auditor independence; final rule. 68 Fed. Reg. 6006; 2003.
	[21]	 Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Pub. L. No. 73-291, 48 Stat. 881.
	[22]	 Single Audit Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-502, 98 Stat. 2327.
	[23]	 Standards for the protection of personal information of residents of the common-
wealth, 201 CMR 17.00; 2010.
	[24]	 The T.J. Hooper (1932) 60F.2d 737.
	[25]	 United States v. Carroll Towing (1947) 159F.2d 169.

222
References
Books, Articles, Instructions, and Guidance
	 [1]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Reporting on controls at a service 
organization relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, or 
privacy. Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2012.
	 [2]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Service organizations: reporting on 
controls at a service organization relevant to user entities’ internal control over finan-
cial reporting. Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2013.
	 [3]	 Office of Management and Budget  Audits of states, local governments, and non-profit 
organizations. Washington, DC: Office of Management and Budget; 2007. [OMB 
Circular A-133].
	 [4]	 Barney JB, Clark DN. Resource-based theory. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 
2007.
	 [5]	 Bazerman MH, Moore D. Judgment in managerial decision making. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons; 2009.
	 [6]	 Board of the International Federation of Accountants  Statement of membership obli-
gations. New York, NY: International Federation of Accountants; 2012.
	 [7]	 Cartlidge A, Hanna A, Rudd C, Macfarlane I, Windebank J, Rance S. An introductory 
overview of ITIL® V3. Wokingham, UK: IT Service Management Forum, UK Chapter; 
2007.
	 [8]	 Cascarino RE. Auditor’s guide to IT auditing Hoboken, NJ, 2nd ed. : John Wiley & 
Sons; 2012.
	 [9]	 Chambers A, Rand G. The operational auditing handbook: auditing business and IT 
processes. West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons; 2010.
	[10]	 International Ethics Standards Board  Code of ethics for professional accountants. 
New York, NY: International Ethics Standards Board; 2009.
	[11]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission  Enterprise 
risk management—Integrated framework. New York, NY: Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission; 2004.
	[12]	 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission  Internal con-
trol—Integrated framework. New York, NY: Committee of Sponsoring Organizations 
of the Treadway Commission; 2013.
	[13]	 Crouhy M, Galai D, Mark R. The essentials of risk management. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2006.
	[14]	 Davis C, Schiller M. IT auditing: using controls to protect information assets, 2nd ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.
	[15]	 Deming WE. Out of the crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center for Advanced 
Educational Services; 1986.
	[16]	 Internal Revenue Service  Examination of returns, appeal rights, and claims for refund. 
Washington, DC: Internal Revenue Service; 2008. IRS Publication 556.
	[17]	 Office of Management and Budget  FEA consolidated reference model version 2.3. 
Washington, DC: Office of Management and Budget; 2007.
	[18]	 Government Accountability Office  Federal information system controls audit manual 
(FISCAM). Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office; 2009.
	[19]	 Government Accountability Office  Government auditing standards. Washington, DC: 
Government Accountability Office; 2011.
	[20]	 Office of Management and Budget  Guidance on Exhibit 300—planning, budget-
ing, acquisition, and management of it capital assets. Washington, DC: Office of 
Management and Budget; 2011.

223
Legislation and Statutes
	[21]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Guide for assessing the security con-
trols in federal information systems and organizations. Gaithersburg, MD: National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2010. [Special 
Publication 800-53A revision 1].
	[22]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Guide for conducting risk assess-
ments. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer 
Security Division; 2012. [Special Publication 800-30 revision 1].
	[23]	 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board  Handbook of international 
quality control, auditing review, other assurance, and related services pronouncements. 
New York, NY: International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board; 2012.
	[24]	 Institute of Internal Auditors  International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) 
2013 Edition. Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal Auditors; 2013.
	[25]	 ISACA. COBIT 5: a business framework for the governance and management of enter-
prise IT; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA; 2012.
	[26]	 ISACA  COBIT 5 for assurance. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA; 2013.
	[27]	 ISACA  ITAF: a professional practices framework for IS audit/assurance, 2nd ed. 
Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA; 2013.
	[28]	 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council  IT examination handbook. 
Arlington, VA: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council; 2012.
	[29]	 IT Governance Institute  Board briefing on IT governance, 2nd ed. Rolling Meadows, 
IL: IT Governance Institute; 2003.
	[30]	 IT Governance Institute  COBIT 4.1. Rolling Meadows, IL: IT Governance Institute; 
2007.
	[31]	 Cabinet Office. ITIL glossary and abbreviations. London, UK: Cabinet Office; 2011.
	[32]	 Kissel R., Stine K., Scholl M., Rossman H., Fahlsing J., Gulick J. Security consid-
erations in the system development life cycle. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2008. [Special Publication 
800-64 revision 2].
	[33]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Managing information security risk: 
organization, mission, and information system view. Gaithersburg, MD: National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2011. [Special 
Publication 800-39].
	[34]	 Moeller R.R. IT audit, control, and security. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & sons; 2010.
	[35]	 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development  OECD guidelines on 
the protection of privacy and transborder flows of personal data. Paris, France: 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 1980.
	[36]	 Orr A.T. Introduction to the ITIL service lifecycle. London, UK: Cabinet Office; 2011.
	[37]	 Parasuraman A, Zeithaml VA, Barry LL. SERVQUAL: a multiple-item scale for meas-
uring consumer perceptions of service quality. J Retailing 1988;64(1):12–40.
	[38]	 Project Management Institute  A guide to the project management body of knowledge, 
4th ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute; 2008.
	[39]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology. {tag as book}Recommended secu-
rity controls for federal information systems and organizations. Gaithersburg, MD: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2009. 
[Special Publication 800-53 revision 3].
	[40]	 Russell JP, editor. The ASQ auditing handbook (4th ed.). Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality 
Press; 2013.
	[41]	 National Institute of Standards and Technology  Security and privacy controls for fed-
eral information systems and organizations. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of 

224
References
Standards and Technology, Computer Security Division; 2013. [Special Publication 
800-53 revision 4].
	[42]	 Senft S, Gallegos F, Davis A. Information technology control and audit Boca Raton, 
FL, 4th ed. : CRC Press; 2013.
	[43]	 Teece D. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2009.
	[44]	 VA Office of the Inspector General  Audit of veteran-owned and service-disabled 
veteran-owned small business programs. Washington, DC: Department of Veterans 
Affairs; 2011. Available from: http://www.va.gov/oig/52/reports/2011/VAOIG-10-
02436-234.pdf.
	[45]	 Wrightson MT, Caldwell SL. Further refinements needed to assess risks and prioritize 
protective measures at ports and other critical infrastructure. Report to Congressional 
Requesters. Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office; 2005. GAO 06-91.
Standards
	 [1]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  A firm’s system of quality control. 
Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2012. [Statement on 
Quality Control Standards 8].
	 [2]	 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board  Assurance reports on con-
trols at a service organization. New York, NY: International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards Board; 2011. [International Standards for Assurance Engagements 3402].
	 [3]	 International Federation of Accountants  Audit considerations relating to an entity 
using a service organization. New York, NY: International Federation of Accountants; 
2012. [International Standard on Auditing 402].
	 [4]	 Object Management Group  Business process maturity model, version 1.0. Needham, 
MA: Object Management Group; 2008.
	 [5]	 Software Engineering Institute  CERT resilience management model, version 1.0. 
Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute; 2010.
	 [6]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for acquisition, version 1.3. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010.
	 [7]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for development, version 1.3. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010.
	 [8]	 Software Engineering Institute  CMMI for services, version 1.3. Pittsburgh, PA: 
Software Engineering Institute; 2010.
	 [9]	 Cloud Security Alliance  Cloud controls matrix version 1.4. Seattle, WA: Cloud 
Security Alliance; 2013.
	[10]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Compliance audits. Durham, NC: 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Auditing Standards Board; 2009. 
[Statement on Auditing Standards 117].
	[11]	 Electronic Industries Alliance  Earned value management systems. Arlington, VA: 
Electronic Industries Alliance; 1998. [ANSI/EIA 748].
	[12]	 General Services Administration  FedRAMP security controls baseline version 1.1. 
Washington, DC: General Services Administration; 2012.
	[13]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Generally accepted auditing 
standards. Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Auditing 
Standards Board; 2001. [Statement on Auditing Standards No. 95].
	[14]	 IEEE P730-2002  Standard for software quality assurance processes. New York, NY: 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; 2002.

225
Legislation and Statutes
	[15]	 International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions  Information system security 
review methodology. Copenhagen, DK: INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee; 
1995. [ISSAI 5310].
	[16]	 Institute of Internal Auditors  International standards for the professional practice of 
internal auditing. Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal Auditors; 2012.
	[17]	 ISA 62443/IEC 62443-1  Security for industrial automation and control systems. 
Research Triangle Park, NC: International Society for Automation; 2007.
	[18]	 ISO Guide 73:2009. Risk management—Vocabulary.
	[19]	 ISO 9000:2005. Quality management—Fundamentals and vocabulary.
	[20]	 ISO 9001:2008. Quality management systems—requirements.
	[21]	 ISO 9004:2009. Managing for the sustained success of an organization—A quality 
management approach.
	[22]	 ISO 13485:2003. Medical devices—Quality management systems—Requirements for 
regulatory purposes.
	[23]	 ISO 14001:2004. Environmental management systems—Requirements with guidance 
for use.
	[24]	 ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994. Information technology—Open systems interconnection—
Basic reference model: the basic model.
	[25]	 ISO/IEC 12207:2008. Systems and software engineering—Software life cycle 
processes.
	[26]	 ISO/IEC 15026:2011. Systems and software engineering—Systems and software 
assurance.
	[27]	 ISO/IEC 15288:2008. Systems and software engineering—System life cycle processes.
	[28]	 ISO/IEC 15408:2009. Information technology—Security techniques—Evaluation cri-
teria for IT security.
	[29]	 ISO/IEC 15504:2004. Information technology—Process assessment.
	[30]	 ISO/IEC 17021:2011. Conformity assessment—Requirements for bodies providing 
audit and certification of management systems.
	[31]	 ISO/IEC 17024:2012. Conformity assessment—General requirements for bodies oper-
ating certification of persons.
	[32]	 ISO 19011:2011. Guidelines for auditing management systems.
	[33]	 ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 1: 
Service management system requirements.
	[34]	 ISO/IEC 20000-4:2011. Information technology—Service management—Part 4: 
Process reference model.
	[35]	 ISO/IEC 27000:2009. Information technology overview and vocabulary.
	[36]	 ISO/IEC 27001:2005. Information—Security techniques—Information security man-
agement systems—Requirements.
	[37]	 ISO/IEC 27002:2005. Information technology—Security techniques—Code of prac-
tice for information security management.
	[38]	 ISO/IEC 27003:2010. Information technology—Security techniques—Information 
security management system implementation guidance.
	[39]	 ISO/IEC 27004:2009. Information technology—Security techniques—Measurement.
	[40]	 ISO/IEC 27005:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Information 
security risk management.
	[41]	 ISO/IEC 27006:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Requirements for 
bodies providing audit and certification of information security management systems.
	[42]	 ISO/IEC 27007:2011. Information—Security techniques—Guidelines for information 
security management systems auditing.

226
References
	[43]	 ISO/IEC TR 27008:2011. Information technology—Security techniques—Guidelines 
for auditors on information security controls.
	[44]	 ISO/IEC 27014:2013. Information technology—Security techniques—Governance of 
information security.
	[45]	 ISO/IEC 31000:2009. Risk management—Principles and guidelines.
	[46]	 ISO/IEC 31010:2009. Risk management—Risk assessment techniques.
	[47]	 ISO/IEC 38500:2008. Corporate governance of information technology.
	[48]	 ISO/IEC TR 24748-1:2010. Systems and software engineering—Life cycle 
management.
	[49]	 ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011. Systems and software engineering—Architecture 
description.
	[50]	 ISO/TS 16949:2009. Quality management systems—Particular requirements for the 
application of ISO 9001:2008 for automotive production and relevant service part 
organizations.
	[51]	 ISO/TS 29001:2010. Petroleum, petrochemical and natural gas industries—Sector-
specific quality management systems—Requirements for product and service supply 
organizations.
	[52]	 International Federation of Accountants  Overall objectives of the independent audi-
tor and the conduct of an audit in accordance with international standards on auditing. 
New York, NY: International Federation of Accountants; 2012. [International Standard 
on Auditing 200].
	[53]	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants  Reporting on controls at a service 
organization. Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; 2011. 
[Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 16].
Online Sources
	 [1]	 About ASQ [Internet]; Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <http://asq.org/about-asq/who-we-are/index.html>.
	 [2]	 About GAO [Internet]; Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.gao.gov/about/index.html>.
	 [3]	 About IAASB [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation of Accountants [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/auditing-assurance/about-iaasb>.
	 [4]	 About ISACA [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.isaca.org/about-isaca/Pages/default.aspx>.
	 [5]	 About (ISC)2 [Internet]; Vienna, VA: International Information Systems Security 
Certification Consortium [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.isc2.org/
aboutus/default.aspx>.
	 [6]	 About ISO [Internet]; Geneva: International Organization for Standardization [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/about.htm>.
	 [7]	 About the AICPA [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/About/Pages/
About.aspx>.
	 [8]	 About the Institute of Internal Auditors [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of 
Internal Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/about-us/
Pages/About-The-Institute-of-Internal-Auditors.aspx>.
	 [9]	 About the PCAOB [Internet]; Washington, DC: Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://pcaobus.org/About/
Pages/default.aspx>.

227
Legislation and Statutes
	[10]	 About Us | Overview [Internet]; Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/about>.
	[11]	 Accounting Standards | Governance | Publications and Resources [Internet]; New 
York, NY: International Federation of Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: 
<http://www.ifac.org/publications-resources>.
	[12]	 Audit and Attest Standards, Including Clarified Standards [Internet]; Durham, NC: 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 June 14]. Available 
from: <http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/audit%20and%20
attest%20standards.aspx>.
	[13]	 Audit Program Protocol [Internet]. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office for Civil Rights [cited 2013 July 18]. Available from: <http://www.
hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/enforcement/audit/protocol.html>.
	[14]	 Become a CPA [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants 
[cited 
2013 
May 
4]. Available 
from: <http://www.aicpa.org/
BecomeACPA/Pages/BecomeaCPA.aspx>.
	[15]	 Category: OWASP Project [Internet]; Bel Air, MD: OWASP Foundation 
[cited 
2013 
May 
4]. 
Available 
from: 
<https://www.owasp.org/index.php/
Category:OWASP_Project>.
	[16]	 Certification—ISO [Internet]; Geneva: International Organization for Standardization 
[cited 2013 June 7]. Available from: <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/certifica-
tion.htm>.
	[17]	 Certification Body Directory [Internet]; London: Standards.org [cited 2013 Jul 14]. 
Available from: <http://www.standards.org/certification_bodies/>.
	[18]	 CIA Eligibility Requirements [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/certification/CIA-
Certification/Pages/Eligibility-Requirements.aspx>.
	[19]	 CISSP—Certified Information Systems Security Professional [Internet]; Vienna, VA: 
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <https://www.isc2.org/cissp/default.aspx>.
	[20]	 The CITP Credential [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/
InformationTechnology/Membership/Pages/CITPOverview.aspx>.
	[21]	 Clarity of IAASB Standards [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation 
of Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/
auditing-assurance/projects/clarity-iaasb-standards-completed>.
	[22]	 COBIT 4.1: Framework for IT Governance and Control [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, 
IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-
Center/COBIT/Pages/Overview.aspx>.
	[23]	 COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise 
IT [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: 
<http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/Overview.aspx>.
	[24]	 COBIT 5 Product Family [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/Product-Family.aspx>.
	[25]	 Code of Ethics [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal Auditors [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/mandatory-
guidance/Pages/Code-of-Ethics.aspx>.
	[26]	 Code of Professional Ethics [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 
4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Certification/Code-of-Professional-Ethics/
Pages/default.aspx>

228
References
	[27]	 CSIC: Twenty Critical Security Controls [Internet]; Bethesda, MD: SANS Institute 
[cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.sans.org/critical-security-controls/>.
	[28]	 Definition of Internal Auditing [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards-guid-
ance/mandatory-guidance/Pages/Definition-of-Internal-Auditing.aspx>.
	[29]	 FIPS Publications [Internet]. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and 
Technology [created 2007 July 3; updated 2012 March 6; cited 2012 March 24]. 
Available from: <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsFIPS.html>.
	[30]	 The IEEE Standards Association [Internet]; Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://standards.ieee.org>.
	[31]	 IIA Certification [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal Auditors [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/certification/Pages/Certification.
aspx>.
	[32]	 Department of Defense  Information assurance workforce improvement program. 
Washington, DC: Department of Defense; 2005. [DoD Manual 8570.01-M].
	[33]	 The Internal Audit Function [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: Institute of Internal 
Auditors [cited 2013 Jun 14]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.org/standards-guid-
ance/topics/pages/the-internal-audit-function.aspx>.
	[34]	 International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists [Internet]; Leesburg, 
VA: IACIS [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.iacis.com/certification/
default_cert>.
	[35]	 International Professional Practices Framework [Internet]; Altamonte Springs, FL: 
Institute of Internal Auditors [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://na.theiia.
org/standards-guidance/Pages/Standards-and-Guidance-IPPF.aspx>.
	[36]	 International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) [Internet]; Vienna: 
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.issai.org/composite-347.htm>.
	[37]	 International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners [Internet]; Brentwood, TN: 
ISFCE [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isfce.org>.
	[38]	 INTOSAI.org: About Us [Internet]; Vienna: International Organization of Supreme 
Audit Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.intosai.org/about-
us.html>.
	[39]	 INTOSAI.org: Membership List [Internet]; Vienna: International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.intosai.
org/ organisation/membership-list.html>.
	[40]	 ISACA Certification: IT Audit, Security, Governance and Risk [Internet]; Rolling 
Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/
CERTIFICATION/Pages/default.aspx>.
	[41]	 Open Standards Compliance [Internet]; Palo Alto, CA: Open Source Initiative [cited 
2013 Jul 14]. Available from: <http://opensource.org/osr-compliance>.
	[42]	 Organization Overview | IFAC [Internet]; New York, NY: International Federation of 
Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.ifac.org/about-ifac/
organization-overview>.
	[43]	 PCI SSC Data Security Standards Overview [Internet]; Wakefield, MA: PCI Security 
Standards Council [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <https://www.pcisecurity-
standards.org/security_standards/index.php>.
	[44]	 Quality Certification [Internet]; Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://prdweb.asq.org/certification/control/index>.

229
Legislation and Statutes
	[45]	 Register of Statutory Auditors [Internet]; Edinburgh, UK: Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Scotland [updated 2013 July 8; cited 2013 July 9]. Available from: 
<http://www.auditregister.org.uk/Forms/Default.aspx>.
	[46]	 Registered Firms [Internet]; Washington, DC: Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board [cited 2013 Jul 9]. Available from: <http://pcaobus.org/Registration/Firms/
Pages/RegisteredFirms.aspx>.
	[47]	 Security Technical Implementation Guides [Internet]. Defense Information Systems 
Agency, Information Assurance Support Environment [updated 2011 February 14; 
cited 2012 February 18]. Available from: <http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/index.html>.
	[48]	 Service Organization Control (SOC) Reports [Internet]; Durham, NC: American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://
www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/Pages/SORHome.
aspx>.
	[49]	 Standards for IS Audit and Assurance [Internet]; Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA [cited 
2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Standards/
Pages/Standards-for-IT-Audit-and-Assurance-English-.aspx>.
	[50]	 State Security Breach Notification Laws [Internet]; Washington, DC: National 
Conference of State Legislatures [updated 2012 August 20; cited 2013 July 18]. 
Available from: <http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/telecom/security-breach-notifi-
cation-laws.aspx>.
	[51]	 Statements on Auditing Standards [Internet]; Durham, NC: American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.aicpa.
org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SAS.aspx>.
	[52]	 Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements [Internet]; Durham, NC: 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants [cited 2013 May 4]. Available 
from: <http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SSAE.aspx>.
	[53]	 Systems and Network Auditor Certification: GSNA [Internet]; Bethesda, MD: SANS 
Institute [cited 2013 May 4]. Available from: <http://www.giac.org/{give link to full 
address}certification/systems-network-auditor-gsna>.
	[54]	 U.S. Government Configuration Baseline (USGCG) [Internet]. Gaithersburg, MD: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Information Technology Laboratory 
[created 2010 February 19; updated 2013 June 3; cited 2013 June 7]. Available from: 
<http://usgcb.nist.gov>.

231
Acronyms
Acronyms and abbreviations
ADP
Automatic Data Processing
AICPA
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
ANAB
American National Accreditation Board
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
APT
Advanced Persistent Threat
ASQ
American Society for Quality
ATO
Authority (or Approval or Authorization) to Operate
BCP
Business Continuity Plan
BPMM
Business Process Maturity Model
C&A
Certification and Accreditation
CAP
Certified Authorization Professional
CC
Common Criteria
CCA
Clinger–Cohen Act
CCE
Certified Computer Examiner
CCEVS
Common Criteria Evaluation and Validation Scheme
CCFE
Certified Computer Forensics Examiner
CCFP
Certified Cyber Forensics Professional
CCM
Cloud Controls Matrix
CCSA
Certification in Control Self-Assessment
CEH
Certified Ethical Hacker
CEPT
Certified Expert Penetration Tester
CERT
Computer Emergency Response Team
CESG
Communications-Electronics Security Group
CFPB
Consumer Finance and Protection Bureau
CFCE
Certified Forensic Computer Examiner
CFO
Chief Financial Officer
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
CFSA
Certified Financial Services Auditor
CGAP
Certified Government Auditing Professional
CGEIT
Certified in the Governance of Enterprise Information Technology
CHFI
Certified Hacking Forensic Investigator
CIA
Certified Internal Auditor
CIA
Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability
CIO
Chief Information Officer
CISA
Certified Information Systems Auditor
CISM
Certified Information Systems Manager
CISO
Chief Information Security Officer

232
Acronyms
CISSP
Certified Information Systems Security Professional
CITP
Certified Information Technology Professional
CGAP
Certified Government Accounting Professional
CM
Configuration Management
CMMI
Capability Maturity Model Integration
CMMI-ACQ
Capability Maturity Model Integration for Acquisition
CMMI-DEV
Capability Maturity Model Integration for Development
CMMI-SVC
Capability Maturity Model Integration for Services
CMVP
Cryptologic Module Validation Program
COBIT
Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology
CONOPS
Concept of Operations
COOP
Continuity of Operations
COSO
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
COTS
Commercial Off-the-Shelf
CP
Contingency Plan
CPA
Certified Public Accountant
CRISC
Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control
CRMA
Certification in Risk Management Assurance
CSIRT
Computer Security Incident Response Team
CVE
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
DISA
Defense Information Systems Agency
DHS
Department of Homeland Security
DoD
Department of Defense
DR
Disaster Recovery
EA
Enterprise Architecture
EC
European Community
EC
European Council
ECPA
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
EDP
Electronic Data Processing
EGAOB
European Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies
ERM
Enterprise Risk Management
EU
European Union
FDCC
Federal Desktop Core Configuration
FedRAMP
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
FERC
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
FFIEC
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
FIPS
Federal Information Processing Standards
FISCAM
Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual
FISMA
Federal Information Security Management Act
GAAS
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards
GAO
Government Accountability Office
GAS
Government Auditing Standards
GCFA
GIAC Certified Forensic Analyst

233
Acronyms and Abbreviations
GCFE
GIAC Certified Forensic Examiner
GIAC
Global Information Assurance Certification
GLBA
Graham–Leach–Bliley Act
GRC
Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance
GSA
General Services Administration
GSNA
GIAC Systems and Network Auditor
GTAG
Global Technology Audit Guide
HHS
Department of Health and Human Services
HIPAA
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HITECH
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
IA
Information Assurance
IaaS
Infrastructure as a Service
IAASB
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
IACIS
International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists
IACRB
Information Assurance Certification Review Board
IAM
Infosec Assessment Methodology
IDEAL
Initiating, Diagnosing, Establishing, Acting, and Learning
IDS
Intrusion Detection System
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IFAC
International Federation of Accountants
IIA
Institute of Internal Auditors
INFOSEC
Information Security
INTOSAI
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
IP
Internet Protocol
IPPF
International Professional Practices Framework
IPS
Intrusion Prevention System
IPv6
Internet Protocol Version 6
IR
Incident Response
IRM
Information Resources Management
IRS
Internal Revenue Service
ISA
International Society for Automation
ISA
International Standard on Auditing
ISACA
Information Systems Audit and Control Association
ISAE
International Standards for Assurance Engagements
(ISC)2
International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium
ISFCE
International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners
ISMS
Information Security Management System
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
ISSAI
International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
IT
Information Technology
ITIL
Information Technology Infrastructure Library
ITSCM
IT Service Continuity Management

234
Acronyms
IV&V
Independent Verification and Validation
JAB
Japan Accreditation Board
MOF
Microsoft Operations Framework
NERC
North American Electricity Reliability Corporation
NRC
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSA
National Security Agency
NVD
National Vulnerability Database
NVLAP
National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program
OCR
Office for Civil Rights
OCSP
Offensive Security Certified Professional
OECD
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OMB
Office of Management and Budget
OMG
Object Management Group
OSCP  
OWASP
Offensive Security Certified Professional 
Open Web Application Security Project
PaaS
Platform as a Service
PCAOB
Public Company Accouting Oversight Board
PCI DSS
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards
PDCA
Plan-Do-Check-Act
PHI
Protected Health Information
PIA
Privacy Impact Assessment
PII
Personally Identifiable Information
PIOB
Public Interest Oversight Board
PMBOK
Project Management Body of Knowledge
PMI
Project Management Institute
POA&M
Plan of Action and Milestones
PRA
Paperwork Reduction Act
RA
Risk Assessment
RMF
Risk Management Framework
RTM
Requirements Traceability Matrix
SaaS
Software as a Service
SACM
Service Asset and Configuration Management
SANS
SysAdmin, Audit, Networking, and Security
SAS
Statement on Auditing Standards
SCA
Security Control Assessment
SCAP
Security Content Automation Protocol
SDLC
System Development Life Cycle
SEI
Software Engineering Institute
SERVQUAL
Service Quality
SIEM
Security Information and Event Management
SOC
Service Organizational Controls
SOX
Sarbanes–Oxley Act

235
Acronyms and Abbreviations
SP
Special Publication
SSAE
Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements
SSCP
Systems Security Certified Practitioner
STIG
Security Technical Implementation Guide
TCSEC
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
TQM
Total Quality Management
UKAS
United Kingdom Accreditation Service
USC
United States Code
US-CERT
United States Computer Emergency Response Team
USGCB
United States Government Configuration Baseline
VPN
Virtual Private Network

237
Index
A
Administrative controls, 5–6
AICPA. See American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA)
American Accounting Association, 172
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA), 13–14, 77–78, 169, 172, 201–203
audit standards, 201–203
certifications, 203
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 12–13, 
134–135
American Society for Quality (ASQ), 15–16, 163, 
214–215
certifications, 215
Application Security Verification Standard (ASVS), 
215
ASQ. See American Society for Quality (ASQ)
ASQ Auditing Handbook, 163
Assessment, 3b
ASVS. See Application Security Verification 
Standard (ASVS)
Audit/auditing
auditors. See auditors
certification, 13–14, 91–94. See also 
Certification; Certification standards
quality, 94
security management, 93–94
service management, 92–93
characteristics, 8
compliance, 13–14, 94–98
commercial standards, 97–98
industry standards, 97
legal, 96
concept of, 2–8
financial, 85–87
cost accounting, 86
programmatic, 87
information security management, 19–20
internal controls, 4–6
IT assets, 112–119, 113t
IT governance, 4–5
IT-specific, 98–102
information systems controls, 100–102
process maturity, 98–99
provision of services, 99–100
operational, 87–91
internal controls, 89
policies, processes, and procedures, 89–90
program or project-focused, 91
organizations and individuals performing, 10–17. 
See also Auditors
overview, 83
quality management, 17
reasons for, 8–9
risk management, 9–10
things to be audited, 6–7
types, emphasis and objectives, 84t
Auditing Handbook, 53–54
Auditors, 10–17
development paths, 14–17
external, 11–13, 76–80
certifying organizations, 80
regulatory, 78–79
internal, 13–14, 58–59
oversight bodies of, 210–211
audit standards, 210
Audit performance, 154–158
analysis of evidence, 157–158, 157t
evidence collection, 155–157, 156f
Audit planning, 151–154
internal and external audits, 153–154
preparation, 151–153
preliminary data gathering, 152
procedures and protocols, 152–153, 153t
resource allocation, 151–152
Audit procedures and protocols, sources of,  
152–153, 153t
Audit process(es), 149
audit performance, 154–158
analysis of evidence, 157–158, 157t
evidence collection, 155–157, 156f
audit planning, 151–154
internal and external audits, 153–154
preliminary data gathering, 152
preparation, 151–153
procedures and protocols, 152–153, 153t
resource allocation, 151–152
overview, 149, 150f
PDCA cycle, 161–163
process life cycles and methodologies, 161–163
relevant source material, 163–164
reporting findings, 158–161
findings vs. conclusions, 159
responding to audit results, 160–161
using information in audit reports, 160
Note: Page numbers followed by “f ”, “t ” and “b” refers to figures, tables and boxes respectively.

238
Index
Audit-related organizations, standards, and 
certifications, 197
AICPA, 201–203
ASQ, 214–215
auditors’ oversight bodies, 210–211
IEEE, 213
IFAC, 205–206
IIA, 203–204
INTOSAI, 204–205
ISACA, 206–208
ISC, 213–214
ISO, 208–209
national and international perspectives, 199–201
GAAS, 200
legal/regulatory compliance, 200
overview, 197
OWASP, 215
SANS Institute, 211–212
SEI, 212
US GAO, 209–210
Audit strategy, and prioritization, 109
Audit universe, 105–106
development and maintenance, 107–108
organizational elements in, 107–108
B
BMIS. See Business Model for Information 
Security (BMIS)
BPMM. See Business Process Maturity Model 
(BPMM)
Business Model for Information Security (BMIS), 
178–179
Business Process Maturity Model (BPMM), 98–99
C
CAE. See Chief Audit Executive (CAE)
California Security Breach Information Act, 138
CAP. See Certified Accreditation Professional 
(CAP)
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), 11, 
72, 98–99, 144, 160–161, 212
CCFP. See Certified Cyber Forensics Professional 
(CCFP)
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS), 73
Certification(s), 10–14, 91–94
AICPA, 203
ASQ, 215
audit in, 13–14
IIA, 204
ISACA, 207–208
ISC, 214
managing, 11–13
quality, 94
SANS Institute, 212
security management, 93–94
service management, 92–93
Certification standards, 141–144, 142t
information security, 143–144
quality certification, 142–143
service management, 144
Certified Accreditation Professional (CAP), 214
Certified Cyber Forensics Professional (CCFP),  
214
Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA), 13
certification, 182
Certified Information Systems Manager (CISM), 
208
Certified Information Systems Security Professional 
(CISSP), 213
Certified Information Technology Professional 
(CITP), 203
Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control 
(CRISC), 13, 208
Certified in the Governance of Enterprise 
Information Technology (CGEIT), 208
Certified Lead Auditor, 94
Certified Public Accountant (CPA) certification, 
77–78
Certified Quality Auditor (CQA), 94
Certified Secure Software Lifecycle Professional 
(CSSLP), 214
Certifying organizations, 80
Chief Audit Executive (CAE), 48
CISA. See Certified Information Systems Auditor 
(CISA)
CISSP. See Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional (CISSP)
CITP. See Certified Information Technology 
Professional (CITP)
Cloud Security Alliance, 118–119
CMMI. See Capability Maturity Model Integration 
(CMMI)
CMS. See Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS)
COBIT. See Control Objectives for Information and 
Related Technology (COBIT)
COBIT 5, 3–4
COBIT 5 for Assurance approach (ISACA), 163
Commercial standards, compliance, 97–98
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (COSO), 4–6, 89, 107–
108, 126–127, 172–173, 173f, 174t
framework for enterprise risk management, 7–8
internal control framework, 89

239
Index
Communications-Electronics Security Group 
(CESG) Assisted Product Scheme, 11
Compliance, 10–14, 94–98, 108–109, 129
audit in, 13–14
commercial standards, 97–98
industry standards, 97
legal, 96
managing, 11–13
Components, IT audit, 105
controls, types of, 109–112
categorization, 110–111, 110t
entity-level, 111–112, 111f
organizational controls, 111–112, 111f
decomposition, 114–119
databases, 116
data centers, 118
hardware, 116–117
interfaces, 119
networks, 117
operating systems, 116
storage, 117
systems and applications, 115
virtualized environments, 118–119
IT assets, 112–119, 113t
procedural controls/processes, 119–126
IT operations, 120–121
program and project management, 121–122
system development life cycle, 122–126
relevant source material, 126–127
scope of audits, establishing, 105–109
audit strategy and prioritization, 109
audit universe, developing and maintaining, 
107–108
governance, risk, and compliance drivers, 
108–109
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) 
Resilience Management Model (RMM), 93
Computer forensics and penetration testing, 216
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 137
Concept phase, of SDLC, 123–124
Conclusions, of audit process, 160
findings vs., 159
Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology (COBIT), 3–4, 89–90, 108, 119–120, 
126–127, 178–180, 180f, 181t, 199
Controls, types of, 109–112. See also specific 
entries
categorization, 110–111, 110t
entity-level, 111–112, 111f
organizational controls, 111–112, 111f
COSO. See Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO)
Cost accounting, 86
“Covered entities”, 134
CPA. See Certified Public Accountant (CPA)
CRISC. See Certified in Risk and Information 
Systems Control (CRISC)
CSSLP. See Certified Secure Software Lifecycle 
Professional (CSSLP)
D
Database, 116
Data centers, 118
Data gathering, preliminary
audit preparation and, 152
Data Protection Directive, 136–137
Deming, W. Edwards, 15–16
Deming cycle. See Plan-do-check-act (PDCA)
Development phase, of SDLC, 124
Drivers, IT audit, 129
certification standards, 141–144, 142t
information security, 143–144
quality certification, 142–143
service management, 144
laws and regulations, 130–141, 131t
European Council Directive 2006/43/EC, 133
government sector laws, 139–141
health industry-specific laws, 133
securities industry, 131–133
security and privacy laws, 135–138
state security and privacy laws, 138
overview, 129, 130f
quality assurance and continuous improvement, 
145
relevant source material, 145–146
service management, 144–145
Due diligence, 72–73
E
EC-Council. See International Council of 
E-Commerce Consultants (EC-Council)
ECPA. See Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA)
EDPAA. See Electronic Data Processing Auditors 
Association (EDPAA)
EGAOB. See European Group of Auditors’ 
Oversight Bodies (EGAOB)
E-Government Act of 2002, 140
Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA), 
138
Electronic Data Processing Auditors Association 
(EDPAA), 206
Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated 
Framework, 172

240
Index
Entity-level controls, 111–112, 111f
European Community (EC), 130
European Community’s European Group of 
Auditors’ Oversight Bodies (EGAOB), 210
European Council Directive 95/46/EC, 136–137
European Council Directive 2006/43/EC, 133, 
178–179
Graham-Leach-Bliley Act, 133
European Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies 
(EGAOB), 11–12
Evaluation, 3b
Evidence
analysis of, 157–158, 157t
collection, 155–157, 156f
types of, applicability of audit methods for, 157t
External auditing
auditors, 11–13, 76–80
certifying organizations, 80
regulatory, 78–79
benefits, 73–74
challenges, 74–76
drivers and rationale, 71–73
independence, 68–70
vs. internal audits, 74
operational aspects, 64–71
organizational participation, 70–71
overview, 63–64
planning, 153–154
roles and responsibilities, 66–68
F
Federal Financial Institution Examination Council 
(FFIEC), 97, 133
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), 
11
Federal Information Security Management Act 
(FISMA), 18, 140, 191
Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual 
(FISCAM), 140, 163, 186, 187f, 187t
Federal Risk and Authorization Management 
Program (FedRAMP), 118–119
FedRAMP. See Federal Risk and Authorization 
Management Program (FedRAMP)
Financial auditing, 85–87
cost accounting, 86
programmatic, 87
Financial Executives International, 172
Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999. See 
Graham-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA)
Findings, of audit process. See also Reporting 
findings, audit processes
conclusions vs., 159
FIPS. See Federal Information Processing 
Standards (FIPS)
FISCAM. See Federal Information System Controls 
Audit Manual (FISCAM)
FISMA. See Federal Information Security 
Management Act (FISMA)
Frameworks. See Methodologies and frameworks
G
GAAS. See Generally Accepted Auditing Standards 
(GAAS)
GAO. See Government Accountability Office 
(GAO)
General Data Protection Regulation, 136
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), 
200
Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), 8, 
169, 170t, 200
GIAC program. See Global Information Assurance 
Certification (GIAC) program
GIAC Systems and Network Auditor (GSNA), 13, 
212
GLBA. See Graham-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA)
Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) 
program, 211–212
Governance, 2
Governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) activities, 
9–10, 108–109
Government Accountability Office (GAO), 6, 
209–210
audit standards, 209–210
Government-focused audit methodologies, 185–188
FISCAM, 186, 187f, 187t
ISSAI, 188
Government sector laws, 139–141
Federal Information Security Management Act, 
140
Privacy Act, 140–141
Graham-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), 133
GRC activities. See Governance, risk, and 
compliance (GRC) activities
GSNA. See GIAC Systems and Network Auditor 
(GSNA)
Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, 163
Guidelines for Auditing Management Systems, 
162–163
H
“Hand rule,”, 136
Hardware, 116–117
Health-care industry
laws and regulations, 133

241
Index
Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health Act, 134–135
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, 134
international health data privacy protection 
laws, 135
Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, 12–13, 73, 96, 
134–135
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), 12–13, 73, 96, 134–135
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)
HIPAA Security Rule, 110–111
HITECH. See Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act
I
IAASB. See International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards Board (IAASB)
IACIS. See International Association of Computer 
Investigative Specialists (IACIS)
IACRB. See Information Assurance Certification 
Review Board (IACRB)
IEC. See International Electrotechnical Commission 
(IEC)
IEEE. See Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE)
IFAC. See International Federation of Accountants 
(IFAC)
IIA. See Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)
Independence
external auditing, 68–70
internal auditing, 47–48
Industry standards, compliance, 97
Information, use in audit reports, 160
Information Assurance Certification Review Board 
(IACRB), 216
Information security
certification, 143–144
Information security management system (ISMS), 
17–20, 143–144, 177
audit in, 19–20
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), 199, 206–208
audit standards, 206
certifications, 207–208
Information Technology Infrastructure Library 
(ITIL), 2–3, 119–120, 139, 182–183, 183f, 184t
Information Technology Management Reform Act 
of 1996, 139
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE), 213
Standard 730, 14
Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), 105–106, 163, 
172–175, 203–204
audit standards, 204
certifications, 204
Institute of Management Accountants, 172
Interfaces, 119
Internal auditing
auditors, 13–14, 58–59
benefits, 56–57
challenges, 57–58
establishing program, 48–55
program charter, 50–52
program responsibilities, 53–55
external auditing vs., 74
independence, 47–48
objectivity, 47–48
as organizational capability, 46–55
overview, 45–46
planning, 153–154
Internal Control—Integrated Framework, 107–108, 
126–127, 172
Internal controls, 4–6
administrative controls, 5–6
categorizing, 5–6, 6b
defined, 4–5
examples, 6t
operational auditing, 89
physical controls, 5–6
technical controls, 5–6
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), 
18
International Association of Computer Investigative 
Specialists (IACIS), 216
International Auditing and Assurance Standards 
Board (IAASB), 169–171
International Council of E-Commerce Consultants 
(EC-Council), 216
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 
189
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), 
169–171, 205–206
audit standards, 206
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) 
Code of Ethics, 48
International health data privacy protection laws, 
135
International Information Systems Security 
Certification Consortium (ISC), 213–214
certifications, 214

242
Index
International Organisation of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (INTOSAI), 204–205
audit standards, 205
International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), 5–6, 141, 177, 178f, 183–185, 185t, 
208–209
audit standards, 208–209
International Professional Practices Framework 
(IPPF), 45, 163, 173–177, 175f, 176t
International Society for Automation (ISA) standard 
62443, 93
International Society of Forensic Computer 
Examiners (ISFCE), 216
International Standards of Supreme Audit 
Institutions (ISSAI), 10, 188
International Standards on Auditing (ISA), 18, 47, 
169–172, 171t
INTOSAI. See International Organisation of 
Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI)
IPPF. See International Professional Practices 
Framework (IPPF)
ISA. See International Standards on Auditing (ISA)
ISACA. See Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association (ISACA)
ISACA’s Code of Professional Ethics, 48
ISC. See International Information Systems 
Security Certification Consortium (ISC)
ISFCE. See International Society of Forensic 
Computer Examiners (ISFCE)
ISMS. See Information security management 
system (ISMS)
ISO. See International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO)
ISO 9000, 94
ISO 9001, 14, 15f, 142–143
ISO 19011, 162–163, 177
ISO/IEC 7498-1, 114, 127
ISO/IEC 12207, 114, 127
ISO/IEC 15288, 124
ISO/IEC 15504, 11
ISO/IEC 17799, 143
ISO/IEC 20000, 99–100, 144, 183–185
ISO/IEC 27000, 143, 189
ISO/IEC 27001, 18–19, 19f, 143, 177, 189
ISO/IEC 27002, 18, 111
security clauses and categories, 190t
ISO/IEC 27005, 6
ISO/IEC 27007, 177
ISO/IEC 31000, 6
ISO/IEC 38500, 183–185
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010, 114, 127
ISO/IEC 38500 standard, 3–4
ISSAI. See International Standards of Supreme 
Audit Institutions (ISSAI)
ISSAI 5310, 188
ITAF. See IT Assurance Framework (ITAF)
IT assets, auditing, 112–119, 113t
decomposition, 114–119
databases, 116
data centers, 118
hardware, 116–117
interfaces, 119
networks, 117
operating systems, 116
storage, 117
systems and applications, 115
virtualized environments, 118–119
IT Assurance Framework (ITAF), 178–179
IT Audit Framework (ISACA), 163
IT Examination Handbook, 53–54
IT governance, 2–5, 129
audit in, 4–5
defined, 2
and management frameworks
COBIT®, 178–180, 180f, 181t
ITIL®, 182–183, 183f, 184t
processes and controls, 3
IT Governance Institute, 4–5
ITIL. See Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL)
“ITIL certification,”, 183
IT operations, 120–121
IT-specific auditing, 98–102
information systems controls, 100–102
process maturity, 98–99
provision of services, 99–100
L
Laws and regulations, 130–141, 131t
European Council Directive 2006/43/EC, 133
Graham-Leach-Bliley Act, 133
government sector laws, 139–141
Federal Information Security Management 
Act, 140
Privacy Act, 140–141
health industry-specific laws, 133
Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health Act, 134–135
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, 134
international health data privacy protection 
laws, 135
securities industry, 131–133
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 132

243
Index
Securities and Exchange Commission, 132
security and privacy laws, 135–138
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 137
Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 138
European Council Directive 95/46/EC, 
136–137
state security and privacy laws, 138
Legal compliance, 96
M
Methodologies and frameworks, 167
COSO, 172–173, 173f, 174t
GAAS, 169, 170t
government-focused methodologies, 185–188
FISCAM, 186, 187f, 187t
ISSAI, 188
IPPF, 173–177, 175f, 176t
ISA, 169–172, 171t
ISO, 177, 178f, 183–185, 185t
IT governance and management frameworks
COBIT®, 178–180, 180f, 181t
ITIL®, 182–183, 183f, 184t
overview, 167, 168t
relevant source material, 193–194
security control assessment frameworks, 188–193
ISO/IEC 27000 series, 189
NIST security control assessment guidance, 
191–192, 192t
N
National Commission on Fraudulent Financial 
Reporting, 172
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 6b, 140, 163
risk management framework, 8–9, 9f
security control assessment guidance, 191–192, 
192t
Special Publication 800-30, 10
Networks, 117
New York Stock Exchange, 9–10
NIST. See National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST)
O
Objectivity, internal auditing, 47–48
Open Systems Interconnection model, 114
Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP), 
215
Operating systems, 116
Operational auditing, 87–91
internal controls, 89
policies, processes, and procedures, 89–90
program or project-focused, 91
Operational effectiveness, 144–145
Organizational controls, 111–112, 111f
Organizational participation, external auditing, 
70–71
OWASP. See Open Web Application Security 
Project (OWASP)
P
Path analysis, 114, 115f
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards 
(PCI DSS), 97–98, 215–216
PCAOB. See Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB)
PCI DSS. See Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standards (PCI DSS)
Performance. See Audit performance
Plan-do-check-act (PDCA), 15–16, 16f, 149, 
161–163, 179
Planning. See Audit planning
PMBOK. See PMI Project Management Body of 
Knowledge (PMBOK)
PMI Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), 126
Preliminary data gathering
audit preparation and, 152
Privacy Act of 197, 140–141
Process. See Audit process(es)
Production phase, of SDLC, 124–125
Program
charter, 50–52
defined, 49b
establishing, 48–55
and project management, 121–122
responsibilities, 53–55
Programmatic auditing, 87
Program or project-focused auditing, 91
Program responsibilities, internal auditing, 53–55
Project-focused auditing. See Program or project-
focused auditing
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB), 11–12, 68–69, 132
Q
Quality assurance, 14–17, 129
and continuous improvement, 145
defined, 14
Quality certification, 142–143
Quality management, 14–17
audit in, 17

244
Index
R
Recommended Security Controls for Federal 
Information Systems and Organizations, 140
Regulatory auditors, 78–79
Reporting findings, audit processes, 158–161
findings vs. conclusions, 159
responding to audit results, 160–161
using information in audit reports, 160
Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization, 
53–54
Resource allocation, in audit preparation, 151–152
Results, audit, 160–161
Retirement phase, of SDLC, 126
Risk, defined, 5–6
Risk assessment, 9–10
Risk management, 5–10, 108–109, 129
audit in, 9–10
components, 8–9
S
SAMM. See Software Assurance Maturity Model 
(SAMM)
SANS Institute, 13, 211–212
certifications, 212
Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, 3b, 9–10, 57–58, 109, 
132, 178–179, 200, 210
on external auditing, 66, 68–69
Section 404, 85
Title II of, 12–13
SAS. See Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS)
Scope of audits, establishment of
audit strategy and prioritization, 109
audit universe, developing and maintaining, 
107–108
components, IT audit, 105–109
governance, risk, and compliance drivers, 
108–109
SDLC. See System (or software) development life 
cycle (SDLC)
SEC. See Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC)
Securities Act of 1933, 132
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, 132
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 132, 
210
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 69
Securities industry
laws and regulations, 131–133
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 132
Securities and Exchange Commission, 132
Security and privacy laws, 135–138
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 137
Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 138
European Council Directive 95/46/EC, 136–137
Security control assessment frameworks, 188–193
ISO/IEC 27000 series, 189
NIST security control assessment guidance, 
191–192, 192t
Security management, 93–94
SEI. See Software Engineering Institute (SEI)
Service management, 92–93
certification standards, 144
Service Organization Control (SOC) reports, 75–76, 
93, 143
SERVQUAL, 14
Six Sigma, 14, 142
Software Assurance Maturity Model (SAMM), 215
Software Engineering Institute (SEI), 212
SSCP. See Systems Security Certified Practitioner 
(SSCP)
Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS), 200, 202t
Statements on Standards for Attestation 
Engagements (SSAE), 160, 202–203
State security and privacy laws, 138
Storage technologies, 117
Support phase, of SDLC, 125
System (or software) development life cycle 
(SDLC), 122–126, 122t, 123f
concept, 123–124
development, 124
operations and maintenance, 125
production, 124–125
retirement, 126
support, 125
utilization, 125
Systems and applications, 115
Systems Security Certified Practitioner (SSCP), 214
T
Threats, 10
Title II of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 12–13
Total Quality Management (TQM), 14, 142
U
US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 
140–141
US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB), 210
Utilization phase, of SDLC, 125
V
Virtualized environments, 118–119
Vulnerabilities, 10

