
The Satellite Communication Ground 
Segment and Earth Station Handbook
Second Edition

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Artech House Space Technology and Applications Series,
turn to the back of this book.

The Satellite Communication Ground 
Segment and Earth Station Handbook
Second Edition
Bruce Elbert

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by John Gomes
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-673-4
© 2014 ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
  All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Ray Sperber, 
for his invaluable contributions to my books


vii
Contents
	
Preface 	
xv
1	
Introduction to the Satellite Communication 
	
Ground Segment	
1
1.1	
Space and Ground Segments	
1
1.2	
First Space Application of Radio	
3
1.3	
Microwave and Radio Telescope Development	
5
1.4	
First Satellite Earth Stations	
8
1.5	
Commercialization of the Ground Segment	
10
1.6	
Growth in Government Use for Mobility and Flexibility	 15
1.7	
Introduction of Consumer Terminals and Applications	
16
1.8	
Satellite COTM	
18
1.9	
The Future of Earth Stations	
19
	
References	
20
2	
Earth Station Design Philosophy	
21
2.1	
Network Topology and Information Formats	
21

viii 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
2.2	
The Major Earth Station—Hub, Gateway, Teleport, 
	
and Tracking Station	
30
2.3	
User Terminals	
34
2.4	
Microwave Systems Engineering	
36
2.4.1	
Microwave Spectrum	
36
2.4.2	
Gains, Losses, and the Decibel	
37
2.4.3	
The Range Equation	
39
2.4.4	
Basic Antenna Principles	
44
2.5	
Modem Design	
47
2.6	
Multiple-Access Control	
50
2.7	
The Internet Protocol and End-to-End 
	
Satellite Networks	
54
2.8	
Satellite Systems Engineering and Operation	
55
	
References	
57
3	
Space-Ground Interface Requirements	
59
3.1	
Satellite Orbital Characteristics	
60
3.2	
GEO Link Characteristics with Link Budgets	
62
3.3	
GEO Orbit Spacing	
72
3.4	
Non-GEO Satellites	
75
3.4.1	
Constellation Characteristics	
76
3.4.2	
Continuity-of-Service Issues	
77
3.4.3	
Link Characteristics for Non-GEO Systems	
78
3.5	
Link Margin	
79
	
References	
80
4	
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements	
81
4.1	
Single Channel per Carrier (SCPC) Networks	
85
4.1.1	
Bandwidth and Quality	
86
4.1.2	
Delay and Latency	
89
4.1.3	
Traffic Engineering and Throughput	
93
4.1.4	
Service Management	
96

 
Contents 
 ix
4.1.5	
Synchronization with Terrestrial Networks	
97
4.2	
VSAT Broadband Networks	
99
4.2.1	
VSAT Network Topologies	
100
4.2.2	
Application Requirements	
101
4.2.3	
Star VSAT Networks	
106
4.2.4	
Mesh VSAT Networks	
109
4.2.5	
CDMA and Adaptive Carrier Cancellation	
110
4.2.6	
Conclusions Concerning VSAT Networks	
114
	
References	
115
5	
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for 
	
TV, Data, and Audio	
117
5.1	
Digital Video Broadcasting and Backhaul	
118
5.1.1	
MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 and High Efficiency Video 
	
Coding Compression	
121
5.1.2	
Digital Video Broadcasting-Satellite (DVB-S) and 
	
DVB-S2 Standards	
127
5.2	
Data Broadcasting and Content Distribution Networks	 132
5.3	
Receiving Dish Selection	
135
5.4	
Digital Audio Radio Service by Satellite	
137
5.4.1	
S-DARS Requirements	
137
5.4.2	
Vehicular Terminal Concepts	
138
	
References	
138
6	
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and 
	
Equipment	
141
6.1	
Architecture Definition and Design	
143
6.1.1	
Meeting the Service Objectives	
143
6.1.2	
Quality of Service (QoS) in Broadband Networks	
146
6.1.3	
Capacity and Distribution of Services	
148
6.2	
Baseband Architecture	
150
6.2.1	
Working from the Outside to the Inside	
150
6.2.2	
User Interface or Access to Content	
152
6.2.3	
Backhaul Circuits: Fiber, Microwave, and Satellite	
152
6.2.4	
Terrestrial Interface: Public or Private	
153
6.2.5	
Information Preprocessing for the Baseband Equipment	 154

x 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
6.2.6	
Multiplexing or Packet Routing	
155
6.2.7	
Multiple Access Processing and Control	
155
6.2.8	
Modulation and Demodulation	
156
6.2.9	
Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation	
159
6.2.10	
Service Management	
160
6.3	
Baseband and Modem Equipment	
161
6.3.1	
Baseband Equipment Design	
161
6.3.2	
Modulation Systems and Modem Design	
164
6.3.3	
Protocol Gateways and TCP/IP Acceleration	
171
6.3.4	
Security and Encryption within the Baseband System	
175
6.3.5	
Conditional Access in Digital DTH Ground Segments	
177
6.4	
Baseband Systems for Scientific Missions	
178
	
References	
181
7	
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment	
183
7.1	
Uplink Design and the EIRP Budget	
183
7.2	
Uplink Power Control	
184
7.3	
Transmit Gain Budget	
188
7.4	
Downlink G/T and RF Level Analysis	
191
7.4.1	
Downlink Noise Temperature Allocation	
192
7.4.2	
G/T Budget	
196
7.4.3	
Gain Budget	
202
7.4.4	
Pointing and Tracking of Antennas	
203
7.5	
Antenna and Microwave Design	
206
7.5.1	
Waveguides and Transmission Lines	
207
7.5.2	
Horns and Other Single-Element Antennas	
212
7.5.3	
Reflector Antennas	
219
7.5.4	
Main Beam, Sidelobe, and Cross-Polarization 
	
Performance	
232
7.5.5	
RF Filtering and Power Combining	
235
7.6	
High-Power Amplification	
238
7.6.1	
High-Power Amplifier Technology	
239
7.6.2	
Application Guidelines	
248
7.7	
Up- and Down-Conversion	
251
	
References	
253

 
Contents 
 xi
8	
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization	
255
8.1	
Allocation of Digital Signal Impairments Between 
	
Space and Ground	
255
8.1.1	
Intermodulation Noise Produced by Nonlinear 
	
Distortion	
258
8.1.2	
Amplitude Versus Frequency Distortion	
262
8.1.3	
Group Delay Distortion	
263
8.1.4	
Amplitude and Phase Nonlinearity	
266
8.1.5	
Frequency Stability and Phase Noise	
268
8.1.6	
Other Impairments Not Directly Associated with
	
 Transmission	
272
8.2	
Spectrum Monitoring and Analysis	
274
8.3	
Software Design Tools	
276
8.3.1	
Orbit Visualization (STK)	
276
8.3.2	
Detailed Link Budget (SatMaster)	
279
8.3.3	
System Simulation and Communication Analysis 
	
Software Tools	
287
8.3.4	
Dynamic Equalization	
290
8.4	
Optimizing the Ground Segment	
292
	
References	
293
9	
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals	
295
9.1	
General Configurations	
297
9.1.1	
RF Terminal	
299
9.1.2	
Baseband	
301
9.1.3	
User Interface	
302
9.1.4	
Standards for Small Terminals: DVB-RCS and IPoS	
303
9.2	
Antennas for User Terminals	
304
9.2.1	
Directional Antennas	
304
9.2.2	
Communications-on-the-Move Antennas and RF 
	
Terminals	
307
9.2.3	
Broad Beam	
307
9.3	
Power Amplifiers	
311
9.4	
Baseband Functions	
320
9.4.1	
Software Design Process	
321
9.4.2	
Software-Defined Radio Applications	
322

xii 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
9.5	
Fixed Terminals	
326
9.5.1	
Receive-Only (TVRO)	
326
9.5.2	
Fixed Transmit-Receive Terminal (VSAT)	
329
9.5.3	
VSAT Installation Considerations	
330
9.6	
Design Requirements for Portable and Handheld 
	
Terminals	
332
	
References	
336
10	
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection	
339
10.1	
Prime Power and Uninterruptible Power Systems	
342
10.2	
Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning	
345
10.3	
Building Design and Construction	
347
10.3.1	
New Construction and Site Development	
347
10.3.2	
Initial and Ongoing site Expenses	
349
10.4	
Grounding and Lightning Control	
352
10.4.1	
Principles of Grounding and Noise Control	
353
10.4.2	
Lightning Protection	
354
10.5	
Designing the Sustainable Ground Segment	
356
10.5.1	
Facility Control Systems	
358
10.6	
Radio Frequency Clearance and Interference Analysis	
359
10.6.1	
Role of the ITU in Frequency Coordination	
360
10.6.2	
Terrestrial Interference and Coordination	
362
10.6.3	
Interference Sources and Evaluation	
363
10.6.4	
Analysis Methods	
366
10.7	
Site Selection	
369
10.8	
Facility Implementation Guidelines and Scheduling	
373
	
References	
377
11	
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance	
379
11.1	
Structure of Earth Station O&M	
381
11.1.1	
Operations Organization	
384
11.1.2	
Preventive Maintenance Scheduling and Conduct	
384
11.1.3	
Corrective Maintenance	
388

 
Contents 
 xiii
11.2	
Earth Station Alignment with the Satellite	
398
11.2.1	
Prequalification of a Transmitting Earth Station	
401
11.2.2	
Uplink Access Test Prior to Service 	
403
11.2.3	
Network Monitoring and Control During Service	
407
11.3	
Service Support for User Terminals	
408
11.4	
Management of O&M 	
410
11.5	
A Final Word	
413
	
References	
414
	
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in 
	
Satellite Communications	
415
	
About the Author	
427
	
Index	
429


xv
Preface 
Our ability to apply space technology to communication needs on earth is nec­
essarily dependent on the ground segment and the earth stations that comprise 
it. Little has been documented on the methodologies and practices that ground 
segment developers employ to design and implement these facilities. Another 
aspect is the powerful trend toward consumer-style user terminals that bring 
satellite communications down to an affordable and practical level, and by do­
ing so have caused the satellite use to reach substantial populations. Doing so 
has not reduced demands on the larger earth stations used as hubs and gateways; 
rather, the opposite has occurred. This situation was the primary motivation for 
this handbook, and we were able to draw on over 40 years of development in 
this field when putting it together.
The book is organized into 11 chapters that discuss the history, require­
ments, systems engineering, hardware design, systems analysis, and operations 
and maintenance of earth stations and user terminals. Our approach is to pro­
vide a thorough understanding of the technology and implementation issues for 
the ground segment, rather than delving into copious detail on each element. 
This is how we could keep the book to a tractable form and allow the reader 
to learn how to develop specific approaches for fixed, broadcasting, and mobile 
satellite applications. A cover-to-cover reading will provide a comprehensive 
review of almost every aspect of the system, considering real-world aspects of 
earth station design and engineering. From there, the book provides a reference 
and technologies to be incorporated for subsequent analysis and selection of 
the appropriate architecture design approach. References containing detailed 
information on specific engineering issues and solutions are included with each 
chapter.
We begin in Chapter 1 with a brief history of the satellite communication 
earth station, which is fundamentally a radio station operating at microwave 

xvi 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
frequencies. We draw heavily from the fields of radio-astronomy (the first dish 
antennas were actually radio-telescopes), radar, and terrestrial microwave. Basic 
engineering principles common to all earth stations are contained in Chapters 
2 and 3, the latter delving in particular into the RF link budgeting process for 
geostationary earth orbit (GEO) and non-GEO satellite transmissions. Chapter 
4 addresses ground segment requirements for two-way communications ser­
vices for telephony and VSAT data applications. One-way (broadcast) service 
requirements are covered in detail in Chapter 5, is by addressing digital video 
broadcasting as well as audio and data broadcasting. The data aspects are of 
particular interest in the context of applying the Internet Protocol over satellite 
links.
Chapter 6 addresses what has become a vital concern in designing in­
tegrated ground segments for digital services—that of baseband architecture. 
The topic, which defied proper characterization in the past, involves complex 
data processing, information transfer over a network, multiple access tradeoffs, 
modulation and coding, and a host of other aspects of creating an automated 
network environment that satisfies subscribers and other users. We address an 
overriding concern about implementing competitive architecture that can make 
money in commercial services. Also of importance is the demand for enhanced 
transportable and in-motion systems to serve emergency and military needs. 
The more traditional topic of earth station RF and equipment design is ad­
dressed in detail in Chapter 7, extending from the general subject of gain bud­
gets (EIRP and G/T) to the specifics of the antennas, high power and low noise 
amplifiers, and up- and down-converters. We provide up-to-date coverage of 
high power solid state amplifiers as replacement for traditional vacuum-tube 
base units. Also considered in the chapter are important design and perfor­
mance issues such as group delay, local oscillator stability, and phase noise. In­
teraction of all of the RF and baseband elements is covered in Chapter 8, which 
deals with signal impairments and PC software tools for link analysis and end-
to-end simulation.
Our next focus is on fixed and mobile user terminals, covered in Chapter 
9 from a design and performance standpoint. Also addressed is the develop­
ment of baseband and modem functions through the principles of the software-
designed radio, as well as specific considerations for handheld satellite phones. 
Design requirements and implementation of major facilities for large earth 
stations are covered in detail in Chapter 10. We round out the handbook in 
Chapter 11 with a comprehensive discussion of operations and maintenance 
principles based on practical experience with many successful projects over the 
years. This considers both the operational needs of the earth station and net­
work, as well as lessons learned in managing the human side of the equation.
This second edition of the handbook is intended for working satellite 
communications engineers, telecommunications specialists, and managers who 

 
Preface  
xvii
need to consider how to design, implement, and manage the ground segment. 
It is also appropriate for specialists in RF, baseband, information network tech­
nology, and space systems who wish to gain a better understanding of the total 
system and the interaction of its key elements. Operations and maintenance 
personnel should find the book useful as an introduction to ground segments 
and earth stations, and as a handy reference. From an education standpoint, 
much of the material is in current use for technical training.
There is a lot that goes into a book like this, which captures much of a life­
time’s experience with the practical side of applying technology to a real need. I 
would like to express my appreciation to my technical reviewer, Ray Sperber, to 
whom this second edition is dedicated, for his outstanding guidance and input 
during development of the manuscript. His insight, motivation, and mastery 
of all things satellite have helped me make this a better book. Also, I wish to 
thank Bill Bazzy, Mark Walsh, and Samantha Ronan of Artech House for their 
support from start to finish. I am very appreciative of my wife, Cathy, for help­
ing get the project together and to my younger daughter, Michelle, who kept us 
moving forward with research assistance. I especially thank my older daughter, 
Sheri Lucas, who educated me on the value and fine points of engineering a 
sustainable facility (see Section 10.5). 
Bruce Elbert
Application Technology Strategy, LLC
bruce@applicationstrategy.com


1
1
Introduction to the Satellite 
Communication Ground Segment
Ground segments of satellite communication systems employ a variety of termi­
nal designs and network configurations in order to provide and manage services 
delivered to end users. The terminals in these networks range from the large 
earth stations used as gateways in a telephone network to very small aperture 
terminals (VSATs) that deliver data communication applications to homes and 
remote business locations. “Small aperture” in this context refers to a reflector 
diameter in the range of 60 cm to 2.8m. We must also include low-cost end 
user communication devices like desktop and handheld mobile telephones and 
direct broadcast satellite (DBS) home receivers. This broad range of ground sys­
tems and devices employs many of the same hardware and software technolo­
gies found in other modern telecommunications and broadcasting networks 
that are the core of terrestrial wireless and Internet services.
1.1  Space and Ground Segments
As illustrated in Figure 1.1, the ground segment is that half of a satellite com­
munication system which, quite naturally, resides on the ground. The space 
segment, consisting of orbiting communication satellites and a satellite con­
trol system used to operate and maintain the satellites, is that vital component 
which relays information between and among the various types of earth stations 
that make up the ground segment. In a previous work [1], we discuss in detail 
the design, operation, and management of the space segment, considering the 
technologies and physical principles that are key to its success. In essence, the 
ground segment is useless without a properly operating space segment. Im­

2 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
plementation of the space segment of geostationary earth orbit (GEO) satel­
lites represents many hundreds of millions of dollars; a global nongeostation­
ary (non-GEO) satellite system could increase this level to billions due to the 
greater satellite quantity. Operators of GEO space segments include Intelsat, 
Société Européene des Satéllites (SES), Telesat, EUTELSAT, Sky Perfect JSAT, 
and others. Companies such as Iridium, Globalstar LLC, O3b, and OrbComm 
operate non-GEO satellite constellations and systems. The ground antenna at 
the top left of the telemetry, tracking, and control earth station facility—along 
with the satellite control center—permits control of the space segment. We will 
not discuss the space segment in detail in this book, but we will at times need to 
consider the capabilities and constraints that it imposes as we work to provide 
the service element of the overall system.
We use the term earth station to include classic fixed earth station facili­
ties as well as mobile aeronautical, maritime, and handheld devices. In some 
cases, earth stations are individually owned and managed (e.g., the teleport op­
erated as a business), to offer specific services to end users. Many readers already 
own their own user terminals, which are technically small self-contained earth 
stations. But these terminals cannot operate without the ground segment of the 
network operator. The hub at the center is a large earth station facility indica­
tive of the resource needed by the network operator to fulfill its communica­
tions and management roles. Examples of the latter include DIRECTV, British 
Sky Broadcasting (BSB), and ViaSat. Many varieties of user-operated terminals 
deliver the final service to network end points.
Figure 1.1  Definition of the space segment and the ground segment

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
3
The first two chapters of this text will lay the groundwork for the detailed 
discussion of design and operating principles that follows. The intention is to 
permit readers to devise their own approach to implementing and managing 
the earth stations and the overall ground segment. The material presented in 
this book should give readers a head start in the process, allowing them to 
prepare requirements, perform preliminary analyses, review designs provided 
by hardware suppliers, and manage the introduction of the overall ground seg­
ment, as well as maintain it through the service life. We assume that readers 
have some level of familiarity with the overall satellite system and the principles 
of RF engineering and telecommunications networks, particularly those using 
satellites and the Internet. We start with a chronological review of earth station 
technology, beginning in the early twentieth century with the first introduction 
of radio (synonymous with wireless at that point in time).
The long history of ground segment and earth station development and 
application dates back to the early 1900s, to the very beginnings of radio com­
munications. Gugliemo Marconi successfully conducted the first transatlantic 
message transmission in 1901. The transmitters of the day produced a radio 
signal of around 1 MHz generated from a continuous spark. Radio waves from 
this frequency and up to about 30 MHz can travel long distances on the ground, 
since they can be reflected by the ionosphere (instead of an orbiting platform). 
Later, commercial ships were equipped with these radios so that land-based 
stations could handle messages sent with the international Morse code. The 
1997 movie Titanic dramatized how these simple mobile radio stations were the 
lifelines of communication afforded the greatest ships at sea.
An overall timeline for the evolution of modern ground segments and 
earth stations is presented in Figure 1.2. It is impossible to present here every 
significant class of facility and application, since to do so would require an area 
the size of a movie screen. However, we aim to show each major introduction 
of ground-based radio technology that contributed to how we use communica­
tion satellites in orbit. Other aspects of this history, particularly from the space 
segment standpoint, can be found in our previous work [1].
1.2  First Space Application of Radio
While HF signals (which lie between 3 and 30 MHz) are much lower in fre­
quency than today’s modern satellite links, the principle is nevertheless the same 
as for the ground segment. Private individuals and experienced radio hobbyists 
(called radio amateurs or hams) helped develop radio communications through 
the medium of amateur radio communication (also called ham radio) and radio 
astronomy. This author spent (and continues to spend) many hours as a teen­
ager, college student, and young engineer using the international Morse code to 

4 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
meet fellow amateurs around the world. (International Morse code differs from 
the original American Morse code because it composes letters with long and 
short “on” radio transmissions rather than sequences of “clicks” of DC current 
over telegraph wires.) Starting in the 1920s, amateurs were granted key status in 
the U.S. domestic regulations and later international regulations as well. They 
developed their own equipment and antenna systems, and moved the technol­
ogy from the low frequencies up to the bands close to those of modern satellites.
The first indication of a connection between radio and space came in 
1922 when Karl Jansky, a young electrical engineer at Bell Laboratories, was in­
vestigating the various sources of noise that hinder long-distance radio commu­
nication. While most of the emitters he identified were due to terrestrial sources 
such as electrical machinery and thunderstorms, there was one unidentified 
source that appeared and disappeared on a daily basis. The clue as to the celes­
tial nature of this source was the fact that it appeared four minutes earlier every 
day. From the standpoint of an astronomer, this indicated that the source was 
extraterrestrial. Karl Jansky’s announcement of the source as in the direction of 
Figure 1.2  Overall timeline of ground segment and earth station development

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
5
the center of the Milky Way Galaxy was reported on May 5, 1933, on the front 
page of the New York Times.
Most early radio installations looked more like broadcasting sites than 
earth stations. However, it was an amateur radio operator by the name of Grote 
Reber who built the first operating parabolic reflector antenna. (The reflector 
is parabolic in cross section, producing a surface called a paraboloid. However, 
the term parabola is more popular, probably because it is easier to say.) Shown 
in Figure 1.3 is the 10m (32 ft) wonder he created to explore the radio sky. 
Reber built this first model himself literally in his own backyard, and made his 
first discoveries of cosmic radio emissions in 1939. After continued measure­
ment and exploration of celestial radio sources, he published the first survey of 
the sky at radio wavelengths in 1942 in the Proceedings of the Institute of Radio 
Engineers [2].
1.3  Microwave and Radio Telescope Development
Earth stations use microwave frequencies, which lie between approximately 1 
and 30 GHz, and therefore owe much to the development of Radio Detecting 
and Ranging (RADAR) systems. Many readers are aware that a radar antenna 
in the Hawaiian Islands detected imperial Japanese aircraft that bombed Pearl 
Figure 1.3  Grote Reber’s home-built backyard radio telescope (photo courtesy of NRAO).

6 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Harbor on December 7, 1941 [3]. However, much earlier, in 1929, G. Ross 
Kilgore, an engineer at Westinghouse, generated 18 GHz of microwave energy 
with an experimental split-anode magnetron vacuum tube. This particular de­
vice could measure Doppler reflections from moving automobiles and railroad 
cars. Radar improved in RF power output and sophistication during World War 
II and shortly thereafter, providing a technology base for terrestrial and satellite 
microwave communications. Professor Wilmer Barrow of the pioneering Radi­
ation Laboratory at MIT experimented with electromagnetic horn antennas for 
“static-less” ultrahigh-frequency wave transmission [4]. The system consisted of 
a conducting tube, a transmitting terminal device, and either a receiving ter­
minal unit or the radiating horn. Other developments at the Rad Lab include 
a multitude of microwave components like the klystron, numerous waveguide 
devices like diplexers, and antenna systems for radar and communication ap­
plications. An early horn reflector antenna was developed at Bell Laboratories 
in 1942, a precursor to antennas used in terrestrial and satellite microwave com­
munications. After the war, Raytheon used microwave technology in an innova­
tive (and noncommunication) manner with their invention of the microwave 
oven. Not surprisingly, the first food item to be cooked was popcorn.
AT&T recognized that microwave technology could increase the capacity 
and reliability of long-haul communication lines. Line-of-sight microwave links 
were established across the developed regions of the world during the 1950s and 
1960s. The terminal ends and intermediate connection points were very much 
like earth stations in their design and use, namely to interface the long-distance 
link with local users. The overall microwave network offers much that a modern 
ground segment can, although it is tied to the specific routing and associated 
real estate.
Radio astronomy, while not able to command the investment and rev­
enues of commercial telephone and television services, still benefited from the 
availability of microwave technology. Here, the challenge is to receive very 
weak signals (effectively noise within the noise). The parabolic dish antennas 
grew in size to provide greater ability to discriminate distant radio emitters. 
The principle behind this is that the width of the narrow antenna beam is 
inversely proportional to the diameter of the reflector. Thus, radio telescopes 
in the 30-to-100-m range soon appeared, topped by the giant 305-m Arecibo 
dish antenna in Puerto Rico (this antenna is actually constructed in a small lake 
basin and was featured in the James Bond movie Golden Eye). Constructed in 
1960 and operated by Cornell University under a cooperative agreement with 
the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Arecibo radio telescope not only 
receives celestial noise, it can also transmit radar signals to map the planets of 
our solar system.
Radio telescopes more along the lines of earth stations were constructed at 
several locations in the United States and around the world. The 91-m (300-ft) 

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
7
Green Bank Telescope was constructed in the 1960s but experienced mechani­
cal failure in 1988. Another 100-m radio telescope was constructed, this time 
using the offset parabolic reflector design popular for home DBS installations 
(and many spacecraft reflector antennas as well). Another type of terrestrial 
radio communications system is the tropospheric scatter communication link, 
which employs microwave signals that can be propagated over the horizon 
(OTH). The tropo installation shown in Figure 1.4 was installed in 1967 by the 
U.S. Army Signal Corps at Pleiku, Vietnam, where it provided a single-hop link 
of about 230 km to Nha Trang (four times line-of-sight range). As can be seen, 
this 15-m antenna points nearly at the horizon to acquire the relatively weak 
(but reasonably stable) signals that have been dispersed by the troposphere.
Radio astronomy, the originator of the large dish antenna, has progressed 
remarkably and benefitted from innovation in space communications. The 
U.S. National Radio Astronomy Observatory based in Washington, DC, has 
constructed a number of large aperture antennas to receive radio waves in the 
microwave and lower spectrum from deep space [5]. One of these innovations is 
evident by the new Green Bank Telescope, shown in Figure 1.5. This 100-foot 
diameter antenna operates in the 0.1 to 116 GHz (3.0m–2.6mm) portion of 
Figure 1.4  Tropospheric-scatter terminal in Pleiku, Vietnam (circa 1967).

8 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the spectrum. As will be discussed later in this text, the Green Bank Telescope 
takes advantage of the offset feed design to eliminate blockage in the space-to-
ground path. Another development that dates from 1980s is the Very Large 
Array (VLA) in Socorro, NM, employing a total of 19 receiving apertures ar­
rayed in a Y shape. The photograph in Figure 1.6 indicates how these antennas 
are arranged; signals are coherently combined to present a much larger effective 
aperture and to permit interferometry.
1.4  First Satellite Earth Stations
Satellite earth stations are different from previous ground-based installations 
in that they are intended to transmit to and receive from spacecraft. The first 
of these were used to track the early vehicles that were launched into orbit and 
deep space. The function is called tracking, telemetry, and command (TT&C) 
and often includes a requirement to receive various types of sensor information. 
Such stations could also be equipped for communication with manned space­
craft and orbiting repeaters (e.g., communication satellites). Both the United 
States and the former Soviet Union introduced these capabilities as part of their 
respective space programs, which began in the mid-1950s. The first TT&C 
ground stations were, in fact, radio telescopes that had been modified for bidi­
rectional transmission. An example is the 90-m Goldstone, California, tracking 
Figure 1.5  The 100 foot diameter Greenbank Telescope (courtesy of the National Radio As­
tronomy Observatory).

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
9
station antenna, which was installed in the late 1950s to track Explorer 1 by 
Jet Propulsion Laboratories (JPL), which at the time was under contract to 
the U.S. Army. In 1959, JPL was transferred to the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) as part of the still-operating Deep Space Net­
work (DSN).
Also installed at Goldstone was the 30.5-m earth station for use with the 
Project Echo passive balloon reflector satellite. Bell Labs in Holmdale, New 
Jersey, provided the other end of the link with their reflector horn antenna [6]. 
Horn antennas of this type have the added feature of very low side and back 
lobe radiation and reception, something that helps reduce noise pickup from 
extraneous sources. Later, this antenna was the instrument used by Bell Labs’ 
scientists A. A. Penzias and R. W. Wilson to make the discovery of the cosmic 
background noise level, produced by the Big Bang. While experimenting with 
noise measurements, they were trying to find where about three degrees Kelvin 
of excess noise was coming from.
The first active repeater satellite was Bell Laboratories’ Telstar 1, which 
allowed the United States and the United Kingdom to communicate real-time 
TV and voice. As the first true earth stations, these facilities were as large and 
elaborate as the TT&C stations and large radio telescopes that they emulated. 
Size did matter because of the low power and antenna gain provided by the 
little Telstar satellite. Because Telstar 1 was in low earth orbit (LEO), the earth 
Figure 1.6  The Very Large Array (VLA)  installed near Soccoro, NM (courtesy of the National 
Radio Astronomy Observatory).

10 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
stations required tracking systems; also, the service was interrupted whenever 
the satellite was not in simultaneous view of the end points.
All of these earth stations were highly customized and experimental in na­
ture. They were not constructed to provide a service to subscribers and certainly 
were not operated as a business. In the next section, we consider how earth sta­
tions evolved into commercial ground segments installed to provide profitable 
communications services and to meet the critical needs of the government.
1.5  Commercialization of the Ground Segment
The creation of the Communications Satellite Corporation (COMSAT) and 
the subsequent launch of Early Bird in 1965 ushered in the era of true com­
mercialization of this medium. It has largely gone unnoticed that one of COM­
SAT’s greatest legacies is its introduction of major earth stations for telephone 
and TV services to the general public and their standardization, which allowed 
an industry based on generally interoperable hardware. The very first transmis­
sions over Early Bird used the same earth stations that were constructed for Tel­
star; however, these facilities had very limited service capability, both in terms 
of capacity and physical location. The intention of Early Bird and many of the 
INTELSAT satellites that followed was to improve the international telecom­
munications network. This demanded that earth stations be located in essen­
tially every country of the world.
COMSAT worked in cooperation with AT&T, RCA (now separated into 
several other companies), and others in the United States, and the major post, 
telegraph, and telephone (PTT) agencies of countries around the world to 
standardize the design and operation of these large earth stations. They helped 
found the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTEL­
SAT), a treaty-based cooperative of national entities around the world. A typical 
INTELSAT earth station of the 1960s, such as the COMSAT facility in Etam, 
West Virginia, represented a substantial investment yet offered connectivity 
with other earth stations through the GEO satellites operated by this consor­
tium. While begun and nurtured by COMSAT, INTELSAT set out on its own 
in the mid-1970s and initiated a broad range of other services and applica­
tions of their space segment. The initial Standard A type of station (initially 
requiring 30-m antennas) was joined by more cost effective Standard B earth 
stations (at 15m to 20m) that allowed countries to provide domestic satellite 
communication networks. Similar stations were installed as part of domestic 
satellite (DOMSAT) systems, such as the Palapa A network in Indonesia (see 
Figure 1.7).
The INTELSAT system established its preeminence through the 1960s 
and early 1970s as the number of earth stations grew from hundreds to 

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
11
thousands. Using technology and standards originally developed by COMSAT 
and improved along the way by INTELSAT and its members, the earth sta­
tions interoperate effectively. At all times, they maintain quality and order (no 
small task for a system used by a wide range of operating organizations on every 
continent). 
Headquartered in Washington, D.C., INTELSAT managed the system 
using its control center, connected to TT&C and monitoring stations strategi­
cally located around the world. Individual earth stations, which were, at the 
time, owned and operated either by members (e.g., the domestic telephone 
companies or PTTs) or other users who obtained their authority from these 
entities, were under the direction of INTELSAT’s control staff. In 2000, IN­
Figure 1.7  Palapa A light-traffic earth station (10-m antenna) in Indonesia.

12 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
TELSAT became a private company, Intelsat, and reconfigured itself to become 
the world’s largest GEO satellite operator. 
While INTELSAT saw its global system grow rapidly in terms of the 
number of satellites and earth stations, an important new phase of satellite com­
munication appeared in 1971 when Canada launched its first GEO DOMSAT, 
Anik A (Anik means “brother” in the native Inuit language). Telesat Canada 
established the first domestic satellite system, which would become a model for 
more than twenty other countries. It pioneered applications like rural telephone 
service to remote regions and national TV broadcasting directly to major cit­
ies and small communities far from terrestrial transmitters. While INTELSAT 
required antennas of at least 15m in diameter, the performance of the Anik 
satellites allowed Telesat to employ 10m and even 4.5m antennas for these ser­
vices (see Figure 1.8). This innovative system also spurred Canadian industry, 
allowing several companies to gain a viable foothold as international suppliers 
of satellite and earth station equipment.
The United States, while a pioneer of commercial satellites and earth sta­
tions, took a back seat to Canada and only produced its first domestic network 
in 1974 with the launch of Western Union’s Westar 1 satellite. Being a purely 
Figure 1.8  A 4.5-m earth station capable of telephone service (circa 1977).

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
13
commercial company, Western Union implemented its ground segment to aug­
ment its existing terrestrial microwave network. Westar earth stations were lo­
cated in major cities around the country to support telephone, telex, and data 
communications. Later, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) became the first 
U.S. television network to use satellites for program distribution and backhaul 
(e.g., the point-to-point transmission of video from temporary sites and remote 
studios at affiliated TV stations).
Integrated ground segments of the day primarily used analog technology 
for telephone, telex, and television service, and depended on human opera­
tors to control access and manage services. The first domestic satellite system 
outside of North America was introduced in Indonesia and its neighboring 
Southeast Asian neighbors in 1976. The Palapa A satellites (named for a mythi­
cal fruit that Gajah Mada, an ancient king of Java, refused to eat until all of 
Indonesia was united) used the same design as Anik A. The ground segment was 
provided on an integrated basis by an international team consisting of the Indo­
nesian PTT (now PT Telkom), Hughes Space & Communications Company, 
Ford Aerospace, ITT, and the TRT division of Philips. Internal to every earth 
station was a single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) system that provided telephone 
service on a demand-assigned (DA) basis. This was directly integrated into the 
Indonesian direct-distance-dialed (DDD) automated telephone network that 
ITT was installing at the time.
The timeline in Figure 1.2 indicates that 1975 was also a pivotal year for 
mobile satellite communications, since this was the year Marisat 1 was launched. 
This L-band GEO satellite was operated by COMSAT as a means to improve 
ship-to-shore communications, which at the time was still dependent on iono­
spheric reflection at high frequency. The first shipboard Marisat terminals still 
needed a dish type of antenna to provide adequate link performance for SCPC 
telephone and telex service. At the other end of the link is a land station acting 
as a gateway to the telephone network in the respective country. This service 
was so successful that COMSAT created Inmarsat, another alliance to promote 
the proliferation of earth stations in the global mobile ground segment. We will 
discuss again how Mobile Satellite Services grew to extend to the air and land, 
providing communications to a wide variety of user terminals.
The decade of the 1980s saw a big increase in the number of satellites 
and satellite operators. The GEO began to become crowded in sectors serv­
ing North America, Europe, and East Asia. Applications in TV, private data 
and voice networks, and mobile communications established themselves as the 
ground segments mushroomed. Private commercial operators such as RCA 
Americom (now part of SES), Hughes Communications, and Pan Am Sat (now 
part of Intelsat) grew to size and profitability on the foundation of the cable and 
broadcast TV industry. Television signals relied on these satellites to serve the 
thousands of locations in North America.

14 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Cable TV systems in local communities created the demand for special­
ized and high-value programming from HBO, Turner Broadcasting (now part 
of Time Warner), Disney, and ESPN. Cable networks numbered more than 100 
by 1985 and continue to be delivered through 3-to-5-m C-band dishes at the 
head ends of local cable TV (CATV) systems. Origination of the network feeds 
requires extensive studio facilities. Ku-band satellites and ground segments also 
appeared in the 1980s to take advantage of the smaller dish sizes that this band 
allows. As a result, VSAT user terminals like that in Figure 1.9 became popular 
with major retailers like Walmart, Rite Aid, and Kmart, and oil companies like 
Chevron, and Exxon Mobile.
The first real DBS system was introduced in Japan in the late 1970s and 
became very popular by 1985. While offering only two TV channels, the NHK 
Figure 1.9  Examples of VSAT earth stations for two-way communications: (a) 1.2-m data ap­
plication (photo courtesy of Hughes Electronics); (b) 1-m video-data terminal (photo courtesy 
of STM Wireless).

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
15
DBS project resulted in several million home DBS installations throughout 
Japan. The United Kingdom and continental Western Europe saw the explo­
sion of commercial satellite TV during the late 1980s. One could argue that 
this expansion came about through News Corp’s Sky TV and the Astra satellites 
operated by Société Européenne des Satéllites. This powerful combination de­
livered an attractive programming package directly to subscribers, who bought 
and installed their own DBS receivers. There is little doubt that this established 
the viability of direct-to-home (DTH) satellite TV, an application which DI­
RECTV subsequently took to new heights (but still at GEO altitude).
1.6  Growth in Government Use for Mobility and Flexibility
The origins of the space programs are tied to government applications, specifi­
cally those involving the military. Communications via satellite are no excep­
tion and the United States began building government-dedicated satellites and 
earth stations even before 1970. However, commercial satellite systems have 
maintained an edge in terms of cost/effectiveness and capability. At times, the 
military services have found it attractive to purchase satellite capacity, earth 
stations, and end-to-end services from many of the commercial operators previ­
ously described.
One operator that benefitted from this interest is Inmarsat. In fact, the 
first Inmarsat satellite was a joint undertaking of COMSAT and the Navy, re­
sulting in the Marisat satellite with both UHF for the Navy and L-band for the 
original Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) offering to commercial shipping. UHF 
served the Navy and Army well, but it has had limitations as to service features 
and capacity. The later Inmarsat series of satellites, on the other hand, have 
demonstrated greater capabilities and the user terminals have generally been 
cheaper and in some cases smaller than their UHF counterparts. Therefore, the 
U.S. military became a strong supporter of Inmarsat at the same time that it 
pursued UHF and other frequency regimes.
Military operations in the Middle East by U.S. forces in the decades of 
the 1990s and 2000s demonstrated the value of Inmarsat services and the small 
terminals became fixtures with units in the field (including portable and ve­
hicular units). Special operations teams needed more of a broadband connec­
tion to remote locations beginning around 2000 and so Ku-band services were 
employed. The terminal devices, previously called fly-away terminals since they 
could be packed in suitcases, were very popular and rose in acceptance by liter­
ally all military units. This is a type of communications on the pause (CoTP). 
Normally, CoTP refers to antennas mounted on trucks or trailers, usually at X 
band. More recently, the military have begun to employ communications on 
the move (COTM) wherein the terminal is mounted on a vehicle and uses a 

16 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
tracking antenna to maintain the connection while in motion. Similarly con­
figured Ku-band terminals are installed in aircraft, including the first to be 
provided on Air Force One. It must be remembered that the higher frequency 
dishes on ships are always COTM, even before the term was popularized. A pic­
ture of a shipboard installation, with protective radome, is shown in Figure 9.6.
1.7  Introduction of Consumer Terminals and Applications
Ground segments that serve individual consumers came into their own during 
the 1990s. Although many U.S. consumers were enjoying direct reception of 
cable and TV networks using backyard dishes (typically 2m to 4m in diameter), 
an explosion of demand for home satellite TV did not really start until DIREC­
TV was introduced. The space segment for this pioneering system consisted of 
rather standard Ku-band Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS) satellites operat­
ing in the assigned slot at 101 degrees west longitude (the Astra Fixed Satellite 
Service, FSS, and BSS satellites had already gained eminence at 19.2 degrees 
west longitude, based on analog transmission). DTH receivers were installed in 
American homes by millions of families who either did not have access to cable 
TV or were unhappy with what the local cable company had to offer.
Complementing the user terminals was the world’s large uplinking cen­
ter for DIRECTV, constructed in Castle Rock, Colorado. This center was the 
first to employ MPEG-based video compression and had the unique capabil­
ity to originate 200 simultaneous channels of programming. The proprietary 
DIRECTV Satellite System (DSS) demonstrated the technical and operational 
viability of this type of implementation (as with many U.S. innovations, this 
proprietary standard has been supplanted in later DTH systems by the Euro­
pean Digital Video Broadcast [DVB] series of open standards). By 2000, ap­
proximately 7 million individual subscribers were employing DSS receivers and 
subscribed to the service (making DIRECTV the United States’ largest “cable” 
TV operator). Echostar, a competitor of DIRECTV, introduced its innovative 
DISH Network and brought the total U.S. DTH subscriber count to over 30 
million, the largest for any country in the world. France, Germany, the United 
Kingdom, Sweden, Thailand, Malaysia, Japan, Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina 
are among the nations in which consumers have access to a high degree of 
choice in TV entertainment. As we write this, Indian DTH subscriber growth 
is over one million per month!
Many of these ground segments use the DVB standard, which contains 
MPEG-2 and most of MPRG-4 video compression and multiplexing, digital 
audio, encryption and conditional access, and online program guides. DVB 
provides many standard features that permit set-top boxes to be supplied from 
multiple vendors, but aspects of the conditional access system are very much 

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
17
closed. In the Middle East and in North Africa, for example, literally all TV is 
delivered through the DTH medium. This is a boon not just for the operators 
but for manufacturers of home receiving antennas and set-top boxes, digital 
video compression and storage equipment, uplink earth stations, and providers 
of the programming itself (as well as advertisers) who gain a direct connection 
to viewers.
Returning to the Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) area, Inmarsat did a 
good job of bringing satellite communication to the personal level. First with 
the Inmarsat M and then the M4 (Figure 1.10), it was demonstrated that one 
could have reliable communication from a highly portable piece of equip­
ment. Likewise, domestic MSS operators Optus Communications (Australia) 
and American Mobile Satellite Corporation (AMSC) adopted similar ground 
Figure 1.10  Examples of compact MSS user terminals for use in the Inmarsat system: (a) 
Standard M; (b) Standard M4 (photos courtesy of NERA).

18 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
segment equipment, including Improved Multi-band Excitation (IMBE) voice 
compression technology from Digital Voice Systems Inc. (DVSI). While these 
terminals were not of the handheld variety, they nevertheless demonstrated that 
individual calls could be placed and subscribers could be serviced conveniently 
and relatively inexpensively (e.g., as compared with the best alternative in a 
remote place, on a ship, or wherever). 
The explosive use of the Internet during the 1990s had an impact on 
satellite communication ground segments. Major corporations that found it 
an effective way to extend their information technology (IT) systems across a 
broader business and geographic base adopted TCP/IP and the rest of the Inter­
net suite of protocols. Companies like HNS, Gilat, and ViaSat enhanced their 
VSAT offerings by better supporting TCP/IP. Oddly, much misinformation 
was propagated during the 1990s that TCP/IP was incompatible with GEO 
satellite links due to the combination of propagating delay and noise-induced 
errors. The leading suppliers of VSAT terminals and the associated hub stations 
devised effective solutions through protocol “spoofing” (a technique also used 
by Cisco to improve performance) to allow satellite networks to challenge ter­
restrial solutions. 
The year 1999 was a watershed for satellite communications because of 
the commercial introduction of satellite handheld phones through the Iridium 
and Globalstar systems. The first Iridium handheld telephone, illustrated in 
Figure 1.11, is not small enough to put in a shirt pocket or small purse, but its 
communication capability was innovative. The ground segment itself provides 
the landing point for terrestrial phone calls and allows this operator to manage 
the system. Thuraya of the UAE introduced its first satellite phone in 2003 and 
has produced the first “cradle” for the iPhone 4.
A great deal of excitement exists about advanced satellite systems that offer 
interactive broadband services to homes and business. Unlike DBS and VSATs, 
the coming generation of Ka-band broadband systems intends to compete with 
the fiber optic and cable networks in the provision of high-speed Internet and 
multimedia services. ViaSat took the lead in 2011 with the introduction of a 
new satellite and network architecture based on the SurfBeam II (Figure 9.4). 
1.8  Satellite COTM
Our final earth station to chronicle takes the form of specialized terminals that 
deliver broadband two-way service to vehicles on the move. These could be 
SUVs, trucks, and military land vehicles, as well as various types of manned 
and unmanned aircraft. While costing substantially more than the SurfBeam II 
device in Figure 1.11, the COTM terminal provides what terrestrial networks 

 
Introduction to the Satellite Communication Ground Segment 
19
cannot—two-way, high-speed data service in less-traveled areas and beyond the 
reach of the cellular and wireless services, particularly 4G Long Term Evolu­
tion (LTE) broadband. The Ka-band satellites launched after 2000 deliver the 
raw bandwidth, but the COTM systems are what render it useful to civilian 
and military operators. As of 2014, the predominant COTM installation is in 
various aircraft and by vehicles used for emergency communications and by the 
news media. Figure 1.12 shows examples of each.
1.9  The Future of Earth Stations
In looking to the future, we can count on satellites getting bigger and these 
terminals getting smaller. This promotes expansion of the ground segments in 
general and the applications they deliver. We see greater diversity of terminal 
types and applications, with the satellites offering bandwidth on attractive terms 
as compared to past decades. Innovation will lie with specialized companies in 
this industry who understand what it takes to produce and operate satellite 
communications earth stations and terminal equipment.
Figure 1.11  First-generation MSS handheld mobile phone for the Iridium system (photo 
courtesy of Kyocera).

20 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
References
[1]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 3rd ed., Boston: Artech House, 
2008.
[2]	 Reber, Grote, “Cosmic Noise,” Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, Vol. 30, No. 
8, pp. 367, 1942.
[3]	 Strull, Gene, “Westinghouse Microwave Systems and Technology,” 1998 IEEE MIT-S 
International Microwave Symposium Digest, Vol. 2, Baltimore, MD, June 7–12, 1998.
[4]	 http://www.rll.mit/edu/about/history
[5]	 Finley, Dave, “The Very Large Array,” NRAO, http://www.aoc.nrao.edu/~dfinley/presen­
tations/VLAPastFuture.ppt.
[6]	 Dankberg, Mark, “Statement of Mark Dankberg at FCC USF Workshop, Chairman and 
CEO, ViaSat Inc.,” April 27, 2011, http://transition.fcc.gov/presentations/04272011/
mark-dankberg.pdf.
[7]	 http://www.bell-labs.com/history/
Figure 1.12  Examples of communications on the move terminals.

21
2
Earth Station Design Philosophy
The previous chapter provided a historical perspective for the ground segment, 
laying out how earth stations were created and evolved into higher forms. As 
a radio communication facility, an earth station receives and, in many cases, 
transmits a properly formatted signal on a reliable and affordable basis. The 
first earth stations were designed as major facilities that could house the neces­
sary electronic equipment. Like the radio telescopes and tropospheric scatter 
sites discussed in Chapter 1, these earth stations were impressive in their scale. 
They bear some resemblance to major earth stations in modern networks used 
as uplinks, concentration points, and network management centers. Subscriber 
terminals, on the other hand, must have fewer components and be simple to 
operate and maintain. A single-function design philosophy was pioneered with 
C-band backyard dish receivers and the first VSATs drawn from the consumer 
electronics and telecommunications equipment businesses. We next review ba­
sic earth stations and their functions as a foundation for the detailed design 
discussions in subsequent chapters.
2.1  Network Topology and Information Formats
Communications satellites combine with earth stations to create networks, 
serving end users with a variety of content and applications. Designing earth 
stations involves a thorough understanding of network principles in general and 
as applied in the current context. Figure 2.1 provides a general view of a net­
work based on its geographical arrangement, referred to as the topology. Under­
standing the origins and destinations of all communications is key to being able 
to overlay an effective network—one that can be implemented and managed. 
There are a total of five regions to be served and it has been determined that 

22 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
from one to four destination nodes will serve well (indicated by the solid dots 
connected by branch lines). These could be in local communities or at office 
parks. At a higher level of this topology we have three telecommunications hubs 
that aggregate demand from the regions. The hubs are in turn interconnected 
by backhaul circuits (called trunks in traditional telecommunications systems). 
Branch lines and backhaul circuits can either be provided by terrestrial links or 
by the various types of satellite link connectivities to be discussed shortly. Figure 
2.2 provides an example of a terrestrial network with three primary locations 
that are interconnected by T1 (1.544 Mbps) backhaul circuits. The latter are 
offered from telecommunications companies with regional and national infra­
structures (LEC for local exchange carrier and IXC for interexchange carrier). 
The individual channels of communications are obtained by subdividing the 
T1 channels into their constituent DS0 channels of 64 kbps each. While this 
type of network is considered old and perhaps obsolete in advanced nations, it 
nevertheless shows a real-world example of how topology works in the network 
domain.
The way that earth stations employ a communication satellite is termed 
the connectivity. The principal connectivities are illustrated in Figures 2.3, 2.4, 
and 2.5, representing the point-to-point, point-to-multipoint and multipoint 
“interactive” connectivity, respectively. Point-to-point connectivity provides a 
full duplex path between two earth stations using the satellite as a repeater in 
the middle. As shown in Figure 2.3, we need two paths through the satellite 
repeater—this is called multiple access. The link can be established on a preas­
signed (permanent) basis or it can be established on demand in response to 
Figure 2.1  A generic network topology featuring hubs, backbone links and subnetworks.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
23
Figure 2.2  An example of a terrestrial network topology to provide classical T1 links to various locations of an enterprise.

24 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
a short-term need. Preassigned links act as backhaul circuits or trunks, while 
demand-assigned links are used to make a telephone call or other on-demand 
transmission requirement. In the world of the Internet, on-demand links pro­
vide connections for access to websites or to deliver files. The delivery of con­
tent in the form of video and audio streams to many locations is the purpose of 
the point-to-multipoint connectivity in Figure 2.4. This is also called “broad­
cast” because the same information is received by all of the sites within the beam 
on the right. Point-to-multipoint connectivity is how direct broadcast satellites 
are used to serve a region with millions of home dish antennas. Only one earth 
station uplink path to the satellite is needed.
Figure 2.5 presents the type of connectivity most commonly found in 
two-way data communications via satellite. There is one primary uplink, called 
the hub, from which information is transmitted to all of the remote antennas. 
In this case, the remote antennas can also originate data which they transmit on 
a different channel from the hub. We see that the individual transmissions from 
the remote sites are in the form of packets or bursts of information, and the 
link bandwidth is actually timeshared. The hub receives the packets sequentially 
from the remote sites.
Figures 2.3 and 2.5 provide the basis of the two fundamental satellite 
network topologies—the star and the mesh. As shown in Figure 2.6, a star is 
formed in the manner of the multipoint “interactive” connectivity, with the 
Figure 2.3  Point-to-point connectivity over a satellite between two earth stations. The link 
could be preassigned for a dedicated connection, or demand assigned to address a require­
ment of limited time duration.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
25
Figure 2.4  Point-to-multipoint connectivity used to broadcast information to many locations. 
A single uplink earth station at A originates the transmission and a multiplicity of receive sites 
receive the same information.
Figure 2.5  Multipoint “interactive” connectivity that employs a broadcast forward link and 
many return links from the remote locations. The forward link is continuous in nature and 
contains data for individual locations, while the return links are time shared to conserve band­
width.

26 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
hub earth station at the center and the remote terminals connected by the satel­
lite links. For two-way (duplex) transmission, the forward link (also called the 
outbound channel) emanates from the hub to all remotes on a single wideband 
channel. Within that channel can be found the individual subchannels of in­
formation addressed to individual remotes. These subchannels are in the form 
of packets of information using the Internet Protocol or other data format. The 
return link (also called the inbound channel) emanates from each individual 
remote terminal, as depicted for Figure 2.5. These illustrations are equivalent, 
except that Figure 2.6 does not show that there is a satellite relay within each 
of the links between hub and remote. Most of the communication is between 
hub and remote, which is on a single-hop basis. Communication between a pair 
of remotes must be via a double-hop that includes the hub. The mesh network 
topology in Figure 2.7 depicts how each remote site, termed a peer node, can 
communicate directly with any other node without the transmission passing 
through a hub station. Avoiding a double hop means that the time delay is re­
duced, as is the quantity of bandwidth required for the end-to-end data transfer. 
The connections can be preassigned to provide backhaul circuits or established 
on demand. In the case of the latter, there must be a control point that recog­
nizes when a remote requires service, where the desired connection is to termi­
nate (i.e., at which remote), and to instruct both terminals as to the bandwidth 
to be used. When the transmission need is through, the control recovers the 
bandwidth to be used for other connections. Operation of a demand-assigned 
network is much like that of the telephone network, applying to both the star 
and mesh topologies.
Putting these elements together, we obtain the architecture of a satellite 
network in Figure 2.8. Three segments are indicated: the space segment, com­
posed of communications satellites (intersatellite links are suggested but not 
Figure 2.6  The “star” network topology, used in the point-to-multipoint and multipoint inter­
active connectivities and each arrow passes through the satellite.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
27
often provided), the ground segment of user terminals (installed at fixed loca­
tions and on moving platforms like vehicles, aircraft, and ships), and the large 
fixed ground stations that control and manage the overall operation. Within 
the last segment we find the TT&C earth stations of the satellite operator, gate­
way stations used to interconnect the user terminals with terrestrial networks 
like the telephone network and the Internet, and hub stations that operate re­
mote terminals and likewise provide terrestrial network access. Because of the 
Figure 2.7  The “mesh” topology where stations can communicate directly with each other 
over separate point-to-point links.
Figure 2.8  Segments of a satellite network architecture.

28 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
importance and scope of hubs and gateways as well as TT&C stations, we now 
review the design philosophy and process for such major earth stations. This 
will be followed with an introduction to user terminal design.
Network requirements derive from user needs related to the who, what, 
where, and when for the services to be provided. The elements of “what” relates 
to the bandwidths and applications, and the “where” defines locations of users 
and information resources (including those that are fixed on the earth or mobile 
on the ground, sea, or air). These requirements then drive network topology 
and the associated configuration of earth stations. Key to the requirements is 
the types of information to be conveyed through the interfaces to earth stations 
and over the satellite links. In Figure 2.9, we summarize various communica­
tion paradigms and formats, segmenting them into broadcast, real-time trans­
fer, and computer data. 
Broadcast requirements are driven by the particular standard used to 
package content and control delivery. We see that DVB-S and DVB-S2 are cur­
rent leaders and will likely be around past 2020. Analog standards, on the other 
hand, are no longer delivered over satellite links due to their increased band­
width but may be provided to the home receiver. As discussed above, broadcast 
of information fits the point-to-multipoint connectivity and star topology of 
satellite networks, which is still the dominant application of GEO satellites.
In real-time transfer, we are speaking of applications like voice telephone 
services where latency must be kept to a minimum. Video conferencing and 
machine-to-machine applications can likewise demand real-time communica­
tions. Conventional T1 and E1 links have long been used in the form of trunks 
and backhaul circuits, with their low latency and synchronous timing. Asyn­
chronous real-time communications was to be the basis of the Asynchronous 
Figure 2.9  Information types and formats, arranged by communications paradigm: broad­
cast, real-time data transfer, and computer data.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
29
Transfer Mode (ATM), the standard adopted by major telecommunications 
providers and industrial/government users. Today, ATM is found in the back­
bone of terrestrial networks and generally is not utilized directly on satellite 
links.
The last paradigm, computer data, is the realm of the Internet Protocol 
family, which comprises many modes for many different demands. We see two 
different approaches to data communications: connection-oriented (also called 
the Virtual Circuit) and connectionless (called datagram). In the Internet, the 
basic means of transmitting packets between all the nodes is through the con­
nectionless mode; the virtual circuit is a logical arrangement that uses the data­
gram for actual information transfer but adds a control feature to assure that all 
packets are delivered without loss. 
We can analyze communication applications according two attributes, as 
suggested in the strategic grid of Figure 2.10. The familiar topologies of star and 
mesh are indicated along the horizontal, and the degree of symmetry (forward 
link versus return link) along the vertical. A common asymmetrical service is 
home Internet access through cable modem or digital subscriber line (DSL), 
where download speed is from four to ten times faster than upload (lower left 
corner of the grid). Symmetrical service provides equal data rates in both di­
rections and is generally needed for backhaul circuits (upper left corner of the 
grid). Both Internet access and backhaul are part of a star topology since com­
munication is from a remote location to a hub. In the case of a mesh topology, 
there are two applications indicated: video conferencing is usually not through 
a hub so as to permit any pair of users to connect regardless of location with 
equal forward and return data rate and minimum latency (i.e., symmetrical 
service). Contrast that with a contribution application used in broadcast me­
dia: there is a transfer of a large volume of data (video streaming or a video file) 
Figure 2.10  Communications application grid, arranged according to the network topology 
and degree of symmetry or asymmetry.

30 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
from the remote location back to a studio for inclusion in the actual broadcast. 
Therefore, the return link would be at many times the data rate required for the 
forward direction for coordination purposes (i.e., without video content and its 
demand for large bandwidth).
Readers familiar with data networking and the Internet Protocol will un­
derstand the meaning of the protocol stack and connection description of Fig­
ure 2.11. The end systems can represent a user PC on the left and the Web serv­
er to be reached on the right. The application software within these machines 
employs a logical connection from end-to-end, but the actual communication 
employs descending layers of functionality within the two end system comput­
ers. The layers perform standardized functions that are defined in specifications 
(called Request for Comment, RFC) and implemented by vendors like Micro­
soft and Cisco Systems within operating systems. The Intermediate Systems 
are typically routers that transfer the packets of data according to routing rules 
and protocols. This structure is used whether the data goes by landlines or over 
satellite links. In the case of the latter, the data experiences a fixed delay of ap­
proximately 250 ms per hop (assuming a GEO satellite is used) along with bit 
errors produced by noise and interference. As will be discussed, modern ground 
station equipment can help overcome performance issues associated with the 
satellite link through adaptation techniques like protocol “spoofing.”
2.2  The Major Earth Station—Hub, Gateway, Teleport, and 
Tracking Station
As the communication hub of literally every application system, major earth 
stations come in varying sizes and configurations to satisfy the requirements in 
one or more of the following functions:
Figure 2.11  Interconnection model for data networks, based on the five-layer protocol stack.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
31
• Telecommunication or Internet gateway, allowing remote user terminals 
or other gateways to gain access to public or private terrestrial networks 
including the PSTN and the Internet;
• Broadcasting uplink to originate video programming, audio (radio) pro­
gramming, and data and other noninteractive forms of information;
• Hub in a star network, allowing remote user terminals to connect back 
to a central location to access a host computer, servers, telephone switch­
ing equipment, and private video transmission;
• Network control center, to process requests from remote terminals for 
service and satellite bandwidth, and to manage the overall satellite tele­
communication network.
• TT&C earth station to track space vehicles and provide two-way tranfer 
of control, sensor, and other data.
Because of the modulator and flexible nature of any large earth station, 
we can use the generic block diagram provided in Figure 2.12 to explore the 
various subsystems. Probably the most essential and sensitive aspect is the RF 
terminal (RFT), which provides the critical direct interface to the space link. 
The RFT radiates in the assigned frequency band, under control or direction of 
Figure 2.12  Operating elements of a major earth station, including RF terminal, baseband 
equipment, terrestrial interface and tail connection, and support systems.

32 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the satellite or ground segment operator. Connection to baseband equipment is 
at a standard intermediate frequency (IF), to simplify connecting different types 
of transmission equipment, whether analog or digital. The IF center frequency 
itself is determined by the RF bandwidth of the carrier on the link to the satel­
lite. The actual RF frequency is established by the up converter and down con­
verter, for transmit and receive, respectively. Typical IFs include:
• 70 MHz, supporting a usable bandwidth of 36 MHz (the typical tran­
sponder bandwidth at C-band) up to a maximum of 54 MHz (one of a 
number of bandwidths used at Ku-band);
• 140 MHz, supporting wider IF bandwidths, such as 110 MHz (the 
upper end of what has been used on some Ku- and Ka-band satellites);
• 1450 MHz, allowing a total bandwidth of 500 to 1,200 MHz to be 
passed from the low noise block (LNB) converter on the antenna to 
internal electronics of the earth station.
The most visible element of an earth station is the outdoor antenna, 
which can take many forms and sizes to correspond to the application require­
ments illustrations (gain, beamwidth, and isolation). For GEO satellites, this 
antenna can remain essentially fixed on the satellite, moving only for initial 
alignment and if a different orbit position must be viewed. Limited-motion 
tracking systems help keep larger dishes pointed properly. Non-GEO systems 
put much tougher requirements on this class of antenna to direct the beam at 
moving spacecraft. Satellites in inclined geosynchronous orbits place a require­
ment on the antenna for slow-rate tracking. Some or all of the remaining elec­
tronic equipment of the RFT is mounted to the antenna to reduce RF losses 
and, in the case of reception, reduce the noise temperature. All of these aspects 
are reviewed below and covered in detail in Chapter 3.
The electronic equipment of the RFT has not changed much in principle 
since the first systems were constructed. This is because all must perform the 
basic functions of translating the IF signal to the operating RF frequency, am­
plifying it to an adequate power level, and connecting it to the antenna (e.g., for 
the uplink). For reception (the downlink), the RFT collects and amplifies the 
signal, and then translates it in frequency to IF. Requirements for each of these 
components are determined through a detailed budgeting process, where the 
overall specifications of the earth station are allocated to components.
The elements of a compact RFT can be attached to the antenna structure 
(possibly the feed itself). In large installations with many high-power amplifiers 
and redundant systems, the RFT may be contained in its own shelter in prox­
imity to the antenna, or installed in the earth station building itself. The latter 
reduces RF equipment maintenance difficulties but introduces more transmit 

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
33
waveguide loss. An exception might be where the antenna is mounted on the 
roof immediately above the HPA.
While the RF terminal design is dictated by the satellite link requirements, 
the baseband equipment is highly specialized and customized for the particular 
multiple access (ma) method and end-user service requirements. Because base­
band equipment is composed of hardware elements performing signal encod­
ing, multiplexing, and modulation, as well as the reverse of these functions, it is 
usually supplied as an integrated system. In recent years, much of the complex 
functionality is provided by a custom software component that runs on a dedi­
cated computer or other processor. We find the greatest complexity, and along 
with it, flexibility, in time division multiple access (TDMA) baseband systems. 
Frequency division multiple access (FDMA) is usually simpler to configure and 
manage, since transmissions are kept apart in frequency. An exception to this 
rule is demand assignment (DA), wherein the channels are assigned dynami­
cally on a call-by-call basis. In this instance, the baseband system requires a 
considerable degree of automation under software control. The remaining MA 
method, namely code division multiple access (CDMA), is likewise complex 
and specialized, with baseband highly customized as well.
The major earth station is in effect a production facility that must oper­
ate and be maintained by staff (locally or remotely) on a 24-hour-a-day basis. 
Necessary support functions for the generic earth station are indicated at the 
bottom of Figure 2.12 and summarized as follows:
• Monitor and control (M&C) systems. Earth stations can be operated 
locally by technical staff or, if the system allows it, remotely from a con­
trol center. A properly designed M&C system allows staff members to 
detect, troubleshoot, and resolve technical problems in a timely manner. 
Most allow operators to configure portions of the station for service and 
to change the functions being used by customers and subscribers. The 
facilities to do this are integrated into the equipment and overall station 
and some could be remoted to a control center by a specialized network.
• Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC). Much of the in­
door equipment is similar in design and construction to high-quality 
computer systems, memory, and peripherals, and therefore should be 
kept in a hospitable environment. This consists of maintaining tempera­
ture and humidity within the proper range for correct and long-life op­
eration. Typical specifications are as follows:
• Temperature: 15° to 25°C
• Humidity: 30% to 70%
• Dust: A consideration in particularly dusty areas. Air should be fil­
tered for particulate matter

34 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Power and utilities. Commercial prime power is typically rated accord­
ing to the national standard in the particular country. More critical is 
the tolerance on this voltage, as some equipment might not have been 
provided with adequate power regulation.
• Emergency safeguards (fire, flood, earthquake, heavy wind). Potentially 
the most difficult and costly factors to address adequately. See applicable 
sections in Chapter 10.
2.3  User Terminals
Large earth stations and user terminals have many things in common: they have 
the RFT with antenna, LNB and HPA, and they have baseband systems to as­
semble and disassemble the user information for transmission over the satellite. 
In addition, both require prime power and must be protected from the envi­
ronment. Some other properties of each are listed in Table 2.1, indicating that 
the typical earth station has a large antenna and employs HPAs in the higher 
powers—klystron (KPA), traveling-wave tube (TWTA) and somewhat more 
complex solid state (SSPA) amplifiers composed of many individual RF tran­
sistor modules. The design of a large earth station is very industrial in nature, 
as evidence by the assembly of electronic units in 8-foot-high racks allowing 
ease of installation, maintenance, and reconfiguration as requirements change. 
With all of the equipment and support (HVAC and M&C), the earth station 
Table 2.1
Comparison of Design Characteristics of Various Large Earth Stations in Comparison 
to Various Classes of User Terminals
Element
Earth Station
Fixed or 
Transportable
Consumer 
Broadband
Handheld UT
Antenna
(D, diameter)
Large
4<D≤30 meters
Small
0.8<D≤4 meters
Compact
0.6<D≤1.2m
Omnidirectional
RF amplifier
KPA, TWTA, or 
SSPA
SSPA (<50W)
SSPA (<5W)
SSPA (<5W)
Indoor 
electronics
Rack and stack
Modules within 
box or cabinet
ODU and satellite 
modem
Integrated unit
Interfaces
Wide range of 
options
Limited range of 
options
Ethernet (RJ-45), 
USB
No options
User interface
Industrial
Administrative
Consumer
Consumer
Installation
Special site
Office, field 
location, vehicle
Home, RV
None
Cost
High
Affordable
Low
Low

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
35
is usually installed in a special building or shelter, and the site requires special 
attention concerning location and access.
The three columns to the right consider the type of user terminal that 
serves a business or government location. Like the earth station, it has an in­
dustrial feel with a somewhat higher price that is justified by its inherent per­
formance capabilities. These terminals can be installed at fixed locations (at a 
branch office or remote industrial site) or can be configured for portability and 
even installation on a variety of moving platforms. Antenna diameter is typi­
cally in the range of 80 cm to as much as 4m, depending on the frequency band 
and satellite employed. As will be discussed in Chapter 9, portable and mo­
bile antennas are considerably more expensive than the fixed variety due to the 
greater mechanical complexity and need for automatic control. Antennas on ve­
hicles must be packaged to withstand the environmental conditions the vehicle 
imposes, and a capability for communications on-the-move (COTM) extends 
these demands greatly. The SSPA to be used would be of lower power than 
for an earth station and is usually between 5 and 50W. Outdoor equipment is 
typically mounted to the antenna system, and indoor equipment, typically in 
the form of a modem and baseband control subsystem, is contained in a single 
cabinet. Application equipment such as personal computers, video systems, and 
electronically controlled machinery such as flight controls would be connected 
through either standard or specialized interfaces. The indoor equipment can be 
placed in an office or vehicle cab and operated by someone with limited train­
ing. The cost of an industrial user terminal can be classed as affordable, mean­
ing that its price is consistent with the need and application. The range could 
be in the range of a few thousands of dollars to several hundreds of thousands, 
depending on the factors cited previously.
The satellite industry has produced user terminals for purchase and use 
by the average consumer of broadband Internet service. It is a compact form 
of broadband terminal, with an antenna in the range of 60 cm to 1.2m. This, 
with an SSPA power of less than 5W, assures a low price per installation. The 
outdoor unit (ODU) is part of the antenna feed, looking much like an inexpen­
sive DBS antenna system. A satellite modem is connected on the other end of 
the coaxial cable to deliver Internet service through the standard Ethernet port.
The handheld user terminal (last column in Table 2.1) is one designed 
like a cellular telephone or perhaps a smartphone. The antenna has an omnidi­
rectional radiation pattern so the user need not know where the satellite is in the 
sky. Also, the term “user cooperation” is used to denote the limitations on use, 
such as requiring a clear unobstructed path to satellites and that the antenna 
must be vertical at all times. Handset design requires the highest degree of inte­
gration and such devices are in use with L-band mobile satellite service systems 
like Iridium, Inmarsat, and Thuraya. The cost is low relative to a conventional 
VSAT and the devices are nearly as easy to use as the smartphones they mimic.

36 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
2.4  Microwave Systems Engineering
2.4.1  Microwave Spectrum
The principles of microwave technology are essential in the development of a 
modern satellite network, especially for the earth stations and user terminals. 
These include use of the radio spectrum between approximately 1 and 50 GHz 
(bridging the ultrahigh frequency (UHF), superhigh frequency(SHF), and ex­
tremely high frequency (EHF) ranges), radio-wave propagation on a line-of-
sight basis, and generation and reception of microwave power. Microwave links 
were installed across the various continents during the 1950s and 1960s, and 
the techniques are well understood. What we will do here is to extend them to 
the earth-to-space path, the space-to-earth path, and the integration of the two 
to provide an end-to-end link. As Figure 2.13 indicates, the microwave spec­
trum is broken up into the familiar L, S, C, X, Ku, and Ka bands actively used 
in commercial and military satellite communications. These are applied to the 
different services, namely:
• Fixed Satellite Service (FSS), intended for communication among fixed 
locations on the earth by public telecommunication operators (direct 
reception by the public is not intended, but is employed throughout the 
world as another application of this band). Services tend to be broad­
band in nature (e.g., greater than 100 kbps and typically in the range 
of 1 to 200 Mbps) due to the RF bandwidth available and the link 
performance of fixed directional antennas on the ground. Originally al­
located for GEO satellites, at least one non-GEO constellation has been 
granted noninterfering access to this spectrum through subdivision of 
the allocation.
• Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS), the bands intended for direct re­
ception of broadband information by the public. The Ku-band BSS seg­
ment has been assigned into channels and orbit positions for use by 
Figure 2.13  Designation of microwave and millimeterwave bands using letter abbreviations 
(scale is logarithmic and boundaries are approximate).

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
37
individual nations according to a predetermined plan. This service is 
fundamentally reserved for GEO satellites, although entry is being al­
lowed for at least one non-GEO satellite system within this same spec­
trum.
• Mobile Satellite Service (MSS), the bands around L and S band, which 
are available for communication with mobile earth stations, including 
ships, aircraft, vehicles, and persons. The Inmarsat system was estab­
lished at L-band with GEO satellites followed by domestic satellites for 
land-mobile services. The regulators later assigned L and S bands to 
non-GEO satellite networks for MSS applications, although these were 
slow to gain general use.
2.4.2  Gains, Losses, and the Decibel
The following is a review of a concept that needs to be taken to heart. It is a 
common practice in the radio engineering field to convert ratios and values into 
their corresponding decibel (dB) equivalent. This is because most radio and 
microwave equations are based on products and ratios; converting to decibels 
allows us to operate on the various gains and losses using addition (instead of 
multiplication) and subtraction (instead of division). We can do this because of 
the definition of the decibel, which is the common logarithm as follows:
	
=
⋅
=
=
10
(
)/10
(
)
10log
10
o
in
G dB
P
g P
G dB
g
g
	
where g is the gain (a factor) applied to an input power, Pi, to obtain the output 
power, Po, from an amplifier or antenna. The value of G in decibels is given by 
the simple formula above. To convert from decibels back to factors or ratios, 
use the last of the three formulas above. Table 2.2 provides a list of common 
values of G and the corresponding value of g (to two decimal places). There are 
a number of noteworthy values in this table: 0 dB corresponds exactly to a ratio 
of 1. In other words, multiplying a power by a gain of 1 is the same as adding 
0 dB, which amounts to no change. Adding 1 dB of power means to multiply 
the power by 1.26, or about a 25% increase. A 3-dB change, which is viewed 
as quite significant and easily recognized on an operating link, means that the 
power increased by a factor of almost exactly 2. Add another 3 dB and the 
power doubles again. These two changes together amount to a total of 6 dB, 
which the table (and formula) tell us is a factor of 3.98 (for all intents and pur­

38 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
poses, this is a factor of 4). The table indicates that a change of 10 dB is exactly 
the same as multiplying by a factor of 10. Each factor of ten adds 10 dB, which 
is the same as an increase in an order of magnitude. The relationships work the 
same in the opposite direction: dividing by 10 is obtained by subtracting 10 dB; 
cutting the power in half is equivalent to a 3-dB reduction in power, and so on.
At times, we need to convert back from decibels into the ratio that it came 
from. The last of the three formulas does this for us, reflecting that the common 
logarithm is to the base 10. The formula states that we take the decibel value, 
divide it by 10 (because we are using decibels and not full bels), and then raise 
10 to that power. In time, we become comfortable talking about decibel chang­
es and factors of increase and decrease, remembering that 0 dB is no change, 1 
dB is a 26% increase (or 20% decrease), and a 3-dB change means the power is 
doubled (or cut in half), and a 10-dB change is an order of magnitude. The last 
three entries relate decibels in steps of 10 to ratios in powers of 10: thus, 10 dB 
is equivalent to a factor of 10 (the only point where a decibel and its equivalent 
ratio are equal). Adding 10 dB to that means to multiply the factor by 10; this 
yields 20 dB, which is equivalent to a factor of 100 (i.e., 102). So it goes for each 
order of magnitude.
Gains are always stated as positive numbers when in decibels and we will 
typically add them in an equation for the combined output power of an am­
plifier and antenna. Losses are likewise stated as positive numbers, but we will 
subtract them as they always result in a reduction in power caused by something 
that dissipates power (such as a waveguide transmission line or the atmosphere).
Table 2.2
Conversion between 
Ratios and Decibels
dB
Ratio
0.00
1.00
0.50
1.12
1.00
1.26
2.00
1.58
3.00
2.00
4.00
2.51
5.00
3.16
6.00
3.98
7.00
5.01
8.00
6.31
9.00
7.94
10.00
10.00
20.00
100.00
30.00
1000.00

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
39
2.4.3  The Range Equation
Since many readers are familiar with the basic property of electromagnetic wave 
propagation in free space, the following is a summary of radio engineering prin­
ciples, demonstrating their simplicity in mathematical terms. The key elements 
in the associated RF link are shown in Figure 2.14. For the typical microwave 
link on a space-to-earth (downlink) or earth-to-space (uplink) path, the free 
space loss can be expressed in dB as:
	
(
)
=
+
+
0
183.5
20log
20log
35,786
A
F
R
	
where F is the frequency in GHz, and R is the range in km.
The factor 20 in front of the log provides the squaring of both the fre­
quency and range in the equation, and the denominator of R (e.g., 35,786) is 
the mean altitude of GEO. This formula, however, adjusts automatically for 
any range, including that of a LEO system at, say, 1,000 km.
Another important principle is that the performance of the microwave 
link can be predicted using the power balance equation, namely:
	
=
-
+
-
-
+
-
0
r
t
t
t
atm
r
r
P
P
L
G
A
A
G
L 	
where Pr is the power reaching the receiver; Pt is the transmitted power; Lt is 
the waveguide loss between the transmitter and the transmitting antenna; Gt is 
the gain of the transmitting antenna; A0 is the free space loss; Aatm is the sum 
of all atmospheric losses; Gr is the gain of the receiving antenna; and Lr is the 
Figure 2.14  Key elements and terms for the uplink and downlink.

40 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
waveguide loss between the receiving antenna and the receiver. The receiver is 
the first low noise amplification stage of the earth station or satellite, depending 
on whether this is the downlink or uplink, respectively. Transmitted power, Pt, 
is provided by a high power amplifier (HPA) within the sending end of the link. 
The most important single element on each end, other than the LNA or HPA, 
is the antenna used to either radiate the signal into space or to capture it on the 
receive side. As readers are aware, the performance of the antenna in terms of 
gain and beamwidth is governed by its effective area (the physical area of the 
antenna, adjusted downward by the aperture efficiency). 
For the typical parabolic reflector type of antenna illuminated by a feed­
horn of some type, the on-axis gain of the main beam can be calculated (as a 
ratio) from [4]:
	
π
η
λ
=
2
4 A
G
	
where η is the aperture efficiency, A is the physical area of the aperture in square 
meters, and λ is the wavelength in meters. We can express this formula for a 
parabolic reflector antenna in a convenient form as follows:
	
(
)
η
=
2
2
10log 110
G
F D
	
where G is the gain in dBi (e.g., gain relative to an isotropic radiator of unity 
gain), F is the frequency in GHz, and D is the physical diameter in meters. This 
assumes a center-fed circular reflector antenna. For noncircular offset-fed reflec­
tor antennas (discussed in Chapter 3), it is a common practice to use a mean 
dimension and adjust for error in the value of h. An important parameter for a 
parabolic reflector antenna is the half-power (3 dB) beamwidth [5]:
	
λ
θ
≈
3
70
dB
D
	
or equivalently for F in GHz and D in meters:
	
θ
≈
3
22
dB
FD
	
Proper operation of the antenna in the system depends on the polariza­
tion of the electric component of the wave, which can be either linear or cir­
cular. Since most systems employ frequency reuse in the same beam, it is vital 

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
41
to provide adequate polarization isolation, measured as the difference in dB 
between the desired and undesired polarizations. The undesired polarization 
is from RF channels on the same satellite (or a satellite in the same orbit po­
sition) that permit frequency reuse. For linear polarization, this amounts to 
proper rotational alignment of the feedhorn, while for circular it is inherent in 
the feedhorn design itself. The other important characteristic with respect to 
interference is sidelobe isolation. The following practical formula has become a 
specification for the maximum expected sidelobe level, in dBi:
	
( )
( )
Θ =
-
Θ
29
25log
G
	
where Θ is the angle measured between the main beam and the sidelobe direc­
tion. This formula was originally adopted by the U.S. Federal Communications 
Commission and has become a global standard for frequency coordination 
between GEO satellite networks. Another formula originally adopted by the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) permits 3dB greater sidelobe 
level for values of Θ greater than 36°:
	
( )
( )
Θ =
-
Θ
32
25log
G
	
The FCC version provides greater confidence of satisfactory operation 
and would allow closer spacing of satellites as well (in fact, it was adopted back 
when the FCC wanted to reduce orbit spacing from 4 to 2 degrees).
The effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP) and the gain-to-noise-tem­
perature ratio (G/T) are important figures of merit for earth stations as they 
establish the RF link performance. The transmit parameter, EIRP, is composed 
of the first three variables in the power balance equation:
	
t
t
t
EIRP
P
L
G
=
-
+
	
expressed in dBW (i.e., dB relative to one watt). From this relationship we see 
that EIRP can be improved by increasing either Pt or Gt, or by reducing the 
loss Lt.
The earth station G/T is the other figure of merit, i.e.,
	
(
)
10log
, in dB K
r
r
sys
G T
G
L
T
=
-
-
	
where Tsys is the combined receiving system noise temperature in Kelvin. G/T 
has the curious units of dB/K. To compute Tsys, we must know the noise tem­
perature of the earth station receiver (assuming this is the downlink) along with 
the losses associated with the antenna. The following is the basic formula for 
computing the system noise temperature:

42 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
	
(
)
=
+
-
⋅
+
1 1
290
sys
a
r
r
re
T
T
l
l
T 	
where Ta is the antenna temperature (e.g., the cosmic and background noise 
picked up by the antenna feed and reflector), lr is the receive waveguide loss 
expressed as a ratio greater than 1 (e.g., lr = 
/10
10 rL
), and Tre is the receiver 
equivalent noise temperature, e.g., the familiar noise temperature rating of the 
LNA or LNB, as appropriate. As written, the equation is not in dB units.
The purpose of using G/T as a figure of merit for an earth station is that 
we can directly apply it to the link budget to provide a measure of carrier to 
noise. We see that
	
=
-
-
+
0
atm
C T
EIRP
A
A
G T 	
where C/T is the carrier-to-noise-temperature ratio, in dBW/K. Noise power 
density (N0 in watts per hertz of bandwidth) is proportional to noise tempera­
ture, with the proportionality constant being Boltzmann’s constant. We then 
have the following relationship for carrier to noise density as a ratio:
	
=
0
C N
C kT 	
where k is Boltzmann’s constant (1.380622 × 10–23 watts/Hz-K).
C/T is converted into carrier-to-noise ratio (C/N) by taking into account 
the bandwidth of the RF signal that the link supports. The following formula 
is expressed in dB:
	
=
-
-
10log
10log
C N
C T
k
B 	
where k is Botzmanns constant (note that 10 log k = –228.6 dBW/K/Hz) and 
B is the carrier occupied bandwidth in Hz which is determined by the data rate 
in bps, Rb, and type of modulation (i.e., B ≈ 0.6 · Rd for quadrature phase shift 
keying [QPSK]).
Because the atmosphere is complex, Aatm is really a combination of several 
losses caused by individual constituents (e.g., oxygen, nitrogen, water vapor, 
and rain). Specific losses due to air and rain are illustrated in Figures 2.15 and 
2.16, respectively [5]. We see that clear air loss is generally well under 1 dB 
while rain attenuation above about 12 GHz ranges from 2 dB to over 20 dB, 
depending on the frequency and rain rate. Other factors that affect rain attenu­
ation are the elevation angle toward the satellite and the link availability. Rain 
rate, in turn, is a statistical factor produced by the local climate; e.g., we can 
expect intense heavy rain (resulting in extreme rain attenuation at peak times) 
in tropical climates like Java, and little rain attenuation during dry months in 
arid climates like California.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
43
Figure 2.16  Rain attenuation versus frequency for 99.5% and 98% availability in a temperate 
climate.
Figure 2.15  Typical atmospheric absorption (dB).

44 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
2.4.4  Basic Antenna Principles
 Antennas used for earth stations are typically a metallic reflector and feed type. 
Most common is the parabolic reflector (i.e., one formed by rotating a parabola 
about its axis to produce a paraboloid). Parabolic reflector dishes are favored 
due mainly to their economy of design and construction and the good effi­
ciency that they afford. Other forms of earth station antennas include flat pan­
els formed from sections of slotted waveguide and phased arrays that contain 
multiple radiating elements fed with a controllable phase and power combiner 
network. The reflector and flat panel must be aligned with the direction of 
propagation, typically perpendicular to the plane of the surface. The phased ar­
ray can be pointed electrically while the physical structure remains fixed to the 
vehicle body; beam motion is produced by altering the phase and amplitude of 
the combiner network [11].
Figure 2.17 illustrates how a parabolic reflector and feed produce a colum­
nar beam and a plane wavefront. The diagram uses geometric optics analogy, 
which is valid in that light is electromagnetic radiation. We see radial rays ema­
nating from the focus at F, which is where the feed horn or feed point is located. 
Once reflected, the rays are parallel and propagate to the right in this diagram. 
The actual electromagnetic fields in proximity to the antenna are complex in 
terms of the distribution and phase relationships, and the beam itself actually 
takes shape in the far field, which is some distance from the feed. A rough order 
of magnitude of the boundary of the far field, R, can be computed from:
	
λ
=
2
2
R
D
	
Figure 2.17  The principle of the reflector antenna.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
45
where D is the diameter and λ is the wavelength in the same units as D. We see 
that smaller wavelengths (higher frequencies) result in a larger distance for the 
same diameter. This is the minimum distance we need to have in order to mea­
sure the antenna pattern with reasonable accuracy on a far-field antenna range.
The geometric optics model is useful for establishing the basic structure 
of a reflector antenna system but is too simple to analyze to most important 
antenna characteristics. These are gain, beamwidth, bandwidth, polarization 
isolation, and sidelobe performance. More specific analyses are based on Max­
well’s equations and computation using models of how electrical currents in­
teract with electromagnetic fields. Currents in metallic surfaces radiate fields, 
and fields that impinge on metallic surfaces induce currents. Both actions oc­
cur simultaneously in conductive material (metal or carbon fiber) so that it is 
possible to receive and transmit from the same antenna device. In Figure 2.18, 
we see important properties of a reflector antenna resulting from fields induc­
ing currents and by those currents then reradiating a field. This is how a feed 
horn in a transmitting antenna induces currents on the surface of the reflector, 
and the currents then produce fields that follow the form of Figure 2.17 in 
the near and far fields. The curved vertically oriented lines define the shape of 
the paraboloid as well as the orientation of currents induced in the surface by 
the radiation pattern of the horn. The currents can be viewed as incremental 
dipoles that individually reradiate the energy from the reflector surface. The 
horn in this illustration produces pure vertically polarized fields, but with the 
exception of the center line, the fields radiated are no longer purely vertical. In 
fact, they have horizontal components in relation to the dish curvature where 
the currents lie. As one looks at this page, the vertical components all add con­
structively, providing enhanced radiation in the vertical polarization. However, 
Figure 2.18  How a reflector produces pure linear polarization.

46 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the horizontal components on the opposite sides of the vertical center line are 
equal and opposite in direction. This removes the horizontally polarized energy 
that was the result of dish curvature. The dish must have vertical symmetry in 
order for this to work as described—any imperfections in the surface will result 
in horizontal energy that is cross-polarized with that from the horn. Polariza­
tion performance behaves the same for horizontal polarization fed by the horn 
(rotate the figure 90 degrees) as well as for circular polarization (which contains 
both horizontal and vertical).
There are a number of means to place the feedhorn at the focus of the 
paraboloid. Two of the most popular are shown in Figure 2.19: (a) prime-focus 
fed and (b) fold-optics. The feed in the prime-focus design is suspended at the 
focus using supporting struts, and the transmission line for transmit and receive 
is carried along one of them to the rear of the reflector. This transmission line 
can be reduced or eliminated with the folded-optics approach that has a subre­
flector positioned in front or behind the focal point, and the feed peers through 
a hole at the bottom of the dish. Struts may still be required to support the 
subreflector; alternatively, the subreflector is supported by a tube which itself 
can be a transmission line. Selection of the approach is a designer’s choice, con­
sidering cost of manufacture, physical stability or compactness, and electrical 
performance. Both approaches do suffer from a loss of gain because of block­
age by the metal around the focus and by the struts, if used. Such blockage is 
avoided using the offset-fed reflector, shown in Figure 2.20. Note how the col­
limated beam scans upward away from the horizontal, which is the center line 
of this reflector. The surface of the reflector is actually taken from upper section 
of the paraboloid and does not have circular symmetry. However, polarization 
purity can be maintained since the reflector still has vertical symmetry (i.e., the 
right side is the mirror image of the left side). The beam can be scanned up or 
down by moving the feed down or up, respectively, with respect to its current 
Figure 2.19  Center-fed reflector antenna configurations.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
47
position, which is below the line of radiation to avoid blockage. The fact that 
the beam is scanned off the horizontal reduces the gain slightly, but this is less 
than the reduction of loss from avoiding blockage.
Some smaller antennas used in mobile installations can benefit from the 
phased array design, an example of which is shown in Figure 2.21. Shown at 
the top are eight antenna elements, each exhibiting an identical amount of 
antenna gain. These are individually fed with the same signal obtained through 
a network of phase shifters and power dividers. The elements acting together 
produce a beam of higher gain than each individually, and the direction of the 
beam can be shifted by adjusting the phase and signal level applied to each ele­
ment. The feed network in this example is a combination of analog and digital 
devices that produce the desired coefficients for phase and amplitude across the 
antenna elements.
2.5  Modem Design
The fact that digital communication has taken over satellites as the primary 
mode of information transmission is not surprising, since many important in­
novations in digital communications, such as TDMA and digital voice com­
pression, were first applied to satellite links [6, 7]. As the title of this section 
suggests, the key earth station component for sending and receiving data is the 
modem. Readers are familiar with cable and DSL modems used to connect to 
the Internet. This term is a contraction of modulator/demodulator, reflecting 
the fact that it provides the dual function of converting a data stream into a 
modulated carrier, and vice versa. For satellite communication in particular, 
Figure 2.20  How the offset-fed reflector antenna eliminates blockage.

48 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
this is critical because the modem must optimize the transition between digital 
information and the analog carrier. The digital side interfaces with the data 
source after any preparatory processes like multiplexing, compression, and en­
cryption. Generally, the modem contains forward error correction (FEC) to 
reduce the required C/N for satisfactory bit error rate (BER) after the satellite 
link. The transmit functions, to be described below, shape digital pulses to re­
duce the RF bandwidth, modulate the pulses onto the carrier, and in the case 
of higher order modulation like 16 quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) 
and 32 APSK transform the waveform into signals that conserve bandwidth.
The data stream and associated modulated carrier for a biphase shift key­
ing (BPSK) modem are shown in Figure 2.22 [8]. We see a 180-degree phase 
reversal whenever there is a transition from a zero to a one (or vice versa). Be­
cause this illustrates BPSK, the signal does not require the receiver to have an 
absolute phase reference in order to resolve the sense of the received bit. A block 
diagram of the modulator is provided in Figure 2.23 to show how nonreturn to 
zero (NRZ) data is modulated onto the sinusoidal carrier by a balanced mixer, 
Figure 2.21  Example of a phased array antenna system using adaptive beam forming.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
49
then amplified and bandwidth filtered to reduce the spectrum width. The last 
step is needed to suppress sideband energy and thereby control adjacent chan­
nel interference (ACI). Power amplifiers and other nonlinear devices positioned 
after this filter may re-create the sidebands and produce ACI in spite of any fil­
tering at the input to the demodulator. The demodulator section (Figure 2.24) 
determines the final performance BER, which is the ratio of incorrectly received 
bits divided by the total received bits during a given time interval. These errors 
are introduced when the received bandwidth contains instantaneous peaks of 
noise and interference that cancel the desired signal. The problem is further 
Figure 2.22  BPSK time domain waveforms..
Figure 2.23  Simplified BPSK modulator block diagram.

50 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
complicated by distortion of the bit pattern itself by bandwidth limiting (which 
is necessary to reduce the total noise power) and channel impairments such as 
group delay and AM to PM distortion. 
Digital communication link performance is largely determined by the 
ratio of signal to noise, measured by a parameter called the energy-per-bit-to-
noise-density ratio (Eb/N0):
	
(
)
=
+
0
10log B Rb
b
E
N
C N
	
The factor B/Rb corrects for a spectrum effect offset, namely that B is 
two sided and Rb is one sided. In a crude sense, Eb/N0 is 3 dB greater than 
C/N, although the precise adjustment must account for other factors such as 
the number of levels (e.g., 4, 8, or 16) per symbol, which may reduce this ratio.
A theoretical plot of bit error rate (BER) versus Eb/N0 is provided in Figure 
2.25 for a typical modem performance curve under thermal noise (but exclud­
ing other factors such as adjacent channel interference (ACI) and intermodula­
tion distortion (IMD)). Further improvement would be obtained from FEC as 
this reduces BER by several orders of magnitude at the expense of increasing 
bandwidth occupancy. However, this tradeoff is almost always favorable, be­
cause BER can be improved more effectively by adding FEC than by increasing 
EIRP.
2.6  Multiple-Access Control
Much attention in recent years has been focused on multiple access (MA) sys­
tems and the corresponding benefits to the technical performance of the system 
and ground segment. The following, in conjunction with Figure 2.26, summa­
rizes the three primary alternatives for multiple access:
Figure 2.24  Simplified BPSK demodulator block diagram.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
51
Figure 2.25  Theoretical probability of bit error (Pe) for BPSK and differential BPSK.
Figure 2.26  Time and spectrum illustrations of FDMA, TDMA, and CDMA, assuming four 
transmitting earth stations.

52 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Frequency division multiple access (FDMA), where individual earth sta­
tions separate their transmissions from each other by uplinking them on 
different frequencies. This is the simplest MA technique, since stations 
transmit to the satellite without coordination and with minimal interac­
tion. Single channel per carrier (SCPC) is that form of FDMA where 
each individual signal (voice conversation, TV program channel, or data 
stream) gets its own carrier within the satellite repeater. The alternative 
is to multiplex several channels into a carriers baseband, which is called 
multiple channel per carrier (MCPC). In either case, loading of the tran­
sponder on a bent-pipe satellite repeater requires management of mul­
tiple carriers and the resulting RF intermodulation distortion (IMD). 
Due to the required amplifier output backoff of 3 to 5 dB, the capacity 
of the transponder is reduced by at least 50%.
• Time division multiple access (TDMA), where separation is achieved 
by having earth stations transmit their data as bursts at different times, 
according to a preset time frame. Thus, the transmissions must be syn­
chronized in time to prevent collisions among the transmissions when 
received at the satellite. An alternative form of TDMA, called ALOHA, 
allows earth station transmissions to be uncoordinated and so introduces 
the possibility of collisions and a corresponding requirement for auto­
matic retransmission. In wideband TDMA, the burst transmissions at 
between 60 and 250 Mbps use the full bandwidth and power of the 
transponder, resulting in nearly 95% efficiency (allowing for the neces­
sary synchronization overhead and guard time between bursts). More 
commonly, TDMA networks use lower data rates (between 256 Kbps 
and 20 Mbps) to share the capacity of a transponder in an FDMA mode 
and reduce the uplink power required from the earth station. The inher­
ent digital feature of TDMA has made it the most popular multiple-
access technique for VSAT networks.
• Code division multiple access (CDMA), where earth station transmis­
sions are encoded using the direct sequence spread-spectrum waveform. 
This is another popular technique obtained by mixing the user data with 
a very high-speed stream of bits from a pseudo-random noise (PN) gen­
erator. Several carriers may be transmitted on the same frequency but are 
separated by virtue of the different spreading codes. The information on 
any particular CDMA channel is recovered at the receiver by multiply­
ing the incoming PN-modulated data by the original PN stream. Prior 
to data recovery, the CDMA receiver must synchronize to the spreading 
sequence and lock onto its precise timing (a technique called autocor­
relation). CDMA has been made immensely popular by the success of 
the digital cellular radio standard from Qualcomm that is based on this 

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
53
multiple-access mode [9]. Use of the same spreading code is possible, 
although there is the finite probability that two stations may be nearly 
synchronous on occasion.
The baseband characteristics, equipment configurations, software re­
quirements, and management systems for these three MA techniques are very 
different. What is more, the particular design for a given supplier will likely be 
incompatible with that of another. It would be necessary to examine, in detail, 
the corresponding elements of the earth station to uncover how the MA func­
tions have been implemented. In simplified block diagrams, MA shows up as a 
box or a footnote, but in reality, the necessary logic can be dispersed throughout 
several elements. For example, the modem would appear as a single box in the 
diagram, but will differ in its internal design.
Shown in Figure 2.26 are the time and spectrum diagrams for the three 
MA methods, indicating how one transponder would be occupied by four earth 
station transmissions. In the FDMA time frame, all four transmissions are vis­
ible, with each at an independent frequency. There are three potential concerns 
with FDMA: IMD produced by a common satellite or earth station RF ampli­
fier, ACI due to unfiltered out-of-band spectrum energy or error of the center 
frequencies (e.g., frequency tolerance), and transponder overdrive due to carrier 
power imbalance. 
In wideband TDMA, the transmissions occur at different times but em­
ploy the full carrier bandwidth; separation is guaranteed by proper timing of 
the bursts and adequate guard times to prevent overlap. The fact that only one 
wideband spectrum is shown is not a concern, because the stations do not trans­
mit at the same time (the spectrum illustration is, in effect, a snapshot taken 
when only one of the four stations is transmitting). A picture of narrowband 
TDMA would look like the FDMA case, since the burst occupies only a frac­
tion of the total bandwidth. However, the picture is once again a snapshot in 
time, with several earth stations sharing the narrowband RF channel.
For the CDMA spectrum arrangement in Figure 2.26, the summation 
of signals from the four stations is because they transmit at the same time and 
may each utilize the full bandwidth. The way that the signals are separated at 
receivers is through the autocorrelation function previously mentioned. To pro­
vide independence, CDMA requires that different PN codes be used by each 
transmitting earth station; otherwise the receiver will not be able to separate the 
data. In practice, there is a limit to the number of simultaneous CDMA signals 
on the same frequency because unwanted transmissions appear as additional 
receiver noise. Also, RF power level in the satellite repeater and earth station re­
ceiver must be kept within a narrow range to prevent elevated carriers from pro­
ducing more RF interference than can be tolerated on a system basis. CDMA 

54 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
has an advantage over TDMA and FDMA in that it can reject narrowband RFI 
that could appear in the occupied bandwidth.
The control of the earth station transmissions in a common MA ground 
segment is critical to the overall management of space segment resources and 
the delivery of effective user services. In FDMA, this management can be man­
ual, using centralized network control, where operators can monitor transmis­
sions and react quickly to problems. An automated demand assignment mul­
tiple access (DAMA) system would be under computer control and comparable 
to a first-generation analog cellular radio network—i.e., carrier frequencies are 
assigned temporarily for connections between pairs of earth stations, and then 
taken back for use by other stations when needed.
TDMA is the embodiment of a digital network via satellite. This MA 
technique was originally pioneered on satellite for the INTELSAT system [6, 
10]. It is also used in the global system for mobile communications (GSM) cel­
lular radio standards. The principle benefit is maximum usage of the available 
power and bandwidth without experiencing IMD. The control of burst trans­
missions within the time frame is provided through a synchronization system 
and traffic-control methodology exercised by a central network management 
facility (located at the hub station or one of the earth stations in the network). 
Control in a CDMA network is simplified in light of the fact that neither net­
work frequency nor burst timing is critical to operation. However, there are still 
issues regarding the total loading of the transponder and control of individual 
power levels. These networks are designed with automatic schemes to adjust 
parameters dynamically, in response to traffic and power loading.
2.7  The Internet Protocol and End-to-End Satellite Networks
The ground segment in satellite communication is not an end, but rather is 
a piece of the overall delivery system for telecommunication or information 
services. Therefore, we must keep in mind that our satellite network does not 
stand on its own, and cannot operate in a vacuum (unlike the space segment). 
As shown in Figure 2.1, the typical earth station interfaces with a terrestrial seg­
ment in order to connect to the final user or, in many cases, an existing public 
network. The best example is a telephone gateway in an MSS network, where 
the satellite network connects calls that originated in the public switched tele­
phone network (PSTN).
In many satellite applications, the user terminal is self-contained and does 
not need to interface with anything or anyone other than the end user. An 
example is an MSS user terminal in the form of a radio telephone instrument 
(e.g., a satellite cell phone). As long as the user understands how to operate 
the device, there is no additional end-to-end interface requirement. The other 

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
55
end of the communication link may still have to be transferred to the PSTN, 
in which case the MSS service must properly interoperate with existing public 
services. This can be an extremely difficult task, because of the multitude of op­
erating conditions, types of calls, and differences that exist among forms of the 
PSTN in different countries (and sometimes within the same country).
There may still be interface requirements at the user terminal when the 
service must be connected to another device such as a PC or TV set. The PC 
must have the appropriate interface connector, signaling, and software to assure 
that the service works correctly. Data networks using TCP/IP usually require 
some form of protocol spoofing to compensate for the variable error rate per­
formance and added delay of the space link. 
The Internet itself has completely standardized the communication of 
information and content, and satellite networks have benefitted as a result. Net­
work architecture can be blended between conventional terrestrial components 
with satellite links, and vice versa. But we must never forget that there are 
consequences to this integration: service performance in terms of reliability and 
data transfer rate can be variable and in some cases unacceptable. Getting back 
to a high level of dependability requires that network architects work closely 
with earth station and user terminal designers and operators. This is often a 
challenge because network folks rarely understand the theory and practice of 
satellite communications. It is incumbent on us to learn everything we can 
about the Internet and how it behaves through satellite links, and to work with 
our colleagues on the terrestrial side to deliver optimized services in those re­
mote places and stations that expect to work as an integral part of the global 
information infrastructure.
2.8  Satellite Systems Engineering and Operation
The daunting task of creating an effective satellite communication system in­
volves many disciplines. The integration of the ground and space segments is 
crucial, as is the proper interfacing of the system with the user environment on 
the ground. We have specialists who deal with each of these elements and with 
the individual components of each element. But it is the job of the systems 
engineer to understand how all of the pieces work together to meet the overall 
requirements of the project and operation.
We refer here specifically to a satellite systems engineer, someone who un­
derstands the functionality of both the space and ground segments. This kind 
of expertise is not easy to come by, and in fact many who claim to be qualified 
are not. In many ways, it is the purpose of this (and the previous) book to create 
a foundation for entering the field of satellite systems engineering. Any ground 
segment project will, of necessity, require that the satellite systems engineering 

56 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
function be performed properly at every key step. Such performance draws 
heavily from generic systems engineering, but we cannot lose sight of the fact 
that we are talking about a satellite communication system. The first step in 
any systems engineering effort is to understand and define the requirements. In 
commercial satellite communication, this includes the purpose and strategy of 
the business that the system supports. Many system engineers work as part of 
business development because of the close coupling between the two functions 
during the formative phase. Because of the many tradeoffs that will be required 
as the design progresses, we must have a complete knowledge of the technology 
options and their characteristics (technical and financial).
In this author’s experience, it is wise to enlist the talent and resources of 
outstanding analysts who can put the problem down on paper (and in software 
models) quickly and produce usable results. These studies form the foundation 
of the trade space for the project. By trade space we mean the collection of 
technology and performance options that we have considered in evaluating how 
to achieve the system objectives. Then we look at different ways to design the 
overall systems and their major components (e.g., the earth stations).
Any good systems engineer can do this, at least in principle. However, a 
satellite systems engineer is one who understands how the space segment is to 
be included. Through research, education, and practical experience, the satellite 
systems engineer can investigate the best satellite design (whether GEO or non-
GEO), frequency band, and MA method. By performing the link analyses and 
sizing exercises, he or she can find the optimum arrangement of earth stations 
in the overall network.
The operation of the ground segment and earth stations is another critical 
aspect of the overall system, since this determines the quality of service (QoS) 
and impacts the financial performance of the business as well. Examples of QoS 
factors include:
• System availability, measured in percent of time that the service is up 
and operating; 
• Data throughput;
• Connection time (for connection-oriented services) and rate (account­
ing for frequency of busy signals and dropped calls); 
• Information transfer delay (also called latency); 
• BER as a function of time;
• Qualitative factors such as customer satisfaction rating;
• Latency.

 
Earth Station Design Philosophy 
57
Many of these factors are set by the design of the ground segment and 
are under the control of the systems and earth station engineers. However, oth­
ers are the result of how well the ground segment is operated and maintained, 
which is something that depends on the people and the systems that perform 
these functions during its lifetime. The operation and maintenance (O&M) 
of ground segment and earth stations is a complex subject, which is treated in 
more detail in Chapter 11.
References
[1]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 3rd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 2008.
[2]	 Elbert, Bruce R., The Satellite Communication Applications Handbook, 2nd ed., Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 2004.
[3]	 Freeman, Roger L., Telecommunications Transmission Handbook, 4th ed., New York: Wiley, 
1998.
[4]	 Stutzman, Warren L., and Gary A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
[5]	 Allnutt, J. E., Satellite-to-Ground Radiowave Propagation, 2nd ed., London: The Institute 
of Engineering and Technology, 2011.
[6]	 Schmidt, W.G., “The Application of TDMA to the Intelsat IV Satellite Series,” COMSAT 
Technical Review, Vol. 3, No. 2, Fall 1973, p. 257.
[7]	 Suyderhoud, H. G., Jankowski, J. A., and Ridings, R. P., “Results and Analysis of the 
Speech Predictive Encoding Communications System Field Trial,” COMSAT Technical 
Review, Vol. 4, No. 2, Fall 1974, p. 371. 
[8]	 Larson, Lawrence E., ed., RF and Microwave Circuit Design for Wireless Communications, 
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1997.
[9]	 Glisic, Savo, and Branka Vucetic, Spread Spectrum CDMA Systems for Wireless Communica­
tions, Norwood, MA Artech House, 1997.
[10]	 Balston, D. M., and R. C. V. Macario, eds., Cellular Radio Systems, Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 1993.
[11]	 Huang, Xiaojing, Y. Jay Gou, and John D. Bunton, “A Hybrid Adaptive Antenna Array,” 
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 9, No. 5, May 2012, pp. 1170.
[12]	 Jo, Kenneth Y., Satellite Communications—Network Design and Analysis, Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 2011.


59
3
Space-Ground Interface Requirements
The ground segments, major earth stations, and user terminals that we address 
in this book are all designed to provide commercial communications services, 
the majority of which are normally associated with terrestrial networks. This 
must be accomplished in a manner that is essentially transparent to the user, 
meaning that subscribers and customers should not be exposed to the unique 
technical and operational aspects of the satellites that are used as radio repeaters. 
Systems and ground segment engineers need to work hard to attain this often 
difficult objective, because the space segment by its very nature is different from 
terrestrial means of transmission (e.g., cable, line-of-sight microwave, cellular, 
wireless, and terrestrial broadcasting). 
The ground segment has the biggest impact on the services to end users 
and to the overall cost of delivering those services. This is because the earth 
stations and user terminals represent the end point in the satellite network, yet 
they need to interface properly with users and terrestrial networks as well. We 
can describe this as the “ground game,” a term coined by investment bank­
ers who value a satellite service in terms of revenue capability and competitive 
position in the associated market or markets. The service and business models 
provide the basis to define an appropriate ground segment that is based on ele­
ments that can be obtained from industrial sources in the North America, Eu­
rope and Asia; the challenge is to select the most appropriate elements and inte­
grate them properly. This was the challenge faced by DIRECTV and Echostar 
in the early 1990s and was repeated by XM Satellite and Sirius Satellite in the 
early 2000s. The ground game also requires that the service provider keep an 
eye on technological developments that could improve business performance, 
including adding market segments and protecting against competitive threats. 
Another part is selection of the best regions in which to offer services, because 
once a region is established, it is extremely difficult to make rapid changes. This 

60 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
is different from the space segment because satellite coverage can be designed to 
reach across many potentially attractive regions.
3.1  Satellite Orbital Characteristics
Readers are no doubt aware that communications satellites operate in three 
basic orbital arrangements and that each has benefits and operational concerns 
related to the provision of services to the ground segment. As determined by 
Keplers third law, orbit period, and hence time in ground view, is proportional 
to the mean radius of the orbit raised to power 3/2 (Figure 3.1). The basic 
properties of the three classes of communications satellites are reviewed below.
• Low earth orbit (LEO), ranging between 800 and 1,200 km (corre­
sponding to orbital periods of 1.6 and 1.9 hours, respectively). The pe­
riod as a function of altitude is shown on the left side of Figure 3.1. If the 
satellites are intended for global coverage (which is the most common 
service mode for communications services), then these orbits must either 
be polar or highly inclined to serve users in northern and southern lati­
tudes. As a rule of thumb, the orbit inclination must be approximately 
equal to the optimum latitude for services. Locations in western Europe 
and North America may be favored at the expense of equatorial regions 
such as Asia, Africa, and Central and South America. The converse is 
true as well; equatorial orbits can serve a band that is in proximity to the 
equator at the expense of northern and southern latitudes. LEO constel­
Figure 3.1  Orbit period and propagation delay for various satellite altitudes, based on Ke­
pler’s third law of planetary motion.

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
61
lations, as they are called, may be fully populated with satellites (between 
about 50 and 150) to provide continuous service. A given satellite is 
able to serve an earth station only for several minutes, a duration further 
reduced if that earth station must simultaneously connect to another 
through the same satellite (a difficulty resolved by inter satellite relays 
of the type found in Iridium). Any LEO network requires a system of 
handover from satellite to satellite, akin to what is done in cellular radio 
telephone networks to prevent a dropped call when a subscriber moves 
from one cell to the next.
• Medium earth orbit (MEO), at an altitude of greater than about 8,000 
km (see the graph on the right side of Figure 3.1). Orbit period is of the 
order of six hours and so the satellite will remain in view throughout a 
majority of connection types. This altitude, being much higher, allows 
a given satellite to see a much larger portion of the earth and to thereby 
serve a greater quantity of users. The MEO orbit is being used to advan­
tage by O3b, a MEO system in near-equatorial orbit at an altitude of 
8,062 km. It provides continuous service to locations within 45 degrees 
north and south latitude using multiple satellites and handoff at the 
earth stations. This is accomplished using at least two tracking antennas 
per ground location so that at least one can transmit and receive from 
a visible satellite. These factors, taken together, mean that many fewer 
satellites are required (12 to 24) which may be of greater capacity than 
LEO spacecraft. The other factor to consider is propagation delay (indi­
cated in Figure 3.1), which is much more significant than in LEO but 
still reasonably low in relation to the GEO satellites to be discussed next. 
Both the LEO and MEO configurations permit multiple hops (i.e., re­
laying through two satellites with a gateway earth station between) be­
cause of the relatively brief delay. Such is not the case for GEO satellites, 
as will be discussed later in the chapter.
• Geostationary earth orbit (GEO), a true equatorial orbit with the 24-
hour period needed to synchronize with the earth’s rotation. At a mean 
altitude of 35,788.293 km (22,237.814 miles), satellites must still be 
controlled (stationkept) to correct for gravitational forces that disturb 
the desired geometry. North-south stationkeeping is used to control the 
inclination of the orbit (to keep it equatorial) and east-west stationkeep­
ing is used to hold the assigned longitude. A typical stationkeeping tol­
erance of 0.1° keeps the satellite well within the beamwidth of all but 
the largest earth station antennas at frequencies up to 30 GHz. Since 
north-south stationkeeping uses up most of the available fuel, it is a 
common practice to extend orbit lifetime by ceasing north-south cor­

62 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
rections and continuing only with east-west corrections for several more 
years (until either the remaining fuel is exhausted or a degradation of 
a critical component renders the spacecraft useless). With inclination 
greater than about 0.5°, earth station antennas will probably have to 
track the satellite. The general class of inclined 24-hour orbits, which 
may also be highly elliptical, is called geosynchronous.
We begin with a discussion of GEO, only because this is the foundation 
of the commercial communication satellite industry. GEO satellite networks 
need fewer satellites, and ground antennas, while larger than their LEO and 
MEO counterparts, need not include tracking systems.
3.2  GEO Link Characteristics with Link Budgets
GEO satellite links are the easiest to understand and apply because of the 
simplicity of the geometry and their relatively stable nature. As introduced in 
Chapter 2, it is an easy matter to compute the free space path loss and thus 
determine the most dominant factor in the overall design. Still, there are several 
other considerations in using GEO satellite links that can, at times, become 
overriding.
The easiest way to understand and appreciate the stability and simplicity 
of GEO links is to examine a set of link budgets for transmission between a 
pair of fixed earth stations. Figure 3.2 provides the basic end-to-end block dia­
gram of a point-to-multipoint digital TV transmission using the Digital Video 
Broadcasting (DVB) standard. The satellite repeater in this example is of the 
bent-pipe variety, which means that it provides the following functions for up­
linked signals: 
• Reception by the spacecraft antenna;
• Low noise amplification;
• Frequency translation to the downlink frequency range (usually without 
an inversion, so that the bottom of the uplink band appears at the bot­
tom of the downlink band);
• Filtering down to the transponder bandwidth (30 MHz in this example) 
by the input multiplexer;
• Gain adjustment using one of the following: (1) fixed gain with or with­
out ground adjustment, (2) automatic gain control (AGC), or (3) hard 
limiting;

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
63
• Power amplification using either a traveling wave tube amplifier 
(TWTA) or solid state power amplifier (SSPA);
• Channel combining by the output multiplexer;
• Transmission within the footprint area by the spacecraft downlink an­
tenna.
The details of the DVB-S2 standard can be found in [1]. The satellite 
repeater does these functions nearly transparently (at least to a first order; more 
will be said later about how to take the significant higher order effects into 
account) in the performance of basic functions of ground coverage, power am­
plification, and frequency translation. The earth stations in the analysis are de­
fined as follows:
• Uplink earth station—a typical Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS) 
broadcast center, similar in concept to that of DIRECTV, discussed in 
Chapter 1. Each uplinked carrier can support a quantity of digitally 
compressed TV channels containing full-time video and audio program­
ming. The modulation format in DVB-S2 (the second-generation satel­
Figure 3.2  Simplified end-to-end block diagram for a DVB-S2 standard link.

64 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
lite mode of DVB) is 8PSK using concatenated coding (i.e., BCH block 
outer code followed by an inner code). A klystron high-power amplifier 
(HPA) operating at 18 GHz provides RF uplink power to a 13-m trans­
mitting antenna. Tracking and uplink power control (UPC) maintain 
the received power at the satellite during relative motion of the satellite 
and during heavy rain along this path, respectively.
• Downlink antenna—a DTH home receiving system with a 45-cm an­
tenna, an integrated receiver-decoder (IRD) with many features to sim­
plify installation and use by the subscriber. Within the set-top box are 
the channel selection, carrier demodulation, error correction, demul­
tiplexing, decryption, MPEG-2 or 4 decompression, and conditional 
access elements needed to reproduce the original programming material.
The transmission system described can be applied to either a video uplink 
or the forward link of a two-way star data network. Basic link budgets for the 
downlink, uplink, and combined overall link are provided in Tables 3.1, 3.2, 
and 3.3, respectively. We have included only the top-level performance param­
eters of the transmit earth station, satellite repeater, and receiving user terminal. 
These factors provide the basic performance of the end-to-end system; that is, 
if the three main elements of the system function as assumed, then the service 
will work accordingly. Tables 3.1 and 3.2 present the stable unfaded condition, 
which is normal for a GEO link with no rain on the uplink or downlink, for a 
satellite that is stationkept to remain within the beamwidth of the earth station 
and user terminal. The links operate in the Region 2 allocation for BSS: down­
link between 12.2 and 12.7 GHz and the corresponding uplink between 17.7 
and 18.2GHz. The second half of Table 3.3 accounts for the amount of rain at­
tenuation on the downlink, which would cause a threshold condition, i.e., one 
in which reception would be just barely acceptable. Rain on the uplink can be 
countered by uplink power control (this will be discussed further in Chapter 4).
For simplicity, only one channel of communication is considered, and so 
we have ignored the following effects (these factors will be evaluated in Chapter 
4):
• Adjacent channel interference, produced by other carriers on different 
frequencies received in the same polarization;
• Cross-polarized signals transmitted to and by the same satellite on the 
same (or adjacent) frequency channels;
• Adjacent satellite interference;
• Linear distortion produced by group delay within filters in the earth 
station and satellite repeater;

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
65
• Nonlinear distortion produced by amplifiers, namely the earth station 
HPA and the satellite TWTA or SSPA, as appropriate.
We use, as an example, the broadcast link from the Sirius 3 BSS satellite, 
shown in Figure 3.3. The downlink link budget (Table 3.1) is straightforward, 
starting with the satellite repeater HPA output power of 112 watts (produced 
by a TWTA), and applied to the antenna after passing through output losses 
of 1.5 dB. The budget is presented such that gains are added and losses—being 
positive—are subtracted. The spacecraft antenna gain of 33 dBi corresponds to 
an area coverage footprint of a relatively large country. The resulting EIRP of 
52 dBW is typical of BSS satellites serving nontropical regions, as suggested by 
the footprint in Figure 3.3.
Free space loss at 205 dB is the largest single entry; however, it is fixed for 
the specific combination of earth station and satellite position. The receiving 
user terminal consists of a nominal 45-cm offset-fed reflector and circularly 
polarized feed and LNB combination. With about 0.2 dB of loss in the receive 
feed and a system noise temperature of 140K, the combination produces a 
receive G/T of 11.3 dB/K. The output of the LNB is a value of C/T of ­–142.4 
dBW/K, obtained with the following simple formula:
	
=
-
+
C T
EIRP
A
G T 	
Figure 3.3  Sirius 3 BSS Nordic coverage from 5.0° east longitude, indicating EIRP perfor­
mance at the 52 dBW level (illustration courtesy of NSAB).

66 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
where A is the sum of the path losses (free space loss and atmospheric loss). The 
corresponding value of C/N ratio is 11.4 dB as measured in the assumed 30 
MHz of bandwidth. Using a bandwidth to bitrate ratio of 30/50 (–2.2 dB), the 
downlink Eb/N0 is 9.2 dB. 
The baseband to modulated-carrier design assumed in this example is ac­
cording to the DVB-S2 standard for Ku-band links [1]. To establish the carrier 
bandwidth, we assume an input information rate of 50 Mbps, which expands 
to 68.89 Mbps due to forward error correction with pilot symbols, and to a 
carrier bandwidth with a 8PSK symbol rate of 22.96 Msps. This results in an 
occupied bandwidth of 30 MHz, assuming the roll-off factor to be 0.35. We 
cannot determine if Eb/N0 is adequate for the downlink until the uplink and 
combined link are considered.
The uplink budget in Table 3.2 follows the same basic format as that 
described for the downlink. A difference is that the EIRP is produced by the 
transmitting earth station with 100 watts of HPA power. A considerable reserve 
of uplink power is available from a backed-off klystron-power amplifier (KPA), 
typically 10 to 15 dB, so that heavy rain on the uplink can be overcome. In ad­
dition, the link can obtain greater margin against rain through repeater AGC 
or limiting in front of the TWTA. The nominal earth station EIRP of approxi­
mately 82.6 dBW, considerably greater than that of the satellite, benefits from 
Table 3.1
Link Budget Example for the Downlink at 12.2 GHz (Ku-band BSS)
Link Parameter
Value
Units
Transmit power (112 watts)
20.5 
dBW
Transmit waveguide losses
1.5 
dB
Transmit antenna gain (footprint)
33.0 
dBi
Satellite EIRP (toward earth station)
52.0 
dBW
Free space loss
205.5 
dB
Atmosphere lose
0.2
dB
Receive antenna gain (0.45 m)
33.0 
dBi
Receive waveguide loss
0.2 
dB
Receive carrier power
–120.9 
dBW
System noise temperature (140 K)
21.5
dBK
Earth station G/T
11.3 
dB/K
Downlink C/T
–142.4 
dBW/K
Boltzmann’s constant
–228.6 
dBW/Hz/K
Downlink C/No
86.2
dB-Hz
Bandwidth (30 MHz)
74.8 
dB Hz
Carrier-to-noise ratio
11.4
dB
Bit rate (50 Mbps)
77.0
dB (bps)
Eb/No down
9.2
dB

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
67
the use of a large-diameter antenna (13m), which is continually directed toward 
the satellite. Satellite G/T, on the other hand, is low (5.5 dB/K) under the as­
sumption that there is a broad coverage footprint to allow access from across the 
same region as the downlink. 
While the earth station EIRP is stated as a given, it is usually the practice 
to calculate this as a requirement for the design of the uplink system. Satellite 
receive sensitivity is specified by the saturation flux density (SFD), a parameter 
which is defined like the G/T according to the uplink footprint of the satel­
lite. In this example, we assume that the specified value of SFD is –80.2 dBW. 
Taking this as the given, we can calculate (or reverse engineer, if you will) the 
necessary value of EIRP emitted from the uplink earth station by:
	
(
)
π
=
+
+
2
10
10log
4
atm
EIRP
R
A
SFD 	
where R is the range from the earth station to the satellite in meters (also called 
the slant range) and Aatm is the atmospheric loss in decibels (typically less than 
0.5 dB in clear weather). The term, 4πR 2, is the area of a sphere of radius R and 
is called the spreading loss as it measures how the energy spreads out like the rays 
of the sun or water from a hose nozzle. Note that in this inverted equation, the 
Table 3.2
Link Budget Example for the Uplink at 18.2 GHz (Ku-band BSS)
Link Parameter
Value
Units
Transmit power (100 watts)
20.0 
dBW
Transmit waveguide losses
3.0 
dB
Transmit antenna gain (13m)
65.6 
dBi
Earth station EIRP (toward satellite)
82.6 
dBW
Free space loss
209.1 
dB
Atmospheric loss
0.4
dB
Receive antenna gain (footprint)
33.0 
dBi
Receive waveguide loss
1.0 
dB
Spreading loss
162.4 
dBm2
Uplink received flux deversity
–80.2
dBw/m2
Isotropic antenna area
–46.7
dBm2
System noise temperature (450K)
26.5 
dBK
Satellite G/T
5.5 
dB/K
Uplink C/T
–121.4 
dBW/K
Boltzmann’s constant
–228.6 
dBW/Hz/K
Uplink C/No
107.2
dB-Hz
Bandwidth (30 MHz)
74.8 
dB Hz
Carrier-to-noise ratio
32.4
dB
 
30.2 
dB

68 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
losses are added rather than subtracted. Table 3.2 presents the range and spread­
ing loss (in decibels) at 39,370 km and 162.5 dB(m2), respectively.
This calculation starts at the end of the path where the SFD is produced 
(at the face of the satellite receive antenna) and travels backward to the earth 
station antenna far field. The spreading loss, computed at 162.5 dB(m2), is part 
of what we would call the free space loss that would be used to calculate the at­
tenuation in the normal direction  between the far field of the uplink antenna 
and the face of the satellite receive antenna. This is obtained by dividing the 
spreading loss by the area of an isotropic antenna computed as:
	
λ
π
=
2
4
iA
	
where Ai is the effective area of an antenna with zero dBi gain. In decibel terms, 
the area of an isotropic antenna can be expressed by:
	
( )
( )
λ -
= -
-
20log
11.0
20log
21.46
F
	
where F is the frequency in GHz. The value is typically negative in decibels be­
cause this area is substantially less than one square meter. To convert spreading 
loss in decibels into free space loss in decibels, simply add 20log(F ) + 21.46.
The nominal value of C/N obtain in the uplink is 32.4 dB, considerably 
greater than the downlink value, causing the uplink to have little effect on 
overall link and system performance. The reason for this approach is that the 
uplink is serving a community of literally millions of downlink antennas that 
are installed and maintained by nontechnical subscribers. Our objective, as ser­
vice provider, is to assure the highest quality of service using those elements that 
are under our direct control. The high uplink C/N can be maintained during 
heavy rain up to the point where our uplink power margin is exhausted (i.e., 
about 10 dB of attenuation). From that point, the repeater AGC takes over by 
maintaining constant drive to the TWTA as higher rain attenuation reduces 
the input power. The uplink C/N will now decline with this loss of input, thus 
degrading the overall performance. This is another reason that a high value of 
clear weather uplink C/N is desired. Figure 3.4, which is the cumulative distri­
bution of attenuation at 20.2 GHz at Clarksburg, Maryland, provides some 
measure of the amount of uplink margin needed for an 18-GHz uplink. For 
example, one might expect that for this location, about 14 dB of uplink margin 
will deliver 99.9% availability in most years. This is seen along the bottom line, 
corresponding to 0.1 percent (equivalent to 99.0 percent availability).
The combined performance of this BSS link example is presented in Table 
3.3, which assumes a bent-pipe type of repeater (i.e., one that allows uplink 

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
69
noise to pass through to the downlink). After converting C/N values to true 
ratios (i.e., 10(C/N)/10), we obtain the combined C/N as follows:
	
[
]
-
=
+
1
th
u
d
C N
N
C
N
C
	
where C/Nth is the combined C/N for the thermal noise (i.e., the receiver noise 
produced in the user terminal and satellite front end), Nu/C is the inverse of the 
true ratio of the uplink C/N (Table 3.2), and Nd/C is the inverse of the true ratio 
of the downlink C/N (Table 3.1).
This formula can be extended to account for interference entries from 
adjacent channels (ACI), cross-polarization (XPOL), adjacent satellites (ASI) 
and terrestrial interference (TI) sources (an example follows):
	
-


=
+
+
+
+
+



1
tot
th
aci
xpol
asi
ti
C N
N
C
N
C
N
C
N
C
N
C
	
Of course, we must convert back to dB as a final step in this calculation.
Figure 3.4  Cumulative distribution of attenuation at 20.2 GHz as measured at Clarksburg, 
Maryland, over a four-year period. (Illustration courtesy of ACTS Propagation Workshop.)

70 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
For the BSS link in question, Table 3.3 evaluates first the combined (ther­
mal) C/N for the unfaded (clear air) condition, which will persist for the major­
ity of the time in all but the rainiest climates in the world.
We have assumed C/I = 16 dB as an allocation for all RF interference. The 
clear air C/(N + I ) of 10.1 dB is then compared to the minimum requirement 
for our user terminal receiver, assumed to be a 8PSK demodulator with R = 3/4 
forward error correction as used in the DVB-S2 standard (reviewed later in this 
chapter). For this type of device, the standard allows 6.0 dB for satisfactory op­
eration; less than this value can produce reception difficulties such as dropouts 
and loss of sync. Our overall system margin is 4.1 dB to take account of rain 
attenuation on the downlink and other effects (e.g., additional interference, 
antenna mispointing, and the like).
A condition with 3 dB reduction of C/N due to rain fade is shown at the 
bottom of Table 3.3. Due to the fact the rain produces both attenuation and an 
increase in downlink noise due to absorption, the actual rain loss is about 1.3 
dB. Adjacent satellite interference is assumed to follow a different path and not 
be attenuated; therefore, C/Nasi is reduced by the amount of rain attenuation 
(e.g., 1.3 dB). The remaining 1.7 dB of fade is that produced by the increase in 
system noise temperature, calculated according to:
Table 3.3
Combined Downlink and Uplink Example, Ku-band BSS, 
Clear Air and Downlink Rain Conditions
Link Parameter
Value
Units
No Fading (clear air)
Uplink C/N
30.2
dB
Downlink C/N
11.4
dB
Overall link C/N (thermal)
11.3
dB
Carrier-to-interference (C/I)
16.0
dB
Total link C/(N + I)
10.1
dB
Minimum requirement
6.0
dB
Overall system margin
4.1
dB
Faded (downlink rain)
Uplink C/N
30.2
dB
Downlink C/N (with 3.0 dB 
fade)
8.4
dB
Overall C/N (thermal)
8.4
dB
Carrier-to-interference (1.3-dB 
decrease in desired carrier)
14.7
dB
Total link C/(N + I)
7.4
dB
Minimum requirement
6.0
dB
Overall system margin
1.4
dB

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
71
	
(
)
Δ
=
-1
270
T
l
l
	
where l is the rain absorption as a ratio greater than 1 (e.g., 1.35 in this ex­
ample). The downlink noise power increases by a factor equal to [T + ΔT]/T, 
which is [140 + 70]/150 = 1.47, or 1.7 dB.
We see that the C/Ntot has decreased to 7.4, resulting in a system margin 
of 1.4 dB. This particular amount of fade is typical of what one would expect 
in a temperate climate such as western Europe (the last entry in Table 3.3) or 
the northeastern United States. Having an extra 1.4 dB of margin provides that 
much more confidence in a system that will adequately serve the customer base.
From the uplink and downlink budgets, we can identify the key char­
acteristics of the transmitting earth station and receiving user terminal (Table 
3.4).This example should demonstrate the simplicity with which GEO links 
can be analyzed and understood. The ground segment design is quite stable, 
because for most applications antenna tracking is not required. The exception 
is the uplink antenna at 13m, which would require a step-track system as a 
Table 3.4
Primary RF Performance Requirements for the Earth Station 
and User Terminal Used in the Link Budget Example
Uplink earth station
Value
Units
Uplink EIRP, single carrier, clear-
air operation
82.6
dBW
HPA output power, single 
carrier, clear-air operation
100
Watts
Uplink power control range
10
dB
HPA size (minimum)
1,000
Watts
Transmit antenna gain
65.6
dBi
Antenna diameter, nominal
13
meters
Maximum EIRP, heavy rain
92.6
dBW
Waveguide loss, maximum*
3
dB
User terminal
Value
Units
Receive G/T
11.3
dB/K
Antenna diameter
45
cm
Antenna temperature
50
K
Receiver noise temperature
80
K
Feed loss noise
10
K
System noise temperature
140
K
Antenna gain, minimum
33.0
dBi
Received C/N at threshold
6.0
dB
*This is based on the type and length of waveguide (normally assumed 
to be about 30m).

72 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
minimum. From these tables, we can determine the primary performance re­
quirements for the earth stations and user terminals.
3.3  GEO Orbit Spacing
Since the vast majority of operating GEO satellites are north-south and east-
west stationkept, we need only consider two factors to describe their location 
and operation: the assigned longitude and the spacing between satellites on 
the same frequency. The fact that many satellites are visible from a particular 
ground location provides motivation for repositioning the antenna from time 
to time. This may be required if the network is moved to a different satellite or 
the result of a satellite anomaly. If this is contemplated, then the antenna mount 
should have the mechanical adjustment range appropriate to the need.
Locating a GEO satellite from the ground is quite straightforward, but 
can be a daunting task for larger antennas. Figure 3.5 provides a simple nomo­
gram to estimate the earth station elevation and azimuth angles relative to true 
north. The y-axis indicates the earth station latitude, either north or south, in 
degrees. The x-axis, on the other hand, called the relative longitude, is the abso­
lute magnitude of the difference in degrees between the earth station longitude 
and the longitude of the satellite. Thus, if the earth station is at 110 degrees WL 
and the satellite is at 85 degrees WL, then the relative longitude is 25 degrees 
(i.e., 110–85). The elevation angle, which also determines the slant range, is 
found from identifying the closest arc-shaped curve (0 degrees is the outermost 
bounding curve, e.g., pointing the antenna at the horizon). The azimuth is 
obtained from the radial curves in the figure, taking account of which quadrant 
the earth station is in as seen from the satellite (see upper right-hand corner of 
the figure for the key). To continue the example, assume that the earth station is 
at 40° NL, then our reference is quadrant II in Figure 3.5, since the ground lo­
cation is to the northwest of the subsatellite point. The corresponding azimuth 
is 360° – 217° = 143°, and the elevation angle is 38°.
A more effective way to determine where to point a real antenna is to use 
PC software such as SatMasterPro, which is reviewed in Section 8.2.2. In addi­
tion, many satellite operators provide a pointing calculator on their Web page 
(for example, see www.intelsat.com). Any of these calculations give nominal 
pointing to the satellite when it is in its center of box, meaning the ideal posi­
tion at the assigned longitude and zero degrees inclination with respect to equa­
torial orbit. Actual stationkeeping produces error in this position that should 
be within ±0.1° of the prescribed value. With four or more satellites sharing the 
same orbit position in some cases, individual nominal positions could be either 
to the left or right of center. Another strategy developed for large groupings uses 
variations in inclination and eccentricity, which is more robust. The particular 

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
73
arrangement depends on the operating approach of the operator or the manner 
in which the slots were assigned by the associated government regulatory body.
Transmitting earth stations and user terminals requires special consider­
ation when employing frequencies at Ku-band and higher. As stated for the 
digital link budget, uplinks may require UPC to maintain adequate signal level 
at the satellite and acceptable link availability. In addition, adaptive coding and 
modulation (ACM)—discussed in Chapter 4—gives another useful tool for 
optimizing link performance in real time. Techniques on the satellite that can 
remove some of this variation include automatic gain control (AGC), limit­
ing, and demodulation/remodulation in a digital processor. This is a complex 
question requiring careful analysis of the system and its elements. For links at 
Ka-band and higher, other techniques may be required if the resulting availabil­
ity is not acceptable. An example of the performance of a given Ka-band path 
measured in the Washington, D.C., area by COMSAT Laboratories is provided 
in Figure 3.4. One technique to overcome severe uplink rain-fade is to employ 
Figure 3.5  Ground antenna elevation angle and azimuth to a GEO satellite.

74 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
ground diversity, where two or more sites are sufficiently separate so that the in­
cidence of both sites experiencing a deep fade is reduced greatly. This can be of 
the order of 20 km or more, and so it imposes both investment and operational 
constraints on the system.
A last factor is the requirement of satellite spacing itself, which is deter­
mined by the beamwidth and sidelobe performance of the transmitting and 
receiving earth stations associated with each satellite. Adequate carrier-to-in­
terference ratio (C/I ) can be obtained at the expense of increasing earth sta­
tion antenna diameter. Increasing antenna diameter also increases transmit and 
receive gain, benefiting performance on the uplink and downlink, respectively. 
A critical concern is uplink interference, which is presented in Figure 3.6 for 
C-band earth station antennas of 5-m and 10-m diameter (orbit spacing and 
Figure 3.6  Uplink C/I due to a C-band transmitting earth station for either 5-m or 10-m reflec­
tor diameter, as a function of orbit spacing and uplink power level increase (assumes 10% 
increase in offset angle due to ground geometry).

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
75
power level difference are the variables). The governing relationships are: (1) the 
sidelobe radiation envelope, which was introduced in Chapter 1, and (2) the 
gain of the desired and interfering satellites as determined by their respective 
footprint coverages. We see that uplink C/I varies dB for dB with uplink power.
3.4  Non-GEO Satellites
Non-GEO satellites have been applied to satellite communication for many 
decades. For example, the Molniya satellites operated by Russia during the So­
viet era proved that one could derive practical services from satellites in highly 
elliptical earth orbit (HEO). A satellite could be used only during the period 
when it was far from the earth, giving path lengths as long as or longer than 
for GEO. Also, the 12-hour period of the orbit requires that two satellites be 
utilized for continuous service (earth stations must hand off between satellites, 
using dual antennas). For the country with the largest geographical area, and 
one substantially at higher latitudes, Molniya offered benefits in terms of high 
elevation angles and extended periods when one satellite could be viewed from 
both ends of the country. But this particular system outlived its usefulness in 
Russia’s more recent history. Meanwhile, HEO is employed by Sirius XM Radio 
with a 24-hour orbit and three satellites.
The Iridium constellation of 66 LEO satellites established non-GEO ar­
rangements as technically viable for mobile communications. Readers may be 
familiar with the approach taken by Motorola in the development of this proj­
ect, but the system entered bankruptcy and was restored to service to provide 
specialized services to government and industry. 
The most recent entry into non-GEO communications is a system in­
tended to serve the other three billion (O3b) people. Their first series of satel­
lites was launched in 2013 and service is provided to developing regions in the 
Pacific Ocean and Africa. The initial eight satellites are in equatorial orbit at 
an altitude of 8062 km, making the orbit period 4.8 hours and the coverage 
extending over a band approximately 45 degrees of latitude above and below 
the Equator. To provide continuous service, individual earth stations have at 
least two antennas that provide a handoff between satellites as they set and rise 
from the horizon. Services are intended for telecommunications operators and 
wireless carriers to provide backhaul connection from remote villages to major 
cities.
Another important aspect of non-GEO satellite operation is for track­
ing, telemetry, and command (TT&C) operations of both commercial satellite 
operators and government agencies on the civil and military sides. During the 
launch and early operation phase (LEOP), all spacecraft need to be tracked and 
controlled to assure safe operation and that the mission requirements are met. 

76 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
This requires full-motion tracking antennas that can point literally anywhere in 
the sky. Furthermore, the TT&C systems on spacecraft use special formats and 
transmission systems, which impact the earth station configuration and how it 
is operated. Figure 3.7 shows a full-motion tracking antenna using a modified 
Az-El mount. Such an antenna normally has a “keyhole” in its motion, meaning 
during a pass directly overhead there may need to be a 180° azimuth rotation 
to maintain pointing at a satellite during its path through the sky. However, 
they are the most common mounts for large reflector antennas because of their 
simplicity and lack of need to put HPAs in an elevated box under the feeds. The 
keyhole can be avoided by including another axis of rotation as implemented in 
this example, or by employing an X-Y mount.
What we are interested in here is the way that such constellations affect 
the manner that the ground segment is designed to serve users.
3.4.1  Constellation Characteristics
The basic relationship governing the application of non-GEO satellites is pro­
vided in Table 3.5, which indicates the altitude, required number of satellites 
for continuous service, orbit period, maximum time in view of a subscriber, 
and mean propagation delay. We have selected typical configurations for discus­
sion, although other variations are certainly possible. For example, Globalstar 
is an important LEO constellation that uses 48 satellites at 1,400-km altitude 
in orbits that are inclined 52° to improve coverage of the inhabited latitudes of 
the planet. Globalstar does not cover the poles as well as Iridium, something 
that GEO satellites cannot accomplish at all. This table considers physical as­
Figure 3.7  Full motion tracking antenna for use in Launch and Early Operation Phase. (Cour­
tesy of L-3 Datron.)

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
77
pects rather than characteristics of the link and service itself. For example, a 
LEO constellation offers global coverage (if the orbits have sufficiently high 
inclination), but whether the user terminal antennas need to track or not de­
pends on the frequency band and bandwidth demands of the link. An L-band 
system supporting narrowband communication, as in Iridium, can get by with 
a near-omnidirectional antenna on the handheld terminal. As the bandwidth 
and frequency are increased, the link demands significant antenna gain, which 
can only be provided using a directional beam of some kind. Once the beam is 
directional, it must point toward the operating satellite. This is demanded by 
O3b, which uses an equatorial orbit at an altitude of 8063 km.
The maximum size of the footprint is determined by the radius of the 
circle of potential coverage centered on the subsatellite point (i.e., the point 
on the ground directly below the instantaneous position of the satellite). The 
Molniya satellite, at approximately 40,000 km maximum altitude, has a larger 
footprint than GEO, while LEO satellites are limited to coverage radius of the 
order of 1,000 km. This area may be further subdivided into cells. The cover­
age areas must overlap and move in an orchestrated fashion, based on the orbit 
arrangement. Progression of the satellites in orbit can be shown using computer 
simulation and visualization with a software tool such as Satellite Toolkit from 
Analytical Graphics (www.stk.com), discussed in Section 8.2.1.
3.4.2  Continuity-of-Service Issues
Maintaining service continuity is a critical issue in non-GEO constellations be­
cause superior performance requires more satellites and gateway antennas. The 
most critical requirement is sufficiently high elevation angle from the ground to 
clear local terrain obstacles, which dictates the minimum number of satellites to 
achieve 100% continuity of service. This can be appreciated by reviewing two 
different architectures: the bent-pipe/ground hub approach of Globalstar and 
the broadband backhaul configuration of O3b. The bent-pipe/ground hub ap­
proach connects user terminal traffic to the satellite and a gateway earth station. 
Table 3.5
Key Parameters for Various Orbit Constellations
Orbit
Altitude 
(km)
Period 
(hrs)
Number of 
Satellites
Nominal 
Inclination
Maximum 
Time in 
View (hrs)
Single Hop 
Propagation 
Delay (ms)
GEO
35,788
24.0
3
0°
24
260
Molniya
40,000 
(apogee)
12.0
2
65°
6.0
300
MEO
8062
4.8
8
0°
0.5
40
LEO
780
1.4
66
86.4°
0.2
5

78 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Information can then pass from the user terminal over the satellite, through 
the gateway and onto the network control center (NCC) via another network 
(presumably terrestrial). The quality of the user-to-gateway connection depends 
on the stability of the link and the ability of the overall network to assure that 
this connection won’t be broken during handover to the next in-view satellite. 
For satellites of the simple bent-pipe design, handover is accomplished within 
the gateway earth stations that perform all of the signal processing and call 
management functions. The technique involves the gateway receiving the same 
signal from two satellites and selecting the strongest of the two at every instant 
in time. Tracking of the satellites by gateway antennas is, of course, a necessity. 
User terminal antennas of the type used in Globalstar do not require tracking 
and handover, and so their design is much like that of a conventional digital 
cellphone (except for the required upward view, as discussed in Chapter 9). 
In contrast, the tracking and handover requirements of high data rate 
Ka-band user terminals place considerable demands on the design, since these 
devices must be affordable to operators in developing countries. While the last 
comment relates to non-GEO systems, the stationkeeping properties of a GEO 
satellite can eliminate tracking requirements for user terminals.
Gateways may be installed to provide access to fixed users, such as through 
the Internet, PSTN, or private networks of some type. The network is robust 
in that, with an excess of satellites and links between them, a communication 
path can be established under nearly any circumstance. The one exception is 
when the user terminal is blocked from view of any satellite. This sort of thing 
is a normal characteristic of communication using a non-GEO constellation, 
but can possibly be made acceptable by supplying an excess of satellites and link 
margin.
3.4.3  Link Characteristics for Non-GEO Systems
Service to the ground segment of a non-GEO system depends in large part on 
the nature of the link, which is shorter but decidedly more dynamic than that 
of its GEO counterpart. Current LEO MSS systems have the advantage that 
user terminals do not need to track the satellites as they pass and as the link 
connection is transferred during calls. Fading on these links is primarily the re­
sult of multipath propagation from reflections off of buildings and the ground, 
and local terrain blockage. As we move to broadband services that require user 
terminals with tracking antennas, the situation is more difficult to address. The 
use of Ku and Ka bands adds the factor of rain attenuation. These are part and 
parcel of the design of O3b.
As a final consideration for the non-GEO type of link, we indicated in Ta­
ble 3.5 the time that a satellite is in view from a particular user on the ground. 
This time is further reduced if an associated gateway or control station must 

 
Space-Ground Interface Requirements 
79
be in view as well. The LEO satellite will appear to spend more of its time at 
the lower elevation angles than at the higher. This, of course, is less desirable 
because of the greater potential for terrain blockage and rain attenuation for Ku 
and Ka band links.
3.5  Link Margin
 The link budget example in Tables 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 presents a realistic example 
of the process to assess link performance using typical performance parameters 
for the satellite and earth stations. The resulting overall system margins in clear 
weather and with rain of 4.1 and 1.5 dB, respectively, give confidence that the 
link will exhibit satisfactory performance under all expected conditions. One of 
these assumptions is that the satellite will deliver the specified values of EIRP, 
G/T, and SFD, and that the earth stations can perform as given in the link bud­
gets. Furthermore, we assume that the amount of downlink rain attenuation 
of 1.3 dB would provide for an availability that meets the service requirement. 
Having 1.5 dB of excess system margin when the downlink is experiencing this 
rain loss gives further confidence. So, the link is robust and could endure some 
unexpected change in this system, such as with receive antenna alignment, ad­
jacent satellite interference, uplink power and satellite repeater gain, and a pos­
sible reduction in downlink EIRP due to satellite age. Rather than relying on 
assumptions, any of these factors can be evaluated using the same link budget 
technique.
As a general rule, this approach is very satisfactory since satellite charac­
teristics are known to the satellite operator (from whom we obtain such data), 
and earth station performance can be assessed using the methods described later 
in this book. Having margin on margin may give one more confidence, but is 
generally not recommended as it comes at a price. For example, an extra 3 dB of 
antenna gain necessitates an increase of antenna diameter of approximately the 
square root of two, or 40%. In terms of power, it is equivalent to doubling the 
raw power from the earth station HPA. The system engineer and earth station 
designer need to work together to come up with reasonable numbers for all of 
the terms in the link budget and agree on appropriate margins.
This completes our brief review of requirements due to the basic physi­
cal characteristics of space segments (GEO, MEO, and LEO). At this point, 
we transition to a discussion of the typical types of services that satellite com­
munication systems currently are able to provide. These are divided into two 
broad categories based on fundamental connectivity: two-way communications 
services (Chapter 4) and one-way broadcasting (Chapter 5). As a result, the 
applications they support are very different in terms of capability and business 
model.

80 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
References
[1]	 Morella, Alberto, and Vittoria Mignone, “DVB-S2: the Second Feneration Standard for 
Satellite Broadband Services,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 201–227, Janu­
ary 2006.
[2]	 Sklar, Bernard, Digital Communications—Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
[3]	 Elbert, Bruce R., The Satellite Communication Applications Handbook, Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 1997.
[4]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 2d ed., Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 1999.
[5]	 European Broadcasting Union, European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Digi­
tal Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for 
11/12 GHz Satellite Services, DN 300421, V1.1.2 (1997–98), p 20.

81
4
Two-Way Communications Service 
Requirements
The foundation of most telecommunication services is the two-way interac­
tive mode, typified by a telephone conversation between two people. This is, 
after all, something that we learn from birth, and provides the principle means 
of exchanging information, views, ideas, and instructions during the normal 
course of our lives. Two-way interactive communications are also necessary for 
connections between computers and in machine-to-machine links. This section 
addresses four implementations of satellite communication services: voice net­
works between fixed points on the ground, broadband data communications 
using very small aperture terminals (VSATs), mobile satellite communications 
to accomplish in remote regions what terrestrial cellular and wireless networks 
can do in developed areas, and other broadband links to support or supplement 
the Internet. Table 4.1 provides a summary of the capabilities of these services 
as they exist at the time of this writing, while the discussion that follows reviews 
their characteristics as they relate to the ground segment. 
The three types of multiple access (MA) that can be applied to these net­
works include frequency division multiple access (FDMA), time division mul­
tiple access (TDMA), and code division multiple access (CDMA), discussed in 
Chapter 2. Multiple access can be instituted in a dedicated arrangement, called 
preassigned, or to establish connections on demand. When MA and demand 
assigned are combined in an integrated system, it is called demand assigned 
multiple access (DAMA). As a result, the use of the term DAMA does not 
inform us of the particular type of MA employed; it merely means that earth 
stations may individually access satellite resources at the time they need it.
The term “dynamic bandwidth allocation” would appear to be a synonym 
for DAMA but could actually mean something different. Dynamic bandwidth 

82 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 4.1
Characteristics of Two-Way Interactive Services Provided by the Ground Segment
Characteristic
Orbit 
Configuration
Bandwidth 
per Channel
Multiple 
Access
Application
Ground Segment Implications
Telephone backhaul 
networks
GEO and MEO
1 to 20 Mbps
FDMA and 
TDMA
Trunks to extend the global network, and 
thin route and rural services in developing 
regions.
May employ conventional bent-pipe 
satellites as well as some processing 
satellites that can reduce earth station 
size and cost.
VSAT data networks
GEO
1 to 20 Mbps 
(return)
FDMA, TDMA, 
and CDMA
Private data networks within countries and 
regional networks to promote businesses 
and governments that require greater extent.
Employs partial transponder capacity. 
Users may share resources of the hub 
and network control.
Mobile satellite 
communication
GEO and LEO
4 to 500  Kbps
FDMA, TDMA, 
and CDMA
National, regional, and international roaming 
for mobile telephone and medium-speed 
data, augmenting the global fixed and 
mobile networks.
Requires a total integrated system with 
a common air interface. Major operators 
develop, manufacture, and distribute 
user terminals.
Interactive broadband
GEO
64 Kbps to 
155 Mbps
FDMA and 
TDMA
Public Internet and multimedia applications, 
local and backbone.
Requires powerful uplink or high-gain 
satellite antenna; service to fixed 
terminals, hubs, and mobile terminals on 
vehicles, aircraft, and ships.

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
83
allocation simply means that the bandwidth for the particular link can be 
changed in response to the immediate need for transmission capacity. This 
need can be measured at the user end and a message forwarded to the network 
control element (typically the hub station), resulting in an increase in the active 
bandwidth on the link in question.
As reviewed in Table 4.2, each MA method has its merits and issues as 
far as application in satellite networks. FDMA is appropriate for sharing of 
spectrum and power within a transponder; it may be used in SCPC DAMA 
networks and for operating different applications within the same bandwidth. 
One of its benefits is that it allows communication where transponder band­
width is restricted.
TDMA, on the other hand, requires tight coordination of timing and 
bandwidth usage, and may be susceptible to interference (as is FDMA). Capac­
ity in TDMA can be allocated simply by adjusting the time duration within an 
overall timeframe. It is beneficial for digital networks because it allows multiple 
logical channels within the time frame and integrates well with control channels 
and back-end systems. 
The third method, CDMA, has been touted for its efficiency in environ­
ments characterized by heavy interference from internal and external sources. 
One benefit is that the transmissions can be adapted to the instantaneous en­
vironment, which is often required in a real-world network. Since CDMA is 
implemented using direct sequence spread spectrum, it reduces the power spec­
tral density of the carrier as emitted from a small transmit antenna (see Section 
4.2.5).
Table 4.2
Characteristics and Application of Multiple Access Methods in Satellite 
Communications Ground Segments
Multiple 
Access Method
Principle 
Application
Benefits
Issues
FDMA
Sharing of transponder 
bandwidth and power
Minimum coordination 
among users
Power sharing, adjacent 
channel interference, and 
intermodulation
TDMA
Digital multiple 
access networks with 
consistent timing and 
coordination
Efficient in terms of 
bandwidth and power 
usage; high degree 
of integration with 
networks
Limited ability to control 
interference using separate 
timing or frequencies; 
requires timing reference
CDMA
High RF interference 
environments; variable 
bandwidth and power 
availability
Can tolerate self and 
external interference; 
little coordination 
among users; low 
potential to cause 
interference
Power control; adequate 
bandwidth for spreading 

84 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Because of the highly variable nature of the different applications and 
environments, these methods represent the principle points of departure for the 
design of appropriate network architectures and rely upon the design and man­
ufacturing capability of industry specialists such as ViaSat, Hughes Network 
Systems, Newtec and Comtech EF Data. In our experience, the selection of the 
optimum MA technique relies more on the experience base and economics of 
the particular supplier and operator as opposed to the ideal technical features 
that one might analyze on a sheet of paper.
Any architecture that uses a star topology (or those meshes that require 
connections back to the PSTN or the Internet) will require one or more hub 
earth stations. This is illustrated by a typical GEO MSS system, shown in Fig­
ure 4.1, that has three types of earth stations: the L-band user terminal, the 
C-band gateway earth station (facilities in three different countries or regions 
are indicated), and the shared Network Management Center and Subscriber 
Management System. This particular network does not allow direct UT-to-UT 
connections as it only offers services between users and the PSTN via the gate­
ways. We see that this architecture offers tight control (vital functions, not to 
be underestimated) and management of the network, including measurement 
of usage and billing.
The following sections review some of the detailed requirements for these 
types of networks that can be served through a satellite communication ground 
segment. This is not meant as a comprehensive treatment but rather an intro­
duction to this type of investigation.
Figure 4.1  GEO mobile satellite and network architecture.

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
85
4.1  Single Channel per Carrier (SCPC) Networks
Voice services are inherently interactive in nature and so the service must adhere 
to user expectations and quality objectives. We have as a basis the work done 
over the past decades at major institutions like Bell Laboratories in the United 
States and European industrial and intergovernmental organizations that seek 
to standardize products and services and promote international business and 
social development. Reviewed below is a body of engineering practice that 
has developed from a terrestrial telecommunications foundation and has been 
adapted to the unique aspects of satellite communications ground segments.
At the same time that voice networks become more readily available and 
lower in cost to use, several important trends have appeared which are causing 
a paradigm shift in the engineering and operation of the global telephone infra­
structure. These result in significant enhancement to the quality, affordability, 
and versatility of voice services from terrestrial fixed and wireless networks. One 
of the more interesting innovations is Voiceover IP (VoIP), an evolving standard 
for adding telephone services to the Internet space. Satellite voice networks can 
still offer a relatively low-cost alternative for rural and developing regions until 
fiber-based terrestrial networks can be justified by the local economy.
The engineering and economic principles that underlie the design and op­
eration of public telephone facilities have evolved over the 100 years that these 
services have been available. These are summarized in the following paragraphs 
as related to satellite networks that offer an alternative to terrestrial networks 
(or a complement, where appropriate). As the previous discussion indicates, 
the rules for network design are constantly being rewritten due to technology 
and economic/market factors. For example, in the United States the cost of 
long-distance service has dropped rapidly and subscribers can enjoy flat rates 
for nationwide calling of $0.07 per minute or less, any time and to anywhere. 
Greater adoption of VoIP has altered how many homes and businesses employ 
these networks. At this level, subscribers need not even hesitate to make a call, 
day or night.
The public switched telephone network (PSTN) represents the common 
denominator for telecommunications throughout the world. To understand 
how satellite telephony services can interface with typical subscribers, we have 
to examine the architecture and interface arrangements of the PSTN. The basic 
interface arrangement for telephony may be split into the subscriber local loop 
and the trunks that connect between telephone-switching exchanges. Typical 
local loop configurations include two-wire analog local loop, four-wire analog 
loop to a private branch exchange (PBX), the digital loop utilizing digital sub­
scriber line (DSL) interface at up to 20 Mbps, and digital loop carrier using 
time division multiplex (TDM) that provides either 24 (T1) or 30 (E1) digital 
voice channels.

86 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
4.1.1  Bandwidth and Quality
The fact that most voice services are carried using the Internet Protocol has 
been nothing short of a revolution in the nature of IT networks in general 
and satellite networks used for voice applications in particular. The traditional 
voice rate of 64 kbps has been compressed down to 8 kbps without the loss of 
quality. In the past, voice compression techniques rendered the audio channel 
unsuitable for fax and dial-up data connections. With the retirement of these 
applications, voice connections no longer need to carry in-band data but rather 
the data is transferred in the form of IP. These packets can be interleaved with 
the voice packets in the same transmission system. However, the requirements 
for voice service are different from those of the typical data application. Prin­
cipal among these is the minimization of latency, especially since a GEO hop 
gives an extra 260 ms of propagation delay for each path. Data connections can 
usually tolerate more delay provided that the actual download rate is reasonable.
VoIP connection requirements to achieve service goals (the particular set 
depends on the application environment, such as in a public, private, or gov­
ernment service) are reviewed in Table 4.3 [1]. In the past, voice channels were 
analog in nature and quantitative measures were straightforward using standard 
test procedures and equipment. With the advent of digital voice and VoIP, it 
becomes more difficult to make quantitative measurements and so quality be­
comes more subjective. However, Table 4.3 is reasonably comprehensive and 
provides guideliines into how to design a network that employs VoIP. A de­
tailed discussion of voice quality and the mean opinion score (MOS) approach 
is provided below. Note that all ITU Recommendations and Reports can be 
downloaded free of charge at www.itu.int.
Avaya, a leading provider of IP telephone systems, suggests a three layer 
architecture for VoIP networks [1]:
1.	 Core. The core layer is the heart of the network. The purpose of the 
core layer is to forward packets as quickly as possible. The core lay­
er must be designed with high availability in mind. Generally, these 
high-availability features include redundant devices, redundant power 
supplies, redundant processors, and redundant links. Today, core in­
terconnections increasingly use 10 gigabit Ethernet or higher.
2.	 Distribution. The distribution layer links the access layer with the core. 
The distribution layer is where policy like the QoS feature and access 
lists are applied. Generally, gigabit Ethernet connects to the core, and 
either gigabit Ethernet or 100base-TX/FX links connect the access 
layer. Redundancy is important at this layer, but not as important as 
in the core. This layer is combined with the core in smaller networks. 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
87
Table 4.3
Suggested Quality Objectives for VoIP over Satellite Networks
VoIP 
Parameter
Typical Objective or Requirement on a Satellite Network
Delay 
Ideally, end to end delay be less than 180 ms for “toll quality”. However, in 
real-world networks, total delay should be less than 450 ms for a single hop 
(including vocoder compression, packet processing, routing and propagation delay). 
Additional delay due to attached networks may render service unacceptable
Jitter
IP over satellite experiences variable delay resulting in jitter. To compensate for 
jitter, a de-jitter buffer is implemented in VoIP systems. Total delay should not 
exceed requirements.
Packet loss 
Voice quality is degraded by loss of a significant percentage of packets (including 
packets received in the wrong order). Should be less that 1% for excellent quality, 
3% for acceptable quality. Packet loss for signaling traffic increases network traffic 
substantially when the loss exceeds 3%, possibly impacting voice quality. Some 
packet loss can be dealt with by generating voice samples to take the place of 
the missing samples. ITU standard G.711 Annex I and the G.729 standard define 
methods by which packet loss concealment can be provided. Excessive packet loss 
cannot be disguised so, ultimately, PLC gives way to “comfort noise” generation 
(CNG) if too many packets are lost in succession.
Echo 
Echo is more pronounced when round-trip delay exceeds approximately 50 ms. 
The two main types of echo are acoustic echo and electrical echo caused by hybrid 
impedance mismatch. Usually, in a 2-party call, only the speaker hears an echo but 
the receiver does not. However, in a conference call many parties might hear an 
echo. Echo cancellors remove electrical echo, providing 40 dB of isolation during 
double-talk (both ends speaking simultaneously) and 80 dB when one person is 
speaking (also referred as echo suppression).
Signal Levels
Modern digital networks interface at an equal audio power level, stated as 0 dB. 
To control echo and other issues, the receive volume is attenuated 8 to 10 dB 
relative to transmit. IP Telephony gateways should provide proper signal level 
adjustments in the direction from the IP network to an analog circuit-switched 
network and in the reverse direction, and also between circuit-switched ports.
Packet 
prioritization
Voice packets should be given priority over general data communications services 
to assume minimum delay. This may be altered where data has a priority for 
operational reasons, in which case, the dropping of up to 1% of voice packets 
would be acceptable.
Endpoint audio 
devices
User equipment can have its own sound card, microphone, speaker or earpiece. 
Network designers should be mindful of the particularities of endpoint audio 
devices as these often determine service quality rather than network performance 
covered above. There are few standards with regard to these devices and it is 
usually best if they can be provided as part of an application and thereby be 
validated prior to initiation of service.
Available 
Bandwidth
The bandwidth requirements for voice are based on the type of vocoder (speech 
compression) as well as how voice packets are combined with the rest of the 
IP stream. Generally speaking, the bandwidth should be greater than twice the 
vocoder rate to account for packet headers and delays associated with protocol 
processing and routing. Header compression reduces the overall bandwidth on 
satellite links.
Silence 
suppression 
and CNG
Voice Activity Detection (VAD) or silence suppression can also be used to save 
bandwidth. Because only one party is speaking at any given time, more than 40% 
of the transmission is silence. During silence, CNG in the receiver informs the end 
user that the connection is still up.

88 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Satellite networks, where employed, normally supply the distribution 
layer for VoIP.
3.	 Access. The access layer connects servers and workstations. Switches 
at this layer are smaller, usually 24 to 48 ports. Desktop computers, 
workstations, and servers are usually connected at 100 Mbps or 1 
Gbps. Limited redundancy is used. Some QoS and security features 
can be implemented in the access layer. Mostly, power over ethernet 
(PoE) is included to power IP telephones and other access devices.
The 64-kbps voice channel of PCM delivers the highest-quality service 
for telephony. With the adoption of digital transmission from end to end, sub­
scribers have become accustomed to clear-channel service without noise and 
with a minimum of disruption. Prior to digital fiber-optic and satellite services, 
networks were analog in nature and suffered from a variety of impairments. 
This is largely behind us; however, impaired voice communication has returned 
in the form of the digitally compressed speech used in mobile networks and via 
the Internet through VoIP.
The ITU has provided a process for evaluating the quality of voice chan­
nels that are impaired as compared to what subscribers expect. This is the mean 
opinion score (MOS) technique, embodied in the P series of recommendations 
Table 4.3  (continued)
VoIP 
Parameter
Typical Objective or Requirement on a Satellite Network
Codec 
selection 
(Mean Opinion 
Score)
VoIP uses standard codec algorithms that are recommended by the ITU:
G.711 PCM 64 kbps, MOS 4.37
G.729 CS-ACELP 8 kbps, MOS 3.94
G.723.1 ACELPMP-MLQ 6.3 kbps, MOS 3.78; 5.3 kbps, MOS 3.68
MOS is measured according to ITU-IT P.862 “Perceptual evaluation of speech 
quality “ (PESQ). MOS above for American English. Satellite networks may 
use other algorithms not transferred directly to the terrestrial network (can be 
accomplished with transcoding at the expense of MOS).
QoS/CoS 
policy 
The term  Class of Service (CoS) refers to mechanisms that mark traffic in such a 
way that the traffic can be differentiated and segregated into various classes. The 
term Quality of Service (QoS) refers to what the network does to the marked traffic 
to give higher priority to specific classes. The fact that certain traffic is marked 
with the intent to give it higher priority does not necessarily mean it receives 
higher priority. CoS marking does no good without the supporting QoS mechanisms 
in the network devices. CoS may be necessary to prevent VoIP calls from being 
connected to the public Internet as voice quality and delay cannot be guaranteed. 
QoS provides the means to give voice packets higher priority for minimum delay 
but allow packet loss up to 1%.
Voice 
Signaling
Establish a TCP connection for a “call signaling” channel (the H.323/H.225 
channel). Once the TCP connection is established for call signaling, the 
H.225.0/Q.931 signaling protocol is used over that connection to route the call and 
exchange addresses necessary to establish a second TCP connection. This second 
TCP connection is used for “media control” (the H.245 channel).

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
89
[2]. A group of test users try out the subject telephone link, either on a listen-
only basis or in an interactive two-way conversation. After completing the ses­
sion, they rate the quality according to the following scale:
5.	 Excellent
4.	 Good
3.	 Fair
2.	 Poor
1.	 Bad
The scores are then averaged to produce the MOS for the particular run 
of the overall experiment. This rating system has proven quite reliable over the 
years and has maintained its popularity in the satellite communication and 
wireless industries. Test equipment now predicts the MOS from direct channel 
measurement. The MOS of a standard 64-kbps PCM telephone channel gener­
ally is slightly higher than 4.0, while significant impairment that reduces the 
naturalness or consistency of the channel will cause the rating to drop by one or 
more points. Ratings below 3.0 are generally not indicative of commercial qual­
ity. For example, the voice quality of AMBE at 3 kbps is adequate for mobile 
satellite service, but would not find acceptance in a fixed line or even cellular 
applications. The curve that corresponds to the true vocoder shows the extent 
of the trade between MOS and bit rate: at 2 kbps, the channel is usable for 
critical communications, but not suited to dialup connections. A typical trend 
curve is provided in Figure 4.2 [3]. Aside from bandwidth and naturalness, 
one of the most important impairments to a telephone conversation is delay, 
discussed in the next section.
More recently, the ITU identified an objective measurement technique 
called PESQ, which predicts the MOS score. It compares the original voice 
signal with a degraded signal resulting from passing through the communica­
tions channel [4].
4.1.2  Delay and Latency
The transmission of communication signals, whether via fiber-optic cable, cop­
per, or radio waves, entails propagation delay. GEO satellites have long been 
used for telephone services, but it is often pointed out that the 260 ms of delay 
associated with one hop is a concern in this age of ubiquitous wireless networks 
and the Internet. One common principle for Iridium and Globalstar is their 
greatly reduced, yet variable, end-to-end delay. On the other hand, the GEO 
delay is a constant and can produce an overall delay that meets quality objec­
tives. In this section, we will consider how delay impacts voice services and 

90 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
what facilities are available to make satellite communication links suitable for 
commercial telephone services.
Delay can be broken down into the following categories:
• Call setup delay (also called post-dialing delay);
• Propagation delay;
• Speech processing (compression/decompression) delay;
• Switching and queuing delay (packet and circuit-switched);
• Delay-induced impairments (echo).
Each is reviewed in the following paragraphs.
Figure 4.2  Comparison of bit rate and MOS for various digital speech compression tech­
niques.

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
91
Call setup delay is the time between when the dialing party completes 
entering the number of the called party and the called telephone instrument 
rings and is answered (assuming no additional delay for a slow response at the 
distant end). Since public telephony, whether using satellite or terrestrial access, 
requires that a connection be established before user information can be trans­
ferred, this is extremely important to the acceptability of the service. Figure 
4.3 illustrates the steps involved and the following equation suggests how these 
contributors can be summed [5]:
	
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
3
3
tot
s
i
p
T
T
T
E T
E W 	
Where Ts is a constant (deterministic) delay assumed for the time before 
a dial tone is delivered to the caller; it is also assumed for the time for a ringing 
message to originate from the called end, and the time for the answer indication 
to be given to the caller. Ti is a constant time for a connection request to traverse 
the network to the called end, E(Tp) is the expected value (statistical average) of 
the switch processing time at nodes A and B, and E(W) is the expected value of 
the waiting time for the call request message to reach switch node B.
This equation and Figure 4.3 are only meant to illustrate the components 
and how they combine to impact the call setup time. In a real case, the engineer 
Figure 4.3  Telephone call signaling sequence, indicating transmission nodes, time duration, 
and delays.

92 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
must evaluate in detail the delays at points of processing, switching, and trans­
mission that affect call setup. This may entail actual measurements or, in the 
absence of a real system, computer simulation. Terrestrial fiber-optic networks 
that employ Signaling System No. 7 (SS-7) produce low setup delay (less than 
1 second), while the corresponding delay in cellular networks can be quite sub­
stantial (5 to 10 sec). Users who have experienced both have come to accept the 
difference in call setup delay performance.
Propagation delay is the time taken to travel over the cable or radio path. 
Presented in Chapter 3 and Figure 3.1, propagation delays for the LEO, MEO, 
and GEO altitudes are of the order of 7, 75, and 260 ms, respectively. LEO 
systems have the benefit of very brief single hop delay, which is comparable to 
delays experienced within telephone exchanges and multiplexing nodes. Mul­
tiple hops for LEO constellations would be acceptable, including intersatellite 
links if present. However, processing and switching onboard a satellite will add 
substantially to this delay, as discussed below. The propagation delay in MEO 
links is significantly greater, but is substantially below that of GEO satellites.
Propagation delay is only one component of the total budget, but for 
GEO systems it is usually dominant. Other contributors include compression 
and decompression processing and packet switching (if used). Experimental 
evaluation of MOS under various conditions of delay indicated that there is a 
cliff in the MOS rating curve at around 500 ms, a point where a significant frac­
tion of telephone users find the circuit to be below 3.0. These scores are heavily 
influenced by the specific conditions of the call. For example, the best scores 
are always obtained for listening-only with steady-state signal quality. Two-way 
interactive conversation immediately brings out the delay characteristics and 
possibilities for speech clipping. However, subscribers involved in a mobile call 
with fading will tend to rate the same delay and quality with a higher MOS 
score (as much as half or a full point) because of a lower expectation.
Speech processing (compression/decompression) is a powerful technique to 
reduce the data rate necessary to transfer a voice channel. For heavy compres­
sion that reduces the bit rate to less than about 6 Kbps, the processing function 
will introduce a delay of its own. The amount of this delay, which is essentially 
constant and fixed for all telephone calls, results from the number of speech 
samples that are required and the actual computation to perform compression 
and decompression. 
Switching and queuing delay (packet and circuit-switched) is the conse­
quence of internal node transfer and buffering of traffic within a network (sat­
ellite or terrestrial). While this is more of an issue for data communication in 
packet switched networks, it is still a natural consequence of having digital 
information transferred through time division switches.
Delay-induced impairment (echo) was a serious detriment for com­
mercial satellite communications prior to the wide scale adoption of digital 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
93
communications for international services. The problem was largely caused by a 
switching device called an echo suppressor, which was used in all long-distance 
circuits to block the reflection of echo. The half-second round-trip delay of 
GEO satellite links combined with poor echo suppression to produce service 
quality that was often unacceptable.
The solution to this problem was a digital device called the echo cancellor, 
which as the name suggests, actually removes the echo by canceling it out at the 
source. The telephone hybrid at the distant end still returns the echo, but the 
echo cancellor introduces a negative-going replica of the echo to substantially 
remove it by numerical subtraction. When the circuit is first established, the 
echo cancellor goes through a training period to model the reflection path. The 
resulting attenuation of 40 dB is sufficient to make the circuit sound natural. 
In addition, hard echo suppression, which is digitally introduced, disables the 
path when only one person is actually speaking. The 40 dB of cancellation is 
really only required when both parties are speaking at the same time (called 
double-talking).
Echo cancellors are now standard in all long-distance circuits, whether on 
satellite or terrestrial links. This is important because all digital services involve 
the kinds of time delays previously discussed. For example, digital compres­
sion in terrestrial cellular networks introduces enough delay to demand that 
echo cancellation be provided within the digital cellular network. Likewise, the 
variable delay of the Internet places an echo cancellation requirement on VoIP 
services.
4.1.3  Traffic Engineering and Throughput
The design of traditional telephone networks was, for decades, viewed as a 
straightforward procedure using the analytical techniques derived by Agner 
Krarup Erlang (1878–1929), the first person to study this problem [6]. A Dan­
ish mathematician who worked for the Copenhagen Telephone Company, Er­
lang proved that Poissons law of distribution governed the theoretical perfor­
mance of circuit-switched networks. It is based on the principle that subscribers 
make calls independently of one another and these calls randomly arrive at the 
telephone exchange at an average arrival rate of λ calls per second. Mathemati­
cally, the probability of k arrivals in an interval of time T is given by:
	
( )
(
)
λ
λ
-
=
!
k
T
T
e
p k
k
	
This surprisingly simple formula tells us that the traffic demand can be 
specified exclusively by λ, the average arrival rate. What remains (to be discussed 
below) is how the switch and network respond to this demand. The individual 

94 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
demand per user is relatively small, perhaps only a few minutes during the busy 
hour. The traffic offered, A, to the exchange that routes calls over the channels 
is measured in Erlang (E ), and defined as:
	
=
⋅
A
call rate call duration 	
For example, if the offered traffic is 0.5 calls per second and the average 
call duration is 30 seconds, then A = 15E. 
The statistical property of telephone calls produces fluctuation in the 
loading of a particular trunk. If all N channels are in use, then the next call to 
arrive (the N + 1 call) will be blocked. The telephone network could either put 
such calls in a queue awaiting available trunk capacity, or immediately reject 
the call (calls dropped). Since calls arrive randomly, N channels will carry fewer 
than N Erlangs of traffic, unless the network operator allows a very high fre­
quency of blocked calls. Traffic loading depends on time of day, so we use the 
concept of the busy hour to form the basis of telephone network design.
A question might arise about the potential load offered by a single sub­
scriber. Suppose that the typical subscriber makes one call during the busy hour 
and that this is two minutes in duration. Then the load for this subscriber is:
	
[
]
=
⋅
=
1 3600 120
0.0333E or 33.3mE
A
	
Thirty such users would produce the traffic load equivalent to one continuously 
occupied trunk.
A. K. Erlang derived the following mathematical relationship (the Erlang 
B equation for blocked calls dropped) to describe how this large community of 
potential callers will impact service on the trunks during the busy hour:
	
=
=
∑
0
!
!
N
B
n
N
n
A
N
P
A
n
	
where PB is the probability that a call will be blocked because all trunks are busy.
For our simple example, 30 subscribers offer a traffic load of 1 E. If N= 3 
channels in the trunk, this formula tells us that the probability is 6.25% (1 out 
of 16) that all channels are already occupied so that the next call is blocked, i.e., 
receives an all trunks busy signal from the switch. Normal telephone engineer­
ing practice would require PB less than 1% (1 out of 100). A compliant design 
would provide five channels, for which PB = 0.3%.
The practical design approach in telephone network engineering is to pre­
define the value of PB based on the quality of service that the network must 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
95
provide to subscribers. In the PSTN, the accepted value is 1%, or one call 
blocked out of every 100 attempts. A graphical representation for a range of 
values of N and E is presented in Figure 4.4. We have chosen the Erlang B 
equation, above, which applies in the arbitrary case that all blocked calls are 
dropped, i.e., that the caller gives up if he or she cannot obtain the trunk for the 
call in question. The Erlang C equation is a refinement that allows for blocked 
calls to be held, that is, placed in a queue awaiting the next available trunk [7].
	
(
)
(
)
=
-
=
+
-
∑
0
!
1
!
!
1
N
B
n
N
N
n
A N
N
N
P
A
A N
n
N
N
	
Whether blocked calls are cleared or held is largely a moot point, since 
neither of these elegant formulas is applied in practice. Rather, they provide a 
means to understand the statistical nature of telephone networks.
Estimating telephone traffic in a new network that has not been con­
structed, or worse yet for a service that does not yet even exist, is difficult, to 
say the least. The procedure seems to be to use either of A. K. Erlangs formulas 
as a rough starting point, and then to proceed with some kind of test case, 
Figure 4.4  Traffic engineering design curves based on Erlang B equation (dropped calls 
cleared from network).

96 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
possibly involving a pilot service on a testbed with live subjects. These data can 
then be used as a starting point or an input to a computer simulation of part of 
the network under investigation. In this way, many scenarios can be tried and 
measured under a variety of conditions. The actual design to be installed should 
probably have excess trunk and switching capacity to alleviate blockages that 
can occur, and to reroute traffic as necessary during peak loading situations. 
The majority of satellite networks employ VoIP for telephone traffic and 
consequently one voice conversation does not employ a fixed amount of band­
width. The actual throughput will depend on the percentage of time that a 
person is actually speaking (typically less than 40% of the time during a conver­
sation, less pauses) as well as how the network responds to congestion. Drop­
ping of packets will reduce the throughput but the connection should stay up. 
Another technique is to change the compression algorithm based on total traffic 
load—this will prevent call blockage at the expense of lower voice quality.
4.1.4  Service Management
 Satellite communications have played a major role in providing cellular cover­
age for remote villages and areas. This is because it can overcome the high cost 
of extending cable or microwave links from a major city across an expanse of 
jungle, mountains, or water. The now-familiar satellite application called cel­
lular backhaul was first employed in Indonesia in 1990 to extend their original 
GSM network outside of the capitol city of Jakarta. Without their domestic 
satellite system, Palapa C, the new cellular operator could not have become a 
national provider of cellular services.
The GSM standard, also referred to as 2G cellular, has been made avail­
able throughout the world and there are over one billion subscribers. The basic 
concept of cellular backhaul is to replace the point-to-point link between the 
base station controller (BSC) and the base transceiver station (BTS), creating a 
large coverage from a single control point. As the familiar cell tower, the BTS 
is located within the remote area to be served. The BSC could be located in 
proximity to the mobile switching center (MSC) that would manage the re­
mote base stations and provide access to the fixed line network. Inserting the 
backhaul service amounts to substituting a point-to-point duplex satellite link 
using either the mesh or the star topology. Voice quality would be satisfactory 
since the satellite link simply transfers digitized speech without modification. 
Alternatively, transcoding could allow a reduction in bandwidth over the satel­
lite path.
GSM employs TDMA for voice and a packet approach for low- to medi­
um-speed data. This technology has satisfied much of the demand in develop­
ing regions and as a result, cellular backhaul is quite popular. Most common are 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
97
mesh-style connections using SCPC modems from Comtech EF Data. This can 
provide bandwidth in the range of 1 Mbps to as much as 50 Mbps.
Ericsson and iDirect have collaborated to use a TDMA VSAT network 
to connect the remote BTS back through a hub to the associated BSC and 
the MSC. Figure 4.5 provides the basic connection arrangement for cellular 
backhaul. The antennas for the remote and hub are shown in Figure 4.6. These 
companies provided an end-to-end solution closely tied to the existing infra­
structure, network management system and operational support system (OSS) 
for operational efficiencies.
Owing to the popularity of cellular data and the smart phone, 2G is fast 
giving way to 3G, which employs wideband CDMA (WCDMA) for all services. 
However, cellular backhaul has not kept pace because of the cost of providing 
the greater bandwidth required from the satellite links. New high-throughput 
satellites can support 3G once the pricing model becomes attractive for higher 
bandwidths.
4.1.5  Synchronization with Terrestrial Networks
 Beyond these basic requirements, there are a host of other issues that can only 
be addressed once the local situation is understood and the appropriate sce­
narios described in detail. This requires a lot of research on the ground, includ­
ing a thorough investigation of the existing PSTN standards and facilities. The 
fact that a given country or region has adopted an ITU or ETSI standard does 
not guarantee that new earth stations or switching equipment will perform 
properly.
Figure 4.5  Cellular backhaul arrangement by Ericsson and iDirect. (Courtesy of Ericsson.)

98 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
One of the questions that often gets overlooked is that of synchronization 
of timing and clocks. Two fundamental approaches are applied.
• In plesiochronous mode, timing is inherently flexible to allow for a wide 
disparity in local timing. This is made possible by including dummy bits 
that can be removed or inserted at each node along with timing buffers.
• Synchronous mode relies on close alignment of timing throughout the 
network. This demands high accuracy of individual clocks, of the order 
of 10–11, in order to achieve maximum throughput without dummy bits. 
The benefit is provision of end-to-end clear channels for precise data and 
applications that demand this type of performance [6].
The goal of synchronous mode is to provide a stable reference that is trace­
able to a highly accurate primary reference source (PRS), such as a rubidium 
atomic clock, the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
WWV radio broadcast, GPS, or the like. This timing can be further distributed 
over the satellite to all locations, a technique that can be successful as long as the 
local environment at the earth station is compatible. For example, the satellite 
network may be properly tied to the PRS, but the local switching office (which 
is independent of the satellite network) may not be so exact.
The slippage of clock timing can cause unexpected difficulties in the op­
eration of certain types of equipment. Voice connections may not even notice 
Figure 4.6  Hub station and remote VSAT terminal to provide cellular backhaul. (Courtesy of 
Ericsson.)

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
99
a clock slip, which might cause nothing more than a click or dropout of a few 
milliseconds. Encrypted services such as voice or data are very susceptible to 
slips, as these interrupt synchronization, a problem that impacts digitally com­
pressed video as well. The solution may require forcing the newly introduced 
satellite network to follow the local clock, or vice versa.
4.2  VSAT Broadband Networks
 Very small aperture terminal (VSAT) satellite communication networks pro­
vide services to millions of locations worldwide and are the fastest growing 
technology for providing broadband service to remote locations as well as a 
wide variety of mobile platforms. The predominant topology in use is that of 
the star network where the remote VSAT is connected over a bent-pipe satellite 
to a central hub station that manages the network and provides access to land-
based networks, particularly the Internet. Like DSL and cable modem service, 
VSATs primarily deliver asymmetrical bandwidth with the forward link (hub 
to remote) operating at tens or hundreds of megabits per second and the return 
link (remote to hub) transferring anywhere between a few hundred kilobits per 
second to tens of megabits per second. This feature allows the VSAT to provide 
previously unserved locations with almost the same level of Internet access or 
private network connection as afforded in major cities.
VSAT networks were introduced during the early 1980s in response to 
pent-up demand for a low-cost and reliable alternative to leased analog or dig­
ital telephone lines for business data communications. Consisting mostly of 
user-premises, small earth stations and a centralized hub main earth station, the 
VSAT network gained popularity by appealing to a segment of U.S. corpora­
tions, offering more effective service than that provided by analog telephone 
lines employing the 9,600 bps modems of the day. The first users in the United 
States included Wal-Mart, then an up-and-coming retailer that built its stores 
near small towns in rural America; Chevron, the first oil company to place 
VSATs at each of its company-owned filling stations; and Toyota of America, 
which wanted to enhance the quality of service provided to the first buyers of 
their new Lexus automobiles.
In reality, VSATs can be configured for essentially any kind of telecom­
munications service (not just data, but also telephone and video as well) and 
are suitable for installation on customer premises. The most visible part of the 
VSAT is its antenna, which typically is less than 2m in diameter. With high 
powered satellites at Ku and Ka bands, size is reduced to approximately 70 cm 
in an effort to reduce the cost and difficulty of installation on typical buildings 
and on vehicles. VSATs are located at hundreds of thousands of homes to en­
courage personal use and small office/home office (SOHO) applications. 

100 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
In the following sections, we provide a brief review of the basic arrange­
ments that VSATs offer, as well as the types of applications that are currently 
supported. This should be viewed as the starting point for developing a specific 
ground segment and for defining requirements for the earth stations themselves.
4.2.1  VSAT Network Topologies
VSAT networks fall into two broad categories: the hub-based “star” VSAT net­
work, which provides a star type of topology, and the “mesh” network, which 
allows connections between any pair of VSATs. Acting as the common relay 
point, the space segment should be fairly transparent to the operation of the 
network, unless we are speaking of a processor-based repeater design. The latter 
may offer remote-to-remote connectivity without the overhead and added delay 
of a ground-based hub.
As with any satellite network, VSATs must employ a multiple access (MA) 
system that is both reliable and efficient. The MA methods introduced in Chap­
ter 2 include TDMA, which is the most common for VSAT networks, CDMA, 
which is well established in mobile networks, and FDMA, the original MA 
technique and still quite useful for mesh and star topologies. Hybrid networks 
that adopt two of these techniques have also appeared as a way to address some 
of the dynamic aspects of VSAT networks. For the mesh, all earth stations must 
transmit with sufficient power to reach any other earth station in the network 
(to permit “any to any” types of connections), while in the star network there 
can be an imbalance of power favoring the VSATs. This recognizes that very 
large networks of small earth stations (with antennas of less than 1m and SSPA 
output power of less than 5 watts) benefit from using a common hub with a 
large antenna (4m to 10m) to be capable of receiving the low-power VSAT 
transmissions. This assumes the common analog bent-pipe type of repeater 
with linear (or near linear) gain characteristics. Later, we provide link budget 
examples to emphasize this particular point.
In the mesh network, we must still provide some form of centralized net­
work control and management, since much of the communication will benefit 
from a demand assignment (DA) scheme of some type. This central control 
could use one of the mesh network earth stations to access the space segment 
and thereby reach the other earth stations in the network. This permits any 
station to request a connection to any other and to obtain the necessary space 
segment bandwidth and power for the duration of this connection. The central 
control function is vital to the proper operation of the ground segment, which 
cannot function without the ability to assign and remove the necessary links 
and manage the network in a service sense. Channel capacity to be assigned 
can be in terms of bandwidth within the transponder or baseband bandwidth 
in packet form.

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
101
The demand for VSAT applications has pushed the operating frequency 
higher into the Ka band, where spectrum is more readily available than it is in 
the bands below. This means that VSAT links must accommodate significant 
rain attenuation, particularly in temperate and tropical regions of the planet. As 
discussed in Chapter 3, it is possible to obtain good link availability (i.e., at the 
99.9% level) provided that there is adequate link margin. Another aspect of us­
ing Ku and Ka bands is that terrestrial interference from microwave stations will 
not be present in general and so VSATs can be operated from almost anywhere 
as long as the satellite (or satellites) can be seen without ground obstruction. 
In the United States and some other regions, it is possible to obtain a “blanket 
license” that covers all VSATs with the same characteristics regardless of loca­
tion within that country.
4.2.2  Application Requirements
The first step in understanding where VSAT mesh and hub networks fit in is 
to examine how companies apply data communications to solve business prob­
lems. We include under business problems the kinds of applications used by 
governments, educational institutions, and nonprofit organizations. All of us, 
then, can acquire the computer hardware and software resources to automate 
routine functions, access and process data, publish and distribute information, 
and engage in electronic commerce at the retail and interorganizational level. 
Some general examples defining the uses of VSATS are:
• As a replacement for a terrestrial star or mesh network that serves an or­
ganization’s data communication needs (this existing network may also 
provide other forms of communications, notably voice and video);
• To activate a new strategic information technology (IT) application to 
achieve a business goal of becoming more competitive in a particular 
market;
• As an integrator of wideband services, where the organization had been 
using a number of different networks and services, each addressing a 
different requirement;
• For rapid installation or expansion of an existing network, taking ad­
vantage of the unique features of satellite communication (including 
mobility);
• As a platform for a corporate Intranet that addresses a wide variety of lo­
cations within a country or region, or even on a global basis. An Intranet 
is a closed computer network that uses the open architecture of the 
Internet, the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/
IP), but limits access and applications to those that support the internal 

102 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
needs of the organization. Virtual private network (VPN) is a secure 
structure that uses the public Internet to extend an Intranet.
Computer networks have long been viewed in terms of a layered architec­
ture, typically following the seven layers of the Open Systems Interconnection 
(OSI) model [7]. Modern data communication theory and practice is literally 
built upon the concept of protocol layering, where the most basic transmission 
requirement is at the bottom, and more complex and sophisticated features are 
added one on top of another. As we move up the stack, each layer obtains a 
service form from the layer immediately below. In this way, the details within 
the layer can be optimized for performance and isolated from the other layers. 
At the very top of the structure is the actual information processing applica­
tion that is required in order for the network to carry out its function. These 
principles are summarized below with a definition of the specific layers (which 
are normally arranged with Layer 1 on the bottom, but listed here in ascend­
ing order, for clarity). An understanding is important because proper operation 
depends on a smooth interaction between a satellite network and these layers.
• Layer 1—Physical. Provides the mechanism for transmitting raw bits 
over the communication medium (cable, wireless, or satellite). It speci­
fies the functional, electrical, and procedural characteristics such as sig­
nal timing, voltage levels, connector type, and use of pins. The familiar 
RJ-45 Ethernet connector definition is a good example of the physi­
cal layer. On satellite links, the physical layer is built into the modem 
and MA elements and must be developed to maintain a reliable point-
to-point or point-to-multipoint transfer of data in the presence of link 
fades and noise-induced errors and interference.
• Layer 2—Data Link. Provides for the transfer of data between adjacent 
nodes or connection points, either by a dedicated point-to-point line 
(e.g., a T1 private line or a satellite duplex link) or a medium capable of 
shared bandwidth (e.g., an Ethernet cable or satellite TDMA channel). 
Another example of a link-layer protocol is high-level data link control 
(HDLC). VSAT terminals and hubs must incorporate a basic protocol 
for maintaining reliable data transfer, often including a recovery from bit 
errors and short interruptions, done in a manner that is invisible to the 
higher-layer protocols by the computer application.
• Layer 3—Network. Responsible for routing information from end to 
end within the network, allowing for multiple data link paths. This may 
involve decisions as to the most effective route through the point-to-
point links that comprise the network. A VSAT network may serve as 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
103
one of these links and hence would have to interface properly with the 
network layer. As the most popular network layer protocol, the Internet 
Protocol is highly suited for transfer of packets over the widest variety of 
networks. Individual packets are routed from source to final destination 
based on the IP address of the recipient. Routers maintain information 
about workable paths that can be used to reach the intended destina­
tion, and routing protocols keep this information timely. However, the 
Internet Protocol itself does not guarantee delivery of each packet nor 
of all of the packets that make up the conversation between the two end 
systems. Specifically for satellite links, IP is effective because it is quick 
acting because packets traverse the network at the maximum speed.
• Layer 4—Transport. Provides another level of assurance that the infor­
mation will properly traverse the network, from end user to end user. 
Two transport layer services are commonly available: connectionless, 
which transfers packets of data, one at a time; and connection-oriented, 
where a virtual circuit is first established before sending multiple packets 
that make up the entire conversation. The familiar TCP layer of TCP/
IP provides a connection-oriented service to computer applications. 
The virtual circuit of TCP tracks every pack and assures 100% delivery. 
Generally, the satellite system tries to use the terrestrial transport layer, 
although some form of spoofing (discussed later) may still be needed to 
improve throughput and reduce the average delay from end to end.
• Layer 5—Session. Somewhat more complicated than Layers 3 and 4, 
but provided to instill yet greater degrees of reliability and convenience 
of interface to applications. It manages the data exchange between com­
puter systems in an orderly fashion to provide full duplex or half-duplex 
conversations. One important service is that of reestablishing the con­
nection in the event that the transport layer is interrupted for some rea­
son. The session layer is optional in the Internet protocol.
• Layer 6—Presentation. Provides syntactic and semantic services to the 
application layer above. What this means is that the presentation layer 
is inserted to resolve the complexities between transport/network layers 
and the more simplistic needs of the actual application that employs 
the network in the first place. Examples of syntax include encryption, 
compression, and numeric encoding (e.g., ASCII). The Internet family 
of protocols does not offer a presentation layer.
• Layer 7—Application. Includes the actual data communication applica­
tions that are common in Internet-based systems, such as file transfer, 
Web services, electronic mail, and remote database access. We refer to 
these as applications because they include not only the protocol ele­

104 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
ments that support specific types of information but also features and 
facilities that ultimately interact with the end user. Most nonexpert users 
will not use the application layer directly, instead relying on specialized 
software within the computer to improve the interface and functionality. 
For example, most Internet surfers use the E-mail package supplied with 
the browser. This package, in turn, will engage Layer 7 electronic mail 
services (e.g., SMTP) to do the actual function of addressing, sending, 
and receiving message traffic.
The previous discussion was, of necessity, somewhat abstract as it relates 
to the logic of how networks are put together and interoperate. Table 4.6 offers 
examples from terrestrial and satellite worlds to provide more of a practical feel 
for these aspects.
We see from Table 4.4 that satellite links differ significantly from terres­
trial data communications at the lowest four layers: Physical, Link, Network, 
and Transport. This takes account of the substantially different technical envi­
ronment of satellite links, particularly the delay, connectivity, and error-pro­
duction mechanisms. Terrestrial links have their foibles regarding congestion, 
errors picked up along the route, and delays encountered from links, nodes, and 
contention for these resources. The key point is that the Internet protocol was 
designed for this environment. It can accommodate satellites as well, but usu­
ally in a nonoptimum way. What we find is that the protocol must be adapted 
to satellites or performance will probably suffer. 
We can now focus in on the Internet Protocol and how satellite networks 
use more specialized protocols where needed. Figure 4.7 illustrates the five lay­
ers that are addressed in this context. Note that both the Session and Presenta­
tion layers in the previous OSI discussion are absent as these functions can be 
subsumed by the Application layer, when required. The figure distinguishes 
between a physical connection and higher-layer logical connections—the Phys­
ical layer contains the actual physical interface, as discussed previously. The 
Table 4.4
Protocols of the OSI Stack Layers, for Terrestrial and Satellite Implementations
Layer Definition
Terrestrial Examples
Satellite Examples
1. Physical layer
Fiber-optic cable, Ethernet 
connection, GSM cellular
QPSK modem-to-modem connection
2. Link layer
MAC, HDLC, DVB-RCS
HDLC
3. Network layer
X.25, ATM, IP, Frame Relay
Proprietary protocols, (IPoS)
4. Transport layer
TCP
Proprietary protocols, SCPS, XTP, IPoS
5. Session layer
Sockets, NetBIOS
Same as terrestrial
6. Presentation layer
ASN1
Same as terrestrial
7. Application layer
http, SMTP, FTP
Same as terrestrial

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
105
remaining layers employ only logical connections, meaning that the system on 
the left employs some form of packet structure or message that is to be ad­
dressed to and transferred to the opposite end of the link or network, as ap­
propriate. This logical connection is defined in the appropriate specification for 
the particular layer and does not have a direct correspondence with something 
physical in the system. If we assume that a user on the left wishes to access a 
Web server on the right, then the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http) is em­
ployed. The http connect message contains the uniform resource locator (URL) 
of this server and desired Web page. That would establish a logical connection; 
however, in doing so, the Application layer needs to engage the lower layers 
in sequence to eventually get to the Physical layer where the data is actually 
handed off to the network.
The majority of VSAT networks that are used to access the Internet or a 
private Intranet employ what can be called a protocol gateway or performance 
enhancing proxy (PEP). As shown in Figure 4.8, this device converts from the 
five layers of the IP stack in the originating system on the left into the satellite-
adapted protocol that is intended to improve performance. At the far end, the 
protocol gateway performs the opposite conversion to produce a standard struc­
ture for the distant computer to interpret.
Referring back to Table 4.4, we see examples of terrestrial protocols at 
each layer and the corresponding satellite protocol that could be employed. 
Physical, Link, and Network layers may be employed directly and would not be 
modified since they can be transferred from end to end on a packet-by-packet 
basis. However, the Transport layer involves a succession of packets that may be 
part of an end-to-end connection (the case with TCP but not UDP, the con­
netionless network layer protocol). The satellite examples include proprietary 
protocols, such as the Hughes IPoS, as well as two standards—Space Com­
munications Protocol Specifications (SCPS), which is part of the Consulta­
tive Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) set of standards for deep 
space communications, and Xpress Transport Protocol (XTP), a protocol that 
has been adopted for satellite links. Each of the primary suppliers of VSAT 
Figure 4.7  The five layer model for the Internet protocol family.

106 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
equipment has incorporated one or more of these protocols in order to provide 
for the aforementioned protocol gateway function, both in the remote VSAT 
and in the hub. If the satellite network is to provide secure VPN capabilities, it 
would be desirable to separate the protocol gateway from the VSAT and hub 
and to place it inside of the firewall on each end that establishes the VPN. This 
is because the protocol gateway must be able to read the TCP protocol headers, 
which become encrypted when passing through a VPN firewall.
This was a brief review of requirements related to data communication 
networks that may be served through the ground segment. The field is evolving 
daily, and we can only attempt to foresee basic trends and general approaches. 
Taking this approach, we now move into a discussion of the specific architec­
tures that are in use at the time of this writing. We can anticipate that new 
arrangements, including the use of onboard processing repeaters and ground-
based beamforming, will add functionality to data communication ground seg­
ments, which should increase their penetration into global telecommunication 
markets.
4.2.3  Star VSAT Networks
The strength of the VSAT star network, illustrated in Figure 4.9, lies in its 
ability to support low-cost VSATs with small antennas and low-power SSPA 
transmitters. The data communications services are centralized in topology to 
connect to server computers located at a company or organization headquar­
ters. This also affords connection to the global Internet or to a private network 
infrastructure. VSATs are placed at remote locations that need data, voice, and 
Figure 4.8  Illustration of how a protocol gateway translates between the standard Internet 
protocol stack and the specialized protocol stack used on the satellite link [7].

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
107
video services from the hub; there is, by design, little or no communication be­
tween and among remotes. Rather, the vast majority of traffic is between VSAT 
and hub, reflecting that the central location has the data (or requires the data) 
that the remote computers provide (or display/store).
Interface requirements for VSATs are satisfied by the functionality of the 
indoor unit and interface connections on the user side. Customer equipment 
like PCs, VoiP switch, video display, or an IP router within a LAN or WAN 
environment are typical attachments. Consequently, the VSAT port is designed 
to accommodate a range of potential connections and to provide the needed 
spoofing of TCP/IP. Within the indoor unit are the multiple access control­
ler and custom modem for the space link. These components form the basic 
link and physical layers and are proprietary to the manufacturer of the system. 
Operators must fully understand what protocols and applications need to be 
supported and that the VSAT network meets this need. Similarly, the hub must 
have appropriate protocol support for the host computer, which often is con­
nected to it with a terrestrial data line of some distance. Operation of the end-
to-end system is centralized to satisfy the demands of user applications and the 
layers of the protocol stack. 
The use of the space segment at Ku band is indicated by the link budget 
for typical forward and return links in Table 4.5. Hub characteristics include a 
6-m transmit/receive parabolic antenna, providing an EIRP of 72.5 dBW and 
a downlink G/T of 34.2 dB/K. The VSAT transmits with an EIRP of 49.0 
dBW, using a 5-watt SSPA connected to a 1.2-m antenna (the actual power at 
Figure 4.9  Data/voice/video network using a central hub earth station and remote VSAT ter­
minal.

108 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the antenna transmit port is 4.0 watts, after waveguide and coupling losses). 
The receive G/T of the VSAT is 20.2 dB/K, which is obtained from a low-cost 
80K LNB. Losses and gains are calculated in accordance with the procedure 
discussed in Chapter 2. The link budget indicates that thermal noise, transpon­
der intermodulation, and RF interference from adjacent satellites combine to 
produce an overall C/N of 12.5 dB in the forward and 9.5 dB in the return 
directions, which are both about 4.5 dB above threshold. This should provide 
Table 4.5 
Link Characteristics and Link Budget for a Typical Ku-band 
Hub-based VSAT Network
Forward
Return
Units
Uplink
14.0
14.0
GHz
Uplink antenna
6.0 
1.2 
meters
Antenna gain
57.0
43.0
dBi
Transmit power
15.5
6.0
dBW
Uplink EIRP
72.5
49.0
dBW
Path losses
207.0 
207.0 
dB
Spacecraft G/T
2.0 
2.0 
dB/K
C/Tup
–132.5
-156.0
dBW/K
K
–228.6 
–228.6 
dB/W/Hz
Bandwidth
28.5
1.25
MHz
In dB
74.5
61.0
dB(Hz)
C/Nup
21.6
11.7
dB
Downlink
12.0
12.0
GHz
Downlink EIRP
49.0
27.8
dBW
Path losses
205.8 
205.8 
dB
Downlink antenna
1.2 
6.0 
meters
Antenna gain
41.7
55.7 
dBi
System noise temp
141
141
K
Earth station G/T
20.2
34.2
dB/K
C/Tdn
–136.6
–143.8
dBW/K
Bandwidth
74.5
61.0
dB(Hz)
C/Ndn
17.6
23.9
dB
Combined Link
 
C/Nth
16.1
11.4
dB
C/IM
50
21.0
dB
C/I
15.0 
15.0 
dB
C/Ntot
12.5
9.5
dB
Threshold
8.0
5.0
dB
Margin
4.5
4.5
dB

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
109
adequate margin for rain fade in most temperate climates along with a system 
margin of 1 dB (not shown).
The forward and return in this example of a typical hub VSAT network 
are unbalanced because their respective data rates are 50 Mbps and 2 Mbps, 
respectively. In this link budget example, each return carrier occupies approxi­
mately 5% of transponder bandwidth, meaning that a transponder bandwidth 
of 28.5 MHz can support a total of 30 simultaneous return carriers. The per-
carrier EIRP of 27.8 dBW in the downlink (which would be in the direction of 
the hub earth station) results from a saturated EIRP of 49.0 dBW minus mul­
ticarrier backoff of 21.2 dB. Since the transponder is in the multicarrier mode, 
an allocation of carrier-to-intermodulation ratio (C/IM) of 21 dB is included 
in the calculation of total carrier to noise ratio (C/Ntot). The exact quantity of 
return carriers will depend on the amount of inbound data throughput to the 
hub (which would be more or less than the outbound data, depending on the 
application). Techniques for evaluating and specifying these components can 
be found in [3]. The link budget does not include a reserve of hub power for 
uplink power control, which may be used to compensate for uplink fade (which 
affects reception at all of theVSATs). Satellite capacity for this network would 
be reserved in a transponder that contains multiple carriers, e.g., single channel 
per carrier (SCPC) or, alternatively, a partial transponder.
4.2.4  Mesh VSAT Networks
Mesh topology achieves direct point-to-point connection between pairs of lo­
cations with minimum propagation delay and satellite capacity utilization (in 
terms of the number of links if not power). For many ground segments, the 
mesh topology is also attractive because of its flexibility for connecting arbitrary 
pairs of earth stations. The same arrangement may allow any single earth station 
to broadcast data to all others. The mesh has been implemented in past years 
using any of the available MA techniques. As discussed in Chapter 1, mesh net­
works involving large earth stations were in use since the 1970s and 1980s for 
demand-assigned telephone services. Telephone service imposes severe require­
ments on the design of the network in terms of call setup times, blocking of 
calls, bit rate, and service management. The transfer of international telephone 
traffic off of satellites to undersea fiber ended this role of mesh TDMA.
There are fundamentally three classes of connectivity requirements for 
mesh networks using VSATs. These are:
• Permanently assigned (dedicated bandwidth) links for constant bit rate 
(CBR) data transfer. This is analogous to a dedicated data line or digital 
private line using some multiple of 64 kbps, including T1 and E1 ser­
vices. Higher data rates from DS3 and OC3 are feasible but would put 

110 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the links out of the class of VSATs under discussion. An example of the 
latter type of application is to allow direct connection from a remote 
location to an Internet service provider (ISP) or cellular base station, in 
situations where terrestrial lines of appropriate bandwidth are either not 
available or too expensive.
• Demand-assigned (circuit switched) links between locations for CBR 
data transfer. Again, the link must not require greater EIRP and G/T 
from the VSATs than is feasible. A telephony type of VSAT can also offer 
connection-oriented data services.
• Dynamic allocation of bandwidth (packet switched), allowing variable 
bit rate (VBR) services on a mesh network basis. This is the same type of 
facility provided by hub VSAT networks, with the exception that trans­
missions can be received by any earth station. 
4.2.5  CDMA and Adaptive Carrier Cancellation
 The use of spreading codes to implement CDMA was introduced in Chapter 
2. In this section, we review additional ways that the spread spectrum technique 
can benefit some applications. The particular form of spread spectrum that 
is being applied in broadband GEO systems is direct sequence spread spec­
trum (DSSS) wherein the input data stream is multiplied by a higher data rate 
spreading code called the chip. The chip itself is a repeating pseudorandom 
sequence of bits, also called a pseudonoise (PN) sequence. Without going into 
the details of how these codes are selected and their relative merits, suffice it to 
say that the process of using DSSS is to expand the occupied bandwidth by the 
ratio of chip rate to input data rate (called the spreading factor), which likewise 
reduces the radiated power spectral density by applying the spreading factor as 
the divisor. As a numerical example, if the chip rate is four times the input data 
rate, then the occupied bandwidth of the resulting DSSS output signal is four 
times that of the unspread case; and the power spectral density of the spread 
carrier is one quarter (i.e., reduced by 6 dB). 
As discussed in Chapter 2, DSSS can result in CDMA where the capacity 
is approximately equal to the spreading factor, which is four in this example. 
That is, all things being equal, there can be a total of up to four individual 
DSSS signals occupying the same bandwidth at the same time. A receiver can 
select one of the signals by again multiplying the received signal by the original 
PN code, which of necessity must be synchronized in time. The latter process 
is called correlation detection and employs a timing lock technique to track the 
stream during reception. The other three carriers remain as noise in the receiver, 
degrading the C/N but still allowing proper detection of the desired signal. 

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
111
Adding more CDMA carriers on the same frequency further degrades C/N to 
the point that all links drop below threshold.
Putting CDMA aside, DSSS is still valuable as a technique to reduce the 
adjacent satellite interference from an uplink earth station. The Federal Com­
munications Commission (FCC) of the United States allows Ku-band VSATs 
to transmit at a level no greater than –50 dBW/Hz as applied to the uplink 
transmitting antenna (the actual language of the FCC rule states this as –14 
dBW/4kHz). Antennas larger than about 80 cm generally can satisfy this limit; 
however, apertures that are installed on vehicles and aircraft have physical re­
strictions that result in lower gain than one would obtain from a conventional 
fixed antenna. Table 4.6 presents how this rule influences the allowable trans­
mit power level in relation to the antenna size, indicating a spreading factor that 
would adequately compensate.
Based on the calculation in this table, reducing the antenna diameter by 
a factor of two will require going from an unspread carrier to one needing a 
spreading factor of four. This will cause the occupied bandwidth to likewise 
increase by a factor of four (which is needed to hold the PSD constant to the 
prescribed value of –50 dBW/m2). The problem is illustrated in Figure 4.10 for 
an antenna that must produce 49 dBW in the direction of the desired satellite. 
The RFI in the direction of the closest adjacent satellite at 2 degrees spacing re­
sults from the sidelobe of that antenna. Assuming a 1 MHz bandwidth (symbol 
rate), the associated power at the antenna input would be:
	
(
)
= -
+
=
6
10
50
10log
10
10
tP
dBW 	
Table 4.6
Estimate of Spreading Factor Needed to Maintain the FCC 
Prescribed PSD at Ku Band
Antenna
diameter, cm
Antenna 
gain at 14 
GHz, dBi
TX power 
at antenna 
flange, W
Required 
spreading 
factor
80
39.2
10.0
1
70
38.0
13.1
1.3
60
36.7
17.8
1.8
50
35.1
25.6
2.6
40
33.2
40.0
4.0
Assumptions
Bit rate
1
Mbps
EIRP
49.2
dBW
Limit
–50
dBW/Hz

112 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
According to the ITU sidelobe envelope, the gain of the antenna in that 
direction must be less than
	
(
)
(
)
° =
-
° =
10
2
29
25log
2
21.5
G
dBi 	
The total power applied to the uplink earth station antenna in this ex­
ample is 10W, or equivalently 10 dBW. The resulting potentially interfering 
EIRP in the direction of the adjacent (interfered-with) satellite is 
	
=
+
=
21.5
10
31.5
i
EIRP
dBW 	
Comparing this to the EIRP in the direction of the desired satellite, the 
estimated value of
	
=
-
=
49
31.5
17.5
C
dB
ASI
	
It can be interpreted from this that the FCC would allow a value of ad­
jacent satellite interference that is 17.5 dB below a desired carrier of the same 
power spectral density. Table 4.6 is consistent with this analysis and indicates 
how the use of spreading can still satisfy the FCC assumption about interfer­
ence in Ku band VSAT networks.
The technique of adaptive carrier cancellation was developed as a means 
to reduce bandwidth in duplex satellite transmission link. As illustrated in Fig­
ure 4.11, two uplink earth stations, A and B, transmit to the same satellite on 
the same frequency and in the same uplink beam. Their carriers overlap and 
would normally result in jammed signals as received at A and at B. Each station 
Figure 4.10  Illustration of the mechanism for generating uplink adjacent satellite interfer­
ence from a small antenna. The PSD shall be no greater than –14 dBW/4kHz, or equivalently 
–50 dBW/Hz.

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
113
has the normal complement of equipment: a satellite modem, RF uplink and 
downlink equipment, and a transmit/receive antenna (in this illustration, the 
equipment at station B is shown with transmit antenna section on the left and 
receive antenna section on the right). A specialized carrier cancellation unit is 
inserted in the IF between the modem and the uplink/downlink equipment, 
which samples some of the uplink carrier to ultimately cancel what is received 
of the B carrier on the downlink side. For this to be effective, the cancellation 
unit has to adjust for the time delay over the satellite path (nominally 260 ms 
but including variables such as orbital motion), frequency difference due to 
errors in local oscillators and due to Doppler, and distortion in the carrier due 
to nonlinearities in the earth station RF equipment and the satellite repeater. 
Variation in the carrier power level must also be tracked. This process is 
complex and requires a certain period of time to complete its adaptation of the 
sample to the actual received signal. By simply subtracting the adjusted sample 
in the adaptive cancellor on the right, what remains is the signal coming from 
station A. Some residual noise will remain due to errors in this process, raising 
the noise floor some measurable amount. The impact on the overall link will 
need to be assessed using a link budget or measurement to provide assurance 
that using adaptive carrier cancellation is of value. Adaptive carrier cancellation, 
referred to as carrier in carrier (CinC), is made available by COMTECH EF 
Data on their CDM 625 series of SCPC modems. It is offered by ViaSat as well 
in a technique called Paired Carrier Multiple Access (PCMA), discussed below 
[9].
Figure 4.11  Illustration of the principle of adaptive carrier cancellation. Carriers from A and 
B are on the same frequency.

114 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Multiple access with CDMA was introduced by ViaSat in their ArcLight 
VSAT product line. This is an interesting application of two special techniques: 
a variant of CDMA which ViaSat calls Code Reuse Multiple Access (CRMA) 
along with adaptive carrier cancellation. The CDMA approach is for the return 
transmissions from remote locations, typically on various types of mobile plat­
forms. Therefore, some amount of spreading is desirable to reduce the PSD of 
the uplink and hence the potential for adjacent satellite interference. The return 
DSSS carriers all use the same spreading code, but they can be distinguished be­
cause they are transmitted randomly from one another and are unsynchronized 
and hence uncorrelated. Each can be despread by separate DSSS receivers. The 
second feature is that the forward carrier is canceled within the hub so that the 
return carriers can occupy its bandwidth within the same transponder. Figure 
4.12 illustrates how this compares with a conventional VSAT TDMA network.
4.2.6  Conclusions Concerning VSAT Networks
VSAT networks exploit the capability of high-powered Ku and Ka band satel­
lites, delivering broadband services to remote locations and mobile platforms. 
The star topology is the most popular as it simplifies the design and reduces 
the cost of the remote site. Mesh topology remains popular where connectiv­
ity between remote sites is essential, and hybrid solutions exist that blend star 
and mesh. We have focused on the overall networking aspect of using VSATs, 
emphasizing the role of the Internet Protocol and the TDMA access technique, 
supplemented with DSSS and CDMA in cases where adjacent satellite interfer­
ence is of concern. The actual hardware needed to implement these systems will 
be covered in subsequent chapters. Not mentioned but nevertheless vital is the 
software that resides at every point in a VSAT network. This software addresses 
all layers of the protocol stack and as a result the companies that produce VSAT 
equipment are very experienced at meeting network demands and addressing 
the unique aspects of the satellite communications environment.
Figure 4.12  Comparison of conventional VSAT Star TDMA network with how ViaSat Arclight 
combines CDMA with adaptive carrier cancellation. (Courtesy of ViaSat Inc.)

 
Two-Way Communications Service Requirements 
115
References
[1]	 Avaya, I. P., Telephone Deployment Guide 555-245-600, February 2010, http://downloads.
avaya.com/css/p8/documents/100016254.
[2]	 ITU-TIP.800, “Methods for Subjective Evaluation of Transmission Quality,” ITU-T Rec­
ommendation, p. 800, (08/96).
[3]	 Elbert, Bruce R., The Satellite Communication Applications Handbook, 2nd ed., Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 2004.
[4]	 ITU-T, P862 (02/2001), “Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ),” ITU-T Rec­
ommendation, p. 862, 2001.
[5]	 Schwartz, Mischa, Telecommunications Networks: Protocols, Modeling and Analysis, Read­
ing, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987. 
[6]	 Erlang, A. K., “The Theory of Probabilities and Telephone Conversations,” Nyt Tidsskrift 
for Matematik B, Vol. 20, 1909.
[7]	 Boucher, James R., Voice Teletraffic Systems Engineering, Dedham, MA: Artech House, 
1988, p. 46.
[8]	 Palter, D. C., Satellites and the Internet—Challenges and Solutions, Sonoma, CA: SatNews 
Publishers, 2003.
[9]	 ViaSat Inc., “PCMA-Paired Carrier Multiple Access (Bandwidth Optimizer),” 2013, 
www.viasat.com. 


117
5
One-Way (Broadcast) Service 
Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio
The point-to-multipoint property of GEO satellites is vital to the entertainment 
industry and direct-to-home (DTH) TV broadcasting is dominant worldwide. 
By broadcasting the same signal across a wide area, a GEO satellite provides an 
excellent distribution point for an entire nation or region; spot beams also offer 
local coverage as well. This has made television services like CNN International, 
the BBC World Service, Al Jazeera, NHK, HBO, and CCTV into widely recog­
nized brands for news and entertainment. Such a use is perhaps the most viable 
killer app for satellites and will likely remain prominent for decades to come. 
From a ground segment standpoint, these broadcast-like applications use 
the point-to-multipoint capability of GEO satellites and thus rely on a central­
ized uplink facility to originate much of the programming. The typical broad­
cast center has the capability to both originate programming from recorded 
media and live studios and relay material that is acquired over inbound ter­
restrial or satellite links. Since we rely heavily on digital compression and ser­
vice multiplexing, the broadcast center is a facility that compresses, modulates, 
and uplinks multiple video, audio, and data channels for distribution over the 
coverage area. The user terminals are consumer items that can be purchased 
for a few hundred dollars (often given away to entice subscription) and can 
be operated via a convenient remote. Some video services are broadcast in the 
clear (free to air), while others are tightly controlled through encryption and 
conditional access (CA).
Other information forms are distributed by satellite, and we anticipate 
that these will also rise in importance, although possibly not to the same busi­
ness level as video. Included are data broadcasting, used to distribute character-
based information, images, and other file types to vehicles and fixed locations, 

118 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
and audio broadcasting. For the mobile implementations of these services, it 
would not be necessary to employ GEO satellites, as some systems use a highly 
elliptical orbit (HEO) similar to that used within the Molnya system of Russia. 
Equipment for the reception of mobile broadcasts is included with normal car 
radios or attached like a car stereo. The following sections review the require­
ments for these services as rendered by satellites.
5.1  Digital Video Broadcasting and Backhaul
The ability of a satellite to serve a particular TV market is determined by the 
coverage area footprint. Thus, the Galaxy satellites are optimized to serve the 
United States, while Astra satellites cover Europe and ArabSat satellites cover 
the Middle East and North Africa. The TV signals themselves must be con­
sistent with the technical standards and content characteristics of the region 
served, aiming for one or more particular user segments. 
Satellite distribution of entertainment TV covers three application ar­
eas: distribution broadcasting (i.e., reaching viewers via VHF and UHF chan­
nels), cable TV (CATV), and direct-to-home (DTH) digital broadcasting. In 
actuality, a given broadcast uplink services only one of these classes because 
of the targeted nature of the programming and the transmission format (ana­
log or digital) and satellite characteristics. The satellite characteristics that have 
been selected for each of the three application areas have fallen into two basic 
categories:
• Broadcast distribution and CATV: C and Ku-band satellites operating 
in the fixed satellite service (FSS) that transmit nominal EIRP levels of 
37 and 44 dBW, respectively, employing 36 MHz transponders. The 
ITU awards orbit positions through the “first come, first served” ap­
proach that gives incumbent satellite operators the advantage of having 
the preferred orbit locations to serve the most attractive broadcast and 
CATV markets. FSS satellites employ linear polarization with a few ex­
ceptions that employ circular polarization.
• DTH: Ku-band satellites operating in the broadcasting satellite service 
(BSS) that transmit at high EIRP levels in the range of 50 to 55 dBW, 
employing 23- to 27-MHz transponders. The orbit locations are speci­
fied in ITU plans that provide for at least one location per country on 
an a priori basis. However, there are a number of DTH satellites that 
use the FSS allocations and are coordinated through the first come, first 
served process. BSS satellites normally employ circular polarization to 
simplify dish installation, while FSS satellites generally employ linear 
polarization. At frequencies above 10 GHz, linear polarization expe­

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
119
riences less depolarization in heavy rain and often reduces the cost of 
transmit/receive antenna feed design in FSS applications.
As a result of these characteristics, receiving earth stations in broadcast 
distribution and CATV are generally larger than their counterparts in DTH. 
From the antenna and LNB, signals are carried over coaxial cable in a com­
mon bandwidth in the 950- to 2150-MHz range, and applied to an integrated 
receiver decoder (IRD). Broadcast distribution and CATV IRDs are provided 
with special features for these applications and the actual cable plant delivers 
signals to set-to-boxes in viewers’ homes. The DTH IRDs are intended for use 
in homes by viewers and perform the set-top-box function as well.
The digital TV signal contains three components: video, audio (typically 
stereo), and data. The MPEG compression format is the most popular for dis­
tribution, CATV and DTH, allowing the service provider to tailor the service 
to the business model and technical objectives. Within the studio environment, 
formats may differ and generally are designed to introduce the least distortion 
and allow for editing of content as well as storage for future playout.
The Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) distribution standard made digi­
tal DTH a global reality and powerhouse. We review the current implementa­
tion of DVB-S2 in this chapter, and the extensions to it in Chapter 6. During 
the preparation of the product, the general view is that no impairment should 
be introduced and the highest data rate possible should be used. Distribution 
of the signal to the consumer occurs with the lowest data rate that is consistent 
with an adequate perceived quality using an MPEG video compression stan­
dard (discussed next).
Broadcast distribution includes various forms of entertainment trans- 
mitted at VHF and UHF to home television receivers. Once carried out as a 
local service, network broadcasting is now a national or international medium. 
The uplinks to transmit programming may be right at the originating studio 
or could be connected to it through a long-haul fiber or satellite backhaul link 
(this is often required for multiregional broadcasts). Businesses also exploit the 
live-action nature of television through private broadcasting and two-way inter­
active video teleconferencing. In the case of the latter, the medium provides the 
means to engage in an enhanced form of interpersonal communication where 
the content is created in real time.
Cable and some DTH TV packages are intended to be subscription ser­
vices (meaning that the viewer pays), and use conditional access to perform 
functions such as:
• Allowing certain types of set-top boxes with appropriate smart card or 
other device technology to reduce the possibility of piracy;

120 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Providing program content with an effective system of scrambling to 
enable a single receiver to receive different services;
• Defining a standard interface specification for other devices such as digi­
tal receivers and PCs;
• Providing facilities for tracking down pirates;
• Arranging for licensing of the technology to manufacturers and provid­
ing an associated code of conduct for them to follow;
• Potentially allowing for the transfer of control at interfaces, such as be­
tween the satellite network and local cable TV system;
• Allowing for receiver mobility for when the owner wishes to relocate or 
install the receiver on or in a vehicle of some type.
Program distribution systems throughout the industry employ all or some 
of the architecture shown in Figure 5.1. There are many options as to how the 
central architecture can be implemented, but the most economical approach is 
to combine these elements into a single broadcast center. This is unique to the 
satellite industry, where one organization can create, distribute, and sell a prod­
uct from one location. For extremely large operations in DTH, for example, 
it could be prudent to achieve redundancy with an alternate broadcast site. 
Network broadcasters like CBS, Fox, and DIRECTV exploit the benefits of 
Figure 5.1  Combined satellite TV network, used to acquire real-time programming and dis­
tribute to TV stations, cable TV systems, and DTH receivers.

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
121
this arrangement. The functions of the broadcast center depend on the specific 
application but include all or most of the following:
• Program origination in a studio;
• Display of prerecorded material, maintained in storage media;
• Program delivery by terrestrial links from remote studios and other ven­
ues such as a football stadium;
• Program delivery by satellite backhaul links from syndication sources 
and other video channels (e.g., cable TV networks);
• Reception of material using electronic news gathering (terrestrial mi­
crowave);
• Reception of material using Ku-band satellite news gathering (SNG);
• Editing of these various inputs into the actual program to be broadcast;
• Relay of programming captured from satellite links;
• Transmission from the studio to a satellite uplink (either C or Kuband);
• Transmission from the studio to a local broadcast transmitter site (for 
local broadcasting, if appropriate);
• Control and switching of input and output video and audio signals, to 
prepare program material for recording and distribution.
5.1.1  MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 and High Efficiency Video Coding Compression
Digital compression by way of the MPEG series of standards plays an impor­
tant role in modern video and audio transmission. Its principal benefits are as 
follows:
• Reduced transmission bandwidth, saving space segment costs and re­
ducing the amount of power needed to transmit an acceptable signal.
• More channels available per satellite, greatly increasing the variety of 
programming available at a given orbit position. This promotes new ser­
vices and makes it feasible to expand a programming service through tai­
loring (e.g., packaging several different feeds of the same material with 
different advertising or localized content) and multiplexing (i.e., sending 
the same channel at several different times).
• Common format, used for satellite DTH, cable TV, and terrestrial 
broadcasting, based either on the U.S. DTV standard or the European 
DVB standard. This also provides a base for HDTV in the digital mode, 
because the number of bits per second of a compressed HDTV signal is 

122 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
less than what was previously required for a broadcast-quality conven­
tional TV signal.
• Ability to provide a full suite of HDTV channels with a transponder 
and support adoption of ultrahigh definition (UHD), also called 4k 
video services.
Table 5.1 gives an indication of the relationship between bit rate and 
application in commercial broadcasting. Perfect video reproduction of analog 
TV signal is achieved with rates of 90 Mbps or greater. Typical viewers cannot 
usually tell that anything is impaired when the signal is compressed to a rate of 
10 Mbps. Below this value, it becomes subjective. For movies, a rate as low as 
800 kbps is sufficient. However, for any live-action sports, at least 2 Mbps will 
be needed. HDTV services at 2k resolution typically require four times the data 
rate as for the SD case described earlier.
Compression systems that operate at an output rate of 45 Mbps or greater 
are designed to transfer the signal without permanent reduction of resolution 
and motion quality. They are said to be lossless in that the output of the decoder 
is identical to the input to the encoder. In contrast, operation below about 10 
Mbps is lossy in that it introduces a change in the video information that can­
not be recovered at the receiving end. Lossy compression can produce a picture 
of excellent quality from the viewers point of view at data rates above about 2 
Mbps. Application of lossy transmission with reduced picture quality may be 
attractive, since it can reduce transmission costs (or allow the user to employ an 
existing communications system such as a VSAT network).
Transform coding of MPEG2 is the most popular technique for reducing 
the number of bits required to represent a digital image. The basic idea is to 
replace the actual image data with a mathematically derived set of parameters 
that can uniquely specify the original information. The parameters, which are 
the coefficients of a mathematical transform of the data, require less transmitted 
bits to be stored or sent than the original image data itself, because they can be 
compressed further. The mathematical formulation of the discrete cosine trans­
forms (DCT) in both the forward and inverse directions is as follows:
For the forward transform used to encode the video waveform:
Table 5.1
Typical Data Rate Requirements for Production and 
Distribution of Network TV Signals
Purpose
Data Rate, Mbps
Program production
250 (nominal, using CCIR 601)
Backhaul transmission
5–10
MPEG-2 delivery
SD–2.5 Mbps, HD–5 Mbps

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
123
	
(
)
( ) ( )
(
)
(
)
(
) π
π
-
-
=
=
+
+
=
∑∑
1
1
2
1
0
2
1
4
2
1
,
,
cos
cos
2
2
N
N
i
j
j
v
c u c v
i
u
F u v
f i j
N
N
N
	
and for the inverse transform to decode the waveform:
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) π
π
-
-
=
=
+
+
= ∑∑
1
1
1
0
2
1
2
1
,
,
cos
cos
2
2
N
N
i
j
j
v
i
u
f i j
f i j
N
N
	
where
	
( ) =
=
=
-

1 52 for
0,
1 for
1,2,
,
1
c w
w
w
N
	
This discussion relates to the compression of an image; substantially 
more bandwidth reduction for video is provided by frame-to-frame compres­
sion, which is also referred to as temporal compression. As is well known, this 
amounts to only occasionally transmitting the full image and then only trans­
mitting changes in the image as time progresses. Periodic full images are trans­
mitted, especially when a scene changes, and interpolation techniques are used 
to fill in the detail.
The DCT algorithm has provided the base to bring DTH into being 
and establish it as the global standard. Moving forward, the MPEG-4 standard 
has added to it compression innovations that provide for greater efficiency and 
better delivery of HDTV. The video coding algorithm used for frame-based 
video is based on proven technology from previous standards (e.g., block-based 
motion compensation, DCT), including tools for functionalities such as scal­
ability and error resilience are specified as well. MPEG-4 defines encoding of 
video objects, which in this case have rectangular shape [2]. Several objects can 
be combined in a scene (e.g., for picture-in-picture overlays). New compres­
sion tools are defined to improve the compression efficiency over the previous 
standards of MPEG-1 and MPEG-2, and to support high compression perfor­
mance for all addressed bit rates. This includes the compact coding of textures 
with a quality adjustable between “acceptable” for very high compression ratios 
up to “near lossless.” The basic compression algorithm is hybrid coding (com­
bination of motion-compensated prediction and scalar-quantized DCT coef­
ficient coding). Two compression techniques that have cut transmission rate in 
half are fractals and wavelets.
The Motion Picture Experts Group, also affiliated with ITU-T and ISO, 
has provided the MPEG series of standards for motion pictures and video, with 
the following desirable features:

124 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• MPEG supports a wide variety of picture formats with a very flexible 
encoding and transmission structure.
• It allows the video service to use a range of data rates to handle multiple 
video channels on the same transmission stream and to allow this mul­
tiplexing to be adaptive to the source content (e.g., statistical multiplex­
ing).
• Algorithms can be implemented in hardware to minimize coding and 
decoding delay.
• Developers can include encryption and decryption to comply with con­
tent restrictions and the needs for business integrity.
• Provision can be made for an effective system of error protection to al­
low operation on a variety of transmission media such as satellite and 
local microwave links. (An excellent example is the DVB standard, dis­
cussed at the end of this chapter.)
• The compression is adaptable to various storage and transport methods, 
allowing content to be accessed by conventional TV receivers and home 
PCs. 
• Transcoding will permit conversion between compression formats, since 
MPEG is widely popular.
• MPEG-processed videos can be edited by systems that support the stan­
dard.
• The standard will most probably have a long lifetime, since it can adapt 
to improvements in compression algorithms, VLSI technology, motion 
compensation, and the like. MPEG-4 is the latest implementation and 
is discussed later in this section.
High efficiency video coding (HEVC) will double the capacity relative to 
MPEG 4 (and quadruple the capacity relative to MPEG 2). This is directly ben­
eficial because it reduces transponder costs and facilitates advanced features, in­
cluding UHD as it becomes a factor in broadcasting. However, it is unlikely to 
result in wholesale replacement of MPEG 2/4 systems that are already in place.
Because delivery systems and applications differ widely, MPEG-2 pro­
vides a variety of formats and services within the syntax and structure, called 
profiles and levels [1]. A profile is a subset of the MPEG bit stream that sup­
ports different classes of applications. A higher profile means more complexity 
in terms of the compression algorithm. A level defines a set of constraints on 
parameters in the bit stream profile. The higher the level, the greater the need 
for hardware/software processing speed. The profiles and levels are defined in 
Tables 5.2 and 5.3, respectively. Table 5.2 begins at the lowest profile, called 

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
125
SIMPLE, which corresponds to the minimum set of capabilities. Going down 
the table adds functionality at the expense of increasing complexity.
The tools and formats of MPEG-2 allow as many as 20 different combi­
nations, which the standard calls convergence points. As with any such stan­
dard, not every combination is either useful or viable. The MAIN profile is the 
baseline for MPEG-2 applications and has been implemented in a number of 
DTH systems. As suggested in Table 5.2, this profile does not include scalabil­
ity tools and therefore is a point of downward compatibility from the higher 
levels that provide scalability.
The basic facilities of the lower layers of the MPEG protocol blend with 
the upper layers provided by DVB or a proprietary alternative such as that used 
by DIRECTV in the United States. The scheme for representing this is shown 
in Figure 5.2. Another dimension of MPEG-2 allows greater bit rate and facili­
ties for a range of qualities from low definition to HDTV. There is an obvious 
impact on the bit rate and bandwidth. These features are reviewed in Table 5.3, 
which delineates layers between those defined by MPEG2 and those associated 
with satellite transmission. Our discussion of DVB-S2 will elucidate the latter.
These levels are associated with the format of the originating source video 
signal and provide a variety of potential qualities for the application. It rang­
es from limited definition and the associated low data rate all the way up to 
HDTV and further enhancements. Another feature of the standard is that it 
permits the older TV aspect ratio of 4:3, as well as the more appealing flatscreen 
or HDTV aspect ratio of 16:9. 
Table 5.2
Profiles and the Associated Algorithms for the MPEG-2 Standard
Profile
Algorithms
SIMPLE
Provides the fewest tools but supports the 4:2:0 YUV representation of the 
video signal.
MAIN
Starts with SIMPLE and adds bidirectional prediction to give better quality for 
the same bit rate. It is backward compatible with SIMPLE as well.
SPATIAL Scalable
This and the profile that follows include tools to add signal quality 
enhancements. By “spatial” it is meant that the added signal complexity allows 
the receiver to improve resolution for the same bit rate. There would be an 
impact on the receiver in terms of complexity and hence cost. It can also be 
a means to add HDTV service on top of conventional resolution (i.e., only the 
appropriately designed receivers can interpret and display the added HDTV 
information).
SNR Scalable
The added signal information and receiver complexity improve viewable single-
to-noise ratio (S/N). It provides graceful degradation of the video quality when 
the error rate increases.
HIGH
This includes the previous profiles plus the ability to code line-simultaneous 
color-difference signals. It is intended for applications where quality is of the 
utmost importance and where there is no constraint on bit rate (such as within 
a studio or over a dedicated fiber-optic link).

126 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The other important element of MPEG-2 is the provision of stereo audio 
and data. The audio compression system employed in MPEG-2 is based on the 
European MUSICAM standard as modified by other algorithms. It is a lossy 
compression scheme that draws from techniques already within MPEG. Like 
adaptive differential PCM (ADPCM), it transmits only changes and throws 
away data that the human ear cannot hear. This information is processed and 
time division multiplexed with the encoded video to produce a combined bit 
stream that complies with the standard syntax. This is important because it 
allows receivers designed and made by different manufacturers to be able to 
properly segment the information. However, what the receiver actually does 
with the information depends on the features of the particular unit.
Figure 5.2  Structure of MPEG-2, indicating its protocol stack and support for satellite and 
terrestrial broadcasting networks (reference: http://www-it.et.tudelftnl).
Table 5.3
Levels and Associated Parameters for the MPEG-2 Standard
Level
Samples/
Line
Lines/
Frame
Frames/s
Mbps
BW (MHz)
HIGH
1920
1152
60
80
40
HIGH 1440
1440
1152
60
60
30
MAIN
 720
 576
30
15
 7.5
LOW
 352
 288
30
 4
 2.0
The bandwidth [BW] indicated in the last column is based on direct QPSK modulation of the bit 
stream and does not include forward error correction coding.

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
127
5.1.2  Digital Video Broadcasting-Satellite (DVB-S) and DVB-S2 Standards
DVB is an outgrowth of work done in Europe by the European Broadcast­
ing Union (EBU) and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(ETSI). With an overall philosophy of creating a general technical solution for 
applications in digital broadcasting, CATV, and DTH, DVB has achieved its 
goals and is the global standard. Importantly, the first generation of the DVB-
Satellite (DVB-S) specification was adopted everywhere where digital DTH 
was introduced, including in the United States, and the bulk of hardware and 
service still operates in this manner.
The DVB-S system is based on QPSK modulation and convolutional 
forward error correction (FEC), concatenated with Reed-Solomon coding. 
Since then, DVB-S links also started to be used for point-to-point transmission 
of television programs, to convey directly to the broadcaster’s premises audio/
video material originated in the studios (TV contribution) and/or from remote 
locations by outside satellite news gathering (SNG) vans. In 1998, DVB added 
DVB-digital SNG (DSNG), extending the functionalities of DVB-S to include 
8PSK and 16QAM for enhanced SNG services.
The success of DVB-S provided impetus to move ahead with investiga­
tions of FEC with reduced C/N. This along with demand for larger capacity 
and innovative services by satellite led the DVB Forum in 2003 to define the 
second-generation system for satellite broadband services, named DVB-S2. Ac­
cording to the DVB Forum, the principal benefits of DVB-S2 are:
• There are four modulation modes available, with QPSK and 8PSK 
intended for broadcast applications in nonlinear satellite transponders 
driven close to saturation. 16APSK and 32APSK, requiring a higher 
level of C/N, are mainly targeted at professional applications such as 
news gathering and interactive services.
• DVB-S2 uses a very powerful FEC, a key factor in allowing the achieve­
ment of excellent performance in the presence of high levels of noise and 
interference. The FEC system is based on concatenation of two block 
codes rather than the block code and convoluitonal code in DVB-S. The 
selected block codes are: BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) outer 
coding and low-density parity check (LDPC) inner coding.
• Adaptive coding and modulation (ACM) allows the transmission pa­
rameters to be changed on a frame-by-frame basis depending on the 
particular conditions of the delivery path for each individual user. It 
is mainly targeted at unicasting interactive services and point-to-point 
professional applications.

128 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• DVB-S2 offers optional backward-compatible modes that use hierarchi­
cal modulation to allow legacy DVB-S receivers to continue to operate 
while providing additional capacity and services to newer receivers.
The basic transmission structure of DVB-S2 is shown in Figure 5.3 where 
the input on the left includes the multiplexed input data stream along with 
commands for ACM. The latter is only included when ACM is provided in the 
implementation and needed to modify the modulation and coding (MOD­
COD) on a frame-by-frame basis. Other elements are included to modify this 
baseband stream before application to the BCH-LDPC FEC encoder. Modula­
tion is applied in two steps—first the serial stream is mapped into the multilevel 
structure that can be modulated according to the various techniques available 
in the standard. The modulation process itself occurs after roll-off filtering is 
applied in the last box on the right.
The DVB-S2 architecture addresses a number of known applications:
• Distribution (broadcast) of standard definition and high-definition TV 
(SDTV and HDTV);
• Interactive services, including Internet access, for consumer applications 
(for integrated receivers–decoders (IRDs) and personal computers);
• Professional applications, such as digital TV contribution (backhaul) 
and news gathering;
• Data content distribution and Internet backhaul;
• Outbound carrier applications in VSAT star and mesh networks.
The improved FEC (relative to DVB-S), together with more modula­
tion options with greater bandwidth efficiency, is the key subsystem meeting 
Figure 5.3  Functional block diagrams of the DVB-S2 transmission system [3]. Shaded ele­
ments are mandatory.

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
129
service demands in the presence of elevated thermal noise and interference. The 
DVB-S2 FEC selection process compared seven proposals for parallel or seri­
ally concatenated convolutional codes, product codes, LDPC codes—all using 
recursive decoding techniques. LDPC code was chosen because it delivers the 
minimum distance from the Shannon limit.
By way of background, LDPC codes were first reported in 1960 by R. G. 
Gallager, an electrical engineering professor at USC, but implementation had 
to wait for computing power and memory to catch up. LDPC codes are linear 
block codes characterized by sparse parity check matrices, where each block of k 
information bits are coded to a code word of size n, and where n is greater than 
k. Like the Reed-Solomon block code that is used in DVB-S, the LDPC code 
is specified in the form (n, k).
Code rates and block sizes for the DVB-S2 standard are given in Table 
5.4 [4]. The total BCH-LDPC block length is 64,800 bits for most broadcast­
ing applications that are insensitive to delay; in two-way applications where 
delay is critical, the block size can be reduced to 16,200 bits. Nominal code 
rates of 1/4, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 8/9, and 9/10 are available 
depending on the selected signal constellation and the system application. The 
actual code rate would include the contribution of the BCH outer code. DVB-
S2 includes 1/4, 1/3, and 2/5 FEC code rates in conjunction with QPSK to 
allow operation at C/N below 0 dB. When employing 8PSK, 16APSK, and 
32APSKL, FEC-coded bits are interleaved onto the same transmission signal. 
To assure clear video under expected conditions, error rate requirements for 
DVB-S2 are very stringent: the MPEG TS packet error rate (PER) is less than 
Table 5.4 
DVB-S2 Coding Parameters*
LDPC 
code
BCH 
Uncoded 
Block Kbch
BCH coded block 
Nbch LDPC Uncoded 
Block Kidpc
BCH 
t-error 
correction
LDPC Coded 
Block nidpc
1/4
16 008
16 200
12
64 800
1/3
21 408
21 600
12
64 800
2/5
25 728
25 920
12
64 800
1/2
32 208 
32 400
12
64 800
3/5
38 688
38 800
12
64 800
2/3
43 040
43 200
10
64 800
3/4
48 408
48 600
12
64 800
4/5
51 648
51 840
12
64 800
5/6
53 840
54 000
10
64 800
8/9
57 472
57 600
8
64 800
9/10
58 192
58 320
8
64 800
*For normal output frame equals 64,800 bits.

130 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
one erroneous packet per hour for a service bit rate of 5 Mbps. For the 188-
byte MPEG packet, this translates into a bit error rate (BER) of less than 10–9. 
Broadcast links are normally operated with significant margin to allow for rain 
attenuation and other variables, which means that nominal BER substantially 
lower than this threshold.
The combined performance of the DVB-S2 standard for the various 
combinations of code and modulation is presented in Table 5.5. Note that the 
Table 5.5
DVB-S2 Modulation and Coding Characteristics*
MOD
COD
R (total)
BW eff, ηtot
Es/No, dB
Eb/No, dB
QPSK
1/4
0.2451
0.490243
–2.35
0.745886
QPSK
1/3
0.3282
0.656448
–1.24
0.587997
QPSK
2/5
0.3947
0.789412
–0.30
0.726963
QPSK
1/2
0.4944
0.988858
1.00
1.048661
QPSK
3/5
0.5942
1.188304
2.23
1.480724
QPSK
2/3
0.6611
1.322253
3.10
1.886854
QPSK
3/4
0.7437
1.487473
4.03
2.305509
QPSK
4/5
0.7936
1.587196
4.68
2.673694
QPSK
5/6
0.8273
1.654663
5.18
2.992904
QPSK
8/9
0.8832
1.766451
6.20
3.728984
QPSK
9/10
0.8943
1.788612
6.42
3.894839
8PSK
3/5
0.5933
1.779991
5.50
2.995822
8PSK
2/3
0.6602
1.980636
6.62
3.651953
8PSK
3/4
0.7427
2.228124
7.91
4.430606
8PSK
5/6
0.8262
2.478562
9.35
5.408002
8PSK
8/9
0.8820
2.646012
10.69
6.464082
8PSK
9/10
0.8931
2.679207
10.98
6.699937
16APSK 2/3
0.6593
2.637201
8.97
4.758568
16APSK 3/4
0.7417
2.966728
10.21
5.487223
16APSK 4/5
0.7914
3.165623
11.03
6.025408
16APSK 5/6
0.8250
3.300184
11.61
6.424618
16APSK 8/9
0.8808
3.523143
12.89
7.420697
16APSK 9/10
0.8918
3.567342
13.13
7.606553
32APSK 3/4
0.7407
3.703295
12.73
7.044117
32APSK 4/5
0.7903
3.951571
13.64
7.672302
32APSK 5/6
0.8239
4.119540
14.28
8.131513
32APSK 8/9
0.8796
4.397854
15.69
9.257592
32APSK 9/10
0.8906
4.453027
16.05
9.563447
* Ideal Es/N0 (dB) for FEC normal frame length = 64,800 bits.
Note: Given the system spectral efficiency the ratio between the energy per 
information bit and single-sided noise power spectral density Eb/N0 = Es/N0 
– 10 log10(htot). Es/N0 performance at Quasi Error Free PER = 10-7 (AWGN 
channel).

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
131
COD column specifies a nominal code rate while the R (total) column indi­
cates the actual code rate, including the combination of BCH and LDPC. Four 
modulation modes can be selected for the transmitted payload: QPSK, 8PSK, 
16APSK, and 32APSK. By selecting the modulation constellation and code 
rates (MODCOD), spectrum efficiencies from 0.5 to 4.5 bits per symbol are 
available and can be chosen dependent on the capabilities of the link budget.
Further enhancement of the DVB standard is available in the form of 
DVB-S2 extensions (DVB-Sx). These extensions further subdivide the range of 
MODCOD to allow better optimization of bandwidth and power utilization 
along with the addition of 64APSK to provide a signal constellation with 6 bits 
per symbol. DVB-Sx is reviewed in Chapter 6.
An important innovation of DVB-S2 is to address the desire of many 
users for greater bandwidth efficiency. This is achieved using the 16APSK and 
32APSK constellations; these have been optimized for nonlinear transponders 
by placing the points on circles. Nevertheless, their performance in the AWGN 
channel is comparable with those of 16QAM or 32QAM, respectively. QPSK 
and 8PSK are intended for broadcast applications, since they are virtually con­
stant envelope modulations and can be used in nonlinear satellite transponders 
driven near saturation. The 16APSK and 32APSK modulations are useful for 
specialized functions like backhaul and data transfer, but they can also be used 
for broadcasting as well provided that the link can provide the required C/N. 
Also, the satellite transponder can be backed off into the quasi-linear region 
or, alternatively, predistortion methods may be added in the uplink station to 
minimize the effect of transponder nonlinearity. Square-root raised cosine base­
band filtering and quadrature modulation are then applied to shape the signal 
spectrum and to generate the RF signal. There are three permitted values for the 
roll-off factor: 0.35 as in DVB-S, plus 0.25 and 0.20 for tighter bandwidth re­
Table 5.6 
Comparison between DVB-S and DVB-S2 for SDTV
and HDTV Broadcasting
Satellite EIRP (dBW)
53.7
System
DVB-S
DVB-S2
Transmission mode
QPSK 7/8
8PSK 2/3
Symbol-rate (Mbaud)
27.5 (a = 0.35)
29.7 (a = 0.25)
C/N (in 27.5 MHz)(dB)
7.8
7.8
Useful bit-rate (Mbit/s)
44.4
58.8 (gain=32%)
Number of SDTV 
programmes 
10 MPEG-2
20 MPEG-4
13 MPEG-2
26 MPEG-4
Number of HDTV 
programmes
2 MPEG-2
5 MPEG-4
3 MPEG-2
6 MPEG-4
From: [3].

132 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
strictions. Smaller roll-off factor is available in some proprietary products based 
on DVB-S2.
The authors of [3] offer a comparison of how the same transponder and 
RF link would support either DVB-S or DVB-S2. As shown in Table 5.5, there 
is a clear advantage in terms of capacity when using DVB-S2. This is a con­
servative estimate as it is relatively easy to obtain more than the 32% gain this 
example shows.
5.2  Data Broadcasting and Content Distribution Networks
Data broadcasting is a relatively small but viable segment of the satellite indus­
try, addressing specific needs for delivery of a common information formats 
across a wide area. Principal among these is the content distribution network 
(CDN), used for narrow casting to retail locations, such as gas stations, super­
markets, and banks. These applications play to the strength of GEO satellites, 
particularly Ku band, since low-cost receive-only terminals may be deployed 
and connected to equally low-cost PCs, video displays, and other types of data 
devices. The DVB-S2 standard offers a very efficient platform for the CDN.
Traditional data broadcasting applications are usually paid for on a sub­
scription basis and fall into the following categories:
• Distribution of background music and advertising, which was originally 
accomplished on an analog basis but now can employ compressed digital 
audio and data. 
• Financial data (stock market ticker and commodity reports). This was 
originally an attractive application as it provided near instantaneous in­
formation to targeted audiences that could afford to pay for subscrip­
tion.
•  News wire services (e.g., Reuters and AP). These services are broadcast 
as sequential articles and other information, making satellite delivery 
nearly optimum.
• Data associated with DTH TV services. Examples include the online 
program guide, authorization for watching programming, and E-mail. 
Digital DTH systems are gearing up to offer the other types of data 
listed above as a means to increase their penetration and revenues. The 
fact that MPEG-2 and DVB are available widely is a factor in the success 
of this combination for bringing data broadcasting to wider markets.
• Internet access and Web page delivery over a high-speed broadcast link. 
As will be discussed, the DVB standard provides a satisfactory transport 

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
133
stream for IP broadcasting of content, overcoming limitations of ter­
restrial networks (e.g., the conventional Internet itself, with its plethora 
of routers).
A CDN employs the foundation of DVB-S2 and the Internet to create 
infrastructure for delivery of commercial and other content to a closed network 
of remote sites. The best way to understand what a CDN is and how it works 
is to consider the example in Figure 5.4; included are a content management 
operation, hub or teleport, and a remote retail location (with either a broadcast 
receive terminal or a VSAT capable of transmit and receive). The remote site 
is assumed to include a conventional local area network (LAN) with displays, 
PCs, and servers to store and display the content. There are many functions 
within this structure that make it very capable and easily managed from a cen­
tral location.
The core of this CDN is shown within the content management opera­
tion where the content is assembled and placed into storage for distribution 
over the broadcast satellite link. Content assembly can be as complex or as 
simple as desired. For example, the content could come from an existing feed 
from a source such as a cable TV channel in which case little if anything need 
be done to it. More likely, the content consists of a many individual elements 
of videos, images, text, and possible data from external sources (stock market 
prices, news wire services, weather broadcasts, etc.). In this example, all of these 
content types are employed and the Authoring and Scheduling activity at the 
Figure 5.4  An example of a content distribution network in retail service using a Ku-band 
GEO satellite.

134 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
lower left makes this happen. Consisting of producers, graphic designers, and 
software-based content assemblers, this function manipulates the multiplicity 
of content elements and loads the structured material into a server from which 
it can be broadcast. However, before that can happen, the Scheduling activity 
puts together a program schedule, called the Play List, from which the proper 
sequence of information is pushed out over the satellite and into the servers at 
the remote Retail locations. Part of this functionality can be provided at the 
Hub, which is directly connected to the teleport uplink. The breakdown of 
functions is up to the architect of the network and depends on the particular 
business model—whether the network is managed and operated by one orga­
nization or whether parts are outsourced to groups that can offer economy of 
scale and specialized content management expertise.
The arrangement at the retail location depends heavily on the purpose of 
the content and how it is to be presented or used. In Figure 5.4, the retail loca­
tion is a store that has video displays to be viewed by customers who walk in 
and wait in line. In addition, the LAN allows PCs and kiosks to allow customers 
and/or employees to interact with the data, such as to look up information or 
to use the display to make decisions on purchases. The activity at the remote 
site is monitored by one of the servers to collect data that might be useful for 
monitor and control locally and from the central site. A low-speed return In­
ternet connection is adequate for this function. If the site is provided with the 
full capability of a broadband VSAT, then the data can travel on the return link 
to the hub and other services such as voice and video teleconferencing can be 
included within this overall architecture.
The concept of the satellite-based CDN has been around since the late 
1990s but the majority of installations employ the terrestrial Internet at the 
time of this writing. However, by employing DVB-S2 as well as VSATs for 
forward and return transmissions, the CDN becomes a very powerful system 
for use in a wide range of environments. These include both commercial and 
government uses, especially when considering remote sites without adequate 
infrastructure and to mobile platforms such as ships and airplanes. 
Beyond the basic blocks of the DVB-S2 broadcast and the VSAT interac­
tive communication for the remote, the CDN depends on several elements that 
are both hardware- and software-based. The authoring software is available for 
use on terrestrial and satellite networks; likewise for the scheduling software. 
The satellite broadcast offers unique benefits with regard to simultaneous de­
livery of the same material, especially in video form. Its elements at the hub 
and remote are available off the shelf, allowing the critical infrastructure to be 
deployed rapidly and with low risk.

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
135
5.3  Receiving Dish Selection
The dish antennas for DTH are perhaps the least expensive element of the 
home installation, but only because they are less than 1m in diameter. This is 
the result of the high EIRP of the Ku-band satellites employed, as demonstrated 
by the link budgets in Tables 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3. That analysis assumed a down­
link EIRP of 52 dBW, which is in the high end of the range offered worldwide 
and the dish diameter of 45 cm is probably the smallest that a system engineer 
would consider. This is because of the contribution of downlink ASI due to 
less isolation in the direction of neighboring satellites (particularly at 2 degree 
spacing). Taking this as a point of departure, other values of EIRP and the cor­
responding dish sizes they impose are considered next.
Figure 5.5 presents the minimum dish size for this particular network, 
which employs the DVB-S2 standard with 8PSK and rate ¾ FEC to deliver 50 
Mbps of content in the temperate climate of Northern Europe. The data relies 
on the same link budget, varying only the EIRP over a range of 42 to 52 dBW 
and compensating for any reduction in C/N by increasing the dish diameter 
and hence its gain. Each point on the graph represents a design case with the 
line providing a means to interpolate between specific points. At an EIRP of 52 
dBW, the required dish size is slightly less than 45 cm; hence, the selection of 
45 cm as a baseline for this level of the satellite coverage. At lower EIRP levels, 
diameter must increase: the corresponding values at 50 and 48 dBW are 55 
and 70 cm, respectively. A dish diameter of one meter would be needed if the 
satellite EIRP is approximately 45 dBW. As the 45 cm dish is the worst case 
as to adjacent satellite interference, the larger dish diameters generally perform 
better. Also note the comment in the caption of Figure 5.5. Keep in mind that 
Figure 5.5  Example of sizing of receiving dish for DTH service at Ku band in a temperature 
climate (non-tropical region); dish size may need to increase by 20 to 50% where adjacent 
satellite interference is a deciding factor.

136 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
curves like this presume a link design and corresponding link budget—one can­
not use this graph as a general sizing tool. However, it is representative of the 
relationship between EIRP and dish diameter.
Satellite coverage is usually not constant and there are different levels of 
performance depending on location within the footprint. The designer of the 
ground segment must choose particular dish sizes that can be made available to 
the consuming audience. There would be three different strategies for selecting 
dish sizes across an integrated network where one entity is responsible for this 
decision:
1.	 Make all antennas the same size, which requires the largest dish ev­
erywhere (best economy of scale but least attractive in overall cost and 
installation aesthetics);
2.	 Select antennas for specific locations, which results in the widest range 
of dish sizes (poor economy of scale but perfect match to the need);
3.	 Use the smallest size over the largest area; in coverage areas with di­
minished EIRP (less than 48 dBW), allow degradation in heavy rain 
(unless unacceptable to users in the area).
Another approach is to specify a limited set of size operations and ob­
tain a balance between economy of scale, aesthetics, and performance. The il­
lustration of satellite coverage footprint in Figure 5.6 shows how contours of 
constant EIRP can be provided with the minimum dish size for the character­
istics assumed in Figure 5.5. The square point represents the peak of the beam 
where the satellite EIRP is maximum: somewhat more than 52 dBW but not 
53 dBW. The suggested dish size within this oval would be 45 cm, as given in 
the original link budgets for the downlink. As we move down the footprint to 
lower levels in EIRP, we see that dish diameter must exceed 45 cm to meet our 
objectives for signal quality and link availability. Thus, the points marked with 
the diamond and triangle could be adequately served by dishes of 55 and 70 
Figure 5.6  DTH antenna sizing alternatives (refer to Figure 5.5).

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
137
cm, respectively. Being inside of the respective contour means that there will 
be some extra downlink margin but the overall system margin would not be 
significantly higher than at the edge of the contour. Now, the point marked 
with a plus is outside the lowest contour and hence a 70-cm dish would not be 
adequate, at least as far as having adequate margin under all link conditions. In 
reality, the edge of the contour (the hexagon shape) does not produce a cliff in 
terms of performance, but we cannot be sure how far away from the edge the 
real cliff will occur. This strategy is perhaps the best and has generally been fol­
lowed in the DTH industry.
5.4  Digital Audio Radio Service by Satellite
First introduced in Africa in 1999 by Worldspace and the U.S. in 2001 by XM 
Satellite Radio, satellite digital audio radio service (S-DARS) is a satellite-deliv­
ered consumer service that provides the equivalent of multiple radio stations. 
Depending on the link budget, it can transport audio and other information in 
digital form to automobiles and other moving platforms. This is of potential in­
terest to developing areas like central Africa, where the terrestrial infrastructure 
is limited, and to developed countries that could afford subscription broadcast 
services to vehicles on the move. 
5.4.1  S-DARS Requirements
A satellite that provides S-DARS services would likely be of the area coverage 
variety, as illustrated for the initial XM Radio system in Figure 5.7. Operating 
at a downlink frequency of 2.333 GHz (e.g., S band), this satellite employs 
spectrum with reasonably good propagation characteristics for a mobile service. 
Figure 5.7  Coverage footprint of WorldSpace “XM Radio” DAR satellite at 115° west longi­
tude (filing before the FCC).

138 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Since there will be situations where the signal is blocked by obstacles like trees 
and buildings, commercial service demands a scheme for providing a continu­
ous flow of audio. This can be addressed in one of three ways.
• Prestore some quantity of data before starting to play. An internal buffer 
delivers a signal if the external signal is blocked, a principle also applied 
in CD players for automobiles.
• Provide two or more independent paths for the signal to reach the re­
ceiver (e.g., path diversity). Operating a pair of satellites that are suffi­
ciently apart in the orbit provides considerable benefit.
• Install terrestrial repeaters (e.g., gap fillers) that receive the signal either 
directly from the same satellite or via independent means and simply 
retransmit it locally. If this is on the same frequency, it will introduce 
multipath signals into mobile receivers, which must have provision for 
selecting or constructively combining them.
The most likely schemes to be applied are the second and third because 
they provide much greater assurance of reception (and can be combined with 
the first, in any case). A critical issue in the design of DAB systems is the avail­
able link margin to cover fading and shadowing. The amount will depend on 
the particular scheme used to maintain signal strength. In general, the more 
margin, the better; however, after a point, it becomes uneconomic to provide 
this excess power from the space segment. Research at the Jet Propulsion Labo­
ratory has uncovered some effective ways to operate in this type of fading en­
vironment [5]. 
5.4.2  Vehicular Terminal Concepts
There is a requirement for receivers to be well integrated into the vehicle elec­
tronic system. In particular, the manufacturers of vehicles and their radios need 
to understand and support this new technology. The alternative is to provide 
some kind of attachment that is more or less independent of the vehicle electri­
cal system. One measure of success for DAR-S has been the ability to become 
part of the vehicular electronic systems so that the audio and data can flow ef­
ficiently and be provided to users in a friendly and welcome manner. 
References
[1]	 ETSI, “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Framing Structure, Channel Coding, and 
Modulation for 11/12 GHz Satellite Services,” EN300 421 V1.1.2, 1997-1998. 
[2]	 http://mppg.chiarlione.org/standards/mpeg-4.

 
One-Way (Broadcast) Service Requirements for TV, Data, and Audio 
139
[3]	 Morello, Alberto, and Vittoria Mignone, “DVB-S2: The Second Generation Standard for 
Satellite Broadband Services,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 94, No. 1, Jan 2006, pp. 210.
[4]	 ETSI, “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Chan­
nel Coding, and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gather­
ing, and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2),” ETSI EN 302.307, V. 1.3.1 
(2013-03). 
[5]	 Goldhirsh, J., and W. J. Vogel, Propagation Effects for Land Mobile Satellite Systems: Over­
view of Experiments and Modeling Results, Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration, Office of Management, Scientific and Technical Information Pro­
gram, 1992.


141
6
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture 
and Equipment
The ground segment architecture of a communication satellite blends telecom­
munications engineering principles with the tools and techniques familiar to 
satellite systems engineers. Therefore, one needs to understand how these fields 
are applied during all phases that define, specify, implement, operate, and main­
tain these networks. As covered in Chapters 4 and 5, ground segments vary in 
function and complexity, reflecting the services to be offered and the details of 
implementation. Here, we consider common issues concerning the architecture 
of the ground segment before moving to the detailed design of earth stations 
and user terminals. We generally find that the basic functionality of architecture 
is embodied in the digital processing and baseband equipment elements, which 
are reviewed in this chapter as well.
The main elements of ground segment architecture are illustrated in Fig­
ure 6.1, indicating the user, gateway, and management components. To pro­
vide telecommunication services, the network allows users to interact with one 
another by talking; exchanging E-mail, or image data; or interacting with data 
transfer associated with the Internet or a video teleconferencing system. Broad­
cast (point-to-multipoint) connectivity offers the means to deliver information 
content to the wide audience defined by the satellite coverage. The architectures 
for the two ground segment roles are usually different, taking account of special 
features to be described in this chapter. Still, Figure 6.1 suggests that for typical 
system to directly serve users, there are common elements that one expects to 
find almost universally:
• A space segment implement as part of the system or preexisting.

142 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• A central facility to broadcast information or provide access to the ter­
restrial networks within a country or region. The former might be self-
contained in the sense that the information is either created or replayed 
locally. More likely, this facility must itself connect to other sources of 
content, either through backhaul links provided by terrestrial networks 
or other satellite networks. The size and extent of the central facility 
grows as broadband services dominate the application mix.
• User terminals of appropriate size and complexity (and cost) to satisfy 
the local needs of subscribers or other classes of users. These might be 
owned and operated by individuals or provided to remote branches for 
use in a corporate or government network. There is a trend to make 
these terminals cheap and easy to operate so that they can be placed at 
every location in which services are required. On the other hand, there 
will be circumstances where user terminals are highly specialized and 
may be shared to reduce investment and operating costs. Such terminals 
may begin to take on the properties of larger earth stations of more tra­
ditional design. 
• A network control facility to coordinate the provision of services to users 
and manage the overall system on a day-to-day basis. A network control 
facility could be collocated with a hub earth station or broadcast center 
(as appropriate), or might be an independent station that can access the 
Figure 6.1  Main architectural elements of a communications ground segment (fixed or mo­
bile). The space segment can be introduced as part of this architecture or preexisting.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
143
space segment directly. Design of the network control and management 
function is perhaps the most complex aspect of the ground segment, 
since it may be highly interactive with the information and users. This 
involves direct monitoring of space segment RF signals from bent-pipe 
transponders (i.e., transponder management) or may focus exclusively 
on baseband information processing and flow, as in the case of voice 
traffic or IP data management.
6.1  Architecture Definition and Design
System architecture definition and design encompasses a number of disciplines 
that were identified in previous chapters. In this section, we go into more detail 
concerning the most critical of these approaches, as they can determine the ac­
ceptability of the ground segment once users gain access to it. Included are the 
following principles:
• A clear definition and flow down of service objectives, in terms of qual­
ity and quantity;
• Adequate determination and allocation of signal impairments that affect 
many of the most highly leveraged performance characteristics of the 
ground segment;
• Identification of the topology and distribution of the baseband elements 
of the system; 
• Creation of a service management approach, using the hardware and 
software aspects of the architecture, adapted to the organization’s needs 
and abilities.
6.1.1  Meeting the Service Objectives
The requirements of the ground segment have been expressed in terms of user 
services that can be accessed either directly from the space segment (by user 
terminals on the customer’s premises or directly attached) or through shared 
earth stations (e.g., hubs, gateways, and the like). Systems architects and their 
business counterparts in marketing and finance attempt to define what service 
mix would be of value to potential subscribers or other types of users. They 
usually have to make many assumptions if a real system (satellite or terrestrial) 
does not already exist.
Selection of appropriate market segments, which are both characteristics 
and behaviors, is both a science and an art [1]. By characteristics, we mean such 
things as age, gender, income, lifestyle, occupation, and location of residence 

144 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
and nationality. By behaviors, we mean appeal based on benefits (prestige or 
convenience of use), experience of user, amount of usage, and attitude toward 
the product or supplier. For example, the first proponents of mobile satellite 
service (MSS) via satellite phones viewed the international business traveler 
(IBT) as the most likely and lucrative target. The characteristics of such poten­
tial users were researched over the years and appropriate properties ascribed to 
them. Examples include: the number of trips per year, where they traveled (to 
developed and developing regions of the world), their dependence on cellular 
telephone services while away from their offices, and how much they would be 
willing to pay for seamless service. This type of information feeds back to indi­
cate the number of subscribers, where they would use their satellite phones, and 
the aggregate calling (and revenue) that one might reasonably assume.
In time, the MSS operators came to realize that there probably would not 
be enough IBTs to go around (the number was further reduced by the rapid 
adoption of GSM in the more heavily traveled regions of Europe, Asia, and 
North America). The operators discovered that other uses could be significant 
and potentially viable support for a satellite system. Another important aspect 
is the rollout of service and the resulting ramp-up of revenues as one or more 
of the systems are adopted by various market segments. If the service is targeted 
to a single country or region, then the corresponding behavior might look the 
same in principle but could be very different in specific terms. On the other 
hand, developing a service business in a single large country is simplified and 
potentially less risky. The variability of these important parameters will deter­
mine if a given ground segment reaches its financial breakeven point and even­
tually makes money.
Analysts can create the spreadsheets and graphs, but the numbers they use 
should be based on reality or at least valid research. The former has been the do­
main of established telecommunication operators, including satellite operators 
like SES, and Inmarsat, whose experience provides confidence in the planning 
process. Once competition is introduced, however, even established systems 
and ground segments cannot be assured by existing financial models. This is 
why it is always necessary to look at many scenarios and to perform sensitivity 
studies to uncover the critical parameters that affect the desired outcome. For 
the case of a new concept without a valid precursor, the study becomes much 
more of a gamble.
There is a value to market research in identifying and measuring the po­
tential attractiveness (or unattractiveness) of a new service offering. Surveys, fo­
cus groups, and pilot trials can be devised and perfected as means of producing 
comparative and quantitative information to assess the value of new services to 
potential subscribers. If done in an artful way, market research can be combined 
with engineering techniques such as the mean opinion score (MOS), which 
was discussed in Chapter 4. Statistical techniques exist that allow the systems 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
145
analyst to find the optimum bundle of services, considering service features and 
their cost to potential users. A popular technique called conjoint analysis links 
features directly to preferences or to customer needs [2]. The survey allows po­
tential buyers to rate the relative value or utility of each feature (including what 
they are willing to pay). For example, for a hypothetical telecommunication 
service that provides image transmission, the profile of a particular package of 
features is valued as
	
=
+
+
+
+
m
r
a
h
t
b
P
u
u
u
u
u 	
where ur = part worth of resolution of image output; ua = part worth of service 
accessibility to user; uh = part worth of availability of hard copy output; ut = part 
worth of transmission time (the shorter, the higher the score); and ub = the base 
level of preference for the image service.
The part worth values are determined through the survey of a sufficiently 
large population, where potential users are exposed to or asked about each of 
the features. They rank them according to their potential interest in obtaining 
the service for either business or personal use. Once the utilities are known, the 
attractiveness of a given product combination is found by summing the values. 
The package with the highest sum will probably be the most attractive to the 
targeted user population. This must be qualified if some features are mandated 
from an organizational or regulatory perspective. Other features may be im­
practical or undesirable for reasons unrelated to the market.
All of these methods help the system analyst or developer examine a po­
tentially important aspect of the service. However, they cannot provide guaran­
tees of what will succeed in the marketplace. This is further blurred by the fact 
that market segments change over time due to user preferences and, of course, 
competition from potentially better services. These factors can be taken into 
account by designing flexibility into the ground segment architecture, to allow 
changes in service type and mix and to provide for growth.
Once the system developer has clarified the market segments and appli­
cations to be delivered, the next challenge would be to size the entire ground 
segment. This includes the network as a whole and any major earth stations that 
are points of traffic aggregation. Individual user terminals might be sized for 
the smallest division of service and so would be considered in aggregate as far 
as how they would load the space segment and major earth stations. The net­
work control and management system would then have to support this overall 
requirement as well. The tool to accomplish this could be as simple as an Excel 
workbook with a detailed itemization of all elements and their performance/
cost, or as complex as an extensive computer simulation that addresses the in­
teractivity and dynamics of the system. The following two sections address the 
two key aspects of this sizing issue.

146 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The space segment could consist of a single satellite in GEO, multiple 
such satellites in different orbital locations, or even a non-GEO constellation. 
In the first instance, a single antenna aperture will provide adequate access to 
the satellite; on the other hand, multiple apertures may be needed especially 
when multiple beams are required for coverage. Small antennas are typically the 
least expensive so that increasing the quantity would not be particularly bur­
densome. The exception is where the antenna is attached to a moving vehicle or 
aircraft. Regarding the latter, operation across a wide region can allow shifting 
of traffic demand based on location or time zone. Referring back to the single 
antenna and satellite combination, it is still possible that the location of that 
satellite could change or a different satellite could be required. Repointing of 
an antenna could be a manual process taking anywhere from a few minutes to 
perhaps a few days depending on the type of antenna mount and provision for 
antenna alignment. Some systems require rapid handover between beams and/
or satellites in order to maintain a continuous connection. Baseband systems in 
each situation could be employed to locate the appropriate satellite or, in the 
case of multiple antennas and satellites (for GEO and non-GEO cases), provide 
the logic and control to assure continuity of service under all expected and pos­
sibly unexpected conditions.
6.1.2  Quality of Service (QoS) in Broadband Networks
Once you know what services are to be provided and where, the next most 
critical set of parameters deals with the quality of service (QoS) as experienced 
by subscribers or other users that receive service from time to time. Another 
term used in this context is figure of merit (FOM). While this may appear to 
be a technical matter, it becomes deeply involved with human nature, prefer­
ences (as discussed above), and comparisons with whatever else is out there to 
experience. For telephone networks, QoS can bemeasured simply in terms of 
the following characteristics (reviewed in Chapter 4):
• Voice quality, as measured using mean opinion score (MOS);
• Call blocking probability;
• Post dialing delay;
• Availability.
All of these are measurable and relatively repeatable. The problem be­
comes more complicated when considering a service with more features than 
POTS (plain old telephone service). For example, with cellular and wireless 
services, one is also concerned with the ability of subscribers to maintain a 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
147
connection as they travel around a cell and as their call is handed off between 
cells. Cellular network engineering cannot guarantee 100% maintenance of the 
connection quality in this dynamic environment, due to the variability of radio 
coverage and performance of the mobile user terminal. The problem becomes 
even more complex when considering mobile broadband, digital DTH TV, 
Internet/WWW, and interactive multimedia. The QoS for a particular applica­
tion that the user is engaged in will differ from another (e.g., another applica­
tion for the same user, and even the same application for another user). This 
demands a dynamic network that allows the user to obtain an appropriate QoS.
While this is currently an ideal, it nevertheless deserves the attention of 
developers of broadband ground segments. François Fluckiger, the noted au­
thor on networked multimedia systems, offers the following general definition 
of QoS [3]:
Quality of service is a concept based on the statement that not all 
applications need the same performance from the network over which they 
run. Thus, applications may indicate their specific requirements to the 
network, before they start transmitting information data.
Another more practical definition is that used as a basis for B-ISDN, as 
being implemented in Europe:
QoS is the measure of how good a service is, as presented to the user. It is 
expressed in user understandable language and manifests itself in a number 
of parameters, all of which have either subjective or objective values.
From a system design standpoint, QoS (and more appropriately FOM) 
couples into some key performance parameters, some that are hard and some 
that are somewhat soft. Hard, or compulsory, requirements include:
• User performance guarantees, such as synchronous timing; end-to-end 
maximum delay, receipt of message; and errored bits, packets, or mes­
sages;
• Network operation properties, such as routing of packets to avoid con­
gestion and ability to accept or reject a request for connection due to 
network state;
• Statistical properties, such as average and standard deviation of connect 
time, holding time, and call continuity.
Other FOMs relate to financial performance and user acceptance. Obvi­
ously, there are as many different QoS measures as there are service characteristics, 

148 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
and the number multiplies as one considers the range of possible applications 
and user profiles. This is an area of continuous study in broadband network 
standards. It is the duty of the system architect to make the right decisions for 
QoS. A ground segment for which this is done correctly will be more likely to 
succeed in both technical and financial terms.
6.1.3  Capacity and Distribution of Services
The market segments, services, and QoS requirements having been set, the key 
remaining attributes of the system to be defined are the capacity of the ground 
segment and the corresponding distribution of this capacity to the various loca­
tions within the overall network. This will determine the economics of the ser­
vice when combined with other financial matters such as investment, operating 
costs, cost of money, and pricing. Selection of locations for service delivery is a 
very complex matter, being determined by such factors as:
• Villages, cities, regions, or countries where the service provider has 
gained market access;
• Regulatory requirements of the location or region, including availability 
of spectrum licensing and procedures/costs for obtaining them;
• The local need for services of this type, reflecting the tastes and special­
ized needs of local subscribers and businesses;
• The ability and means for potential users to pay for equipment and 
services;
• Competition from local service providers who offer comparable services;
• Competition from other satellite-based and terrestrial service providers;
• The practical aspects of implementing a suitable ground segment when 
and where needed;
• The ability of the ground segment operator to manage the assets, dis­
tribute user equipment and provide service.
The design of the space segment in terms of the orbit configuration, an­
tenna and repeater arrangement, and communications processing has a large 
impact on how capacity and services are allocated across the service area. For 
example, the ability of a single GEO satellite to perform these functions is de­
termined by its overall capability in terms of RF radiated power (EIRP) across 
the coverage region, the total spectrum, considering frequency reuse, and the 
quantity and mass of payload hardware that are employed to relay signals of 
the ground segment. For the spacecraft antenna system, the coverage footprint 
is key to defining the potential of the satellite to support the service and its 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
149
distribution. It is these aspects that must be carefully considered in the design, 
because changes in orbit are typically very limited in nature. In time, satellites 
will be designed with greater flexibility for moving capacity and services around 
the visible globe. This is the motivation for satellites that employ digital pro­
cessing repeaters, phased array antennas, and quantities of spot beams that can 
be arranged to suit the dynamic distribution of traffic. All of these issues com­
bine into what investment bankers call the space game in the satellite industry.
There is a clear trend in space segment design to employ multiple spot 
beams to achieve a number of aims:
• Reuse frequency to increase satellite and space segment capacity. This 
reduces cost per unit of service and allows the satellite to meet greater 
total demand. ViaSat1 and KASat are good examples.
• Increase the EIRP and G/T of the satellite to reduce the cost and size of 
earth stations and user terminals. Ka-band broadband systems introduce 
user terminals with compact antennas and low power transmitters that 
deliver high-speed Internet services and other innovations like personal 
video conferencing.
• Provide coverage of major cities and other hot spots of demand. This is 
used in DTH services to provide local channels (e.g., local into local.)
A difficulty that can exist is that the capacity of a given beam is deter­
mined by the available bandwidth to the beam and the characteristics of the 
air interface (e.g., the link budget, MODCOD, and multiple access method). 
Once the capacity of one beam is reached, it is not possible to uplink and/or 
downlink traffic to or from that particular beam. Due to the constraints of the 
beam-to-beam routing patterns, saturation of such a highly demanded beam 
can limit the aggregate capacity of the satellite and network. Means to over­
come this limitation include: using more bandwidth-efficient modulation or 
multiple access, adding more spectrum (either in the same but adjacent band 
or in a completely different band), or adding beams and satellites in such a way 
as to not introduce unacceptable interference into the operation of the existing 
satellite(s). None of these solutions are particularly easy, but they become valu­
able as traffic builds.
While the satellite determines the overall coverage area, the specific instal­
lation of major earth stations usually defines how services might be delivered 
and where (i.e., the ground game). Tied together with the satellite, the ground 
segment represents a fixed base-station infrastructure to allow user terminals 
to access the network. Unless one is speaking of mobile or transportable earth 
stations, the ground segment will represent a sunk cost that cannot easily be 
redeployed to different locations or applications. An approach to overcome this 

150 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
problem is to install major earth station equipment in an existing facility such 
as a teleport. User terminals, on the other hand, are designed more like con­
sumer electronic items and might even be discarded when the service is not 
desired or available.
6.2  Baseband Architecture
The functionality of the ground segment architecture is principally embodied 
in the baseband equipment contained within the earth stations and user ter­
minal. Reflecting this point is the fact that suppliers of application systems for 
VSATs, DVB services, IP multicasting, and VOIP telephony have concentrated 
on the baseband sections, leaving the RF terminals to be supplied by other 
manufacturers and integrators who are familiar with the microwave industry. 
There is at least one exception to this in that ViaSat has its own supply of 
microwave devices for its SurfBeam II product line. In Table 6.1, we provide 
a general outline and definition of the functions performed by the baseband 
architecture. For bent-pipe satellites, all baseband functions are, of necessity, 
performed on the ground. Figure 6.2 provides a generalized baseband architec­
ture, based on the previous assumptions, and the following paragraphs review 
some of the important issues involved in the definition and selection of the 
associated nine elements. The satellite channel and user terminals complete the 
overall architecture.
6.2.1  Working from the Outside to the Inside
Recognizing that proper architecture comes from commitment to the user com­
munity and application mix, we begin the detailed discussion of the baseband 
system from the outside or external interface. This is clear from Table 6.1 and 
Figure 6.2 where (A) at the left represents access to the network or body of users 
on the terrestrial side. This is because most ground segments ultimately access 
fixed facilities with concentrations of population and resources that those on 
the satellite system wish to reach (and, in the case of interactive applications, 
vice versa). This is similar to what we saw in the protocol stack and how the 
common layers on both ends employ a logical connection while the lower lay­
ers and physical network implement the means of transferring the requested 
information.
The right-hand column of Table 6.1 indicates that a global standard is 
the way to specify how this external interface is to work. Thus, the architect 
must chose the right standard and analyze it thoroughly to see how it may need 
to be presented and potentially adapted to the satellite medium. We spoke of 
the protocol gateway as a tool for performing this function within the ground 
segment baseband system. However, for this to work properly, the system must 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
151
Figure 6.2  Generic baseband architecture for a digital communications satellite network. 
One-way broadcast and two-way interactive service options are suggested.
Table 6.1
Allocation of Requirements and Functions to Baseband Architecture and Earth Station Elements
Function
Requirement
Element
Description
Network interface or 
access to content
Deliver a standard application 
to the user (or access content)
A
Defined by global standard 
for the particular application
Backhaul circuits
Connect between network 
interface (or content source) 
and earth station
B
Typically a terrestrial 
transmission line using 
cable, fiber, or local 
microwave
Terrestrial interface
Interface from backhaul circuit 
to the baseband equipment of 
the earth station
C
Port cards or connectors that 
comply with the selected 
global standard (in A)
Information processing
Compression, encryption, 
protocol conversion, etc., based 
on unique constraints of the 
baseband architecture
D
Data processing or 
specialized protocol 
conversion equipment 
Multiplexing
Combining two or more 
information channels into a 
single data stream
E
Multiplex equipment—fixed 
time slot, statistical or 
packet multiplex
Multiple access 
processing and control
Assign and allocate data 
for efficient transfer via the 
satellite network
F
Baseband multiple access 
equipment
Modulation and 
demodulation
Encode and transfer data 
streams between the baseband 
equipment and the RF terminal
G
Modem equipment
Bandwidth 
management
Engineer and optimize the flow 
of network traffic
H
Network control elements
Service management
Coordinate application delivery, 
information supply, and 
conditional access for users
I
Service management 
elements

152 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
respond in an expected way to the global standard; otherwise, service disrup­
tions rather than customer satisfaction could result. The technical side of the 
Internet is defined in documents available on line called Request for Comment 
(RFC), which are produced by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). 
While somewhat arcane, these documents do the necessary job of defining the 
interface or function in clear language so that developers can produce the re­
quired software code to operate in PCs, servers, routers, and importantly, satel­
lite communications baseband equipment. It is the real-world application of 
these standards that is the difficult part, one that depends on the resources 
and experience of major players like Cisco, Lucent, Microsoft, Apple, Google, 
and in the satellite industry, ViaSat, Hughes Network Systems, Gilat, iDirect, 
Newtec, and others.
6.2.2  User Interface or Access to Content
The first point of entry into the ground segment architecture is the specific 
interface at the user (voice, data, videoconferencing, etc.) or, in the case of 
broadcast applications, the source of content (TV programs, movies, Web pag­
es, radio programs, computer games, books, etc.). We previously reviewed some 
of the critical demands on the user side in terms of QoS and the like; here our 
concern is the electrical and procedural aspects ensuring that the service will 
connect properly. The user interface will generally satisfy a recognized standard 
(such as RJ-11 modular jack for analog telephone, V.35 for medium- or high-
speed data, Ethernet for LANs, and ASI for MPEG video), consistent with 
terminal equipment and terrestrial telecommunications networks around the 
world. The data format, protocol, and signal characteristics at this interface will 
adhere to a standard format that is compatible with the user device, as discussed 
in the previous section. This interface must be defined and validated for the 
service and user community during the earliest possible phase of development.
6.2.3  Backhaul Circuits: Fiber, Microwave, and Satellite
The basic function of a backhaul circuit is to provide the last mile link between 
the earth station and the actual user or source of content. These circuits can be 
a few kilometers in length or perhaps thousands of kilometers for terrestrial and 
satellite arrangements. If user and earth station are co-located, the backhaul 
circuit is replaced by a piece of cable of appropriate length. Backhaul circuits 
may be owned, shared, leased, or obtained as a service from a network operator 
(particularly telephone companies and satellite-based service providers). The 
key is to obtain sufficient bandwidth with the needed quality and reliability at 
an acceptable price. While terrestrial fiber is preferred, wireless/microwave and 
satellite links can be substituted where fiber is unavailable or impractical. A 
double-hop will result if a satellite backhaul is employed.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
153
Options for backhaul circuits are derived from what is available on the­
market or can be constructed in reasonable time. These include the following:
• Twisted-pair cable;
• Coaxial cable;
• Fiber-optic cable (multimode);
• Fiber-optic cable (single mode);
• Line-of-site microwave (point-to-point);
• Local microwave distribution service (LMDS, point-to-multipoint).
• Satellite point-to-point and multi-point links.
Twisted pair, coaxial cable, and multimode fiber are normally associated 
with short distances (e.g., under about 2 km) within a building or campus 
environment. Telephone companies will use twisted-pair and coaxial cable for 
the last mile as part of a long-haul connection. Once the signals are inside their 
plant, they would normally multiplex the data onto single-mode fiber-optic 
cables to take advantage of the existing investment and the favorable per-circuit 
economics offered thereby. Microwave links are still applied for short-haul lo­
cal connections for data rates up to about 20 Gbps; however, rarely does one 
find long-haul microwave in use today. The multi-channel microwave distribu­
tion service (MMDS) and newer LMDS technologies could be attractive in the 
short-haul case if a network is already up and in operation in the local area. Not 
to be overlooked is the ease, or lack thereof, of monitoring and managing this 
part of the architecture, as the service cannot be provided in the absence of a 
working backhaul.
The challenge for the ground segment architect is to first identify the 
backhaul requirements in terms of the locations to be connected and the band­
width requirements. From there, it is possible to compare the viable alternatives 
as cited above, the providers of the services and/or equipment, and the costs of 
implementing and operating this segment of the system.
6.2.4  Terrestrial Interface: Public or Private
The end of the backhaul circuit that terminates at the earth station is called the 
terrestrial interface. As with the interface at the user or content provider, this 
interface would likely satisfy a recognized standard (the same standard, in fact). 
It is the function of the earth station baseband equipment to work within the 
constraints of the terrestrial interface and deliver a satisfactory service. In this 
way, the terrestrial interface shields the backhaul circuit and end user from the 

154 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
peculiarities of satellite communications in general and the implementation of 
the overall network in particular.
There are two options for how the terrestrial interface could be imple­
mented at the earth station. In the standard arrangement, the interface is pro­
vided on a conventional termination frame such as is found in a telephone 
exchange. In the case of digital services, the interface is at a patch field. The 
alternative is for the connection to be made directly on the baseband equip­
ment at what are called port cards. These are typically computer-type printed 
circuit cards with standard connectors on the rear edges. The backhaul circuit 
connection is made directly on the card, reducing the amount of rack space and 
cabling within the earth station. A potential drawback of this approach is that 
the backhaul circuit possibly cannot be tested or reconnected without disrupt­
ing the operation of the baseband equipment. In the case of a fiber backhaul 
circuit, it is likely that standard multiplexing equipment would be introduced 
at the terrestrial interface to separate individual digital channels (this is not 
to be confused with the multiplexing function contained within the baseband 
equipment). Other issues concerning lightning and surge protection for the 
backhaul circuit are addressed in Chapter 10.
6.2.5  Information Preprocessing for the Baseband Equipment
Information processing in the context of the baseband equipment is the most 
compute-intensive aspect of the architecture. What we find within this element 
are complex functions like digital compression to reduce bandwidth and en­
cryption to achieve security and control delivery of service. Protocol conversion 
is another important function for data networks such as those that support IP 
transfer. The techniques for performing this conversion depend heavily on the 
architecture of the network as well as other specifics that are up to the supplier 
of the hardware and software. A common technique is that of protocol spoof­
ing, where the user and terrestrial interface are made to believe that they are 
directly connected to the other end of the satellite link when, in actuality, their 
digital conversation is with the information processing function at the closely 
connected earth station. Additional processing is involved with functions cov­
ered in the following sections.
The type of equipment in use for interface processing often consists of 
specialized digital electronics that provide cross-connections along with a high-
speed bus and input/output functions. There would be a local processor with 
custom software to direct these functions, some of which could be performed 
within the processor itself. In many respects, the capability described here is 
much like that of an IP router of the type used in the Internet. The difference, 
however, is the way the equipment is configured and the software that runs it. 
The software in the server will, from time to time, be upgraded to take account 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
155
of bug fixes, improvements, and new features to be included. The server will 
often contain the traffic routing map that organizes and routes information to 
the uplink and between locations, as defined by the operator via the network 
management system.
6.2.6  Multiplexing or Packet Routing
The multiplexing function takes the required number of processed information 
streams and combines them to produce a high-speed baseband. In broadcast­
ing, this stream represents several MPEG-2 channels along with associated data 
and control channels. The equivalent function in a telephone gateway com­
bines several voice channels using time division multiplex (TDM) or IP within 
a VoIP switch. The behavior of this arrangement is like that of an IP router and, 
in fact, router technology is directly applicable. We review how routing ties in 
with multiple access performance in the next section.
6.2.7  Multiple Access Processing and Control
The portion of baseband architecture most critical to satellite network opera­
tion deals with multiple access (MA) control of transmission. Because of the 
unique properties of FDMA, TDMA, or CDMA and, more importantly, the 
particular implementation, the MA function integrates with much of the rest 
of the baseband system and software. When using TDMA, the functions of 
information processing and multiplexing are coordinated in such a way that 
transmissions from different earth stations do not interfere with one another 
when they reach the satellite. As discussed in Chapter 4, TDMA places strin­
gent requirements on network timing to prevent signal overlap and maximize 
throughput. This is further complicated if the satellite contains multiple beams 
and possibly a time-division satellite-switch or router to interconnect them. 
From a logical standpoint, the information is assigned to time slots, which are 
routed through the shared bandwidth of the satellite repeater. Individual sta­
tions adhere to a common network connectivity map to assure a consistent 
distribution of time slots and capacity. From time to time, the map is changed 
(manually or dynamically) to accommodate changes in the station user and 
service mix. One of the dynamic functions is the intelligent matching of access 
scheme to the user traffic. This allows the network to properly respond to a 
multiplicity of IP data from different applications.
When looking at FDMA, we find a much simpler type of system from 
the standpoint of MA control. In fact, the multiplexed information may be 
connected directly to the modem and uplink without any active control. This 
is possible because FDMA uses separate, noninterfering frequencies that can be 
assigned on a permanent or at least scheduled basis. The complexity and need 
for control comes with demand assignment (DA) of carrier frequencies under 

156 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
some type of traffic control. When operating in this manner, FDMA shares 
some complexity with TDMA.
CDMA is deceptively simple from a control standpoint, since individual 
transmissions are uncorrelated and hence do not directly interfere with each 
other. The need for control increases with the number of simultaneous trans­
missions (users). The objective of the architecture is to maximize the system 
capacity (i.e., the number of simultaneous users), which in turn requires that 
the transmitter be adjusted so that the signal-to-interference ratio at the satel­
lite repeater is at a minimal acceptable level [4]. Ideally, earth stations and user 
terminals should maintain this desired level, otherwise capacity will be reduced 
(because there will be more interference noise than budgeted). This ideal is not 
possible in practice because of normal errors in aligning uplink power and the 
presence of uplink fades due to a variety of sources (particularly shadowing in 
mobile satellite communications). As a result, an effective uplink power con­
trol scheme must be introduced. Another feature now implemented in wire­
less CDMA systems is to adjust the coding and compression on the individual 
channels in response to the overall loading of the transponder. These factors are 
very complicated and comparisons with TDMA are difficult and depend on the 
particular network configuration and type of RF interface.
6.2.8  Modulation and Demodulation
The term modem has come to refer to the combination, in one package, of the 
modulator and demodulator that provides the conversion from bidirectional 
data to the send-receive transmission on a carrier frequency. In ground seg­
ment architecture, the actual modem may consist of separate modulator and 
demodulator due to the special attributes of the MA system and space link. For 
example, in the case of a conventional VSAT star network, the hub transmits 
a continuous TDM stream on the uplink, while the return link transmitted by 
the remote VSATs are in TDMA burst format at a significantly lower data rate 
(typically a ratio of 10:1 of forward to return). In a given network supported by 
one forward link, there would be one outbound modulator transmitting a con­
tinuous TDM data stream, and multiple inbound demodulators each operating 
in a burst mode to recover the TDMA transmissions from multiple VSATs on 
the particular carrier frequency. Several such burst demodulators are normally 
required at the hub.
In some forms of FDMA, a combined modem can be used if the up­
link and downlink bandwidths are the same. Carrier transmission is continu­
ous, which is also more conducive to containing the send and receive functions 
within the same unit.
This brief discussion reviewed the architectural aspects of modulation and 
demodulation. Later in this chapter, we review the specific requirements and 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
157
design approaches for modems as used in satellite communications. An impor­
tant function often consigned to the modem is that of error correction in the 
form of convolutional, block, and turbo coding systems.
6.2.8.1  Bandwidth Efficiency
Satellite bandwidth is provided by repeater systems in space, something that is 
costly to produce. Therefore, bandwidth efficiency in our industry is especially 
important and in some applications is the critical basis of success or failure. 
Some applications have overpaid for satellite bandwidth and ultimately faced 
collapse as the bills came in while the revenues did not. One very straightfor­
ward way to reduce bandwidth cost is to increase the transponder throughput 
per megahertz: this is the essence of bandwidth efficiency and often employs 
bandwidth efficient modulation (BEM). The DVB-S2, discussed in Chapter 
5, has provisions for 8PSK, 16APSK, and 32APSK along with improved FEC 
achieves many of the goals of BEM. From a theoretical standpoint, the DVB-S2 
goal was to reach the Shannon limit, which is defined as [6]:
	
2
log
1
S
C
B
N


=
+



	
C is the channel capacity in bits per second;
B is the bandwidth of the channel in Hz;
S is the average received signal power over the bandwidth (in case of a 
modulated signal, denoted C, of the modulated carrier), measured in 
watts;
N is the average noise or interference power over the bandwidth, 
measured in watts; 
S/N is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) or the carrier-to-noise ratio (CNR) 
of the communication signal to the Gaussian noise expressed as a linear 
power ratio (not as logarithmic decibels).
The capacity formula can be approximated for a numerical ratio, S/N >> 1:
	
(
)
≈
⋅
⋅
0.332
in dB
C
B SNR
	
For an SNR of 10 dB and a bandwidth of 1 MHz, the value of C is 
3.3 Mbps. Importantly, this equation illustrates the nonlinear trade between 
power and bandwidth (i.e., a law of diminishing returns). For example, dou­
bling power increases SNR by 3 dB, which increases capacity by only 30%. The 
stipulation that S/N>>1 is further clarified by stating that values near 5 dB (3 as 

158 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
a ratio) overstate capacity by 10% and capacity is actually negative in decibels 
(less than unity) where SNR is negative in decibel terms.
We also need to interpret this as operating under quasi-error-free con­
ditions with the nominal error rate being less than 10–10. At 3.3 Mbps, that 
produces one error occurring every 5 minutes on average. As discussed in Chap­
ter 3, this is achievable using the appropriate MODCOD combination from 
DVB-S2. Yet, the cost of achieving bandwidth efficiency often involves increas­
ing the carrier power, which is another valuable resource from the satellite re­
peater. The key to the design of an application system that satisfies all relevant 
requirements is the proper optimization of these choices through the use of the 
link budget tool.
We can look at improving efficiency in terms of reducing both the band­
width and the power that would otherwise be required to support a given ser­
vice through a single broadcast carrier within a bent-pipe transponder. The 
constraints of bandwidth and power are well understood and can be evaluated 
through the link budget. Less appreciated but still worthy of consideration are 
the nonlinearities of the saturated amplifier in the transponder, typically a trav­
eling-wave tube (TWT), and the impairments introduced by the variation in 
gain and phase (delay) across the transponder bandwidth. In previous systems, 
these factors were considered by backing the transponder off by approximately 
1 dB on the uplink, which reduces the downlink EIRP by much less than 1 
dB, and by adding what is called “implementation margin” in the link bud­
get’s bottom line. The principal reason for the backoff is to reduce adjacent 
channel interference from spectral regrowth. Implementation margin, on the 
other hand, compensates for nonlinear distortion of the carrier itself and other 
channel effects like phase noise and filtering imperfections and tracking loop 
performance internal to the modem.
A typical value of implementation margin for a saturated carrier is in the 
range of 1 to 3 dB. The required value of implementation margin relates to 
the degree of roll-off factor, α, which itself is in the range of 0.2 to 0.35 under 
DVB-S2. Reducing the roll-off factor increases the throughput but tends to 
increase intersymbol interference (ISI) that in and of itself can cause an increase 
in the error rate. A higher value of implementation margin can compensate for 
this ISI, but this is at the expense of either throughput or power. These trade-
offs can be assessed using measurement or computer simulation. A desirable 
arrangement would consist of allowing operation at saturation without spectral 
regrowth and eliminating the ISI at a low value of α through the well-known 
technique of amplitude and phase equalization at the receiver. The DVB Forum 
and several equipment suppliers are improving the standard and bringing prod­
ucts to market that incorporate features to overcome the traditional nonlinear 
effects just described and to enhance the performance of the DVB-S2 link.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
159
6.2.8.2  Spread Spectrum
We have reviewed the basic principle of spread spectrum and CDMA; what 
we wish to cover now is how baseband systems make use of these features to 
improve the operation of ground segments and user terminals. A key area where 
spread spectrum has gained a footing is mobile systems with user terminals that 
have disadvantaged antennas. The latter simply means that the antenna size is 
forced to be its smallest to allow installation on some kind of vehicle or aircraft. 
Reducing antenna aperture will necessarily reduce its transmit gain; to maintain 
the same value of uplink EIRP as would otherwise be required, the RF power 
from the HPA must be increased the appropriate amount. This tends to cause 
an increase in power radiated toward adjacent satellites that can be assumed to 
be 2 degrees away, through either the sidelobes or the edge of the main beam 
itself depending on the radiation pattern of the user antenna. Calculations of 
these factors were presented in Chapter 4.
This application of spread spectrum is commonplace in mobile broad­
band satellite networks and tends to reduce the bandwidth efficiency of the re­
sulting implementation. The optimization techniques discussed in the previous 
section might prove useful to reduce the uplink power needed to close the link 
without the need for spread spectrum. Alternatively, spread spectrum can be 
part of a CDMA solution so that the bandwidth can be reused by multiple user 
terminals. The consequence of this is that the uplink power from these termi­
nals must be tightly controlled so that capacity is not degraded from what one 
would obtain using either FDMA or TDMA. However, mobile systems bring 
with them the property of antenna motion due to changes on vehicle or aircraft 
orientation. It is possible for the antenna to compensate for this motion but it 
is likely that some of this motion cannot be corrected under all of the expected 
conditions that the mobile user faces.
6.2.9  Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation
The remaining functions of architecture relate to the transfer information from 
end to end and the management of the key resources of the system. Band­
width management contains a number of system management functions for the 
network or broadcast operation, including traffic control, capacity assignment 
and optimization, and coordination between operating elements. The TDMA 
network connectivity map mentioned in Section 6.2.7 would be generated and 
maintained as part of bandwidth management. Depending on the organiza­
tional/political structure of the network, bandwidth management could be cen­
tralized (which is usually most efficient) or distributed among the stations (a 
less efficient but possibly more reliable alternative).
Bandwidth management in FDMA and CDMA involves assigning indi­
vidual channels as needed to meet traffic demands. The requirements could be 

160 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
for fixed bandwidths that remain in place infinitely, in which case the band­
width management function is satisfied with basic carrier monitoring. For 
demand-assigned applications, bandwidth management is adynamic process 
similar to maintenance of the network connectivity map inTDMA.
6.2.10  Service Management
Service management is a vital function of the architecture and often it is treated 
more like an afterthought than a serious requirement. However, after the net­
work is working and providing services, the operators quickly learn how effec­
tive their service management capability really is. If the requirements were set 
correctly in the beginning and the capabilities were incorporated consistently 
and strongly, then the provision of services will occur as needed. Under ser­
vice management we find the important technical role of network monitor and 
control (to identify, troubleshoot, and resolve problems). The complete set of 
service management functions is potentially extensive, tied to the nature of the 
business structure, regulatory environment, and competition.
Over the years, two major subdivisions have occurred: operations support 
systems (OSSs) and business support systems (BSSs). These IT systems address 
the complex functions of dealing with a large base of users and customers. They 
traditionally follow the form of their counterparts in such industries as pub­
lic telephone service, cable TV, cellular telephone, major IT systems, and now 
DTH satellite broadcasting. According to Alcatel-Lucent, a leading provider 
of these capabilities to the broad telecommunications industry, OSS software 
applications allow operations and IT personnel to administer operational pro­
cesses of a network and services, including service quality monitoring, network 
and server performance, logical and physical resources management (also re­
ferred to as element and network management), and provisioning of the service 
for a new or existing customer.
BSS software applications are used by operations, customer care, and oth­
er functional groups to manage business operations focusing on external busi­
ness such as billing, pricing, sales management, customer-service management 
and the management of customer databases.
The first DTH systems had to establish both of these capabilities at the 
same time that they rolled out their space segment and ground segment. As 
these descriptions imply, OSSs and BSSs are demanding in terms of computer 
resources, software and personnel who can take customer requests and service 
complaints, track usage, collect money, and assure that all is well for the user 
and for the business overall.
Our discussion of baseband architecture was from an overview perspec­
tive rather than going into particular approaches, which are usually proprie­
tary. This is because of the extensive detail that is involved in the elements 

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
161
and interconnections needed to produce a working architecture. What is most 
appropriate for the architect is to be sure of the business and service require­
ments, the functions to be performed and their locations (geographically and 
logically), and the high-level solutions that can be applied (e.g., the MA system, 
baseband structure and protocols, and vendor technology platforms).
6.3  Baseband and Modem Equipment
The portion of the earth station that exists between the RF terminal and the 
terrestrial interface is defined as the baseband and modem equipment. A simpli­
fied block diagram of these elements is provided in Figure 6.3, indicating the 
modulator and demodulator (which could be combined in the same modem 
unit, depending on the application); the multiplex and demultiplex equipment; 
and a segment that we refer to as multiple access and timing control. Connected 
to the latter is the terrestrial interface that would apply if this earth station were 
to connect to an external network. Alternatively, the equipment may deliver 
services directly to a user device such as a TV or PC.
6.3.1  Baseband Equipment Design
Engineering principles for this important segment cover many fields, including 
analog circuit design, information theory, digital signal processing, digital hard­
ware design and development, and software engineering. Unlike RF engineer­
ing, which is driven by the requirements of the microwave link requirements, 
baseband equipment is highly integrated with the applications that the earth 
station supports. This means that this portion of the earth station is custom­
ized for the network and use. Our main consideration in this section is with 
the requirements for and performance of baseband equipment as compared to 
the RF terminal and satellite link. The engineering principles behind digital 
baseband equipment have developed from telecommunications switching along 
with strong input from the information technology industry. Any baseband sys­
tem is primarily embodied in an information processing structure that supports 
the collection, routing, management, and control of data. Underlying all of this 
is a strong element of software, both in terms of computer code and firmware 
that operates a wide variety of locally connected and remote devices throughout 
the baseband architecture. 
Critical steps in baseband design include the following:
• Clear definition of the service requirements, operating modes, fail-safe 
processes, and management aspects of the baseband architecture taken 
to the equipment level;

162 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 6.3  Baseband subsystem of a central hub earth station for digital communications services.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
163
• Allocation of functions to components within the baseband equipment 
for earth stations and user terminals;
• Careful specification of component technical requirements, operating 
conditions, and the tradeoff between hardware and software implemen­
tation (now heavily between true software versus firmware that can be 
updated);
• Arrangement of the components within the baseband equipment and 
the interconnection/intercommunication processes;
• Selection of the optimum hardware and software platforms, considering 
make versus buy issues (i.e., build internally versus purchase of off-the-
shelf solutions);
• Proper definition of timing and sequencing of functions;
• Design and functional verification of each component, considering also 
the operation and maintenance as a unit and as part of the baseband 
equipment: This considers the use of computer simulations before key 
selections are made;
• Creation of an operating control system and supporting man/machine 
interface for management of the baseband equipment and its functional­
ity.
• Careful design of the ultimate user interface and behavior.
These tasks can represent a major effort and cannot be carried out in 
a vacuum. In particular, this will be a multidisciplinary effort involving sys­
tems architects, service designers, equipment designers, software engineers, and 
operations and maintenance specialists. Critical to this is sound inclusion of 
the user need and behavior under all expected conditions. Many of the tasks 
must be performed in parallel with others and considerable iteration will be 
needed. Often, a proof-of-concept pilot must be developed, possibly involving 
a hardware/software simulation, to demonstrate how components will interact 
with each other and the end user. For most baseband equipment development 
projects, it is advisable to start with a known architecture that can be adapted 
to the specific needs. This has the advantage of providing a working baseband 
system, with components that perform functions and that can communicate 
with each other according to established processes and timing. On the other 
hand, any existing system brings with it certain built-in constraints that may or 
may not hinder the conversion to the new requirements. The difficulty here is 
that one cannot always make a complete determination on this issue until the 
development project nears completion at which time changes are most difficult 
to make.

164 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
6.3.2  Modulation Systems and Modem Design
The engineering principles behind modulation and modem design as related 
to satellite communications are extensive and have undergone rapid improve­
ment in recent years. The selection of a particular type and design of modem 
depends heavily on the particular modulation format, as summarized in Figure 
6.4. Digital modulation can be subdivided into categories that have constant 
envelope (i.e., the envelope of the signal amplitude does not vary appreciably 
during transitions between bits or symbols) or nonconstant envelope (i.e., the 
envelope varies and in fact may collapse to zero during normal transmission). In 
general, constant envelope is preferred for nonlinear RF channels such as a satu­
rated satellite transponder, or earth station HPA, whereas nonconstant envelope 
usually demands linear channels. Our examples to follow will be for forms of 
PSK and ASK that are popular in commercial satellite communications where 
nonlinear channels are commonplace. A generalized modem block diagram of 
a QPSK modem is provided in Figure 6.5, assuming constant bit rate transmis­
sion in a nonburst mode. All of the functions in the diagram are implemented 
mathematically in VSLI and DSP chips. This lends itself to the use of software 
Figure 6.4  Digital modulation tree, indicating the primary techniques used in commercial 
satellite communications.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
165
Figure 6.5  Generalized block diagram of a QPSK (a) modulator and (b) demodulator.

166 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
defined radio technology. Significant modifications are needed to support a 
higher order modulation, e.g., eight-phase PSK, and 16 APSK, or to allow burst 
operation for TDMA. In Figure 6.6, we provide examples of unfiltered modem 
output spectra for binary PSK (BPSK), QPSK, offset OPSK (OQPSK), and 
minimum shift keying (MSK). Figure 6.7 provides specific detail for Gauss­
ian MSK (GMSK), a refinement of MSK that employs less bandwidth yet re­
tains its constant envelope properties. The lower sideband levels of MSK and 
GMSK, and to some extent OQPSK, are a consequence of maintaining a more 
constant envelope than standard QPSK and BPSK provide. On the other hand, 
the main lobes of these particular modulation formats are broader. In general, 
these spectra would be further filtered at the modem output to reduce adjacent 
channel interference.
The important determinants of modem link performance are as follows:
• Modulation format (according to Figure 6.6), based heavily on theory of 
statistical communications in presence of noise;
• Forward error correction (FEC), implemented with one of a number of 
standard error correction codes: convolutional encoding, turbo coding, 
block encoding, or a combination (i.e., concatenated coding);
• Decoding approach, such as soft decision or hard decision for convolu­
tional coding;
• Techniques for carrier, bit, and timing recovery;
Figure 6.6  Normalized power spectral density for BPSK, QPSK, OPSK, and MSK.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
167
• Interference environment, including co-channel and adjacent channel;
• Use of spread spectrum modulation as in code division multiple access;
• Non-linearity effects in ground and satellite HPAs;
• Effect of the fading environment on modem operation.
It is impossible to provide the full range of possible performance under all 
of the variables. Examples of modem performance for a subset are provided in 
Figures 6.8 and 6.9 for convolutional and block error-correcting codes, based 
on theory. Each graph includes the performance of the uncoded digital channel 
as a reference. Concatenation (i.e., the sequencing of two component codes) 
has proven extremely effective in the popular applications of DTH and VSAT 
networks. Another trend is the application of more bandwidth-efficient digital 
modulation formats, such as eight-phase PSK (8PSK) and sixteen-level APSK 
(16APSK). These represent a tradeoff between bandwidth and power (i.e., ad­
ditional power in terms of Eb/N0 is needed to achieve the narrower bandwidth).
Characteristics of commercially available satellite modems are provided 
below. These are examples of stand-alone units that would be found in a major 
earth station used for medium- or high-speed data transmission.
NovelSAT produces the NS3000 satellite modem for data rates up to 365 
Mbps (shown in Figure 6.11). It utilizes proprietary digital signal processing, 
resulting in higher reliability and reduced packaging size. Table 6.2 provides a 
summary of specifications; its main features include:
Figure 6.7  Comparison of constant envelope modulations—MSK versus GMSK. In compari­
son to MSK, GMSK occupies less bandwidth and has lower sidebands, yet retains its constant 
envelope properties [7].

168 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Software-based technology to simplify conversion for other features;
• Automatic uplink power control (UPC).
MODCOD technology established at the time of this writing is based 
primarily on DVB-S2 along with innovations in turbo codes used mainly for 
the return link of VSATs. As discussed previously, modem suppliers and the 
DVB Forum are working on a variety of improvements and have demonstrat­
ed increases in throughput in the range of 20% to 60%. In addition, further 
Figure 6.8  Convolutional code performance (Source: IEEE).

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
169
reduction in the required Eb/No of up to 4 dB (under certain combinations of 
modulation and coding) have been demonstrated. Newtec of Belgium, working 
along with other groups in the DVB Forum, has identified a number of DVB-
S2 Extensions that address both the DTH market and the somewhat specialized 
market for backhaul and VSAT systems. The Newtec DVB-S2 capability with 
extensions is shown in Figure 6.11. In it, we see a greater degree of flexibility 
for selecting the MODCOD and the overall performance is better in terms of 
throughput. The next incarnation of DVB for satellite will likely include several 
of the following:
Figure 6.9  Block code performance. (Reprinted with permission of Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ.)

170 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Bandwidth increase: Allowing the symbol rate to increase to 72 Msps 
(Mbaud) in a 72-MHz transponder with an appropriately smaller roll-
off (RO) factor α, discussed previously.
• Predistortion technology: Designed to compensate for impairments 
caused by filters and nonlinear amplifiers of the satellite repeater. New­
tec’s technology, Automated Equalink, can reduce implementation mar­
gin by up to 2 dB and facilitate the use of more bandwidth efficient 
modulation like 32 APSK and 64 APSK on carriers occupying the full 
transponder bandwidth and power.
• Adaptive coding and modulation (ACM): Newtec offers a version they 
call FlexACM that combines adaptive modulation with noise and dis­
tortion estimation technology and predictive technology on upcoming 
variation to reduce the implementation margin, discussed above.
• Bandwidth cancellation: The same technique as carrier-in-carrier, de­
scribed in Chapter 5.
Figure 6.10  NovelSat NS 3000 modem incorporating DVB-S2 extensions.
Figure 6.11  Capability of DVB-S2 Extensions. (Courtesy of Newtec.)

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
171
6.3.3  Protocol Gateways and TCP/IP Acceleration
This discussion of protocol adaptation for satellite communications, intro­
duced in Chapter 4, is within the context of the Internet Protocol in general 
and TCP/IP in particular. As discussed previously, a protocol gateway is a soft­
ware module within the VSAT and within the hub that converts from the stan­
dard structure of TCP/IP into a protocol that is optimized for the properties of 
the GEO satellite link. Examples of the latter include SCPS and XTP, which 
were introduced in Chapter 4. The protocol gateway exists within the baseband 
system and there is the potential for extending it beyond the earth station to 
the end user’s terrestrial network. The nature of the IP stack, consisting of five 
layers, is such that interaction with satellite links can be problematic unless 
addressed properly by the protocol gateway. TCP, in particular, has these key 
characteristics in this regard [8]:
Windowing: TCP is a connection-oriented protocol that tracks the trans­
fer and delivery of all packets to assure 100% accuracy. The sending end con­
tains a buffer memory with sufficient capacity to hold transmitted packets for 
the duration of the round trip delay as a minimum. This is equal to the delay-
bandwidth product, namely the product of the round trip time delay (approxi­
mately 0.5 seconds for GEO) and the actual data rate of transmission. For ex­
ample, the minimum buffer size for a 1-Mbps link would be 0.5•1,000 kbps, or 
Table 6.2
Summary of Technical Specifications of NovelSat NS3000 Satellite Modem
IF frequency range
950 to 1750 MHz (up to 2150 MHz)
Digital interface
F-type 75 Ohm
Maximum digital data rate
365 Mbps
Modulation/demodulation
DVB-S2 plus 64 APSK
Forward error correction
DVB-S2 with improvements
Clock
10 MHz
Band select
22 kHz ±4 kHz
Output power
–30 dBm to 0 dBm
Output spurious
–55 dBc at max power
Output return loss
>12 dB
Input power
–20 dBm to 0 dBm
Stability
±10 ppm over 0°C to 50°C
±0.03 ppm (option)
Size, weight
48.3 × 45.7 × 4.45 cm, 4 kg
Operating temperature and humidity
0 to 50 C, up to 85% noncondensing
Software interfaces
Command line interface Web-based 
graphic user interface
SMMP V3
Front panel

172 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
500 kb. The TCP stack on each end establishes the amount of unacknowledged 
data that can be in transit at any given time. This is referred to as the window 
size, and is communicated via a 16-bit field in the TCP header.
Packet loss and retransmission: The destination is able to determine if the 
received packet is good, in which case it transmits back an acknowledgment 
(ACK). The technique used to verify a good packet is the cyclic redundancy 
check (CRC), also called a checksum. The sending end can then drop the copy 
maintained in its buffer memory. In the case where a packet is not received due 
to bit errors or possibly a dropped packet, no acknowledgment is sent. The 
receiving end, having waited the round trip time plus an allowance for other 
factors such as processing time, resends the unacknowledged packet again. This 
system assures that all packets are sent and received correctly. There is an ad­
ditional feature to improve upon throughput since the scheme just reviewed 
requires a full round-trip time between every packet. Rather, packets are sent in 
batches and a combined acknowledgment is returned from the receiving end. 
The principles of multiple packet transfer and the use of the window are illus­
trated in the ladder diagram of Figure 6.12. Figure 6.13 examines how a lost 
packet is retransmitted.
Slow start and congestion avoidance: In the global domain of the Internet, 
a connection is initiated without knowledge of network conditions and must 
assume it is already congested. This may or may not apply to a satellite link, but 
the assumption is inherent in any computer system configured to use TCP/IP. 
After a connection is established, the originating end will send one packet. If 
the ACK is received within the window, two packets are then sent, and so on. 
This is referred to as slow start; at some point, the link runs at the maximum 
data rate that can be maintained by both ends. Figure 6.14 illustrates the be­
havior of TCP/IP from the first packet through the ramp up in speed. When 
a packet is lost and no ACK is returned, the end systems assume that the net­
work is congested and drop back to the initial condition of zero data transfer. 
From there, that assumption of congestion leads to what is called the slow start, 
wherein the packet transfer rate is increased incrementally and at a slower rate.
In the case of a typical TDM/TDMA satellite network, data transfer can 
jump immediately to the maximum throughput because there is no need for a 
slow start. A packet loss is most likely due to bit errors rather than congestion, 
so all that is required is retransmission of the lost packet and data transfer can 
continue at the maximum rate. Further loss could cause the connection to drop.
Connection establishment and termination: The TCP connection is estab­
lished by a three-way handshake (SYN message, then SYN-ACK returned, then 
the ACK message). This insures both sides are synchronized, resulting in data 
flow in either direction. Connection termination is a four-way process (FIN 
message, then FIN-ACK in both directions); data flow then terminates inde­
pendently in each direction.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
173
Figure 6.12  Illustration of the principle of windowing addresses packet loss and retransmis­
sion. In this example, overall delay is reduced by sending and acknowledging multiple packts.
Figure 6.13  Illustration of how the protocol responds to a packet loss and abscence of the 
ACK. The sending end holds packets for the duration of the window; if this times out, the miss­
ing packet is retransmitted.

174 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
It is important to note that any limitations are not caused by the satel­
lite link, but by TCP’s sliding window algorithm, data acknowledgment and 
retransmission methods, the slow start and congestion avoidance mechanisms, 
and their reaction to satellite link latency, bit errors, and asymmetric bandwidth.
The satellite-optimized connection-oriented protocol has become the 
preferred means of addressing the shortcomings of TCP/IP. XTP, mentioned in 
Chapter 4, has the features that allow the suppliers of satellite network software 
to compensate for these issues [9]. In particular, XTP does not suffer from the 
slow start and congestion avoidance problems of TCP and provides a number 
of tools that can correct for the other aspects of satellite links. It is not the 
only solution but it has the advantage of being an open standard similar to 
those promulgated by the IETF. As discussed previously, the protocol gateway is 
the means of adapting TCP/IP to a satellite-optimized protocol based on XTP 
or the like. Positioned between the user interface that employs TCP/IP at the 
Transport layer and the corresponding layer within the VSAT or hub baseband 
equipment, it intercepts TCP connections and converts the appropriate pro­
tocol data units to the satellite-optimized protocol for the satellite portion of 
connection. Another term for this type of gateway is PEP, which was mentioned 
in Chapter 4. An arrangement of protocol gateways in a satellite network is 
presented in Figure 6.15.
In summary, the protocol gateway or PEP is the established approach for 
baseband architectures that must make effective TCP/IP connections over GEO 
satellite links. Its principal advantage is that it employs a well-designed proto­
col that allows the highest levels of performance despite satellite conditions. 
Figure 6.14  Illustration of the principle of the slow start for congestion avoidance in stan­
dard TCP/IP. After the throughput reaches maximum, a packet loss occurs and the link drops 
back to its initial state. From there, the slow start beings again, but is halted at mid point to 
allow for congestion avoidance.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
175
Importantly, it requires no changes to end nodes or applications since these can 
use TCP over the terrestrial portion of the network with the satellite-optimized 
protocol only in use over the satellite link. The approach depends on the ability 
of the protocol gateway to read the TCP headers and then act appropriately to 
establish effective connections for IP data over the satellite. If these headers are 
encrypted as they would be when using IP-Sec or some other forms of encryp­
tion (discussed in the next section), then the satellite protocol will not perform 
the acceleration function. It is obvious that there is nothing the protocol gate­
way can do to overcome the inherent delay of the satellite path, and the gateway 
may interact with the application in unexpected ways. It is therefore prudent 
to test the operation of all applications over the accelerated link to determine 
what, if anything, needs to be done to the application or possibly within the 
gateway itself. There is always the technique of increasing link speed over the 
satellite and using more effective FEC to improve performance when a connec­
tion is up and working.
6.3.4  Security and Encryption within the Baseband System
Satellite uplinks and downlinks are vulnerable to interception and jamming, 
a fact that often concerns potential users. Like other forms of wireless com­
munications, radio waves extend over a wide area and can be detected with the 
proper equipment. Another concern is that receiving equipment for any kind 
of radio system is open to interference from signals on the same frequency or 
even nearby in frequency and all that prevents jamming is having an adequate 
carrier to interference ratio. As shown in Figure 6.16, these are two important 
aspects of security as it relates to design of a satellite system and the associated 
Figure 6.15  An example of the application of protocol gateways as part of the baseband 
system of a satellite network. The particular approach has the protocol gateway separated 
from the modem and router; many implementations for VSAT services have all three fucntions 
combined into single baseband elements. (Courtesy of Mentat.)

176 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
ground segment. We concentrate here on the use of encryption and anti-jam 
within the baseband portion.
In general, ability of satellite communications to reach many users in a 
given area over a common medium is beneficial to networking. However, there 
are inherent security and business concerns when “everybody hears everything.” 
The most common solution is to encrypt the data prior to the uplink; the satel­
lite, being a bent pipe in most instances, relays the signal without modification 
and so the downlink is protected as well. Encryption technology has evolved 
over the years thanks to its widespread use in computer networks and the Inter­
net and in all forms of wireless communications. In particular, many commer­
cial systems now provide Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) link encryption 
that was adopted as a U.S. Federal Information Processing Standard. The most 
straightforward method is to perform encryption on the entire data stream at 
the transmitting earth station and to decrypt data immediately on reception 
at the receiving earth station. The type of encryption device usually is placed 
adjacent to the satellite modem, producing unencrypted data at the earth sta­
tion interface. In this case, the connection is in the clear and requires at least 
some form of physical security. Encryption on the satellite link is common in 
military and bank networks. In Figure 6.17, we see that satellite link encryp­
tion can work effectively with a protocol gateway because the TCP headers are 
unencrypted prior to entry into the earth station.
Application layer encryption, illustrated in Figure 6.18, is a form of end-
to-end encryption wherein the actual data is encrypted within the application 
and prior to addition of protocol headers. There is some loss of security because 
headers provide information as to the origin and destination of the data trans­
fer or connection. On the other hand, the TCP headers that pass through to 
the earth station allow the protocol gateway function to work correctly. Secure 
Figure 6.16  Illustrations of how either interception or jamming can be instigated by a stealthy 
Earth station located within the area of satellite coverage.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
177
Sockets Layer (SSL) is a good example of a common application layer encryp­
tion system.
These examples provide a range of options for encryption from the base­
band and user interface. Suppliers of VSAT systems and modems have incor­
porated encryption within their offerings so it is important to understand the 
specifics of how it is accomplished and the overhead associated with its use.
6.3.5  Conditional Access in Digital DTH Ground Segments
Security and encryption play a role in satellite DTH broadcasting in the form 
of conditional access (CA), which provides for tight control of subscription 
to services and the delivery of copyrighted content. First introduced in the C-
band cable TV market back in the late 1980s, CA today is the foundation of 
a profitable enterprise that provides satellite TV to more than a billion people 
worldwide. In North America, Europe, and Asia, subscription services for mov­
ies and sports are extremely popular and the revenues garnered are important 
to the providers of the content. The baseband systems that make up the CA 
segment are quite complex since they provide both network control (down to 
the individual set-top-box and by program) and security (authentication and 
encryption using smart cards). There is also the element of service management 
Figure 6.17  Appropriate location of TCP acceleration protocol gateway when employing link 
encryption.
Figure 6.18  Application-layer encryption provides data security but allows TCP headers to 
pass to the protocol gateway.

178 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
that is discussed in Section 6.2.10 since these aspects must be tied together to 
assure consistent operation of the system and the business.
The basic CA architecture is presented in Figure 6.19 [10]. The DVB 
series of specifications includes a segment for CA and offers a fairly consis­
tent approach [11]. However, there is considerable room for innovation and 
proprietary features that make systems incompatible with each other. This can 
be seen as an advantage as well since it makes it somewhat harder to break a 
given system. The CA architecture starts with a subscriber authorization system 
(SAS) to control access and authorize use of copyrighted material, and includes 
the CA host at the uplink and the CA client at the set-top-box. The scrambler 
and descrambler assure that content is encrypted during broadcast, and the CA 
module (smart card) provides the secure key for decoding video, audio, and 
data (including the program guide).
The technical CA solutions were developed for digital DTH in the 1990s 
and so there is considerable experience with the technology and operation. One 
of the originators involved with the early DIRECTV CA system was News 
DataCom, a subsidiary of News Corp originally based in Israel. The company 
was acquired by Cisco Systems in 2012 and continues its business within the 
Cisco Videoscape Unity platform. Another provider of CA systems is Irdeto of 
the Netherlands.
6.4  Baseband Systems for Scientific Missions
Space missions around the earth and beyond require space-to-ground commu­
nications for scientific data return and for conventional telemetry and com­
Figure 6.19  The major components of the DVB Conditional Access (CA) architecture and 
their interrelationships [10]. The scrambler and descrambler implement the data-scrambling 
elements, and control words are the cipher keys. CA-Host, CA-Client, and CA-Modules are 
the three diistributed components of the Subscriber Authorization System (SAS) element, and 
they use CA descriptors and CA messages (Entitlement Control Messages, EMM, and Entitle­
ment Management Messages, ECM) for communications.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
179
mand (T&C). The baseband functions are generally performed by specialized 
units that can be configured to serve various missions at different times. The 
block diagram of a programmable T&C processor (PTP) is shown in Figure 
6.20 and its physical configuration in Figure 6.21.
These units are designed to operate within standards agreed to by space 
research organizations such as NASA and ESA. The following lists are key speci­
fications of the PTP based on the Consultative Committee on Space Data Sys­
tems (CCSDS).
Telemetry Processing
• Data rate: up to 30 Mbps;
• Integrated receiver, demod, bit sync, and Viterbi decoder;
Figure 6.20  Block diagram of a programmable T&C processor (PTP). This example is for 
equipment supplied by AVTEK Technology.
Figure 6.21  Programmable T&C processor (PTP). (Courtesy of AVTEK Technology.)

180 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Turbo encoding and decoding;
• CCSDS telecommand;
• IP over CCSDS or high-level data link control (HDLC);
• Disk logging;
• Coding gain: >5 dB.
Interface
• Frequency range: IF (50–90 MHz), L band (1435–1545 MHz), and S 
band (2200–2300 MHz);
• Demodulation: FM, Linear PM, AM, BPSK, QPSK;
• Data rate: up to 20 Mbps;
• BPSK Subcarrier Demodulator;
• Subcarrier range: 1 kHz to 5 MHz (1-Hz resolution);
• Data bandwidth: 100 Hz to 2.5 MHz Loop bandwidth: 1 Hz to 25 
kHz;
• Loop bandwidth: 1 Hz to 25 kHz;
• Acquisition/tracking range: 2 × loop bandwidth;
• Ethernet, ATM;
• TCP/IP Socket interface.
Within CCSDS is found the SCPS protocol discussed in Chapter 4, a 
protocol that some developers have used for the protocol gateway functions de­
scribed in the previous section. Specifically with regard to IP, CCSDS provides 
a transfer mechanism called IP encapsulation in CCSDS. Figure 6.22 illustrates 
the basic function of encapsulation.
There are many other considerations for constructing a baseband system 
that supports space science. In many cases, the ground segment is highly cus­
tomized to the requirements, such as for earth observation with high resolution 
cameras, requiring specialized high-speed modems and schemes for tracking a 
moving spacecraft. Generally, the terrestrial network portion can employ the 
global Internet provided that the QoS meets mission requirements. Otherwise, 
dedicated backhaul circuits would be needed. The use of a space relay such as 
the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) may be required to assure con­
tinuous access to the science mission.

 
Ground Segment Baseband Architecture and Equipment 
181
References
[1]	 Viardot, Eric, Successful Marketing Strategy for High-Tech Firms, 2d ed., Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 1998.
[2]	 Urban, Glen L., and John R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products, 2d ed., Engle­
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993.
[3]	 Fluckiger, François, Understanding Networked Multimedia: Applications and Technology, 
London: Prentice Hall, 1995. 
[4]	 Lee, Jhong Sam, and Leonard E. Miller, CDMA Systems Engineering Handbook, Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 1999, p. 368.
[5]	 Xiong, Fuqin, Modem Techniques in Satellite Communications, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, August 1994, p. 84.
[6]	 Sklar, Bernard, Digital Communications–Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd, ed., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001, p. 525.
[7]	 Xiong, Fuqin, Digital Modulation Techniques, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2006, 
p. 289.
[8]	 Palter, D. C., Satellites and Internet—Challenges and Solutions, Sonoma, CA: SatNews 
Publishers, 2003.
[9]	 Strayer, W. Timothy, Bert J. Dempsey, and Alfred C. Weaver, XTP: The Xpress Transfer 
Protocol, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1992.
[10]	 Ho, Tong, “Digital Video Broadcasting Conditional Access Architecture,” Fall 2002, 
http://www.cs.sjsu.edu/~stamp/cs265/projects/papers/dvbca.pdf
Figure 6.22  Scope of IP protocol encap.

182 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
[11]	 van Rijnsoever, B. J., and J. P. Linnartz, “Interoperable Content Protection for Digital 
TV,” IEEE Multimedia and Expo 2000, IEEE Conference on Communications, Vol. 3, 
2000. 

183
7
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment
The design of a typical earth station follows the principles of RF and microwave 
engineering, in the context of transmission of modulated carriers through the 
satellite to other earth stations. Because of the complexity of this task, we break 
the problem down into its constituent parts:
• Uplink design—microwave transmission toward the satellite, involving 
a high-power signal;
• Downlink design—the corresponding receive direction, involving low-
power signals in noise;
• Antenna and microwave design—the earth station components that in­
terface directly with the RF path;
• Upconversion and downconversion—the portion of the earth station 
used to translate frequencies between IF and RF and vice versa.
7.1  Uplink Design and the EIRP Budget
The transmit portion of an earth station is sized according to the EIRP required 
for the uplink path. The link budget, developed in Chapter 3, provides the 
starting point for RF chain analysis within the earth station; Chapter 8 gives 
an example of a PC software tool for convenient development on link budgets. 
Assuming that the uplink side of the link budget is defined, the designer needs 
to consider what can practically be implemented within the RF transmit por­
tion of the earth station. There could be constraints on the maximum transmit 
power imposed by a limitation on prime power generation, radio frequency 
interference, or radiation hazard (a particular concern in portable or handheld 

184 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
equipment). Also, there could be a size limit on the earth station antenna, such 
as for installation on the roof of a building or on a vessel or vehicle. Another 
consideration is the level of sidelobe radiation from the uplink antenna toward 
adjacent satellites.
The uplink portion of the link budget determines the required EIRP. The 
factors that constitute the required EIRP are the gain of the antenna, the loss of 
the transmission line (waveguide, coaxial cable [coax], or whatever is being used 
on the transmit side), and the output of the high-power amplifier (HPA) itself. 
The antenna could be a parabolic reflector of substantial diameter such as that 
used in a video uplink, or it could be a simple rod or helix antenna attached to 
a mobile terminal. We use the term HPA in reference to any type of amplifier; 
in actuality, the amplifier might only produce one watt of output (in which case 
it could hardly be called high power).
The basic relationship for the EIRP in dBW is as follows:
	
o
t
t
EIRP
P
L
G
=
-
+
	
where Po is the HPA output power at the waveguide flange; Lt is the transmis­
sion line loss between the HPA and antenna feed; and Gt is the antenna transmit 
gain at the operating frequency in the direction of the satellite. Starting with a 
required value of EIRP and uplink frequency, the designer determines the type 
and size of antenna, the type of transmission line (waveguide or coax, with its 
associated dB/meter loss factor), and the distance between antenna and HPA. 
Working backward from the antenna,
	
=
+
-
t
t
o
G
EIRP
L
P 	
This simple relationship demonstrates that the gain we need increases 
with the required EIRP and the loss of the transmission line. Note also that in­
creasing the transmit power has the direct benefit of allowing a reduction of the 
needed gain (evident by the minus sign). As well, an increase in transmit gain 
typically increases receive gain and helps reduce adjacent satellite interference.
7.2  Uplink Power Control
Depending on the requirements of the link, service, and space segment, the 
earth station may need some form of uplink power control (UPC) to reduce 
variation of power level at the satellite repeater. If we assume ideal operation 
without carrier level variation, the signals within a typical transponder may ap­
pear to be nonvarying over time. An example of this is shown in Figure 7.1(a), 
which represents an SCPC transponder with several low-power carriers and two 

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
185
higher-power carriers. Due to drift and/or link fading, the levels of the different 
carriers will change over time, producing the variability shown in Figure 7.1(b). 
This poses the following potential problems:
• The aggregate power of all carriers could drift upward, meaning that 
the total backoff of the transponder is reduced. This is a consequence 
of individual carriers being adjusted upwards to improve service qual­
ity. This condition will generally result in greater IMD noise within the 
transponder and a reduction in the overall link C/N (assuming the link 
was previously operating at its optimum backoff).
• A particular carrier that drifts downward in power will experience a di­
rect reduction in uplink C/N of precisely the same amount, measured in 
dB. Also, the carrier will see a relatively higher level of IM noise, and the 
downlink C/N will decrease as well. Taken together, the link C/N will 
have been reduced through this combined mechanism.
• Uncertainty (error) in uplink level adds up to a mean value of service 
degradation. This must be compensated for by improving the overall 
link performance for all carriers. If carrier levels can be held within tight 
limits, then this margin is unnecessary.
Figure 7.1  A multicarrier transponder: (a) with carriers aligned properly in power; and (b) 
with excessive power variations that degrade service for some and reduce the total backoff.

186 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Uplinks may fade due to shadowing in L- and S-band mobile satellite 
systems or rain in Ku- and Ka-band fixed satellite services. As discussed 
in Chapter 3, additional power margin within earth station HPAs will 
be very useful for correcting for uplink fade while holding power nearly 
constant at the satellite.
There are three basic approaches for controlling uplink power variation: 
open-loop control within the earth station, closed-loop control using a down­
link beacon signal transmitted through the satellite, and remote control from 
the distant end of the link. Open-loop systems sense the power within the up­
link chain, usually at the output of the HPA and before the antenna. As shown 
in Figure 7.2, a small sample of signal power is taken from a directional coupler, 
detected and fed back to a controlled-variable attenuator at the input to the 
HPA. This compensates for internal drift and aging of earth station transmit 
components only. The optional radiometer senses the presents of rain to pro­
vide a cross reference. The closed-loop approach, shown in Figure 7.3, adjusts 
for equipment drift and uplink fading as the means to maintain nearly constant 
power at the satellite. The satellite would be required to transmit a nearly con­
stant downlink beacon carrier, which is either the normal telemetry carrier or a 
special signal provided within the payload for that purpose. Another, less accu­
rate, approach is to use a carrier uplinked from one of the earth stations within 
the footprint. The obvious difficulty with an earth-station-generated beacon is 
that it, too, is subject to equipment drift and uplink fading. In either case, the 
earth stations with power control have a dedicated receiver to detect the average 
beacon level, and use this to control the variable attenuator ahead of the HPA. 
(In Chapter 6, it was suggested that the modem might perform this function 
as well.)
Figure 7.2  Open-loop uplink power control system, using an optional RF radiometer to detect 
rain attenuation from the ground.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
187
The third method involves using the opposite end of the link where the 
actual bit error rate or C/N can be measured. As the received quality degrades 
at the distant end, it sends a message back to the transmitting to ask for a pro­
portional increase in EIRP. This can respond well to the status of the link and 
provide constant overall performance. In the use of DVB-S2, the ACM feature 
can also alter the MODCOD while maintaining the symbol rate, assuring that 
the link remains up and working. The technique is provided in VSAT networks 
where the hub detects signal quality and directs the remote site to increase or 
decrease power as needed. Also, two-way modems for point-to-point links can 
likewise be provided with UPC on both ends.
An important issue in UPC design relates to the response of the control 
loop to the dynamics of fading. This can be slow or fast, depending on the phe­
nomenon, e.g., rapid fades due to multipath or slow fades due to widespread 
rain. It is not possible to anticipate every possible condition that could be expe­
rienced on the link; hence, the control loop may have to be adaptive in nature. 
Performance of the loop can be verified using link fading simulation, which 
can be performed by a special link simulator or an appropriately programmed 
computer.
UPC systems have been successfully applied to Ku-band BSS broadcast 
centers that originate digital multiplexed video channels, as well as hub stations 
for the out route carrier used with VSAT star networks. Even though UPC is a 
dependable way to maintain network service availability during various forms 
of fading, it can go out of alignment due to normal wear and tear. Therefore, 
it becomes necessary to continuously monitor the operation of the equipment 
and perform preventive maintenance to assure that the controlled carrier levels 
are proper. Also, the satellite beacon carrier, which is the reference for closed-
loop UPC, is a critical element and must itself be stable and dependable.
Figure 7.3  Closed-loop uplink power control system, using a dedicated satellite UPC beacon.

188 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
7.3  Transmit Gain Budget
The gain budget is very similar to the link budget except that it represents the 
internal RF equipment chain within the earth station itself. We use as an ex­
ample the block diagram of a video-class earth station in the transmit direction, 
shown in Figure 7.4. Quite obviously, the particular type of equipment and its 
arrangement must be known (or at least understood in general terms) in order 
to put the block diagrams together and then create the gain budgets. We will 
evaluate the downlink gain budget, which is very similar, in the next section.
In the transmit direction, we see that the first stage is the modulator con­
nected at the upconverter at the IF. A typical upconverter is capable of output­
ting its carrier at the desired RF frequency at a power level in the range of –30 
to 0 dBm (e.g., –60 to –30 dBW). The particular value is determined by the 
required transmit power from the antenna and the intervening gains and losses 
after the upconverter. The corresponding link budget for the uplink at 18.2 
GHz, given in Table 3.2, indicates a required EIRP of 82.6 dBw. Assuming a 
13-m antenna with 65.6 dBi of gain and 3 dB of transmit waveguide loss, the 
HPA output power needed is 20 dBW (i.e., 100 W). RF performance of the 
component is shown in Figure 7.4; i.e., the gain of the HPA itself, the passive 
loss of the coax transmission lines internal to the station, and the loss of the 
power combiner used to connect redundant upconverters. An allowance of 2 to 
3 dB additional power is often required by the satellite operator.
Values for these characteristics can be obtained from suppliers and stan­
dard catalogs. The losses for the waveguide and semirigid coax cable are tak­
en from the typical data in Table 7.1 and Figure 7.5 [1].This indicates that a 
Figure 7.4  Uplink gain budget for an earth station high-power transmit chain (assumed to 
be at 18.2 GHz).

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
189
waveguide at 18.2 GHz would have about 0.3 dB of loss per meter, while the 
corresponding loss for semirigid coaxial cable is about 1.5 dB per meter. Our 
100-watt HPA has a nominal gain of 60 dB, which is typical for a complete unit 
with final amplifier and driver amplifier. The loss of a passive power combiner 
is basically the inverse of the number of inputs to be combined, which in this 
case is 1/4 (about 6 dB). An additional attenuation of 1dB accounts for internal 
resistive loss, yielding a total of 7 dB for the four-way power combiner. Work­
ing backward, the output of the upconverter would have to be –33 dBm (-63 
dBW) in order to produce the desired 20 dBW at the output of the HPA. This 
particular value may be lower than the level recommended for the particular 
upconverter. It is customary to specify output of low-level devices such as up­
converters and modulators in dBm. A discussion of various classes of HPAs and 
their power capabilities is provided in Section 7.6.
The uplink gain budget reveals whether all of the active and passive ele­
ments of the earth station are compatible with one another. For example, does 
the HPA have adequate input power to achieve the required input to the an­
tenna? If not, then another driver amplifier needs to be introduced into the 
Table 7.1
Properties of Typical Coaxial and Waveguide Transmission Lines (Figure 7.5)
Description
Material
Type #
Outer 
Dimensions 
(inches)
CW 
Power 
Handling
Flexibility
 1. Coaxial
Teflon
0.141” dia
0.14 dia
50W
semiflexible
 2. Coaxial
Polyethylene
RG 8
0.42 dia
30W
flexible
 3. Coaxial
Helical 
polystyrene
7/8” HELIAX
1.0 dia
700W
semiflexible
 4. Coaxial
Air
3-1/8” RIGID
3.5 dia
12kW
rigid
 5. Rectangular WG
Aluminum
WR 770
8 × 4
57MW
rigid
 6. Rectangular WG
Aluminum
WR 187
2 × 1
3MW
rigid
 7. Rectangular WG
Brass
WR 90
1 × 0.5
730kW
rigid
 8. Rectangular WG
Brass
WR 62
0.7 × 0.4
440kW
rigid
 9. Rectangular WG
Silver
WR 28
0.36 × 0.22
95kW
rigid
10. Rectangular WG
Silver
WR 8
0.16 dia
1.8kW
rigid
11. Elliptical WG
Aluminum
RG 379
2.5 × 1.5
20kW
semirigid
12. Flexible Elliptical 
WG
Copper
WE 44
2.5 × 1.5
4kW
flexible
13. Ridged WG
Aluminum
WRD 750 
D24
0.7 × 0.4
100kW
rigid
14. Overmoded 
Circular WG
Copper with 
Teflon liner
60mm dia
4 dia
—
rigid
15. Microstrip
Gold on 
Alumina
0.025”
—
50W
rigid

190 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
chain between the upconverter and HPA. Uplink power control, if provided, 
puts additional demands on the uplink for amplification and output power.
Assuming that there is enough drive to the HPA, the other critical aspect 
of meeting the EIRP requirement is the amount of loss between it and the an­
tenna feed. This should be controlled as carefully as possible, as every 0.5 dB of 
loss represents a power reduction of approximately 10%. The types of items to 
be encountered include:
• Transmission line (typically waveguide or simirigid coax), as reviewed 
previously. The amount of loss is predictable and can be calculated based 
on the type of line and its length. Flanges or other connectors will in­
troduce attenuation from power absorption as well as additional loss 
due to voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR), the latter governed by the 
formula in dB:
Figure 7.5  Attenuation characteristics of typical coaxial and waveguide transmission lines.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
191
	
[
]


+
=


⋅


2
1
10log
4
m
VSWR
L
VSWR
	
Environmental factors also play a role in changing the transmission 
characteristics of the line. One of the biggest concerns is contamina­
tion and the resulting rust and corrosion from air and moisture. This is 
why lines are fed dry air or nitrogen (the latter introducing a change in 
dielectric constant and hence a shift in center frequency of waveguide 
filters in the same line).
• Power combiners, typically using microwave filters to minimize inser­
tion loss. This topic is reviewed later in this chapter. Other filtering 
might be included to reduce uplink out-of-band radiation (to protect 
other services such as space research and radio astronomy, discussed in 
Chapter 1).
• High-power microwave switches that allow backup HPAs to be con­
nected in and for routing the uplink to alternate antennas. These switch­
es are typically mechanical in nature so as to provide full bandwidth 
operation with minimum insertion loss. They can be installed in a build­
ing or shelter to protect them from the elements. For larger stations it 
is useful to consider RF switching and routing between HPAs or indi­
vidual uplink channels, or even to allow these channels to be connected 
to any particular antenna on site. This arrangement would be controlled 
through the monitor and control (M&C) system of the earth station. 
An important point is that the particular routing of uplink chains to 
antennas should be made clear to operators at all times so that a mistake 
or failure does not cause harmful interference to another transponder or 
satellite.
• Measurement tools inserted in transmit and receive waveguide runs 
such as directional couplers and attenuators.
7.4  Downlink G/T and RF Level Analysis
The function of downlink design is to meet the G/T requirement and deliver 
sufficient carrier power to the downconverter and demodulator. The G/T anal­
ysis considers the total received noise due to the antenna, waveguide, low noise 
amplification, and subsequent stages. This is evaluated against the net antenna 
gain as measured at the same reference point in the earth station RF receive sec­

192 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
tion. The gain budget technique is then used to verify signal level in the same 
manner as for the uplink. These aspects are reviewed in the following sections.
7.4.1  Downlink Noise Temperature Allocation
In Chapter 3, we introduced the system noise temperature, Tsys, that defines the 
sensitivity of the receiving system for all earth stations. Noise is basically derived 
from the irreducible thermal noise due to the random motion of electrons in con­
ductors and solid state devices [2]. Within the RF bands of interest, we have the 
basic relationship for the noise spectral density, N0, in watts per Hertz (W/Hz):
	
=
0
eq
N
kT 	
where Teq is the equivalent noise temperature in Kelvin (K) and k is Boltzmanns 
constant. As measured across a resistor with resistance, R, and in a bandwidth, 
B, the resulting RMS voltage is given by Nyquists formula,
	
=
4
eq
V
kT BR 	
We can assume that both the power source and load have the characteris­
tic impedance, R, over the bandwidth of the carrier. Then, the noise power in 
the load for the bandwidth of interest, B, is simply
	
=
eq
N
kT B 	
For a typical arrangement of earth station RF receive components, the 
system noise temperature as referred to the LNA or LNB input is:
	
-
=
+
⋅
+
1 290
a
r
sys
re
r
r
T
l
T
T
l
l
	
where Ta is the antenna temperature; lr is the loss factor (l ≥ 1) for the input 
receive waveguide or transmission line; 290K is the assumed physical tempera­
ture of the waveguide; and Tre is the equivalent noise temperature of the receiver 
(including noise added by stages downstream of the LNA or LNB, generally 
assumed to contribute 0K).
From this relationship, we see the criticality of controlling waveguide loss 
and using LNAs with appropriately good performance in terms of noise contri­
bution. Antenna temperature for reflector antennas is generally under 50K for 
dishes larger than about 40 wavelengths (e.g., 3m at C band, 1m at Ku band, 
and 60 cm at Ka band). As shown in Figure 7.6, noise pickup at high elevation 

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
193
angles is nearly constant and is dominated by background noise from space 
and antenna backlobes. Lower elevation angles introduce more ground noise. 
Evaluations of this type can be made by integrating across the entire antenna 
radiation pattern in three dimensions. However, limited accuracy is obtained by 
measuring the antenna temperature directly with a calibrated receiver.
The situation for very broad-beam antennas such as those used for mo­
bile communications is that antenna temperature is often greater than Tre. As 
illustrated in Figure 7.7, a simple mobile antenna will allow ground noise to 
enter at nearly the same gain as the desired signal [3]. Summation of the total 
noise throughout the broad antenna pattern is also a difficult analytical process 
because of coupling effects from adjacent objects which distort the pattern. 
More noise may be introduced by local sources such as a human being or an 
operating vehicle. Therefore, noise in mobile user terminals may be dominated 
by the pickup of their antennas.
The noise temperature of a particular LNA or LNB can be computed from 
the performance of its components. Figure 7.8 presents an example consisting 
of an input waveguide and flange, low loss isolator, two stages of low-noise 
GaAs FET amplification, a final high-gain stage using bipolar silicon transis­
tors, and an output isolator. More detail concerning LNA and LNB construc­
tion is given in Section 7.4.2.1. The function of the input and output isolators 
is to match the amplifier to the transmission lines. This produces the lowest 
equivalent noise and prevents reflected energy from distorting the frequency 
response. Amplifier noise temperature and noise figure are directly related to 
each other by the following:
	
(
)
=
-
⋅
1 290
T
F
	
Figure 7.6  Typical antenna temperature contribution with elevation angle for a reflector an­
tenna with a diameter greater than 40 wavelengths. 

194 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.7  Broad beam pattern of a rectangular microstrip patch MSS antenna.
Figure 7.8  Low noise amplifier (LNA) block diagram, showing a waveguide-to-coax adaptor 
input, a three-port coax isolator, and three stages of amplification. The isolator at the output 
reduces interaction with downstream components.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
195
where F is the noise figure as a linear factor (F ≥ 1) and 290 is the ambient 
temperature in Kelvin.
The basic relationship for determining Tre for a typical receiving chain is 
as follows:
	
(
)
3
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
3
1 290
rest
re
w i
w i
T
T
T
T
l l
T
l l
G
G G
G G G


=
-
⋅
+
+
+
+




	
This equation must be calculated entirely in linear mathematics (not dB). 
The first term represents the noise contribution of the input losses due to the 
coupler and isolator and the second term is the combined noise contribution 
of the stages of amplification. The factor, lwli, accounts for the combine loss of 
the waveguide-to-coax transition and isolator at the front end of the LNA and 
increases the noise effect since it is due to the loss ahead of the active ampli­
fier stages. The summary of the overall performance of this LNA is presented 
in Table 7.2. The total noise temperature of this LNA is approximately 100K, 
two-thirds of which is contributed by the first GaAsFET stage. Note also the 
total gain, which amounts to approximately 54 dB. Both of these values are 
typical for Ku- and Ka-band LNAs.
We now evaluate the systems noise temperature for the earth station, con­
sisting of the antenna, transmission line, LNA (or LNB, if appropriate), and the 
remaining stages of the RF/IF downlink system. An example of the analysis of 
system noise is provided in Table 7.3 for the receiving system shown in Figure 
7.9. We are assumed to be looking into the LNA itself as the plane of reference. 
In calculating the G/T, it does not matter what the reference plane is as long as 
both G and T are evaluated at the same point.
Table 7.2
Analysis of Tre for Typical LNA String Shown in Figure 7.8
Component
Gain of This 
Stage, dB
Noise 
Figure, dB
Noise 
Temperature, K
Gain of 
Stages 
Preceding 
Stages, dB
Contribution, K
Waveguide/ 
isolator
–0.25  
0.25
 17
–0.0
17.18
GaAs LNA 
stage 1
11.5  
0.85
 63
–0.25
66.41
GaAs LNA 
stage 2
11.5  
1.10
 84
11.25
 6.27
Bipolar 
amplifier stage
32.0  
5.50
739
22.75
 3.92
Output isolator –0.5  
0.50
35
54.75
 0.00
Total at output
54.25  
—
—
—
93.78

196 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
7.4.2  G/T Budget‑
The evaluation of G/T at this point is very simple: it is the ratio of the gain 
to the system noise temperature (or difference in dB) at the same point in the 
receiving system (e.g., the input to the LNB). The antenna gain is reduced by 
the amount of waveguide loss already budgeted in Table 7.3 (e.g., 0.2 dB). 
Assuming the 45-cm-diameter antenna in the link budget from Chapter 3 in 
Table 3.1, the receive gain at the antenna feed output flange is 33.0 dBi. This 
is reduced by 0.2 dB, yielding 32.8 dBi of effective gain. Our corresponding 
value of noise temperature is 140K, or 21.5 dB/K. The G/T of this receiving 
earth station is therefore 11.3 dB/K. This would correspond to a condition of 
Figure 7.9  Typical block diagram to determine receiving system noise temperature.
Table 7.3
Analysis of Tsys for Receiving Earth Station in Figure 7.9, Referenced to Input to LNB
Element
Gain, dB
Noise 
Figure, dB
Noise 
Temperature, K
Gain With 
Respect to 
LNA Input
Contribution, K
Antenna feed
–0.25  
—
40.00
0.25
37.76
Input 
waveguide
–0.25  
0.25
17.18
0.25
16.22
LNB (input is 
reference)
54.00  
1.22
94.06
 0.00
94.06
Cable
–10.00  
10.00
2610.00
54.00
0.01
Receiver
 —
12.61
5000.00
44.00
0.20
System noise 
temperature
 —
—
—
—
148.25

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
197
(1) perfect alignment of the main beam with the satellite, and (2) clear sky at an 
elevation angle of greater than about 25°.
7.4.2.1  Low-Noise Amplification and Block Conversion
Low noise amplification was early on the scene in satellite communications 
because of the weak signals coming from small satellites that could fit on a table 
top. These LNAs used a device based on the principle of microwave emission 
through stimulated emission of radiation (MASER), which was subsequently 
replaced by the parametric amplifier. Microwave transistor amplifiers based 
on the gallium arsenide field-effect transistor (GaAsFET) appeared in the late 
1970s and ultimately took over from the parametric amplifier. With an output 
at the same frequency as the input, these early LNAs needed long waveguide 
or low-loss coax runs back to the downconverters. Thanks to the home receiv­
ing system industry that appeared in the early 1980s, a demand for a low-cost 
alternative appeared and was met through the now-familiar low noise block 
(LNB) converter, which is illustrated in Figure 7.10. As can be seen, the LNB 
includes an LNA as the front end and preamplifier and the mixer and local 
oscillator translate the entire downlink frequency range (be it C-, X-, Ku, and 
Ka band) to an industry standard L-band range from 950 MHz to an upper fre­
quency of 1,450 to 2,150 MHz, depending on certain design criteria of the en­
tire receiving system. The local oscillator (LO) frequency is selected so that the 
when subtracted from the downlink frequency it produces the L-band output 
range required for transmission over the coaxial cable. For example, if the LO 
frequency is 10.75 GHz (the next to the last value in Figure 7.10), the uplink 
frequency range is (.95–1.45 GHz) + 10.75 = 11.7 to 12.2 GHz.
The important design criteria for the LNB include:
• Sufficient LNA gain to overcome the conversion loss of the downcon­
verter so that the noise temperature of the LNA is not degraded by 
downstream noise;
Figure 7.10  Typical block diagram of a low noise block converter (LNB). The fixed local oscil­
lator frequency is determined by the downlink frequency range (C band or one of the various 
Ku or Ka band ranges).

198 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Low loss at the input to maximize G/T when attached to the antenna;
• Appropriate frequency and phase stability of the local oscillator along 
with adequate filtering to block harmonics and undesired mixer products;
• Protection from out-of-band signals at the input to prevent overload of 
the low-level stages;
• Packaging to withstand the environmental conditions that the LNB will 
experience when attached to the outdoor antenna;
• Stability under the various conditions of operation.
The DTH industry has produced variants of this design to provide for 
simultaneous reception from two polarizations and from multiple orbit loca­
tions. The objective is to employ a single cable to the set-top-box. An example 
of a combined LNB and feed system is shown in Figure 7.11 where the feed 
housing has three feedhorns, each with its own dual-polarization feed element 
and LNB. See Figure 7.28 for an illustration of the principle of the dual circu­
larly polarized receive feed.
7.4.2.2  Predicting and Measuring System Noise Temperature
The calculation in Table 7.3 is the industry standard procedure for assessing the 
system noise temperature. As is always the case, the accuracy of the answer is 
only as good as the assumptions that went in. Measuring system noise tempera­
ture using test equipment is a complicated process and there are several ways to 
go about it. Even the best method, which is a measurement of the actual G/T of 
the earth station using a calibrated source such as a radio star or known satellite 
Figure 7.11  An example of a triple LNB feed system. (Courtesy of DIRECTV.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
199
beacon, brings with it measurement error of at least 0.5 dB at Ku band and 1.0 
dB at Ka band. Routine measurements using a large antenna and conventional 
RF equipment might produce an error of 1 dB or more.
Recognizing that system noise temperature and G/T are important de­
terminants of link performance, it is prudent to retain some conservatism in 
the analysis. We are fortunate that there are several factors that produce the 
overall C/N of the link at the input to the demodulator, including uplink and 
downlink noise, intermodulation, cross polarization interference, adjacent sat­
ellite interference, and potentially cochannel interference from other beams on 
the same satellite. Also, the worst case in systems at Ku and Ka bands is during 
heavy rain when downlink noise is increased by several decibels due to emis­
sion by the relatively warm atmosphere. Therefore, an error of 0.5 dB in system 
noise temperature (about 10%) is not going to have a significant impact in a 
typical satellite communications system.
7.4.2.3  Calculating and Measuring Antenna Gain; Error Analysis
There are a number of classical methods for determining the gain of an earth 
station antenna. We introduced the simple calculation from the theory for an 
aperture of physical area A in Chapter 2, which states the gain as [16]:
	
π
η
λ
=
2
4 A
G
	
For a circular aperture of diameter D,
	
π
η
λ


=




2
D
G
	
This deceivingly simple formula is correct as far as it goes. The diameter, 
D, is known although we need to use the average over the physical area, and λ 
is simply the speed of light divided by the frequency. That leaves h, the antenna 
efficiency, which takes account of the various losses due to antenna geometry, 
illumination by the feed, the resistivity of metal, defocusing of the beam, sur­
face tolerance, blockage, and the like. The constituents of h are subject to our 
inability to separate and assess each of them. Some of these can be determined 
from complex mathematical models based on optics and electromagnetic the­
ory. In the end, antenna designers are left to estimate the losses with the result 
that there will be some error in the gain that is presented.
A direct measurement of gain can follow some well-established practices 
[10], which include the following options:

200 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Antenna range measurement (with a land-based source called a bore­
sight);
• Measurement from a source in space (radio star, the moon, or a cali­
brated satellite radiator);
• Comparison with a calibrated “standard” antenna (similarly, the two-
antenna method);
• Calculation from the directivity radiation pattern without a direct mea­
surement of the absolute gain (integration across the pattern composed 
of relative radiation levels).
The standard test range provides for measurement in the far field of the 
antenna, which is located beyond a minimum distance governed by the wave­
length and size of the antenna [16]
	
λ
>
2
2D
R
	
As plotted in Figure 7.13, the equation indicates that the minimum range 
distance increases with antenna diameter and frequency. Clearly, small anten­
nas can be measured on short ranges: a 2-m antenna at 10 GHz requires about 
130m. However, an 8m antenna at 20 GHz requires a range that is 9 km long 
(except in the case of a compact range, discussed below).
This can only be satisfied by an outdoor range where the boresight is 
beyond this boundary for the antenna under test. Also, the range itself must 
Figure 7.12  Typical receiving chain gain budget at 12 GHz.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
201
minimize reflections from the ground and objects that would distort the mea­
surement. The way around this issue is to use what is called a compact range 
[14], which employs a specially curved mirror to produce the equivalent of the 
far field with the physical range that is far shorter. This is also desirable because 
the test can be performed in a special facility called an anechoic chamber that 
precludes reflections off of the walls.
The detailed performance of the antenna when installed can be measured 
using radio source in space, such as a radio star or a satellite with a known value 
of EIRP. The gain of the antenna is then calculated using a reverse link budget, 
where the space source EIRP is known and the received power level is accurately 
measured from the antenna under test. The free space loss can be calculated 
with absolute accuracy; however, atmospheric losses will have to be estimated 
so that they can be included in the governing equation:
	
=
+
+
-
0
r
atm
G
P
A
A
EIRP 	
where Pr is the measured power received by the antenna, A0 is the calculated 
free space loss, Aatm is the estimated atmospheric loss, and EIRP is the radiated 
power from the space source. As stated previously, an overall measurement er­
ror of 1 dB is typical for a good quality measurement system and comparable 
knowledge of the space source.
The standard gain antenna approach requires a second antenna with 
known gain. These are available on the market or could be certified as part of 
previous calibration efforts. The decibel difference between the received power, 
Pr, from the test antenna and the standard gain antenna is either added or sub­
tracted, as appropriate, from the gain of the standard gain antenna. Contrast 
this with the two antenna techniques, which measure the gain of either of two 
Figure 7.13  The minimum distance between the antenna under test and the boresight trans­
mitter as a function of frequency and antenna diameter.

202 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
electrically and physically identical antennas. Assuming that one can construct 
such identical antennas, the gain of one antenna is obtained by determining the 
total antenna gain over a known path and then simply dividing this value by 2.
The last method does not require a direct measurement of gain as pos­
tulated for the antenna range and the space type measurement, relying instead 
on the relative directivity pattern of the main beam and sidelobes [11]. In the 
following approximation, G(0,0) is the gain at beam center, P(0,0) is the direc­
tivity at beam center (typically adjusted to 1, which is 0 dB), and the integral 
is performed across two perpendicular cuts through the measured directivity 
pattern.
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
π
θ
θ
θ θ
=
° +
°




∫0
0,0
0,0
,0
,90
sin
P
G
P
P
d
	
This calculation is surprisingly effective, yielding values that are within 
0.5 dB of direct measurements of antennas in the range of 5 to 15m.
Antenna ranges are maintained by the major designers and manufacturers 
of microwave antennas, including Space Systems/Loral, Airbus Defense, MIT 
Lincoln Laboratories, Georgia Tech, the Fraunhofer Institute of Germany, and 
others. These employ either the far field range or a compact range design that 
uses mirrors to create parallel rays.
7.4.3  Gain Budget
The downlink gain budget is best understood through an example, which we 
take from the diagram in Figure 7.12 and the link budget defined in Table 3.1. 
The carrier level at the input to the LNA (e.g., the output of the antenna feed 
and waveguide) is calculated as:
	
=
-
+
-
r
o
t
t
P
EIRP
A
G
L 	
From Table 3.1, this is 52.0 – 205.5 + 33.0 – 0.2 = –120.7 dBW. The RF 
components in the receiving system introduce the gains and losses indicated in 
Figure 7.12, giving a received power of about –83 dBW (–53dBm) at the input 
to the video receiver. We would like this power to be in the middle of the receiv­
ers design range. Assuming this range to be –40 to –60dBm, we have a satisfac­
tory design for the downlink. If this were not adequate for the downlink, then 
we have two choices: buy a receiver that meets our middle of the range crite­
rion, or adjust the preceding gain accordingly. Increasing the gain usually means 
buying an LNA (or LNB, as appropriate) with more gain. If such a device is 
not available, then we need to insert a driver amplifier between the LNA and 
receiver. As discussed in Section 7.4.1, the noise contribution of this amplifier 

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
203
may be negligible if the gain of the preceding LNA is sufficient. Inserting a fixed 
value of attenuation can decrease gain. This might occur naturally if the coaxial 
transmission line is extended in length (or, alternately, a more lossy type of cable 
is used). Otherwise, we can insert a fixed or adjustable attenuator.
7.4.4  Pointing and Tracking of Antennas
Pointing and tracking systems control earth station antenna motion and are 
useful for operation with antenna beamwidth less than about 0.5º, operation 
with satellites in inclined orbit, and operation with non-GEO satellites.
GEO satellites eliminate or simplify pointing and tracking because the 
operator maintains the orbit location to within a stationkeeping box, typically 
±0.05° or ±0.1° as seen from the earth. These values double to 0.1° and 0.2°, 
respectively, when considering the full width of the box as related to the earth 
station antenna beam. The typical shape of the primary beam pattern of a cir­
cular aperture is shown in Figure 7.14 for various reflector illuminations as a 
function of the normalized angle [12].
A quadratic curve fit to the pattern labeled in the graph yields the follow­
ing approximation for the change in gain as a function of the ratio of the angle 
to the 3-dB beamwidth:
	
2
3
3
dB
db
G
θ
θ


Δ
≈- 



	
Figure 7.14  Power pattern (in dB) of a circular aperture; curve intersecting m = 4 used to 
define the shape of the main beam. [12, p. 61–63.]

204 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
This simple formula agrees with the definition that ΔG = –3 dB at an 
angle equal to θ3dB.The value of θ of interest is where the gain reduction is only 
0.5 dB for an antenna without tracking (i.e., a fixed antenna). The two-sided 
angle from the center of the main beam is approximately 0.4082 · θ3dB. Solving 
for the value of ΔG equal to 0.5 dB and θ equals 0.1° (equivalent to ±0.05°) 
provides that θ3dB should be approximately 0.25°.
For many antennas, the θ3dB beamwidth can be estimated from:
	
θ
≈
3
22
db
fD 	
where f is the frequency in gigahertz and D is the diameter of the circular ap­
erture in meters. As a result, the product  must be less than 89.8 and 44.9 for 
the ±0.05° and ±0.10° stationkeeping box sizes, respectively. This is plotted 
in Figure 7.15 to indicate the maximum antenna diameter for which the gain 
variation is satisfied.
Figure 7.15 shows a range of antenna sizes versus frequency which is de­
termined by the size of the stationkeep box of the satellite in use. Keep in mind 
that the same ground antenna may need to operate with a variety of different 
satellites that could pose some variability. This suggests it might be wise to as­
sume the worst case of ±0.1°, in which case a pointing and tracking system 
would be required. As discussed later in this chapter, the most common type of 
mechanical antenna mount is the azimuth-elevation (az-el) mount that employs 
the most common scheme for locating the satellite in terms of its local elevation 
Figure 7.15  Maximum circular aperture that can be fixed with respect to a satellite with 
stationkeeping error: solid line for ±0.05° and dashed line for ±0.1°

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
205
from horizontal and azimuth angle measured from true north. This mount can 
be motorized in both of these axes and the only question is the angular travel. 
Most az-el mounts allow the full elevation range of 0° to 90°; the azimuth range 
is often limited to something of the order of ±30° about the installed normal 
azimuth direction.
Satellite motion as seen from the earth will depend on the orbit inclina­
tion in addition to other factors. For a small inclination value (comparable to or 
less than the eccentricity), typically less than about ±0.25°, the motion is close 
to that of a circle within the box. For large values of inclination compared to 
the orbit eccentricity, the motion is that of a figure eight. As shown in Figure 
7.16 [13], the satellite is moving faster than the earth’s rotation in position 1, 
then passes through its central longitude in position 2 on its way to position 3, 
which is retrograde, and finally through position 4 as it again crosses its central 
longitude. Unless the ground antenna beam is broader than the value of inclina­
tion of the satellite, a tracking capability is going to be needed. Earth stations 
that use satellites in non-GEO orbits including HEO, MEO, and LEO require 
tracking systems and mounts that can point nearly across the entire sky.
A motorized manual system will work for initial satellite positioning and 
touch up possibly once or twice per day. When automatic tracking (autotrack) 
is needed, this can be added to the motorized system. The first level of capabil­
ity is with step tracking where satellite position is estimated using orbital data 
and then optimized by peaking on the signal power. This depends on some 
controlled motion of the antenna where the actual signal level will vary perhaps 
by about 0.5 dB, which is apparent from the slow rate of gain fall off near the 
peak in Figure 7.14. This would need to be included in the link budget and 
the uplink and downlink gain budgets. Monopulse tracking uses a system that 
produces both a “sum” (peak) and a “delta” (null) when the beam is centered, 
as shown in Figure 7.17. This arrangement assures that the beam can be main­
tained at the center with essentially no loss of gain. Antennas of this type are 
Figure 7.16  Ground locus of satellite when inclination is large and eccentricity is small [13].

206 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
used for tracking spacecraft with precise readout of azimuth and elevation of 
the ground antenna. The actual feed system that produces sum and difference 
patterns (in two axes) is presented in Figure 7.36.
The forgoing discussion addresses the need and ability of tracking sys­
tems, which introduce a potential failure mode and requirement for operation 
and maintenance. Further details on specific implementations can be found in 
Section 7.5.3.2.
7.5  Antenna and Microwave Design
The objective of antenna and microwave design is to provide a nearly transpar­
ent path to the link for the baseband equipment and, ultimately, the end user. 
This is addressed through analysis of element performance based on its physical 
and electrical properties, governed by the laws of electromagnetic theory and 
microwave electronics. While the capability of these devices has improved as 
their cost has come down, the basic principles have not really changed very 
much over the 70 years of refinement of the technology base. A basic principle 
is that of guided waves through metal structures such as rectangular waveguide, 
coaxial cable, and various compact arrangements that come under the general 
category of stripline. These are covered in Section 7.5.1.
Another consideration relates to the consistency and reliability of opera­
tion over time, as the RF portion of the earth station is exposed to a potentially 
hostile outdoor environment. Rain, ice and snow, wind and salt spray, sun, 
and heat and humidity produce various forms of degradation, both short term 
and long term. For this reason, RF equipment must be properly protected, its 
Figure 7.17  The sum and difference patterns of a monopulse tracking feed system.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
207
performance monitored, and corrective action taken at the first sign of trouble. 
Repairs under these circumstances could take the facility out of service for a 
considerable time.
In the next paragraphs, we review the design principles for the essen­
tial elements, including antenna feeds, transmission lines, and RF filtering and 
multiplexing (principally on the uplink side). Antenna structures can be simple 
fixed designs such as those used for DTH services, complex tracking antennas 
or large-diameter uplink antennas in GEO and non-GEO systems. Specific 
antenna designs will require the attention of the antenna manufacturers who 
are able to design and produce the mechanical and electrical portions and in­
tegrate them into a complete working assembly. This is a complex process and 
includes the care needed to properly align the system and perform antenna 
performance tests, including the pattern measurements on an antenna range 
discussed previously.
7.5.1  Waveguides and Transmission Lines
Microwave frequencies can propagate best within metallic tubular structures as 
opposed to pairs of wires, common in telephone and low-speed data applica­
tions. This is not to say that you cannot use good-quality twisted pair cable 
to transfer microwave signals; however, the substantial attenuation and poor 
external isolation of this type of cable renders it far less appropriate than the 
approaches to be discussed in this section. A selection of waveguide structures is 
provided in Figure 7.18, illustrating many forms of hollow waveguide, coaxial 
lines, and stripline [4]. The following properties are important to their applica­
tion in an earth station:
• Rectangular waveguide (hollow inside)—the width, a, and the height, 
b, determine transmission characteristics, principally attenuation versus 
frequency. The principle property of rectangular guide is the lowest fre­
quency that can propagate, e.g., the cutoff frequency of the dominant 
mode (discussed below). Support for a single linear polarization is pro­
vided (except in the case of a square cross section).
• Circular waveguide (hollow inside)—the diameter, d, is the only dimen­
sion in question, likewise determining the cutoff frequency; a flexible 
waveguide similar in mechanical design to electrical BX cable is popular 
for low-loss, high-power transmit applications at C and Ku band. It can 
support either linear or circular polarization. An elliptical cross-section 
allows a single polarization (not shown in Figure 7.18)
• Coaxial line (circular or square cross-section)—this will propagate mi­
crowave and lower frequencies, effectively down to DC. The highest 

208 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
operating frequency is determined by the acceptable loss. The square 
cross-section version has been called squareax and may be formed with 
Figure 7.18  Microwave transmission lines: (a) microstrip line, (b) triplate stripline, (c) sus­
pended stripline, (d) circular coaxial line (circular waveguid has no inner conductor), (e) 
square coaxial line (squarax), and (f) rectangular waveguide.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
209
a center conductor held by dielectric spacers and sandwiched between 
two machined plates.
• Stripline and microstrip—bimetallic transmission line with a strip con­
ductor suspended over a flat sheet of metal called a groundplane; al­
ternatively, there can be two groundplanes with the strip in between. 
This technique is popular for compact structures, particularly within an 
equipment module or microwave integrated circuit (MIC).
Propagation with low loss through the transmission line usually requires a 
very smooth interior surface and low electrical resistance (e.g., high conductiv­
ity, exemplified by aluminum, brass, gold, copper, or silver, in increasing order 
of preference). The propagation of electromagnetic waves through typical trans­
mission lines is illustrated in Figures 7.19 and 7.20 for rectangular and circular 
guides, respectively. Figure 7.19(a) displays transverse-electric (TE) modes in 
rectangular guide, wherein the electric component is oriented perpendicularly 
with respect to the direction of propagation. The top of the chart shows TE10, 
the dominant mode with the electric component oriented vertically (indicated 
by vertical arrows). This propagates at the lowest possible frequency or, con­
versely, the longest possible wavelength, given by
	
λ 2a 	
This simple formula conveys the fact that the wide dimension, a, must 
be larger than one half wavelength (this dimension must be adjusted for the 
actual wave velocity, which is less than in free space). As shown in (1) in the 
graphic, the arrows extend between the bottom and top walls, where the head is 
pointed toward the positively charged side to correspond to one instant in time. 
The horizontal dashed lines are the edge views of circular rings of the magnetic 
component. This is clearer in the top view of the guide, shown in (3). Along 
the length of the guide (2), the electric components reverse positive to negative 
(from pointing upward to pointing downward) to define the wavelength along 
the guide. One can think of a wave as having two components that are mirror 
images of each other, each taking a zigzag path parallel to the wide walls (i.e., 
bouncing off of the narrow walls of the waveguide). In reality, points of bounc­
ing are where currents that are induced in the walls are subsequently reradiated. 
Thus, the waveguide completely contains the wave, providing total RF isolation 
to the outside world.
We need to point out that the dimension, b, being smaller than a, cannot 
allow a horizontal wave to propagate properly. In effect, rectangular waveguide 
allows us to propagate TE10 in one polarization only. The only way to use a 
rectangular guide to carry horizontally polarized waves is to literally rotate it the 

210 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.19  (a) Propagation modes in rectangular waveguide: TE modes. (b) Propagation 
modes in rectangular waveguide: TM modes.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
211
Figure 7.19  (continued)

212 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
required 90° so that dimension b is now vertical (not particularly elegant, but 
nevertheless the way it must be done). 
To allow both horizontal and vertically polarized waves to propagate 
would require that a and b both satisfy the cutoff criterion of being at least 
one half wavelength. This is a role for square waveguide, often used in feed­
horns (discussed in the following section). While this is useful in some applica­
tions, allowing propagation along both polarizations gives rise to the potential 
for moding (i.e., the transfer of energy from one into another, less desirable, 
mode). The second illustration in Figure 7.12(a) shows the first such higher 
order mode (TE11) with curved electric and magnetic components. The cutoff 
wavelength is shorter than TE10, demonstrating that it is, in fact, a higher order 
mode. Similar remarks can be made for TE21, shown at the bottom of Figure 
7.19(a). Generally speaking, the only time when a microwave designer inten­
tionally uses a higher order mode is within a specialized structure such as of a 
microwave filter or feedhorn to take advantage of a property like wave cancella­
tion or impedance matching. 
Circular waveguide, shown in cross-section in Figure 7.20, has many ap­
plications in earth stations and demonstrates that, indeed, microwave mechan­
ics is very close to plumbing. The TE modes in Figure 7.20(a) are related to 
their counterparts in rectangular guide. Here, TE11 is the dominant mode for 
use in earth stations for low-loss transmission associated with the antenna itself. 
The E vector in this example is vertically polarized; observe how the middle vec­
tor is straight, but those to the left and right are curved. In every case, the vector 
is perpendicular to the conducting wall where it touches, a boundary condi­
tion for electric fields in general. The fact that the opposite-sided vectors are 
symmetrical is good for propagation because it cancels out the nonhorizontal 
component. For this reason, an open circular guide can radiate pure horizontal 
polarization (or any angle of linear polarization, as desired). Since horizontal 
polarization can also propagate, circular waveguide will transfer circular polar­
ization. The remaining examples in Figure 7.13 are provided for reference only.
7.5.2  Horns and Other Single-Element Antennas
Microwave propagation can be initiated through a radiating structure as simple 
as a piece of waveguide or wire of appropriate dimensions. These single-element 
antennas
• Provide a direct coupling of RF energy between the transmission line to 
space (the majority of antennas exhibit reciprocity, which means that the 
coupling is just as effective for energy from the transmission line to space 
as it is from space to the transmission line);

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
213
Figure 7.20  (a) Propagation modes in circular waveguide: TE modes.(b) Propagation modes 
in circular waveguide: TM modes.

214 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.20  (continued)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
215
• Form electromagnetic energy into a beam to provide the desired direc­
tivity and possibly the suppression of sidelobes;
• Provide the correct polarization with the desired sense, e.g., linear (verti­
cal or horizontal) or circular (left hand or right hand);
• Possibly allow the beam and polarization to be altered either mechani­
cally or electrically.
These generic antenna requirements often represent tradeoffs with per­
formance, physical size, power-handling ability, cost, and convenience of use. 
Antennas are, after all, the most visible aspect of an earth station since they usu­
ally require an unobstructed view toward the satellite. Also, the physical ground 
below the antenna (which may be the earth itself, the top of a building or other 
structure, or the body of a vehicle, aircraft, or vessel) can affect the performance 
of the antenna. Generally speaking, the narrower the beam, the less interference 
we expect from the ground due to reflected RF energy and blockage.
We start with a discussion of elemental antennas, which are the simplest 
in structure and are often used in combination to produce more effective radia­
tion characteristics. The most basic types of antennas are simple extensions of 
the end of the transmission line, such as the open end of the waveguide itself. 
The wave will be linearly polarized in free space because this is the same polar­
ization within the guide, a principle often used in antenna design. The com­
mon problem with a simple waveguide antenna is that there is an impedance 
mismatch with free space, resulting in significant reflected power and a loss of 
radiation efficiency. The radiation pattern of the open-ended waveguide may be 
unacceptable for the application as well.
The way to both correct the impedance mismatch and create a more ap­
propriate beam pattern is to flare the end of the waveguide in the form of a 
pyramidal horn, illustrated in Figure 7.21 [6]. Horns, in general, are desirable 
as feeds for parabolic reflector antennas, as will be discussed in Section 7.5.3. 
As shown by the vertical arrow, TE10 mode produces linear polarization while 
Figure 7.21  A common horn antenna called the “pyramidal horn.” The opening is wider than 
a half wavelength to increase gain and to match the impedance of the guide to free space.

216 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
the flare angle and aperture opening determine the gain and impedance match 
to space. To change the sense of polarization, one only has to rotate the horn 
90°, a process that requires a corresponding twist in the input waveguide. We 
could have used a square waveguide and horn to allow both senses of polariza­
tion to operate at the same time. In this case, the waveguide would be capable 
of TE11 mode, which raises the possibility of undesirable moding. Another type 
of dual-polarized horn is the circular conical horn, which uses round instead 
of square guide. This also involves TE11 mode and offers somewhat improved 
performance in terms of circular polarization (CP) purity, sidelobe control, and 
manufacturing ease.
An important enhancement to improve the polarization purity of the con­
ical horn is to introduce corrugations, shown in Figure 7.22. The corrugation 
helps purify polarization as well as control sidelobe levels. As with the preceding 
horn designs, the angle of the flare is used to adjust the impedance match and 
beam pattern. The refinement here is the introduction of circular ridges in the 
mouth of the horn. The spacing and height of the ridges produce higher order 
modes that help cancel some of the undesired radiation from the horn. An 
extension of this well-established design is the flanged waveguide horn (Figure 
7.23), which contains a more limited number of circular (annular) slots. Horns 
of this type are commonly used in low-cost C-band reflector antennas.
Figure 7.22  A C- or Ku-band corrugated horn.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
217
Other classes of transmission line antennas are configured from cable with 
the ends exposed to space in an appropriate way. Familiar at HF (e.g., short 
wave bands between 3 and 30 MHz), they are made by pulling apart the in­
dividual conductors of twin lead or coaxial cable to form a half-wavelength 
dipole. Directivity can be improved by placing another wire behind the antenna 
to create the simplest form of Yagi-Uda array. Additional approximately half-
wave elements placed in front of the dipole (called directors) further enhance 
the gain. At microwave frequencies, a dipole element can take the form of a slot 
in a metal plate or waveguide (illustrated in Figure 7.24). A horizontal slot is 
like an open-ended rectangular waveguide and can radiate vertical polarization. 
Another configuration in (b) is from a rectangular ring slot, which likewise 
produces vertical polarization. A circular ring would allow the transmission (or 
reception) of circular polarization. The illustration in (d) shows how the per­
formance of a slot or dipole can be improved by placing a ground plane behind 
it. The cavity backed element offers greater gain and directivity and provides 
isolation from circuitry located behind the element.
Multiple elements in an array may be driven in phase with the same sig­
nal to produce a focused or shaped beam, which is applied in mobile antenna 
systems. Figure 7.18 provides waveguide implementations of slot arrays that 
produce focused fixed beams. With elements tied to individual amplifiers and 
phase shifters, it is possible to shift the beam in space by varying the electrical 
parameters (e.g., an electrically steered phased array) without physically moving 
the antenna structure.
Circular polarization (CP) is somewhat more complex to create but subse­
quently eliminates the need to perform mechanical rotations (since the wave is 
rotating). There are two approaches for creating CP in the first place.
Figure 7.23  Compact circular flanged horn with annular slots cut into the waveguide. The 
slots are used to shape the pattern and reduce sidelobes. 

218 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Introduce a discontinuity within a square or circular waveguide to split 
the LP wave into two components, and then delay one with respect to 
the other by the equivalent of 90° of phase (shown in Figure 7.26) [5].
• Split the power equally and couple one of the inputs at an angle of 90° 
with respect to the other in an orthomode transducer (OMT). However, 
the orthogonally coupled signal must also be delayed by 90° so that 
CP is created (as in the previous case). Figure 7.27 illustrates the OMT 
which can accept vertical and horizontal polarizations as described above 
[14].
The advantage of the first approach is its simplicity, since it is performed 
within the waveguide and does not require added mechanical hardware. The 
second approach is completely mechanical and may offer greater bandwidth 
and provide a more stable system. It is, however, more expensive to construct 
and is much bulkier in appearance. Another approach is the ultrasimple septum 
polarizer illustrated in Figure 7.28, used in low-cost DTH receive antennas.
Figure 7.24  Slot antenna elements: (a) rectangular, (b) folded rectangular, (c) annular slot, 
and (d) cavity backed slot. 

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
219
7.5.3  Reflector Antennas
The basic properties of and requirements for reflector antennas such as the 
parabolic reflector are covered in our other work [6] and further investigated 
in another reference [7]. We concern ourselves here with the reflector antennas 
commonly used in earth stations for satellite communication. These are the 
familiar dishes used for video uplinks, mobile telephony gateways, VSAT hubs, 
and DTH receivers. The design of the reflector and feed follow principles that 
have not changed in decades, but are subject to numerous improvements that 
make them easier to install and operate, and reduce manufacturing costs. As 
readers are familiar, in reflector antennas size matters, since gain (as a true ratio) 
is proportional to area. Likewise, the beamwidth is inversely proportional to 
diameter.
Figure 7.25  Waveguide slot arrays: (a) edge slot array; (b) displaced longitudinal slot array; 
(c) inclined series slot array.

220 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.26  Conversion from linear to circular polarization by a 90° polarizer consisting of a 
dielectric plate.
Figure 7.27  A waveguide ortho-mode transducer (OMT) that can be configured as a wave­
guide polarizer. The two vertically polarized input on the left and right sides would contain the 
same signals as the horizontally polarized inputs on the top and bottom but with a 90 degree 
phase shift.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
221
Earth station antennas fall into a common set of alternatives as far as how 
the feedhorns are placed relative to the reflecting surface. In low-cost center-
fed designs, the feed would be supported in front at the focus of the reflector; 
alternatively, for better performance and ease of maintenance, the feed is placed 
behind the reflector and a subreflector is used to properly direct the internal 
beam. This approach is either called a Cassegrain or Gregorian, based upon 
the relative distance and shape (convex or concave, respectively), as shown in 
Figure 7.29.
There are a number of intriguing and potentially valuable reflector con­
cepts that have been introduced for large earth stations. First demonstrated in 
the 1970s by COMSAT Laboratories, the torus antenna is a multibeam design 
that gets its name from the shape taken by its oblong reflector. As shown in Fig­
ure 7.30, the reflector is a segment of the surface of a toroid formed by rotating 
a single parabola about a vertical axis that passes through its focus. The reflector 
looks like a movie screen, and in fact screens of this type are used to increase 
the light intensity from TV projectors. As shown in the diagram, this geometry 
allows several feeds to be placed side by side without physically or electrically 
interfering with one another. Each feed sees approximately the same surface 
curvature; thus, there is no additional degradation normally associated with 
skewing a feed from the center line. The beams are produced in precise align­
ment, to be directed at different satellites along the geostationary arc. With the 
reflector oriented along the orbital arc, each feed can be placed for appropriate 
beam-to-satellite alignment. A commercially available torus receiving antenna 
is offered by ACTi (Figure 7.31).
Figure 7.28   The septum polarizer uses square waveguide to receive the cirularly polarized 
signals and an internal metal plate called a septum to separate the two senses of polarization 
and convert them into respective linearily polarized outputs.

222 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Large antennas that must track MEO or LEO satellites can be quite cum­
bersome as far as how the energy is transferred between the feedhorn and the 
transmission line to the RF electronics. 
Receiving antennas are simple in structure and the feed will usually con­
tain the LNB as well. However, transmitting antennas must contend with a 
more complex feed as well as supporting two waveguides (at least for a short 
Figure 7.29  Geometry of the reflector and subreflector in an earth station antenna: (a) 
Cassegrain geometry, (b) Gregorian geometry.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
223
distance) as well as some form of HPA. There are many trade-offs in this regard 
driven principally by the location of the HPA. Large antennas, like the 9-m 
Cassegrain shown in Figure 7.32, with HPA requirements in excess of 200W 
usually require some type of external shelter or housing. Between the HPA and 
the antenna feed there would need to be a waveguide run of significant length 
and corresponding loss. Maintenance of this waveguide and the HPAs in the 
Figure 7.30  Multibeam torus antenna geometry.
Figure 7.31  The Simulsat 7 multibeam Earth station antenna. (Source: ATCi.)

224 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
shelter are also a concern. There is a trend toward positioning the HPAs with 
the antenna to minimize the waveguide run thus saving both RF and prime 
power. On the other hand, the HPA must survive in the exterior environment 
(as do the LNBs).
We turn now to a discussion of the physical and operational properties 
of reflector antennas, since these aspects often determine how the earth station 
and overall ground segment will satisfy system requirements. Table 7.4 summa­
rizes the more critical of these concerns, broken down into the major areas of 
electrical performance, mechanical properties, and system requirements. Each 
key category is reviewed in a subsequent section below. While this list is lengthy, 
it cannot consider every important requirement and approach for a particular 
application. It is a checklist to show the extent of the issues involved, since the 
antenna is the one physical item that determines how well the RF link will 
perform at the time of installation and throughout the seasons and operating 
life of the system.
7.5.3.1  Electrical Performance
The parameters of interest (gain, directivity, polarization, sidelobes, etc.) repre­
sent the input/output characteristics that determine how well the antenna will 
satisfy the requirements stated in a link or gain budget. Most of these can be 
measured at the factory or on an appropriate antenna range using standard RF 
test equipment. The actual installations can have considerable impact on these 
characteristics, which is why we consider the mechanical and system aspects in 
the next two subsections.
Figure 7.32  Example of a Cassegrain 9-meter antenna with equipment located behind the 
reflector. The shelter contains the redundant HPAs and up and down converters, with a dedi­
cated HVAC system.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
225
Table 7.4
General Requirements for Earth Station Reflector Antennas
Characteristic
Considerations
Design Approach
Electrical performance
Frequency
Link requirement, transmit and 
receive band
Straightforward feed design
Bandwidth
Frequency dependent
By design
Gain
Link requirement
Straightforward design
Antenna temperature
G/T
Inverse with size
Directivity pattern
Overall system performance
Determined by many factors
Cross polarization (axial 
ratio)
Interference design, linear or 
circular
Straightforward design, but 
dependent on installation quality
Power handling capability
High power uplinks
Waveguide and feed design
Port-to-port isolation
Simultaneous transmit and 
receive, and dual polarization
Waveguide and feed design
Out-of-band emissions
Compatibility with other radio 
services, e.g., radio astronomy; 
terrestrial interference
Proper filtering and feed design
Mechanical properties
Angular travel
Ability to cover the operating 
segment of the GEO arc or sky
Requires appropriate mechanical 
mount
Ability to repoint without 
disassembly
Possible need to change 
alignment for other slots or 
orbits
Requires appropriate mechanical 
mount
Drive speed and 
acceleration
Critical for tracking non-GEO 
satellites
Motor power to keep antenna 
pointed at satellite position
Pointing and tracking 
accuracies
A function of antenna 
beamwidth and link budget 
requirements
Requires motor drives and signal 
tracking system; possible need 
for radome
Wind loading (operating 
and storage)
Heavy wind locations, including 
hurricanes and typhoons
To allow operation under 
certain wind, and safe stowage; 
possible need for radome
Other environmental 
requirements
High humidity and/or rain; low 
temperature and ice, corrosion 
and sunlight, dust and sand
Provide protection and blowers; 
provide heaters; possible need 
for radome
Reflector surface accuracy
Achieve the desired gain under 
all conditions
Appropriate reflector structural 
design and alignment; possible 
need for radome
Weight
A factor for mobile and 
transportable installations
Use lightweight materials like 
plastic, graphite, and titanium
Mounting requirements
Depends on location, fixed or 
mobile/transportable
Requires study of situation; 
may include detailed structural 
analysis

226 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
7.5.3.2  Mechanical Properties
Antennas are electrically conducting mechanical structures that radiate when 
excited by electrical energy. It is this duality that forces earth station design 
engineers to understand many aspects of mechanical and civil engineering. Re­
quirements for angular travel and motion of the reflector and feed derive from 
system requirements to keep the antenna pointed at the desired satellite. The 
mount and support structure would have the necessary degrees of freedom to 
accomplish this, typically through one of three mechanical arrangements (see 
Figure 7.33):
1.	 Azimuth-elevation the most common approach (discussed previously) 
can point the antenna based on the orbital geometry. These have been 
improved over the years to give full coverage, using a central bearing 
structure that allows the system to rotate in azimuth the full 360° of 
the compass. A possible disadvantage of the az-el mount is that it has 
a keyhole effect when following a spacecraft that passes directly over­
head. At that time, the antenna reaches its limit at 90° elevation (e.g., 
zenith pointing) and must be rotated 180° in azimuth so that eleva­
tion can decrease to permit the beam to follow the satellite downward 
again from zenith.
2.	 Polar (not shown) an arrangement used in most telescopes that di­
rectly compensates for much of the rotation of the earth. The primary 
axis of rotation is aligned with that of the earth, i.e., pointing toward 
Polaris, the North Star. These were popular for early use with GEO 
Table 7.4  (continued)
Characteristic
Considerations
Design Approach
System requirements
Functional requirements
Satisfy the local and 
systemwide requirements
Requires viewing the antenna as 
part of the overall system
Remote operation
Limited human intervention
Possible requirement for remote 
control operation
Maintainability
Will depend on the location and 
system requirements
Must be considered before 
specification and purchase
Lifetime
Depends on the application
Large antennas typically 
designed for 10 years or more; 
low-cost home installations may 
be up to 5 years
Interfaces (electrical and 
mechanical)
Transmission line connections, 
other power or utility 
connections to meet 
environmental needs
Must be considered before 
specification and purchase

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
227
since most antenna adjustment is made in one axis to direct the beam 
at a different satellite.
3.	 X-Y system optimized for small changes about a fixed direction that 
also does not have a keyhole effect. Not attractive for most situations 
where the antenna would have to be repointed frequently across the 
GEO arc is applied to tracking of LEO satellites as discussed in Sec­
tion 7.4.4.
A tracking antenna automatically keeps its beam pointed at the satel­
lite using electric motors that drive the mount from position to position. The 
motors and servo loops must have the power to overcome inertia and friction 
throughout the travel, which can be a challenge for large structures and, of 
course, fast-moving satellites. Drive speed refers to the ability to keep the an­
tenna moving at a constant angular rate, where acceleration is the more difficult 
challenge of overcoming the inertia of a possibly massive reflector and feed 
system. If RF electronics are also attached to the driven structure, then this 
becomes part of the inertial load of the drive motors. It is possible to include 
Figure 7.33  Antenna mount and drive configurations: (a) azimuth-elevation, (b) X-Y.

228 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
a set of redundant motors to provide backup in case of failure, something that 
should be considered if the operation of one particular antenna is critical.
The other aspect of tracking is the technical approach for controlling the 
drive to keep the antenna beam on the satellite as it moves along its orbit track. 
There are three basic methods for accomplishing this:
1.	 Program track an open-loop control system that uses prerecorded 
(canned) tracking instructions to command the antenna to move 
along the predicted path of the satellite. See Figure 7.34 for an illus­
tration of a program track system for a shipboard antenna. Tracking 
systems can predict orbit motion if suitably equipped.
2.	 Step track a simple closed-loop antenna pointing system that drives 
the antenna to a point of maximum received signal. As shown in Fig­
ure 7.35, the controller uses the amplitude of a received carrier (either 
a stable communication signal or a beacon carrier generated onboard 
the satellite) as the only reference. The antenna is stepped in small 
increments typically producing 0.5 dB of change to hunt for near-
optimum pointing using successive approximations. An example of 
the type of path is the rectangular inward spiral shown in the figure.
3.	 Autotrack (also called monopulse track) a sophisticated closed-loop 
control system usually using both axes to sense error in pointing. As 
shown in Figure 7.36, these error signals are processed in the control­
ler to be used to control the pointing of the antenna and beam. The 
principle is also presented in Figure 7.17. The action of an autotrack 
system is nearly continuous in maintaining constant alignment within 
the bounds of acceptable angular pointing error. The term monopulse 
refers to the use of a four-element feed system that provides sum and 
difference reference signals, by detecting the dual downlink signal.
Figure 7.34  Functional block diagram of a program tracking system for a limited motion re­
flector antenna installed on a ship.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
229
7.5.3.3  System Requirements
The earth station antenna, particularly those of large size and with the abil­
ity to track satellites, must be specified in terms of the end use or application. 
These are system requirements, either from the standpoint of the operation at 
particular locations or, on a larger scale, the function within the context of the 
entire system or service environment. We have already addressed the electrical 
and mechanical performance parameters, which relate to the real-time aspects 
of antenna usage. Other requirements that can make a big difference for the 
lifetime of service include the following:
• Functional requirements. Included here are aspects of antenna opera­
tion that impact the overall system. These extend beyond antenna gain, 
pointing and tracking, and ability to redirect toward a different section 
of the orbit or sky. Examples include transportability, which is the abil­
ity to remove the antenna quickly, transport it by a specified means of 
transportation such as aircraft or vehicle, and reassemble the antenna for 
use at another location. Devices that can be transported and erected on 
Figure 7.35  Block diagram of a step track system, which detects changes in received power 
and moves the beam according to an inward spiral pattern.

230 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
site, like the one shown in Figure 7.37, are designed and manufactured 
with this need in mind. Another example would be an antenna installed 
in a commercial aircraft to provide bidirectional communications with 
a GEO satellite. Obviously, the antenna should be as flat as possible so 
as not to impact the aerodynamic properties of the aircraft. A preference 
Figure 7.36  Simple two-axis monopulse feed.
Figure 7.37  A satellite news gathering (SNG) antenna system capable of operation in Ku and 
Ka bands.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
231
would be for a flat array that can track the satellite with an active beam 
of some sort or a reflector shaped like the torus (but much smaller) to 
have a low profile.
• Remote operation. An antenna may be required to perform without 
human intervention or, alternatively, through a remote control network 
of some type. The latter could be over the satellite, which is acceptable 
as long as the antenna is already adequately aligned to provide the link. 
Redirection of large antennas is used in program distribution to TV sta­
tions, which is possible because only a few satellites might be used dur­
ing a particular day. Operations personnel at a central monitoring center 
could activate the RF transmission, permitting remote adjustment of 
power level and polarization. The ability to shut down an errant uplink 
antenna system would be a necessity, since there would not be someone 
on site to inhibit the improper operation of the RF equipment or an­
tenna system.
• Maintainability. In practice, this is critical to the system operation and 
its ability to serve users in a reliable and consistent manner. The best 
example involves a gateway earth station for an MSS system. Extra an­
tennas are included to allow for planned and emergency maintenance 
without reduction in availability. Another aspect that cannot be over­
looked is the possibility of difficulties with the electronics for tracking 
the satellites. These systems can malfunction, driving the antenna off 
of a satellite, or precluding satellite acquisition in the first place. Lastly, 
there are human factors to be considered, in that it should be possible for 
maintenance personnel to perform these functions without risk to life 
or to the operation. Coming into play here are any local environmental 
or physical conditions that people could expect to experience, including 
wind, rain, and difficulty of reaching critical parts of the antenna system 
under extreme weather conditions.
• Lifetime. Antennas can be designed and built to work for an extended 
period, often 10 years. Some can be counted on to last beyond the ex­
pected lifetime of a particular satellite or service. On the other hand, 
antenna designs using lightweight materials such as plastic cannot with­
stand harsh environments for more than a few years. The same can be 
said of electronics that are immediately attached to the antenna, includ­
ing passive devices such as feeds, polarizers, and reject filters. This can 
tie back into the maintenance as discussed in the last paragraph, since 
almost anything can be made to last a long time if it is properly looked 
after (the converse is true as well, particularly when it comes to anten­
nas). The local environment has a lot to do with this. Tropical climates 

232 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
take their toll through moisture (which produces rust and invades mi­
crowave plumbing), fungus (which literally eats its way through paint, 
rubber, and other organic materials), and high winds. Similarly, arctic 
latitudes are very difficult for antenna systems because of wide tempera­
ture swings that cause cracking of materials, and ice and snow can reduce 
performance and distort reflectors and support structures, which is why 
antenna deicing using electric or gas heaters is the standard in all but 
tropical and semitropical climates. In arid climates, blowing sand and 
dust must be contended with as well.
7.5.4  Main Beam, Sidelobe, and Cross-Polarization Performance
We have chosen antenna configurations that have been applied in satellite and 
terrestrial radio communications, particularly reflector and horn antennas. Pla­
nar array antennas were offered in the United Kingdom and Japan during the 
early rollout of DBS services, but more recently have been proposed for Ka-
band applications. 
A problem in specifying antennas is the difficulty making proper RF mea­
sures of these parameters. Physical size may make it very difficult to orient a 
reflector so that an appropriate signal at the desired frequency can be either 
received or transmitted in the far field region. A common practice is to use the 
same mechanical design as an antenna that has been fully characterized, then 
erect the new antenna on site. Once in working order, patterns can be measured 
(either fully or partially) to establish that (1) the antenna is assembled correctly 
(something that often is not the case on first check) and (2) not seriously af­
fected by the local environment and terrain. A typical set of these measurements 
for a 10-m reflector antenna at C band is presented in Figure 7.38.
The pattern characteristics of horn antennas are perhaps the most predict­
able, based on theory and range measurement. This is because of the compact­
ness and consistency of horn geometery (unless we are speaking of a very large 
horn that is composed of many pieces that may not have sufficient dimensional 
accuracy or stiffness). Horns have become more sophisticated over the years 
as designers have sought to improve efficiency and bandwidth; these improve­
ments also benefit reflector antenna systems where horns are used as feed ele­
ments. The element of an array poses other issues, since by itself it behaves as a 
broadbeam antenna like that used for hemispherical coverage.
Antenna polarization properties provide isolation for frequency reuse in 
FSS and BSS satellite links. Large earth station antennas must provide between 
27 and 30 dB of cross-polarization isolation within the main beam. The higher 
value is usually associated with linearly polarized feeds because of the greater 
simplicity of the hardware and measurement procedure. Polarization isolation 
in the center of the beam is primarily the responsibility of the feedhorn, with 

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
233
the reflector and support affecting the performance only slightly. Achieving 
high isolation values in practice is a matter of good design and manufacture 
Figure 7.38  Measured 10-m earth station antenna pattern at C band: (a) transmit, 6,175 MHz, 
(b) receive, 3,950 MHz.

234 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
of the feed and polarizer; however, very-low-cost antennas may not be satisfac­
tory for demanding situations such as hostile physical environments, millimeter 
wave frequencies, and networks with high internal or external RF interference. 
For example, the cross-polarization interference potential of the antenna affects 
transmissions on the cross-polarized channel or on an adjacent satellite that is 
cross-polarized in order to improve frequency reuse.
The surface of the reflector will introduce some distortion to the antenna 
pattern and potentially a reduction of gain and increase in sidelobes as well [8]. 
Figure 7.39 presents the loss of gain due to finite surface error. As an example, 
for 0.5 dB of loss due to this factor, the surface error (averaged over the reflec­
tor) should be less than about 1/37 (2.7%) of a wavelength. This corresponds 
to 1 mm at 10 GHz, independent of reflector size. This formula may under­
estimate or overestimate the loss G/Go, depending on how the surface error 
is distributed across the reflector [9]. Another consideration is the presence 
of other objects or surfaces that the electromagnetic wave must pass through 
or around. For example, a radome may be employed to protect the antenna 
and RF electronics that must operate in extremely low temperatures or gusting 
wind. While it provides a comfortable working environment, it nevertheless 
introduces a direct loss of possibly less than 1 dB, as well as the potential for 
altering sidelobe levels. Other causes of concern are local structures and terrain 
features that introduce multipath reflections.
Figure 7.39  Normalized loss (in dB) due to finite surface error (according to Ruze).

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
235
7.5.5  RF Filtering and Power Combining
Large earth stations, such as those used as broadcast centers and gateways, are 
required to transmit carriers in different transponders at the same time. This 
may be accomplished at a low power level prior to the HPA, or if the require­
ments dictate, at a high power level prior to the antenna. For example, the 
uplink system in Figure 7.4 shows up to four uplink carriers at the power com­
biner that are transferred to a single HPA and antenna. Intermodulation in that 
amplifier must be within the overall budget, necessitating a total output backoff 
in the range of 7 to 10 dB. This increases the power rating of the amplifier by 
the same amount (i.e., a factor of 5 to 10). Furthermore, there will be four car­
riers (representing 6 dB of power) and a potential requirement for uplink power 
control (typically in the range of 7–10 dB). In this example, one carrier requires 
100 watts (20 dBW); assuming the lower end of the ranges stated previously, 
the total HPA power would have to be:
	
(
)
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
=
10log
20
6
7
7
40
10
out
carrier
carrier
total
UPC
out
P
P
N
BO
BO
P
dBW
kW
	
This is the approach used in early Intelsat gateway earth stations relying 
on a wideband TWTA (typically 10 kW). These devices were extremely costly 
and consumed a great deal of power. A DTH uplink could require 16 carriers 
per polarization for a total of 40 kW, which is probably impractical for a single 
amplifier. Assuming 5% efficiency in the backed-off mode, the raw AC power 
to support one polarization would be nearly a megawatt.
For DTH at Ku band and broadband gateways at Ka band, uplinks must 
operate more efficiently both in terms of hardware and power input. The scheme 
that was developed in the 1970s is to transmit individual high power carriers 
through separate HPAs composed of narrowband klystron amplifiers. Then, 
the outputs of the amplifiers, which are on different transponder frequencies, 
are combined in an RF power combiner of the form shown in Figure 7.39.
The outputs of multiple HPAs must be combined in a way to minimize 
RF loss and undesirable interaction among the RF signals. For this to work ef­
fectively, the following features must generally be provided:
• Filtering of the carrier after amplification to reduce adjacent channel 
and out-of-band emissions produced by amplifier nonlinearity;
• Combining of RF carriers on different frequencies for transmission on a 
common waveguide and antenna feed;
• Low RF loss and acceptable channel distortion (e.g., gain slope and 
group delay) in providing the above features.

236 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The typical type of device that meets these requirements is an RF com­
biner composed of microwave filters, shown in Figure 7.40. This particular ar­
rangement has five inputs: four enter through individual microwave directional 
filters, while the fifth enters from the end of the string. The directional filter, 
shown in Figure 7.41, allows signals outside of the passband to circulate around 
the filter, whereas the signals within the passband go through to the other side. 
Filters of this type cannot be tuned to a different channel on site and represent 
a considerable procurement lead time. The first filter at F1 is a basic waveguide 
BPF and can be omitted if out-of-band rejection is not required for KPA1.
The multiplexer introduces 0.5 to 1.0 dB of loss due to internal resistance 
and VSWR. For the maximum power of a 3 kW klystron power amplifier (dis­
cussed in Section 7.6.1.3), this equates from 300 to 750 watts of excess heat. 
In most applications, 3 kW of RF power is not required on a continuous basis. 
This heat can be removed through conduction and/or radiation so that the 
equipment does not overheat. Likewise, the combination of all of the outputs, 
amounting to up to 15 kW in this example, will require high-speed air blowers 
or even water cooling. Similarly, the small internal dimensions of the antenna 
feed must withstand the heating, potentially requiring additional antennas for 
heating reasons alone.
Hybrid power combining without filters is less complex. There would be 
approximately 3 dB of loss per hybrid in tandem connection. Another way to 
determine the total loss is to calculate the division factor, e.g.,
	
(
)
=10log
L
N 	
Figure 7.40  A high-power RF multiplexer used to combine the outputs of several klystron 
power amplifiers in an earth station.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
237
where N is the number of inputs to be combined. Thus, there would be 9 dB 
of direct loss for combining of 8. Additional line loss of about 1 dB would 
normally be encountered as well. This approach is rather lossy but allows maxi­
mum flexibility, since the carriers may be located at any frequencies within the 
passband of the HPA. Terminated hybrid output ports will need to dissipate 
wasted RF power which will be substantial.
Owing to the benefits of the multicarrier HPA system along with its chal­
lenges as to aggregate power and intermodulation, an innovative approach has 
been produced by Advantech Wireless based on the high power, efficiency and 
linearity of the gallium nitride (GaN) FET. The GN transistor is near the top 
end of the high-electron mobility transistor (HEMT) family and is produced 
on a sapphire substrate. Shown in Figure 7.42 is an HPA system composed of 
phase-combined 400-W GaN SSPAs installed on the antenna upper platform. 
Rated at an output power of 2,400W, this Ku-band HPA is composed of eight 
phase combined 400-W amplifiers installed on each polarization of the an­
tenna in Figure 7.42. The modules were factory preset for equal gain and phase 
characteristics and the system allows hot-swappable unit replacement without 
tuning or adjustment procedures. If one amplifier unit fails, the maximum level 
degradation is 1.2 dB, which can be automatically compensated by increasing 
the input level using UPC. Intermodulation distortion is nearly 25 dB below 
the carrier, as shown in Figure 7.43. The discussion of SSPA designs continues 
in the next section.
Figure 7.41  Characteristics of an RF directional filter: (a) schematic diagram, (b) transfer 
characteristic of single cavity, (c) characteristic of multiple cavity, (d) drawing of multiple 
cavity directional filter.

238 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
7.6  High-Power Amplification
For earth stations and user terminals that transmit, the high-power amplifier 
(HPA) is probably the most critical active component. When operating prop­
erly, it disappears into the background and tends to be neglected. However, 
Figure 7.42  GaN SSPAs installed in close proximity to the antenna shown on the upper plat­
form of this antenna. (Courtesy of Advanced Wireless.)
Figure 7.43  Uplink RF carriers from the SSPA system, indicating RF intermodulation approxi­
mately 25 dB below the carriers. (Courtesy of Advantech.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
239
due to the sensitivities involved with DC to RF conversion, amplification, heat 
generation, and removal, mechanical sensitivity, and the need for stable prime 
power (sometimes at high voltage), HPAs can be challenging when it comes to 
their selection and operation. We consider here a range of performance from 
less than one watt to up to 10 kW of output, and both solid-state and vacuum 
tube configurations. In the past, the main focus was on obtaining high power 
over the required bandwidth, and DC to RF efficiency was not a significant 
concern within the ground segment. Introduction of mobile and portable user 
terminals has made efficiency and durability at power below about 100w much 
more of a concern, although power consumption of large HPAs in teleports 
represents a high cost as well.
7.6.1  High-Power Amplifier Technology
A typical RF HPA is comprised of four key components: the amplifier mod­
ule itself, which provides some of the gain and the majority of the RF output 
power, a low-level driver amplifier to bring the total gain up to meet the overall 
HPA gain requirement, tuning and bias circuitry required for the particular 
type of amplifier and application, and a power supply to derive the required 
voltages and currents from the selected prime power source (e.g., AC for fixed 
installations and DC for mobile and handheld terminal designs).The primary 
focus of HPA design is on the power amplifier module itself as it determines 
the output signal characteristics. In the following sections, we review specific 
amplifier designs available for earth stations and user terminals. 
7.6.1.1  Solid-State Power Amplifier (SSPA)
While the original HPAs in use were based on vacuum tube technology (dis­
cussed in the following sections), there has always been a keen interest in using 
solid-state RF amplifiers for the simple reason that in theory they do not wear 
out. In addition, there is a perception that in theory they are less complex and 
hence are more reliable. Whether these benefits are obtained in practice or not 
depends on many factors because HPA requirements are much different from 
those of audio amplifiers, computer memory, and digital signal processing cir­
cuits. In spite of these issues, there are many options for using SSPAs in earth 
stations that provide some important advantages in terms of compact design, 
improved reliability and lifetime, enhanced linearity, and reduce prime power.
The first introduction of solid-state RF devices in commercial earth sta­
tions was in the LNA and driver amplifier. The SSPA was introduced around 
1985 with the advent of the low-cost two-way terminal for low- and medium-
speed data transmission. At a power level of around 5 watts (still viable for small 
terminals at low to medium data rates), the early SSPA was limited to such 
thin route applications, although without it, the modern VSAT would not have 

240 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
grown to its current market size. At the time of this writing, SSPAs were on the 
market reaching up to about 1,000 watts through paralleling of many stages. 
Depending on transistor type power output of an individual transistor stage is 
rarely greater than about 100 watts. High power is achieved by hybrid combin­
ing of matched transistor pairs and of such modules.
A common output device of the SSPA is the Gallium Arsinide field effect 
transistor (GaAsFET), which comes from the same family as the GaAsFET used 
in low noise amplification. In this role, however, device and circuit are different 
owing to the need to dissipate more heat and for efficiency in converting DC 
to RF.  As discussed in Section 7.5.5, the GaNFET shows particular benefits at 
a somewhat higher cost. Generally, the output power and gain performance of 
SSPAs decreases with increasing frequency although the previously mentioned 
GaN transistor can operate effectively up to 100 GHz. This is compensated by 
having more combined stages to produce the desired out power and gain. An 
example of a 400-W Ku band SSPA from Avantech is shown in Figure 7.44; a 
similar Ka band SSPA is also available. Table 7.5 provides some of the critical 
specifications applicable to the Ku band unit, which includes a block upcon­
verter (BUC) from L-band IF to Ku band RF. The latter is specified in subbands 
and not over the entire 1.5 GHz of allocated spectrum. Figure 7.45 provides the 
block diagram of the RF section, indicating all DC and RF connections.
Lower-power SSPAs are available from many manufacturers in North 
America, Europe, and Asia. An outdoor unit capable of 120W at Ku band from 
Figure 7.44  Uplink configuration consisting of eight (8) phased-combined 400 W GN SSPAs. 
(Courtesy of Advantech Wireless.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
241
CPI is shown in Figure 7.46. This unit is termed a block upconverter by CPI 
but is in reality both an SSPA and a BUC. Typical specifications are shown in 
Table 7.6. Shown in Figure 7.47 is a rack-mounted SSPA rated at 500W at Ku 
band from Teledyne Paradise Datacom. Specifications for this unit are provided 
in Table 7.7. The amplifier operating point referred to as P1dB is the 1-dB com­
pression point (where the amplifier output/input characteristic departs from 
linear by 1 dB).
These amplifiers provide good performance in a relatively small pack­
age; some allow hot-swapping in the event of component failure (as shown at 
the lower right in Figure 7.47). Outdoor units are designed to withstand the 
elements.
Large-capacity indoor SSPAs are capable of kilowatt output at X- and Ku 
bands. An example of such a unit is the ModuMax SSPA system from General 
Dynamics SATCOM Technologies (GD SATCOM), shown in Figure 7.48. 
As is standard in the industry, this X-band SSPA employs plug-in modules and 
provides graceful degradation in the event of amplifier failure. Defective RF 
Table 7.5
Typical Specifications for the 400-W Ku-Band SSPA 
Specification
Ku-Band Capability
Operating frequency range
13.75–14.50 GHz
L-band IF input range
950–1,950 MHz
Amplifier module output, single 
carrier
400W (56 dBm)
Linear power output at the flange
158W (52 dBm)
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–25 dBc two signals 5 MHz apart versus total power
Gain
Combined 75 dB ±3 dB, –30°C to +55°C
Gain variation
1.0 dB peak to peak over 750 MHz
0.6 dB peak to peak over 40 MHz
Gain slope
0.015 dB/MHz
Output SWR
1.3:1 into 50Ω
Spurious output for max output in 
linear mode
SSPA: -65 dBc, second harmonic -50 dBc
AM to PM conversion
<2.5°/dB peak to peak at rated output
Group delay
1 ns P-t-P ripple max over any 40-MHz band
BUC
10-MHz reference, internal or external
Weight
64 kg
Size
406 × 767 × V 279 mm
Power consumption
7 kW at max linear power, 8 kw at sat
Temperature
–30°C to +55°C, forced air cooling
Humidity
100% condensing, up to 2 in/hour rain
Courtesy of Advantech Wireless.

242 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.45  Block diagram of the RF section of the 400 W GaN SSPA. (Courtesy of Advantech.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
243
modules can be hot-swapped while the SSPA is in continuous operation. Fail­
ure of one module results in a reduction of output of approximately 1.5 dB. 
Also, there is redundant forced-air cooling and it is powered by three identical 
Figure 7.46  Ku band outdoor-mounted SSPA capable of 120W output. (Courtesy of CPI.)
Table 7.6
Typical Specifications for the 120-W Outdoor Ku-Band SSPA
Specification
Ku-Band Capability
Operating frequency range
14.0–14.5 GHz or 13.75–14.5 GHz
L-band IF input range
950–1,450 MHz
Amplifier module output, single carrier
120W (50.8 dBm)
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–22 dBc two signals
Gain
60 dB
Gain variation over temperature
±2 dB maximum
Output SWR
1.3:1 into 50Ω
Spurious output for max output in 
linear mode
–60 dBc
AM to PM conversion
<2.0°/dB at -3 dB relative to rated output
BUC
10-MHz reference, internal or external
Weight
15.4 kg
Size
343 × 254 × 191 mm
Power consumption
750W
Temperature
–40°C to +60°C, forced air cooling
Humidity
100% condensing
Courtesy of CPI.

244 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
plug-in power supplies that are rack-mounted. Key specifications are provided 
in Table 7.7; this particular unit does not include a block upconverter from 
L-band.
7.6.1.2  Traveling Wave Tube Amplifier (TWTA)
The TWTA has been the traditional HPA for earth stations since the first instal­
lations in the INTELSAT system back in the 1960s. Those were 10 kW devices 
that could operate across the entire 500-MHz uplink range at C band. During 
the 1970s and 1980s, C- and Ku-band TWTAs in the 100-to-600-watt range 
were very popular for commercial earth stations. During the 1990s, TWTAs 
were introduced at the 800-watt level as C-band and Ku-band amplifiers be­
came common at approximately the same power levels. Ka-band TWTAs are 
available up to 700 watts.
Because of their cost and complexity, TWTAs are generally limited to 
applications in major earth stations and larger user terminals (which could be 
aptly described as earth stations in their own right). But TWTAs have special 
features that make them particularly valuable in certain applications:
• A usable RF bandwidth of around 1,000 MHz at C through Ka bands;
• Good overall efficiency in converting prime power (AC or DC) into 
saturated RF output power;
• Ability to handle heat and cold, due to the inherent ruggedness of the 
traveling wave tube itself;
Figure 7.47  Ku band indoor rack-mounted SSPA rated at 500 W with hot-swappable power 
modules. (Courtesy of Teledyne Paradise Datacom.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
245
• Availability of amplifiers in all frequency bands of interest (e.g., L, S, C, 
X, Ku, and Ka).
• Ability to handle reflected power as compared to SSAs.
Compact TWT amplifiers are produced for C-, Ku, and Ka bands, and 
are available at up to about 800W for indoor or outdoor use. Figure 7.49 shows 
an indoor rack-mountable unit from CPI that can operate across 1 GHz of 
bandwidth between 13.75 and 14.8 GHz, making it suitable for a wide range 
of applications. It employs internal linearization to make its performance com­
parable to that of the SSPAs previously described. Detailed specifications are 
provided in Table 7.9. TWTAs do not generally include the BUC function and 
so their input and output are in the same frequency band.
7.6.1.3  Klystron Power Amplifier (KPA)
Output power requirements that exceed about 1 kW are candidates for the 
KPA. Historically, KPAs were large, expensive, and temperamental; as a result, 
their usage was limited to major earth stations used for satellite control and TV 
transmission. With improvements in amplifier and power supply packaging, 
KPAs have been brought down to size and, at the same time, become more de­
Table 7.7 
Typical Specifications for the 500-W Rated Output Indoor Ku-Band SSPA
Specification
Ku-band capability
Operating frequency range
 14.0–14.5 GHz (extended to 13.75–14.5 GHz
L-band IF input range
950–1,450 MHz (extended to 950–1,700 MHz)
Amplifier module output, single carrier
500W (57 dBm) rated output, 400W (56 dBm) at 
P1dB
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–25 dBc at 3-dB backoff from P1dB
Gain (including BUC)
75 dB
Gain variation over temperature
±2 dB maximum
Output SWR
1.3:1 into 50Ω
Spurious output for max output in linear 
mode
–60 dBc at rated output, –50 dBc at P1dB
AM to PM conversion
<0.5°/dB at -3 dB relative to P1dB
BUC
10-MHz reference, internal (10-7) or external
Weight
82 kg plus 13 kg for power supply
Size
190 × 105 × 300 mm (190 × 17.5 × 161 mm power 
supply)
Power consumption
4,600W
Temperature
0° to +50°C, forced air cooling
Humidity
95% condensing
Courtesy of Teledyne Paradise Datacom.

246 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 7.48  X band indoor SSPA capable of 100W output. (GD SATCOM.)
Table 7.8
Typical Specifications for the 1,000W-Rated Output ModuMax Indoor X-Band SSPA 
Specification
X-Band Capability
Operating frequency range (output and 
input)
 7.9–8.4 GHz
Amplifier module output, single carrier
1,000W- (60 dBm) rated output, 900W (59.5 
dBm) at P1dB
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–25 dBc at 3 dB backoff from P1dB
Gain at max setting
60 dB
Gain variation over temperature
±0.75 dB
Output SWR
1.2:1 into 50Ω
Spurious output
–70 dBc at P1dB
AM to PM conversion
<3.5/dB at -3 dB relative to P1dB
Weight
115 kg plus 25 kg for power supply
Size
483 × 577 × 695 mm (483 × 133 × 615 mm 
power supply)
Power consumption
8,500W
Temperature
0° to +50°C, forced-air cooling
Courtesy of GD SATCOM.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
247
Figure 7.49  Ku-band 400 watt linearized TWTA, indoor rack mounted. (Courtesy of CPI.)
Table 7.9
Typical Specifications for the 400-W Indoor Ku-Band TWTA 
Specification
Ku-Band Capability
Operating frequency range
 13.75–14.8 GHz
TWT output
400W (56 dBm)
Amplifier module output, single carrier
350W (55.4 dBm)
Bandwidth
500–1,750 MHz, depending on 
configuration
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–24 dBc with two equal carriers at 7 dB 
total output backoff; with linearizer at 4-dB 
total output backoff
Gain
73 dB at rated output, 76 dB small signal
Gain variation
±1 dB across any 80-MHz band, 3 dB 
across band
RF level adjustment
0–20 dB
Output SWR
2:1 max operational
Spurious output for max output in 
linear mode
–60 dBc at rated output, second and third 
harmonics
AM to PM conversion
<2.5.0°/dB at -6 dB relative to rated output; 
with linearizer at -4 dB
RF interface
Output: WR75 Input: Type N coaxial female
Weight
27.3 kg
Size
483 × 133 × 610 mm
Power consumption
1.5 KVA maximum
Temperature
–10°C to +50°C, forced-air cooling
Humidity
95% noncondensing
Courtesy of CPI.

248 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
pendable. An example of one of these compact designs is shown in Figure 7.50. 
The klystron vacuum tube employs a resonant cavity as part of the amplifier 
structure and therefore is somewhat limited in bandwidth. This means that the 
typical KPA will be able to operate over as little as a single transponder (adja­
cent transponders can be spanned if the KPA bandwidth is sufficient, often the 
case with Ku-band BSS uplinks.) The process to change transponders involves 
mechanical adjustment of the cavity dimensions, which retunes the center fre­
quency accordingly. While tuning is a mechanical action, control is usually 
extended through electrical actuators.
An example of the block diagram of a 3-kW C-band KPA is provided in 
Figure 7.51 and typical specifications are provided in Table 7.11.
7.6.2  Application Guidelines
In this section, we provide some technical and operational criteria for compar­
ing the different amplifier types. The following are usually the most important 
with respect to the application:
• Maximum power output (the saturated output power available from the 
particular amplifier type, delivered for a specified input power);
• Gain (both the small signal gain and the saturated gain must be speci­
fied, which can be adjusted either locally or remotely using an input 
attenuator);
Figure 7.50  Ku-band BSS klystron power amplifier rated at 1.4 kW output. (Courtesy of Com­
tech Xicom.)

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
249
Figure 7.51  Generalized block diagram of a high-power klystron power amplifier.

250 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• RF bandwidth (the minimum usable bandwidth of the amplifier, which 
must be consistent with the carrier transmission requirement and the 
possible need to move the carrier within the uplink frequency range—
the latter may involve retuning);
• Linearity (carrier to intermodulation ratio or digital sideband regrowth); 
• Efficiency (prime power to RF output);
• Cost (purchase price, service, and operation);
• Size and weight (transportation and installed);
• Lifetime and reliability (device and overall amplifier package);
• Safety (installation, operation and maintenance, radiation);
• Environmental ruggedness (resistance to shock, heat, cold, humidity, 
contamination, changes in operating conditions).
Table 7.10 
Typical Specifications for the 1.4-kW Ku-Band BSS Klystron Power Amplifier 
Specification
Ku-Band Capability
Operating frequency range
 17.3–18.1 GHz
Klystron output
1.7 kW
Amplifier module output, single carrier
1.4 kW
Bandwidth
85 MHz (tunable across range)
C/IM at total output, linear mode
–26 dBc with two equal carriers at 7 dB total 
output backoff
Gain
75 dB at rated output
Gain variation
±0.4 dB across ±30-MHz band
RF level adjustment
0–30 dB in 0.1-dB steps
Output SWR
2:1 max operational
Spurious output for max output in linear 
mode
–70 dBc at rated output, second harmonic
AM to PM conversion
<3.0°/dB rated output
RF interface
Output: WR75 Input: Type N coaxial female
Weight
136.1 kg
Size
482.6 × 533.4 × 221.5 mm
Power consumption
11.3 KVA maximum (180% inrush current 
maximum) 
Temperature
–10°C to +50°C, forced-air cooling
Humidity
95% noncondensing
Courtesy of Comtech Xitech.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
251
7.7  Up- and Down-Conversion
Up- and down-converters provide the translation between intermediate fre­
quency (IF), which is typically 70 MHz or 140 MHz, and the actual uplink 
and downlink frequencies, respectively. In larger earth stations, the converters 
are separate units designed for flexibility, ease of maintenance, and stable opera­
tion. When performed within a user terminal, the requirements allow low-cost 
manufacture and integration with the RF or baseband components. Typical 
block diagrams are provided in Figure 7.52 for a fixed frequency unit that con­
verts between 70 MHz IF and Ku band (e.g., 14.0 to 14.5 GHz uplink and 
11.7- to 12.2-GHz downlink). Variability in RF frequency selection is provided 
using a phase-locked frequency synthesizer. The objective of these converters 
can be summarized as follows:
Table 7.11
Specifications for the Miteq Series 9900 Ku Communication Upconverter
Specification
Ku-Band Capability
Output frequency range
 13.75–14.8 GHz
IF input range
70 ± 20 MHz (140 ± 40 MHz optional)
Input power level
+15 dBm maximum
Output power level
+10 dBm maximum (+12 dBm typical)
C/IM at total output, linear mode
-55 dBc with two equal carriers at 0-dBm output each
Gain
31 dB–34 dB at 23°C
Gain variation
±0.3 dB maximum
Gain slope
0.03 dB/MHz typical, 0.05 dB maximum (10 MHz 
maximum)
Group delay
0.03 ns/MHz, 1-ns peak-to-peak ripple
Output SWR
2:1 max operational
Spurious output for max output in 
linear mode
-65 dBc at 0 dBm output
AM to PM conversion
<0.1°/dB at 0 dBm output
Frequency stability
±2 × 10-8, 0° to 50°C
External frequency reference
5 or 10 MHz, automatically switches to internal 
reference if external falls below +1 dBm
Weight
5.5 kg
Size
482.6 × 44.5 × 508 mm
Power consumption
45W 
Temperature
0°C to +50°C, forced-air cooling
Humidity
95% at 30°C
Courtesy of Miteq.

252 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Perform the frequency translation between IF and RF for specific tran­
sponders with specified center frequencies and bandwidths. There could 
be intermediate translation to the L-band range of 950 to 1450 MHz or 
other upper frequency;
• Allow for selecting other transponders from time to time, by replacing 
reference oscillator module or crystal, or with a frequency synthesizer 
that allows any transponder to be selected (this has become the preferred 
mode and is more accessible due to technical innovations and reduction 
of manufacturing cost);
• Minimize the error in translated frequency, through use of stable oscil­
lator design or the provision of an accurate internal or external reference 
(discussed in Section 8.1.5);
• Provide a satisfactory frequency response in terms of gain flatness, out-
of-band rejection, and group delay (much the same as for the satellite 
transponder itself). This is because the converter is the principle band­
width-limiting device within the RF portion of the earth station. The 
analysis of group delay and other impairments is covered in Chapter 8.
• Products that result from frequency multiplication and mixing so that 
only desired signals appear at the output.
Figure 7.52  Block diagrams of fixed-frequency converters used in earth stations: (a) up con­
verter, (b) down converter.

 
Earth Station RF Design and Equipment 
253
Recognized suppliers include Narda Microwave East (L3 Communica­
tions), Miteq, and NEC Corp. Below, we provide the detailed characteristics of 
an upconverter to Ku-band for reference purposes and not as a recommendation.
This particular upconverter, shown in Figure 7.53, is intended for in­
stallation inside a teleport and translates from a 70-MHz IF to any 36-MHz 
RF transponder at Ku band. There is an option for a 140-MHz IF to provide 
sufficient bandwidth for a 72-MHz transponder. Detailed specifications are 
provided in Table 7.11, indicting the various power levels, frequency response 
characteristics, and linearity. The upconverter can either run on the external 
frequency reference oscillator or an internal local oscillator, specified at a fre­
quency error of ±2 × 10–8 over a temperature range of 0° to 50°C. 
Miteq offers a downconverter that actually translates from the L-band 
range to 70 MHz, requiring the use of an LNB at the antenna. This is consis­
tent with the gradual replacement of LNAs by LNBs; as a result, LNA devices 
are becoming rare in commercial applications but remain common in those 
using government spectrum (e.g., X band).
References
[1]	 Cheung, W. Stephen, and Frederic H. Lovien, Microwaves Made Simple, Dedham, MA: 
Artech House, 1985, p. 44.
[2]	 Pritchard, Wilbur, The calculation of system temperature for a microwave receiver, The 
Communications Handbook, Jerry D. Gibson, ed., Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.
[3]	 Fujimoto, K., and J. R. Jones, Mobile Antenna Systems Handbook, Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 1994, p. 465.
[4]	 Kitsuregawa, Takashi, Advanced Technology in Satellite Communication Antennas: Electrical 
and Mechanical Design, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1990.
[5]	 Kitsuregawa, Advanced Technology in Satellite Communication Antennas, p. 82.
[6]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 3d ed., Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 2008.
[7]	 Johnson, Richard C., Antenna Engineering Handbook, 3d ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1993, pp. 17-21.
Figure 7.53  Miteq series 9900 C and Ku rack-mountable communication upconverter. (Cour­
tesy of Miteq.)

254 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
[8]	 Ruze, J., Antenna Tolerance Theory: A Review, IEEE Proc., Vol. 54, April 1966, 
pp.633640.
[9]	 Baars, Jacob W. M., The Parabolic Reflector, Antenna in Radio Astronomy and Communica­
tion—Theory and Practice, Springer, 2007, pp. 87–90.
[10]	 IEE Standard Test Procedures for Antennas, IEEE, 1979.
[11]	 Ludwig, A., “Gain Calculations from Pattern Integration,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, March 1967, Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 309–311.
[12]	 Baars, Jacob W. M., The Parabolic Reflector Antenna in Radio Astronomy and 
Communication—Theory and Practice, Springer, 2007, pp. 61–66.
[13]	 Kawase, Seiichiro, Radio Interferometry and Satellite Tracking, Artech, Boston, 2012, p. 92.
[14]	 Shields, Michael W., and Alan J. Fenn, “A New Compact Range Facility for Antenna and 
Radar Target Measurements,” Lincoln Laboratory Journal, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2007.

255
8
Signal Impairments and Service 
Optimization
Technical analysis of the ground segment encompasses many fields, ranging 
from communications engineering to orbital mechanics. Rather than attempt 
to address every aspect and methodology, we have selected specific approaches 
that have the most leverage for optimizing technical performance. We first ex­
amine some of the more traditional analytical approaches for determining the 
impairments to modulated signals as they pass through elements in the end-
to-end path. Important to this is an understanding of the effects of amplitude 
and phase nonlinearity, group delay, intermodulation distortion, and radio 
frequency interference. The remainder of the chapter reviews three classes of 
software tools for the PC: SatMaster Pro, a low-cost but effective link budget 
package; Satellite Tool Kit, a popular orbital visualization tool; and PC-based 
signal analysis. Using MATLAB with Simulink by Mathworks this discussion 
is meant as an introduction and starting point for detailed investigation where 
required. Finally, service performance can be enhanced through active hardware 
and software features embedded in the ground segment.
8.1  Allocation of Digital Signal Impairments Between Space and 
Ground
The title of this section suggests that we need to segregate the impairments 
between those that are produced by the ground segment and those from the 
space segment. Then, within each segment, we allocate them further to major 
elements, such as demodulators, multiplexers, filters, amplifiers, and in the case 
of DSPs, to various mathematical operations associated with conversions and 

256 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
manipulations. This allocation process often proves too conservative and so an 
end-to-end simulation or measurement with actual hardware can be beneficial. 
This is a very time-consuming process, requiring the skills of highly qualified 
engineers and even scientists. The basic structure for this type of study is pre­
sented in Figure 8.1, which indicates how the building-block nature of the end-
to-end link impacts service quality. At each block, the communication signal 
experiences linear and nonlinear forms of distortion, noise and interference, 
and other impairments that may or may not be immediately apparent.
A list of typical impairments in digital systems is presented in Table 8.1. 
While most of these impairments will be present in every system, their values 
and relative meaning will vary greatly from case to case. By assessing, evaluating, 
allocating, and combatting these impairments, we gain insight into the leverage 
points that impact the performance, cost, and even the feasibility of the system. 
The first four impairments are determined individually for particular elements 
in the end-to-end transmission system. Some are due to passive devices like fil­
ters, while others are introduced by active components within the modems and 
HPA. The last row represents the combination of all impairments when acting 
together on the communication signals. This may not be a simple sum of the 
Figure 8.1  Signal impairment contributions within the communication channel of a typical 
end-to-end satellite link.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
257
individual contributions; hence, it is often necessary to use either hardware or 
software (computer) simulation to assess the total impact. Some of these tools 
are discussed at the conclusion of this chapter. End-to-end performance of the 
real system can be improved with adaptive equalization in the earth stations 
discussed at the end of this chapter.
Assignment of these allocations to the ground and space components de­
termines, in large measure, the difficulty of designing and building the par­
ticular components. For example, it is much easier to control intermodulation 
noise on the ground by increasing the saturated power of the HPA than by 
doing the same in the satellite transponder. Therefore, we would likely allow 
for more of this type of impairment from the satellite than the earth station. 
On the other hand, phase noise produced within the satellite would not be cor­
rectable on the ground, and so adequate measures must be taken in the design 
of the space components. Some experience-based guidelines are provided in the 
following subsections, which relate to each of the rows in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1
Transmission Impairments in a Satellite Digital Communications Link that Behave Like Noise* 
and that Do Not Behave Like Noise†
*Impairments that 
Can Be Treated Like 
Noise (Addressable 
by Increasing 
Power or Improved 
MODCOD)
General Impact
Sources (Space or 
Ground)
Corrective Actions
RF interference 
(external carrier)
Reduction in link 
margin, increase in 
BER
Cross-pol, uplink and 
downlink RFI, co-pol 
interference on same 
satellite, terrestrial RFI
Reduce interference 
levels through lower 
sidelobes and improved 
isolation; change 
MODCOD to re-optimize 
link; increase transmit 
power or antenna gain
Rain attenuation and 
sky noise
Reduction in link 
margin, increase in 
BER
Rainfall, thermal noise 
increase
Increase power (uplink 
power control), change 
MODCOD
Intermodulation
Reduction in link 
margin, increase in 
BER
Amplfier nonlinearity 
that results in 
intermodulation 
distortion
Backoff in associated 
amplifier and increase 
power output as 
appropriate, use a 
linearizer
Antenna mispointing
Reduction in link 
margin, increase in 
BER
Earth station antenna 
misalignment, satellite 
motion outside of box
Realign antenna, add 
power to provide 
adequate margin, 
employ an automatic 
antenna control unit 
and drive motors

258 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
8.1.1  Intermodulation Noise Produced by Nonlinear Distortion
All satellite communication systems are designed to overcome the various types 
of natural and artificial noise that enters through the uplink and downlink. 
In Section 3.1.1, we described the process of summing the noise on a power 
basis to produce the combine C/N for the end-to-end link. We assumed that 
intermodulation (IM) noise could be considered like thermal noise, which 
is typically how it is done in the industry. There are circumstances, however, 
where IM noise characteristics produce a greater impairment to the service than 
indicated by summing it with the other noise sources. An example of this is 
coherent IM experienced in FM, where the products contain modulation from 
the communication signals. As a result, coherent IM can introduce intelligible 
crosstalk into FM receivers if the product falls within the signal bandwidth. 
Digital modulation, however, is generally not subject to this impairment.
Table 8.1  (continued)
†Impairments that 
Are Caused by 
Distortion within the 
Channel (Not Directly 
Addressable by 
Increasing Power or 
Improved MODCOD)
General Impact
Sources (Space or 
Ground)
Corrective Actions
Amplitude and phase 
nonlinearity
Intermodulation 
noise, modulation 
transfer
Nonlinear amplifiers 
operated near 
saturation
Backoff or use of a 
linearizer
Amplitude versus 
frequency distortion  
(gain slope and ripple)
Variation in carrier 
levels or modulation 
crosstalk
Filters and amplifiers
Better tuning, amplitude 
equalization
Group delay (phase 
versus frequency 
distortion)
Intersymbol 
interference, 
alteration of 
phase modulation, 
baseband 
intermodulation
Filters
Better design, delay 
equalization
Phase noise and jitter
Baseband noise, 
carrier frequency 
error
Local oscillators in up- 
and down- microwave 
frequency converters
Improved local 
oscillators, frequency 
phase lock control
Combined effects of 
multiple impairments 
and nonlinearities
RF and baseband 
noise, other signal 
impairments, 
intersymbol 
interference, 
distortion due 
to digital signal 
processing 
(quantification noise, 
spectrum foldover)
All active elements 
and filters acting 
collectively; digital 
signal processors
Adjustment and 
optimization of the 
end-to-end transmission 
system design; adaptive 
control of channel 
equalization and 
linearization

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
259
Narrowband IM products will produce a peaked spectrum that is not flat 
within the bandwidth of the desired signal. Whether this poses a difficulty for 
the desired signal or not depends on the transmission parameters of the link. 
Dynamic IM products caused by external interference sources, alter their fre­
quency and bandwidth, due to the variability of the signals producing them. 
Such products can sweep in and out of carrier bandwidths, producing intermit­
tent difficulties for normal communication services.
Earth stations that transmit multiple carriers (e.g., SCPC) are potential 
sources of IM noise. This can be controlled by either using separate transmitters 
for each carrier (which is an expensive solution) or by increasing the saturated 
power of the HPA to allow greater multicarrier backoff. With adequate output 
backoff IM noise can be held to 20 dB below the carrier. Some ground seg­
ments employ larger VSAT antennas that have the capability to transmit two or 
more carriers. The HPA in this case would need to be chosen with a total sys­
tem tradeoff in mind, e.g., considering the intermodulation noise of the VSAT 
combined with that of the satellite transponder. 
DBS satellite systems are operated on a single-carrier-per-transponder ba­
sis so that maximum signal power and minimum IM noise are provided. Satu­
rated operation is desirable on a power basis but introduces spectral regrowth. 
This is indicated in Figure 8.2, a comparison of the original carrier before and 
after spectral regrowth occurs in a saturated amplifier. Having increased sub­
stantially, the sidebands can introduce adjacent channel interference. Multicar­
rier services like SCPC data, VSAT networks, and video teleconferencing using 
FDMA will produce very significant amounts of IM noise within a given tran­
sponder. In a typical link budget, the carrier-to-intermodulation-noise ratio (C/
IM) will have a value comparable to the downlink C/N, which in and of itself 
will decrease their combination by 3 dB relative to the downlink C/N alone.
This can be derived by evaluating the C/N and C/IM as the backoff is 
changed, as shown in Figure 8.3. Fundamentally, the input backoff is deter­
mined by the uplink EIRP from the transmit earth station. The resulting uplink 
C/N is the dotted straight line, indicating that uplink C/N increases linearly 
along the Y-axis, which causes the input backoff to decrease (dB for dB) toward 
0 dB along the X-axis. In principle, the uplink C/N can continue to increase, 
limited only by the amount of earth station HPA power available. Looking at 
the curved dashed line of the downlink C/N, which is in turn driven by the up­
link, does in fact exhibit saturation and has its maximum where the input back­
off is 0 dB. This corresponds to saturation drive and maximum HPA output 
on the satellite. We can combine the two values of C/N to produce the thermal 
C/N using the relationship (in terms of real ratios and not dB)
	
-


=
+




1
u
d
th
N
N
C
N
C
C
	

260 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
This is plotted as the saturating solid curve just below that for the down­
link C/N alone. The particular shape results from the fact that combined link 
thermal C/N is largely determined by downlink C/N, which reaches its maxi­
mum at saturation of the satellite HPA while the uplink C/N is not so con­
strained. The third element is the C/IM that is produced in the satellite HPA, 
shown as the downward sloping solid line. The general property of C/IM is that 
it decreases as the transponder is driven toward saturation (0-dB backoff). Note 
that the C/IM and C/Nth curves cross at one point in Figure 8.3. Overall link 
Figure 8.2  Illustration of spectral re-growth of a QPSK carrier as it passes through a non-
linear amplifier [6]. (a) the filtered QPSK carrier before the non-linear device; (b) after the 
non-linearity showing re-growth by approximately 20 dB.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
261
C/N, shown as the humped curve with the shading below it, is obtained with 
the same form of equation as above
	
-


=
+




1
th
tot
N
C
IM
N
C
C
	
and exhibits its maximum near the same input backoff where the C/IM and 
C/Nth curves cross. The point along the X-axis where the maximum occurs is 
called the optimum input backoff; the optimum output backoff is the corre­
sponding value from the downlink C/N curve (which is produced by the same 
backoff property as the output of the satellite HPA). 
The backoff where the total link C/N is maximum is also where the ca­
pacity of the transponder is maximum. This can be determined form the link 
budget by varying the input backoff and observing either the overall link C/N 
or the resulting quantity of carriers that the transponder will support in the 
multicarrier mode. Optimum backoff may be used to set the particular value 
of uplink EIRP from the earth station. Often, this is limited by what the earth 
station can produce in terms of antenna gain and/or the power of its HPA. The 
maximum value of total link C/N is not very sensitive to backoff near the peak 
of the curve; hence, the input backoff can vary plus or minus a few decibels 
Figure 8.3  Tradeoff between C/N and C/IM in an FDMA transponder or HPA.

262 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
without significant impact on performance. For the types of HPAs in typical 
bent-pipe satellites, the optimum output backoff is in the range of 3 to 5 dB, 
with the high end attributable to TWTAs without linearization and the low end 
to TWTAs with linearization or SSPAs. The precise results will also depend on 
the specifics of the amplifier, particularly the input versus output power and the 
AM-to-PM characteristics.
8.1.2  Amplitude Versus Frequency Distortion
This particular impairment is common to all communication channels with 
amplifiers and bandpass filters, as found in the transmitting earth station, tran­
sponder, and receiving earth station. Ideally, the devices should be flat as a 
board within the usable bandwidth, and in the case of a filter have very steep 
out-of-band skirts to prevent adjacent channel interference. Out-of-band re­
jection that is not ideal will allow some sideband and IM energy to pass into 
adjacent channels. It is a common property that filters with better out-of-band 
rejection have poorer inband properties, but performance of modern micro­
wave and digital baseband filters is substantially better than what was possible 
even in the early 1990s. This is due to improved analytical and manufacturing 
techniques for hardware filters and greater use of the ideal response properties 
of digital filters within the DSP.
The three basic filter properties that produce amplitude distortion are 
identified in Figure 8.4. These are as follows:
1.	 In-band ripple (not shown), which has a peak-to-peak variation pro­
duced by the number of tuned circuits and their coupling character­
istics. Wideband communication signals that have bandwidth much 
greater than that of one ripple cycle are not affected as long as the 
ripple variation is less than about 0.25 dB. The effect of greater ripple 
amplitude can only be assessed by analysis or test.
2.	 Gain slope, which is a steady tilt of the frequency response, measured 
in dB/MHz, with either a positive or negative slope. This impairment 
interacts with phase modulation on a carrier, and produces amplitude 
modulation with the same content; it may also cause I-Q coupling in 
QPSK and higher-order modulation.
3.	 Band-edge droop, which is a rounding of the amplitude response, giv­
ing the appearance of a frown (convex downward curvature), as shown 
in Figure 8.4. Impairment to a centered carrier is usually minimum; 
however, narrowband carriers that are off center will experience some 
degree of gain slope.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
263
In practice, amplitude versus frequency distortion is usually expressed as 
a linear combination (in dB) of the three distortion types. An example is as 
follows:
X dB per MHz; plus Y dB per MHz2; plus Z dB per MHz3
The effect on signals that traverse the channel may or may not also be a 
linear sum. In some cases, adding the effects produces greater impairment than 
is experienced by the effects simultaneously. All three components of amplitude 
response (x, y, and z) may be partially compensated in the transmitting and 
receiving earth station, which is described later in this chapter.
8.1.3  Group Delay Distortion
The ideal communications channel is one with a flat amplitude versus frequen­
cy response and constant time delay over the same bandwidth. Since time delay 
is the first derivative of phase, we can therefore conclude that the ideal is for a 
linear slope of phase versus frequency. Any deviation from constant delay versus 
frequency introduces an impairment to carriers that pass through the chan­
nel. We term this group delay distortion (the reference to group means that a 
modulated signal is used to measure the delay over the bandwidth of a range of 
frequencies rather than a single frequency) [2]. It is possible to compensate for 
Figure 8.4  Ideal and real filter amplitude responses (gain versus frequency).

264 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
nonlinear phase using delay equalization, which is common in data communi­
cations where phase distortion is a concern.
Group delay is measured in microseconds (ms) or nanoseconds (ns), and 
is a relative measure; actual signal delay through a filter is less than 1 ms. An 
example of such a characteristic is shown in Figure 8.5 for a typical transponder 
channel over a C-band satellite. The group delay is typically minimum at the 
center of the channel, where we arbitrarily set its value to zero. It then increases 
toward the edge of the transponder, hits a maximum somewhere out of band, 
then goes either downward or upward, depending on the filter transfer charac­
teristics. While we reference the group delay value of zero at the center, there 
is in fact a fixed delay associated with passage of the signal through the filter. 
Group delay can be a serious impairment for phase modulated carriers. In 
digital systems, the effect on PSK transmission is to distort the transitions be­
tween symbols. The resulting received pulse train deviates from the ideal shap­
ing that was produced by the modulator, resulting in additional bit errors.
Group delay causes a change in the basic shape of the “bit” pulse after it 
is demodulated. The solid waveform in Figure 8.6 presents the standard pulse 
shape after bandwidth limiting and shaping in the modulator. The sharp peak 
at the center of the pulse makes it easy to detect at the receiver; the ringing 
tails ahead and behind the main portion have zero crossings at the precise peak 
time of adjacent pulses. This condition is met when the filtered bandwidth is 
equal to the symbol rate adjusted for the roll-off factor. When exposed to the 
combination of group delay and bandwidth limiting from the transponder, the 
pulse shape becomes distorted, as shown by the dashed waveform in Figure 8.6. 
There are two critical aspects: the peak has been reduced slightly, and the zero 
Figure 8.5  Typical group delay characteristic (delay versus frequency).

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
265
crossings of the tails no longer reside at the precise time of other signal peaks. 
The first deviation causes a reduction in signal power (a loss) and the second 
introduces interference into the detection process, which is the intersymbol 
interference (ISI). The signal power loss can be corrected by increasing carrier 
power; additional signal power can also address all or part of the errors intro­
duced by the ISI. The sum of these power adjustments is called the implemen­
tation margin.
A measurement technique called the eye diagram, shown in Figure 8.7, 
graphically displays signal waveshape on a received signal. Both the ISI and the 
signal reduction are apparent, and the white area “eye opening” indicates the 
degree of the distortion (shown in the cross-hatched area). Closing-in of the eye 
Figure 8.6  Bandwidth-limited pulse waveform as transmitted on a digital carrier. (a) the solid 
line is the ideal shape with no intersymbol interference; (b) the dashed line showing the effect 
of group delay, producing distortion of the shape and introduction of ISI.
Figure 8.7  Eye diagram for a QPSK signal, for either the “I” or “Q” channels [4].

266 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
indicates more distortion, caused by impairments such as group delay. Another 
analog measurement technique employs a vector scope to display the signal am­
plitude and phase, representing the signal constellation. This will be described 
in the next sections where amplitude and phase nonlinearity are discussed.
Group delay can be corrected relatively easily because it is a linear prop­
erty of filters and like passive devices. The technique is called delay equalization 
(often shortened to equalization) and involves a device (like another filter) with 
an opposite-going delay versus frequency characteristic. In relation to Figure 
8.5, the equalization delay curve would be the mirror image below that shown 
(a frown instead of a smile). The small inband delay ripple in Figure 8.5 need 
not be corrected—just the roll-off at the edges. This flattens out the character­
istic to produce nearly constant delay over the usable portion of the channel 
(resulting in an unimpaired the signal). 
Bent-pipe satellite transponders typically have delay-equalized filters in 
them; however, earth stations generally do not have equalization included in 
them. Delay equalization can be introduced prior to the offending device or 
after it—the main requirement is that the intervening channel between filter 
and equalizer should itself be linear (no saturating amplifiers with AM/AM and 
AM/PM). Equalization can be more sophisticated if it is accomplished using 
DSP within the earth station to dynamically correct for delay distortion and 
other impairments. Such a device requires an initial time interval to “train” 
itself for the combination of impairments within the operating channel. This 
is discussed in Section 6.2.2 in connection with DVB-Sx and further at the 
conclusion of this chapter.
A way around the problem is to use delay equalization on the same side 
of any nonlinear amplifier in the channel. For example, group delay in the 
transmitting earth station can be compensated in the same station or onboard 
the satellite ahead of any nonlinear devices. In the same manner, group delay 
after the satellite power amplifier would be compensated either on the down­
link side of the satellite repeater or within the receiving earth station. One issue 
that has to be dealt with is the number of equalizers that have to be included. 
For example, equalizing the transmitting earth station is fairly simple since we 
can compensate for a fixed level of impairment. Doing this within the receiving 
earth station may require as many equalizers as there are receivers, which for a 
DTH system could number in the millions. If this can be done using digital 
signal processing, the equalization may be included in all receivers.
8.1.4  Amplitude and Phase Nonlinearity
Passive devices like transmission lines, reflector antennas, and filters exhibit lin­
ear types of impairments like gain slope and parabolic group delay distortion. 
Active devices used to amplify, translate in frequency, and modify the signal 

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
267
structure involve some form of nonlinearity that is sensitive to the signal am­
plitude (or power level) yet may be memoryless. Nonlinearity means the input/
output characteristic is not a straight line exhibiting constant gain, and devices 
with wide bandwidth are termed memoryless because the output responds in­
stantaneously to the input. The classic TWT characteristic, shown in Figure 
8.8, is a dominant source of amplitude and phase nonlinearity for satellite com­
munication services. However, readers should be aware that any active device 
will exhibit nonlinearity in a similar way. Transistor amplifiers, like GaAsFETs, 
have generally less distortion versus input power. In either case, it is possible 
to compensate by introducing distortion that is opposite-going to either the 
amplitude or phase or both. Of course, linearization cannot cause the output 
power to be greater than the amplifier is capable of delivering.
Uncompensated amplitude or phase nonlinearity may have a significant 
impact on communications service quality. The primary effects are as follows:
• RF intermodulation distortion, covered earlier in this chapter. If the 
driving signals are much too strong, then it is possible for the active 
device to generate a wide spectrum of unwanted intermodulation prod­
ucts, affecting services in adjacent bands. 
• AM-to-PM transfer, which is a mechanism for transferring AM from 
one signal to PM on the same or, in the case of multicarrier operation, 
Figure 8.8  TWT nonlinear characteristics (AM-to-AM and AM-to-PM).

268 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
to other signals passing through the same amplifier. It is a case of the 
strongest carrier transferring its AM (if present) onto weaker carriers that 
share the bandwidth of the channel. The AM-to-PM transfer coefficient 
is the first derivative of phase shift versus power input, measured in de­
grees/dB. AM-to-PM also contributes to RF intermodulation distortion 
and spectral regrowth since it affects the q component as well as the i 
component of a complex waveform.
Amplitude limiting is an effect on strong carriers that drive the amplifier 
or other active device toward its point of maximum output (e.g., the saturation 
point). At low levels of drive, most active devices are nearly linear (constant 
gain). Moving toward saturation, the signal experiences some degree of limit­
ing, causing flat-topping of the time waveform. In the worst case, the device 
acts as an ideal limiter, producing a pulse stream at the carrier frequency and 
harmonics in the output. This is how sideband regrowth is produced.
8.1.5  Frequency Stability and Phase Noise
Modulators, frequency converters, and demodulators contain local oscillators 
that allow the carrier to be translated either up or down in frequency. Since a 
real oscillator cannot generate a pure sine wave, it will add to the variability of 
the signals as well as the baseband noise that is reproduced at the receiving end 
of the link. For a typical mixer stage, the various forms of noise on the local 
oscillator are transferred directly to the carrier. Providing adequate cleanliness 
for the LO is therefore a critical aspect of the design of the ground segment and 
the satellite as well. 
Any microwave frequency source can be stabilized by phase locking its 
frequency to a low-drift, temperature-stabilized crystal reference [3]. Further 
improvement is obtained by using an atomic frequency standard as the refer­
ence. However, the short-term stability of the source is not as easily controlled, 
and constitutes a principal source of error or degraded performance in many 
microwave systems. The rather complex methods by which short-term stability 
must be measured cause us to express the measurement results in unusual terms, 
which are subject to misinterpretation and confusion.
The nature of short-term instability is that it is a random phenomenon 
with small, relatively slow, nonsystematic changes in the long-term-average fre­
quency (the carrier frequency). One way of thinking about this random varia­
tion is to consider that it is the result of frequency-modulating the carrier by a 
complex signal having a limited spectrum signature; in other words, the spec­
tral content of the modulating signal is not infinite in bandwidth with the 
same amplitude at all frequencies, like that of white noise, but has most of its 
energy concentrated at low frequencies, with the amplitude of its frequency 

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
269
components falling off rapidly at higher frequencies. Figure 8.9 shows the spec­
trum of a signal that would, if it frequency-modulated a carrier, result in typical 
short-term frequency instability produced by an oscillator. Figure 8.10 shows 
the actual spectral distribution of phase noise after demodulation from a carrier, 
indicating their similarity.
If we recall that there is a physical correspondence between frequency 
modulation and phase modulation (i.e., that frequency deviation is equal to 
the rate of change of phase deviation), then it is possible to express a particular 
short-term instability in terms of either FM noise or phase noise. As we shall 
see, the measurement of phase noise, either above or below the carrier (single-
sideband phase noise) is preferable to measuring frequency deviations when the 
deviations are small. Another way of thinking about the short-term instability 
of the signal source is simply to say that the small, random frequency changes 
cause phase jitter in the carrier. For some very critical applications, the measure­
ment and interpretation of phase jitter is the only practical way of evaluating 
the short-term stability of a signal source.
All of the measurements and calculations discussed in the foregoing text 
have assumed that the random phenomenon we call short-term frequency or 
phase change can be averaged over a bandwidth, weighted, and expressed as 
an equivalent time-invariant quantity. In fact, instantaneous values of random 
functions may be very much larger than such averages, and, in microwave sys­
tems requiring the highest order of stability, even these very brief and/or very-
seldom-occurring excursions are significant. One technique that has proved 
effective is to phase-lock a local oscillator to a stable frequency reference, dis­
cussed later in this section.
Figure 8.9  Spectrum of a signal that would, if frequency-modulating a carrier, result in typi­
cal short-term frequency instability.

270 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Another source of frequency error is Doppler shift caused by relative mo­
tion between the earth station and the satellite, governed by the formula
	
Δ
=
r
f
V f c 	
where Vr is the range rate in meters per second, f is the frequency of the trans­
mitted wave, and c is the speed of light (e.g., 2.98 × 108 meters per second in 
vacuum). For example, a relative velocity of the earth station with respect to the 
satellite of 100 m/s at 12 GHz would produce a Doppler shift of 4,027 kHz 
(4.027 Hz/kHz). This represents an increase in frequency if earth station and 
satellite are moving toward each other, and a decrease if away. Let us say that 
our carrier has a bandwidth of 10 MHz, then this shift represents only 0.04 % 
of frequency error and can be ignored. If, on the other hand, the carrier band­
width is much narrower, say 10 kHz, then the error is substantially greater in 
relative terms (e.g., 40%).
Frequency stability is the ratio obtained by taking the absolute frequency 
error (the worst-case value of the difference between the actual frequency and 
the assigned frequency) and dividing it by the assigned frequency. Examples of 
types of oscillators and their typical values of frequency stability are provided 
in Table 8.2.
The stability of microwave oscillators can be improved through the use 
of a phase lock loop (PLL). This can produce an excellent blending of good 
short-term stability from an oscillator device with excellent long-term stability 
Figure 8.10  Phase noise sideband profile for a downconverted continuous wave tone gener­
ated by a 14.5-GHz VSAT terminal

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
271
available from an atomic standard or GPS. As shown in Figure 8.11, the voltage 
controlled oscillator (VCO) output is divided down by an integer and com­
pared with that of a highly stable crystal reference [4]. The difference is filtered 
by the loop filtering (a critical element) and detected before applying it as a 
correction input to the VCO. When first turned on, the VCO frequency will 
Table 8.2
Typical Types of Local Oscillators and Their Values of Frequency Stability
Type of Oscillator
Assigned 
Frequency
Frequency 
Stability, per 
month
Frequency 
Stability, over life
Quartz crystal (not 
temperature stabilized)
100 MHz
10–3
10–6
Temperature-stabilized 
quartz crystal
100 MHz
10–7
10–6
Frequency synthesizer
By design
Based on reference
Based on reference
Dielectric resonator 
oscillator (DRO)
1 to 14 GHz
10–5 (based on 
crystal reference)
10–6
Yttrium iron-garnet (YIG) 
oscillator
1 to 100 GHz
DC current 
controlled
Rubidium atomic standard
—
10–12
10–11
Cesium atomic standard
—
10–13
10–13
Hydrogen atomic standard
—
10–15
10–15
Corrected quartz oscillator 
(using GPS)
—
10–12
10–13
Figure 8.11  Basic phase-lock loop feedback system.

272 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
be pulled into the reference, requiring a settling time, as dictated also by the 
lop filter.
Various impairments, including phase noise and AM-to-PM, can also 
be seen in the instantaneous phase and amplitude of the modulated carrier 
as presented by the vector scope. This device can display the signal constella­
tion of either the transmitted or received signal, indicating the degree to which 
the detection of the proper symbol will be affected by noise, interference, and 
impairments. For example, Figure 8.12 provides the vector scope display of a 
received QPSK signal for two conditions: on the left is the received signal with 
thermal noise present, and on the right is the received signal with thermal noise 
and phase distortion. Thermal noise by itself produces a circular cloud of dots 
(each the tip of a received signal vector) all of which appear to stay within the 
respective quadrant. Only when a dot moves into an adjacent quadrant is a 
symbol error produced. A symbol error in this case can result either in one or 
two bit errors, depending on which quadrant the resultant lies. The case with 
phase noise indicates that the circular pattern is distorted into more or less of 
an ellipse whose major axis lies along a circle. This indicates an excessive varia­
tion on phase.
8.1.6  Other Impairments Not Directly Associated with Transmission
Any RF communication system brings with it sources of degradation that ap­
pear through ancillary functions within the system. These include harmonics 
from oscillators and nonlinear devices (amplifiers, mixers, and multipliers), spu­
rious products produced in power supplies, frequency converters or other com­
ponents, and timing irregularity due to synchronization issues such as jitter. It is 
the function of proper design of baseband and RF systems that these problems 
Figure 8.12  Victor scope representation of a received QPSK signal, (a) with thermal noise 
only, (b) with thermal noise and phase distortion.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
273
be suppressed to such an extent that they are insignificant. Frequency error and 
phase noise could be included in this group but have already been addressed 
in Section 8.1.5. Each of these impairments deserves a chapter of its own but 
is generally relegated to the internal design and refinement of the components 
that produce them. While they are not system problems they nevertheless need 
to be considered as they can produce bit errors or even render a link unusable 
or introduce unacceptable interference into other working communication sys­
tems—both in-band and out-of-band.
Harmonics are produced by nonlinearity wherever it exists—in the uplink 
earth station and satellite as well as within the downlink chain. They are often 
removed using nothing more than a highpass filter at the output of the generat­
ing device. However, harmonics can intermodulate with other signals and pro­
duce interference that falls within the operating bandwidth of the generating 
system. The solution is to capture and remove the harmonic at its source, which 
is usually within an item of equipment. Occasionally, a radiated harmonic can 
exceed an ITU or other regulatory limit (falling out-of-band but within the al­
location of another service such as radio astronomy) and the offender will end 
up spending valuable resources to resolve the situation even though there is no 
direct effect on service.
Spurious products (“spurs”), discussed in Section 7.7, are undesired carri­
ers that appear in the output of devices that either employ nonlinearity in their 
function (mixers and multipliers) or exhibit nonlinearity in their operation 
(amplifiers near saturation). Many of the devices covered in Chapter 7 include 
in their specifications that spurs must be at least 50 or 60 dB below the carrier. 
This would generally preclude spurs from being an issue in the link budget or 
actual operation. Intermodulation products, per se, are not considered to be 
spurs because they can be predicted based on the quantity of carriers and type 
of nonlinearity that generates them. Removal of spurs is generally the respon­
sibility of the equipment designer which is why most active devices have spur 
specifications. In the unusual case where the spur level is within specification 
but appears on a particularly critical frequency, the earth station designer will 
need to isolate the spur and remove it using notch filtering or possibly using a 
different device that does not produce the offending spur. A spur that is sensi­
tive to the power level can be controlled by backing off the associated device 
and adding gain in a following stage.
Timing irregularity is an issue that affects the information signal at the 
baseband level. Generally, it occurs when two or more data stream are com­
bined prior to modulation. An example is when video and IP data are summed 
using a time multiplexer; the video is generally transmitted as a constant bit rate 
signal that demands consistent timing, while IP data is more tolerant of timing 
irregularity. Timing error can also result from variable time delay due to relative 
motion of transmitting and receiving devices. If the receiving device cannot 

274 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
adjust for timing error, then the sending end will require some rearrangement 
so that the errors do not occur. In one case, this was resolved by including a de­
vice that added a time stamp to the video signal, allowing the receiver to adjust 
itself in real time.
The three impairments just described are basically independent of each 
other and mostly independent of the impairments identified in Table 8.1. The 
ground segment designer will need to identify and track each of these and pro­
vide thorough testing of components and the entire system to be assured that 
they are controlled. This is also a place for the budgeting of these and other 
impairments and tracking them throughout development and into operation.
8.2  Spectrum Monitoring and Analysis
Spectrum monitoring and analysis is performed using equipment that displays 
and measures individual frequency components in terms of the location in the 
spectrum (i.e., the actual frequency at RF or IF), the power in decibels rela­
tive to a reference (such as 0 dBm), and bandwidth in kilohertz or megahertz. 
Mathematically, the spectrum is obtained by taking the Fourier transform of 
the time waveform of the signal
	
( )
( )(
)
π
π
∞
-∞
=
=
∫
cos2
sin2
X f
x t
ft
j
ft dt 	
where X(f  ) is the signal voltage at each frequency (f  ) and x(t) is the time wave­
form representation of the original signal at time (t), including real (I ) and 
imaginary (Q) parts; that is:
	
=
-1
j
	
The integral sums the signal for all time. Moving from theory to practice, 
the key piece of test equipment that produces the spectrum is a type of micro­
wave receiver called a spectrum analyzer, shown in Figure 8.13. Note how the 
spectrum of the single carrier in the display is bandwidth-limited, much like the 
spectrum presented previously in this chapter. The controls allow the operator 
to examine the fine structure of the particular carrier and measure power levels 
in dBm shown along the Y-axis. The total bandwidth can be changed to observe 
adjacent carriers as well. The spectrum analyzer can be found in laboratories 
where equipment is developed and tested and in earth stations to monitor the 
uplink as well as the downlink.
A test set up to measure BER as a function of C/N (or Eb/No) is indicated 
in Figure 8.14. The objective is to simulate a given value of C/N as observed on 
the spectrum analyzer, where carrier power is given by the peak of the carrier 

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
275
and the noise is derived from the noise floor. Care must be taken when assessing 
noise power because it will depend on the measurement resolution bandwidth 
(RBW) setting of the spectrum analyzer. If the latter happens to be 1 kHz, then 
30 dB must be added to whatever noise power is measured on the display. Like­
wise, carrier power is best measured with no modulation since all of the power 
will be recovered through the same 1-kHz measurement bandwidth. The rela­
tive levels of the carrier and noise are individually set by the respective variable 
attenuators. The BER is measured by the BER test set that is connected (or part 
of) the modem.
The above mention of resolution bandwidth goes along with a basic un­
derstanding of spectrum analyzer usage [7]. RBW is set by an intermediate 
frequency (IF) filter in the receiver section of the spectrum analyzer and it pro­
vides a bandwidth as selected on the front panel (or via a remote input, if ap­
propriate). It determines the selectivity of the measurement thereby dictating 
the power that is detected and displayed in dBm at the particular frequency. 
Figure 8.13  An example of a spectrum analyzer, indicating a single carrier and the noise 
floor. (Courtesy of Agilent.)
Figure 8.14  Modem BER performance measurement using spectrum analyzer test method. 
(Courtesy of Comtech EF Data.)

276 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The display sweeps a range of spectrum corresponding to another setting of the 
analyzer. Narrow RBW means better selectivity to allow detailed refinement of 
the spectrum picture. Unfortunately, this interacts with the rate of frequency 
sweep: if the sweep is too rapid, the spectrum will be distorted. There is thus 
a trade-off between RBW and sweep rate, especially important if one is trying 
to capture a pulsating carrier (e.g., TDMA). The spectrum analyzer includes a 
lowpass filter prior to the detector that sets the video bandwidth. Its purpose 
is to average or smooth the trace on the screen. This is another adjustment to 
make the image look less distorted and to provide a better image for study.
These procedures and tests are examples of what can be accomplished 
through spectrum analysis. Intermodulation products, shown in Figure 8.15 
(actually a computer simulation using the mathematical model shown), are eas­
ily identified and measured relative to the carriers that generated them. There­
fore, most C/IM measurements are made with a spectrum analyzer. Another 
important use of the device is to detect the presence of undesired frequencies 
(ones that should not be present). This comes into play when detecting the 
presence of spurious signals coming out of a device and for radio frequency 
interference that is received by the antenna or EMI produced within the earth 
station itself.
8.3  Software Design Tools
One of the benefits of the modern PC is its ability to perform mathemati­
cal analyses and provide excellent visual displays for typical satellite commu­
nications problems. For most situations, this is a huge improvement over the 
scientific calculator, simple spreadsheets, and older (and obsolete) mainframe 
software, much of which was custom written in years past. We review in this 
section three PC-based software packages that allow ground segment designer 
and earth station engineers to do their jobs more effectively and accurately. 
Reviewed below are Satellite Tool Kit (STK), an orbit and coverage visualiza­
tion product; SatMaster Pro, an effective link budget generation and analysis 
package; and MATLAB Simulink™, a set of sophisticated signal and system 
analysis tools that can help predict end-to-end performance. Simulations have 
also been performed using MathCad (as in [4]) and open-source applications 
such as Python. The discussion that follows is not exhaustive, as it would take 
several volumes to represent this software as well as other equally valuable tools 
for the PC.
8.3.1  Orbit Visualization (STK)
The Satellite Tool Kit (STK)® is an off-the-shelf PC software computer-aided 
engineering (CAE) package for orbit analysis, determining earth station point­

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
277
ing angles, making satellite coverage predictions and evaluating communica­
tions paths under dynamic conditions. This graphical-oriented tool offers in­
dividual stand-along capability and cross-discipline understanding to analysts 
and system engineers at many levels. STK supports preliminary definition of 
requirements, design tradeoffs, comparison of orbit and launch, and prelimi­
nary evaluation of operating strategies for space and ground segments. 
The package is available as a free download from www.stk.com. in the 
basic configuration with two-dimension and some three-dimension visualiza­
tion. When combined with other modules that are purchased from Analytical 
Graphics, Inc. (AGI), the tool provides many integrated functions: defining 
and propagating satellite orbits, determining visibility areas and times, comput­
ing antenna and sensor pointing angles, and generating results in textual and 
color graphical formats.
Based on simple user inputs, STK generates paths for a variety of space- 
and ground-based objects, such as satellites, missiles, ships, aircraft, and land 
vehicles. An example of an orbit visualization for a LEO constellation is provid­
ed in Figure 8.16. STK provides animation capabilities and a two-dimensional 
map background for visualizing the path of these vehicles over time. STK can 
model the field of view available to these objects, enabling the user to determine 
whether the object can see its target (e.g., earth station locations or satellites). 
Along with these displays, STK computes and outputs access times, position, 
and other key information. 
Figure 8.15  Spectral plot of two carriers and the third order intermodulation products the 
generate in a non-linear device. Carriers and products have near-zero bandwidth, indicative 
of using a very narrow analyzer bandwidth with unmodulated carriers. 

278 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
STKs browser window allows the user to add/remove objects, define 
object properties, and manipulate objects to analyze relationships or summa­
rize key information. Individual objects can be defined by satellite orbit type; 
graphic characteristics, such as azimuth-elevation masks for earth stations and 
other targets; constraints, such as sensor ground sample distance; and special 
properties, such as model attributes.
The object-oriented approach recognizes many classes of objects that can 
be manipulated by the user, including: application (the highest-level object 
definition, corresponding to the simulation model itself), ground vehicle, area 
target, scenario, missile, planet, satellite, launch vehicle, star, aircraft, facility, 
sensor, ship, and target. As objects are created and defined, they compose a 
scenarioa depiction of the events and relationships between space- and ground-
based objects for a particular time period. 
AGI maintains an up-to-date database of over 8,000 cataloged objects 
at www.stk.com. Data include two-line element sets (TLEs), Space Surveil­
lance Catalog (SSC) numbers, common names, launch dates, launch times, 
apogee, perigee, activity state, and more. This database is particularly useful for 
inserting objects into STK as vehicles for analysis, as the TLE in the database 
propagates the vehicles orbit automatically. Updated three times each week, the 
database is used by the STK Close Approach (CAT), which references objects in 
the database to obtain an estimate of approach to an existing vehicle.
Figure 8.16  Ground track for a LEO constellation as presented by Satellite Tool Kit (image 
courtesy of Analytical Graphics, Inc.).

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
279
STK provides some tools to represent the RF elements of a communica­
tion link for use in object and scenario evaluations. These include the following:
• Receivers: simple receiver, complex receiver, laser receiver, multibeam 
receiver;
• Transmitters: simple transmitter, cable transmitter, medium transmit­
ter, complex transmitter, multibeam transmitter, laser transmitter, GPS 
satellite transmitter;
• STK can be used to model simplified transponders: additional gains and 
losses, polarization, antenna selection and setup, receiver environment 
factors, spectrum filter options, receiver output factors.
Generally, STK is best for depicting or visualizing geometry and motion 
among objects such as satellites, aircraft, launch vehicles, and the like. It is best 
suited for non-GEO missions, GEO operations from fast moving platforms, 
and transfer orbits of satellites on their way to GEO.
8.3.2  Detailed Link Budget (SatMaster)
Link budgets reviewed in Chapter 3 are essential to satellite system design and 
earth station specification. While they are based on a set of well-understood 
relationships, they have been very individualized, according to the engineers 
knowledge and approach to the problem. Many have tried to standardize link 
budgets, but there continues to be reluctance by experienced satellite communi­
cations engineers to relinquish their individual style and practice. While much 
can be said for maintaining tight control over the detailed engineering approach 
that we each take, the variation in formats complicates the matter of trans­
ferring knowledge and even results of link budget analyses, because engineers 
often have difficulty understanding the assumptions used by others. While we 
do not recommend a particular off-the-shelf software package for detailed en­
gineering and design, there still is benefit in some of these tools for common 
problems involving GEO satellite links in the FSS and BSS frequency bands. 
One relatively inexpensive yet complete tool is SatMaster Pro, available over the 
Internet. A screen shot is provided in Figure 8.17.
Provided by Arrowe Technical Services in the United Kingdom (www.
arrowe.co.uk), SatMaster, version Mk 8.7, is a reasonably versatile tool for stan­
dardized analog and digital link budgets. There are separate link budget formats 
for GEO and non-GEO systems, providing individual uplink and downlink, as 
well as combined versions. Calculators are included for antenna aiming, dual/
multi feed positioning, sun outage prediction, and polar mount alignment. 
Files of simplified EIRP, SFD (saturation flux density), and G/T maps are not 

280 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
included as this data must be provided by the user. An example of a complete 
Ku-band digital video link budget is provided in Table 8.3. System require­
ments for SatMaster include: Windows XP, 7, or 8.
The program can determine HPA size, uplink power requirements, band­
width, and power usage per carrier. Predictions are made of atmospheric losses 
and rain fade margins based on availability on uplink and downlink. The link 
may use information rates from 9 Kbps to over 40 Mbps. Output backoff and 
transponder intermodulation interference may be estimated and the budgets 
may employ any common MODCOD, including those of DVB-S and DVB-
S2. The software is intended for VSAT networks, broadcast TV, SNG, Ku 
trucks, data transmission, and radio station feeds.
The output of SatMaster Pro in Table 8.3 comprises several sections that 
cover the inputs, general calculations, uplink calculations, downlink calcula­
tions, and the overall link calculations. Additional sections address the calculat­
ed EIRP densities for the earth station and satellite, earth station uplink power 
requirements, and space segment utilization (addressing capacity and whether 
the link is bandwidth- or power-limited). The columns provide all values for the 
three key conditions: clear weather on both ends, rain on the uplink only, and 
rain on the downlink only. The latter two consider that rainfall at the uplink 
Figure 8.17  Screenshot of SatMaster 8.7 input window for GEO link budget.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
281
Table 8.3
Example of a Link Budget Prepared with SatMaster Pro
Link budget produced using Satmaster Pro 8.7n, Thursday 12 December 2013
Service Name
Forward Carrier
Coverage
Central
Uplink earth station
Las Cruces, USA-NM
Downlink earth station
Dayton, USA-OH
Satellite name
HTS-1
Modcod
DVB-S2 8-PSK (3/4) {normal frame,no pilots}
Link Input Parameters
Up
Down
Units
Site latitude
32.32N
39.75N
Degrees
Site longitude
106.78W
84.25W
Degrees
Site altitude
1.39
0.312
km
Frequency
29.8
20
GHz
Polarization
Circular
Circular
Rain model
ITU-R
ITU-R
Rain zone or mm/h
34.5
45.3
Availability (average year)
99.9
99.5
%
Antenna aperture
3.5
0.85
meters
Antenna efficiency or gain (+ or - prefix)
60
60
% or dBi
Coupling loss
3
0.3
dB
Antenna mispoint loss
0.5
0
dB
Other path losses
0
0
dB
LNB noise figure or temp (+ prefix)
90
dB or K
Antenna noise
65.26
K
Csat/ACIo
116
115
dB.Hz
Csat/ASIo
116
102
dB.Hz
Csat/XPIo
113
112
dB.Hz
Uplink station HPA output back-off
6
dB
Uplink power control
8
dB
Number of carriers / HPA
4
HPA C/IMo
113
dB.Hz
Required HPA power
MIN
W

282 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 8.3  (continued)
Satellite Input Parameters
Value
Units
Satellite longitude
107W
Degrees
Transponder type
LTWTA
G/T reference
22
dB/K
SFD reference
-100
dBW/m2
Receive G/T
20
dB/K
Attenuator pad (gain step)
10
dB
Effective SFD
-88
dBW/m2
Satellite ALC
10
dB
EIRP (saturation)
64
dBW
Transponder bandwidth
250
MHz
Input backoff total
3
dB
Output backoff total
2.37
dB
C/IM
15.88
dB
 
Carrier/Link Input Parameters
Value
Units
Modulation
8-PSK
Required Es/No
7.91
dB
Information rate
50
Mbps
Information rate overhead
0
%
FEC code rate
0.7427
Spreading gain
0
dB
(1 + Roll-off factor)
1.2
Carrier spacing factor
1.2
Bandwidth allocation step size
0.01
MHz
Implementation loss
0
dB
System margin
0
dB
 
Calculations at Saturation
Value
Units
Gain 1m^2
50.94
dB/m2
Uplink C/No
109.66
dB.Hz
Downlink C/No
102.32
dB.Hz
Total C/No
101.59
dB.Hz
Uplink EIRP for saturation
75.07
dBW

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
283
Table 8.3  (continued)
General Calculations
Up
Down
Units
Elevation
52.39
38.35
Degrees
True azimuth
180.41
213.26
Degrees
Compass bearing
171.71
219.27
Degrees
Path distance to satellite
36929.96
37907.65
km
XPD during rain
24.47
26.97
dB
Propagation time delay
0.123185
0.126446
Seconds
Antenna efficiency
60
60
%
Antenna gain
58.55
42.8
dBi
Availability (average year)
99.9
99.5
%
Link downtime (average year)
8.766
43.83
Hours
Availability (worst month)
99.615
98.44
%
Link downtime (worst month)
2.809
11.393
Hours
Maximum availability at current HPA power
99.963
99.4999
%
Minimum antenna size at current HPA 
power
0.85
Meters
Uplink Calculation
Clear
Rain Up
Rain Dn
Units
Uplink transmit EIRP
63.02
63.02
63.02
dBW
Transponder input backoff (total)
3
3
3
dB
Input back-off per carrier
12.05
16.52
12.05
dB
Antenna mispoint
0.5
0.5
0.5
dB
Free space loss
213.28
213.28
213.28
dB
Atmospheric absorption
0.23
0.52
0.23
dB
Tropospheric scintillation fading
0
0.2
0
dB
Cloud attenuation
0
0.7
0
dB
Rain attenuation
0
11.48
0
dB
Total attenuation (gas-rain-cloud-
scintillation)
0.23
12.7
0.23
dB
Other path losses
0
0
0
dB
Uplink power control
0
8
0
dB
Uncompensated fade
0
4.46
0
dB
C/No (thermal)
97.6
93.14
97.6
dB.Hz
C/N (thermal)
24.09
19.63
24.09
dB
C/ACI
30.44
25.97
30.44
dB
C/ASI
30.44
25.97
30.44
dB

284 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 8.3  (continued)
C/XPI
27.44
24.05
27.44
dB
C/IM
27.44
27.44
27.44
dB
C/(N+I)  [ = Es/(No+Io) ]
20.31
16.64
20.31
dB
Eb/(No+Io)
16.83
13.16
16.83
dB
 
Downlink Calculation
Clear
Rain Up
Rain Dn
Units
Satellite EIRP total
64
64
64
dBW
Transponder output backoff (total)
2.37
2.37
2.37
dB
Output backoff per carrier
11.42
11.42
11.42
dB
Satellite EIRP per carrier
52.58
52.58
52.58
dBW
Antenna mispoint
0
0
0
dB
Free space loss
210.04
210.04
210.04
dB
Atmospheric absorption
0.42
0.42
1
dB
Tropospheric scintillation fading
0
0
0.27
dB
Cloud attenuation
0
0
1
dB
Rain attenuation
0
0
3.06
dB
Total attenuation (gas-rain-cloud-
scintillation)
0.42
0.42
5.07
dB
Other path losses
0
0
0
dB
Noise increase due to precipitation
0
0
2.87
dB
Downlink degradation (DND)
0
0
7.52
dB
Total system noise
170.26
170.26
329.67
K
Figure of merit (G/T)
20.19
20.19
17.32
dB/K
C/No (thermal)
90.9
90.9
83.38
dB.Hz
C/N (thermal)
17.39
17.39
9.87
dB
C/ACI
30.06
30.06
30.06
dB
C/ASI
17.06
17.06
17.06
dB
C/XPI
27.06
27.06
25.26
dB
C/IM
15.88
15.88
15.88
dB
C/(N+I)  [ = Es/(No+Io) ]
11.76
11.76
8.17
dB
Eb/(No+Io)
8.28
8.28
4.69
dB

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
285
Table 8.3  (continued)
Totals per Carrier (End-to-End)
Clear
Rain Up
Rain Dn
Units
C/No (thermal)
90.06
88.86
83.22
dB.Hz
C/N (thermal)
16.55
15.35
9.71
dB
C/ACI
27.24
24.54
27.24
dB
C/ASI
16.87
16.54
16.87
dB
C/XPI
24.24
22.29
23.2
dB
C/IM
15.59
15.59
15.59
dB
C/I (total)
12.69
12.28
12.61
dB
C/(No+Io)
84.7
84.05
81.42
dB.Hz
C/(N+I)  [ = Es/(No+Io) ]
11.19
10.54
7.91
dB
Eb/(No+Io)
7.71
7.06
4.43
dB
Implementation loss
0
0
0
dB
System margin
0
0
0
dB
Net Es/(No+Io)
11.19
10.54
7.91
dB
Required Es/(No+Io)
7.91
7.91
7.91
dB
Excess margin
3.28
2.63
0
dB
 
EIRP Density Calculations
Clear
Rain Up
Rain Dn
Units
Flange transmit (up)
-69.04
-69.04
-69.04
dBW/Hz
Satellite (down)
-20.94
-20.94
-20.94
dBW/Hz
Flange receive (down)
-188.6
-188.6
-196.12
dBW/Hz
 
Earth Station Power Requirements
Value
Units
EIRP per carrier
63.02
dBW
Antenna gain
58.55
dBi
Antenna feed flange power per carrier
4.47
dBW
Uplink power control
8
dB
HPA output back off
6
dB
Waveguide loss
3
dB
Number of HPA carriers
4
Total HPA power required
27.4861
dBW
Required HPA power
560.5473
W
 

286 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
site is uncorrelated with that on the downlink, a reasonable assumption if the 
locations are at least 100 km apart. The condition of simultaneous rain on the 
uplink and downlink can be evaluated if a certain box is checked under the se­
lected rain model. Needless to say, there is a great deal of information provided 
and most situations only require about half of it be reviewed. Having all of the 
detail does permit more careful examination when needed. 
SatMaster Pro provides an effective means to evaluate various forms of 
interference, including adjacent channel interference (ACI), cross-polarization 
interference (XPI), and adjacent satellite interference (ASI). Owing to the fact 
that the actual interference to the desired carrier is a function of carrier power 
and bandwidth, SatMaster Pro uses the concept of carrier-to-interference den­
sity, relative to single carrier saturation (Csat/I0). The relationship between the 
normal way to express C/I and this alternative is as follows:
	
(
)
=
-
-
∗
0
carrier backoff
10 log carrier symbol rate
sat
C I
C
I
	
The carrier backoff is normally determined through running the link 
budget as is the symbol rate. So, we must initially estimate these values before 
Table 8.3  (continued)
Space Segment Utilization
Value
Units
Overall availability
99.4005
%
Information rate
50
Mbps
Information rate (inc overhead)
50
Mbps
Transmit rate
67.3219
Mbps
Symbol rate
22.4406
Mbaud
Noise Bandwidth
73.51
dB.Hz
Occupied bandwidth
26.9288
MHz
Minimum allocated bandwidth required
26.9288
MHz
Allocated transponder bandwidth
26.93
MHz
Link efficiency
1.609
bps/Hz
Percentage transponder bandwidth used
10.77
%
Used transponder power
52.58
dBW
Percentage transponder power used
12.43
%
Max carriers/transponder
8.04
Limited by:
Power
Power equivalent bandwidth usage
31.0797
MHz

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
287
first running SatMaster. After the initial run, the required values are provided in 
the table and suitable adjustments to the Csat/I0 made.
This was meant as an introduction to SatMaster Pro to provide the reader 
with its general capabilities and output format. In using this tool, it is neces­
sary to carefully consider all of the input assumptions as they interact when 
combined. Once an initial link budget is created and the inputs validated for 
their accuracy, it is an easy matter to perform tradeoffs and sensitivity studies 
as execution of the program is almost instantaneous. The output can be copied 
into Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet program, but this contains only the 
values and not the formulae. The propagation models used in SatMaster are all 
derived from ITU reports and recommendations [8].
8.3.3  System Simulation and Communication Analysis Software Tools
Our focus here is on the evaluation of the satellite link on an end-to-end basis 
rather than the design and optimization of a particular element like a modem or 
nonlinear amplifier. Still, there has been impressive progress to date in the area 
of software tools for digital systems and this progress provides some interesting 
options for the development of the overall ground segment. The MATLAB® 
family of software solutions provides a substantial foundation for simulation of 
satellite links and systems, primarily from the standpoint of the signal structure, 
modem operation, the impact of elements that contribute impairments, and 
the performance of the end-to-end system in terms of ISI and BER. However, 
developing an accurate model of the system that represents all of these factors is 
still a daunting task. On the other hand, the integration of the MATLAB with 
other modules makes the structure extremely powerful for predicting perfor­
mance as well as for the actual design of critical elements.
The software module that provides to MATLAB the features needed 
for satellite link evaluation is called Simulink®. This is a block diagram en­
vironment for multidomain simulation and model-based design. It supports 
simulation, automatic code generation, and continuous test and verification of 
embedded systems. Simulink provides a graphical editor, customizable block 
libraries, and solvers for modeling and simulating dynamic systems. It is inte­
grated with MATLAB® so that algorithms written in MATLAB can be incor­
porated into models and then simulation results can be transferred to MATLAB 
for further analysis. Another feature within Simulink is called SimRF™, which 
provides a component library and simulation engine for designing RF systems. 
It includes amplifiers, mixers, S-parameter blocks, and other basic blocks for 
designing architectures for communication and radar systems. These blocks 
may be connected arbitrarily to form diverse architectures and simulate the be­
havior of the RF front-end at the system level. SimRF allows simulation of RF 
amplifiers to estimate gain, and intermodulation distortion. The simulation of 

288 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
mixers enables prediction of image rejection, reciprocal mixing, local oscillator 
phase offsets, and DC conversion. Frequency-dependent mismatches between 
linear and nonlinear components can be evaluated in the time and frequency 
domains.
We will use DVB-S2 as an example of how SimRF and Simulink can ad­
dress the modeling of a satellite communications link. Figure 8.18 provides the 
block diagram of this simulation as presented by SimRF. The following descrip­
tion is provided by Mathworks:
This model shows the state-of-the-art channel coding scheme used in 
the second generation Digital Video Broadcasting standard (DVB-S2), 
employed for DTH and the VSAT outbound carrier. The coding scheme 
is based on concatenation of LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) and 
BCH codes. The outer BCH codes are used to correct sporadic errors 
made by the LDPC decoder.
This example models the BCH encoder, LDPC encoder, interleaver, and 
modulator, as well as their counterparts in the receiver, according to the DVB-
S2 standard. The communication system in this example performs these tasks:
• Generation of BBFRAME by a random source;
• BCH encoding for all coding parameters and normal FECFRAME;
• LDPC encoding for all coding parameters and normal FECFRAME;
• Interleaving;
• Modulation (QPSK or 8PSK);
• AWGN channel modeling;
• Soft-decision demodulation;
• Deinterleaving;
• LDPC decoding, by means of the message passing algorithm;
• BCH decoding;
• BBFRAME unbuffering.
Note that the channel model is a simple one, including only Gaussian 
noise and no other impairments that would provide ISI, ASI or phase distor­
tion. These can be included using modules that represent sources of these im­
pairments (discussed below). Mathworks has appropriate models for AM-to-
AM and AM-to-PM as well as means to introduce frequency offset, jitter and 
phase noise. All of these would be useful to create a more complete model of the 
transmission system over a satellite.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
289
Figure 8.18  Simulation model using Simulink and SimRF for a DVB-S2 transmission link. (Courtesy of Mathworks.)

290 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The following example of a simple simulation considers the performance 
of a 16QAM channel with Gaussian noise and an unmodulated adjacent chan­
nel. A nonlinearity is included as well and the results measured in terms of BER 
versus Eb/No, with and without ACI. This example shows how to use baseband 
modulators and demodulators with frequency upconversion and downconver­
sion to simulate passband communication systems. The block diagram of the 
simulated system is given in Figure 8.19. In general, it is simpler and faster to 
model a system at complex baseband. However, there are some circumstances 
where it is preferable to model the system at real passband. An example of this is 
when an adjacent band tonal signal is processed with a nonlinearity and causes 
interference in the band of interest. This example illustrates this scenario by 
assuming a 16QAM communications system transmitting in an additive white 
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with interference in its passband. A tone in 
an adjacent channel that has been processed by a cubic nonlinearity causes this 
interference. After modulation, you apply pulse shaping using a square-root-
raised cosine filter. You use the spectrum estimator to verify that the frequency 
spectrum of the baseband signal is centered at zero hertz, and that it has been 
filtered properly, shown in Figure 8.20. The results of the complete simulation 
include these factors and are compared with theory in Figure 8.21. 
8.3.4  Dynamic Equalization
The principle of group delay equalization has been with us for many decades yet 
it can only address one type of impairment to digital communications. More 
recently, suppliers of ground equipment have begun to offer a variety of tools 
that effectively cancel out the very impairments that we have reviewed in this 
chapter, namely AM-to-AM and AM-to-PM distortion produced by amplifiers, 
phase distortion from oscillators, and group delay and gain slope from filters 
and other band-limiting devices. The techniques can be performed by digital 
Figure 8.19  Basic repeater simulation model with noise and interference.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
291
Figure 8.20  Computer generated spectra using 16QAM. (Courtesy of Mathworks.)
Figure 8.21  Link performance in terms of symbol error rate vs. Eb/No. (Courtesy of Math­
works.)

292 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
signal processing elements on the ground that can measure the combined ana­
log distortion and then counter this distortion to produce a nearly ideal signal 
for demodulation. The system we referred to as carrier cancellation in Chapter 
4 incorporates dynamic equalization as a means to further reduce the residual 
power of the local carrier. 
Dynamic equalization can modify the property of the transmitted carrier 
as well as counter AM-to-AM and AM-to-PM that is produced by downstream 
nonlinear elements. For example, Figure 8.22 shows how predistortion of a 
16QAM signal presented as a signal constellation can provide for a nearly ideal 
result after transmission through a device with amplitude nonlinearity. The re­
sult for the actual spectrum is presented in Figure 8.23, indicating that sideband 
regrowth is effectively nullified. The work of the DVB Forum and associated 
suppliers regarding extensions to DVB-S2 is addressing dynamic equalization 
as part of an enhanced ACM structure.
8.4  Optimizing the Ground Segment
The concepts and tools in this chapter cover a wide range of technical issues and 
system concepts. As a result, this has been more of a survey than a cookbook 
of how to accomplish this important but challenging task. There will be cir­
cumstances where a specific approach can be applied successfully so that some 
performance aspect is measurably improved. However, the benefit may not out­
weigh the challenge of collecting the required information and performing the 
necessary analyses and tests that verify that this indeed works in the real world. 
The budgeting process is one of the most important concepts in ground seg­
Figure 8.22  Received 16QAM signal constellation on vector-scope, (a) without pre-distor­
tion, and (b) with pre-distortion.

 
Signal Impairments and Service Optimization 
293
ment design; with it, the engineer identifies, quantifies, compares and verifies 
the details and brings them together in a meaningful way. Computer simulation 
appears to be the ultimate tool for accomplishing this on an integrated basis. 
If a reliable model can be assembled and verified, you will have a very use­
ful workbench for optimizing portions of the ground segment, or possibly the 
ground segment as a whole. Somewhere between these extremes, we can have 
confidence that the system will do what it is supposed to do.
References
[1]	 Carducci, F., and R. Novello, On-board Multiplexing: The Skyplex Transponder and the 
Multimedia Highways, 17th AIAA International Communications Satellite Systems Con­
ference and Exhibit, a collection of technical papers, February 2327, 1998, Yokohama, 
Japan, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, New York, 1998, p. 461.
[2]	 Lance, Algie L., Microwave Measurements, Handbook of Microwave and Optical Compo­
nents, Vol. 1, Microwave Passive & Antenna Components, ed. Kai Chang, New York: Wiley, 
1989, p. 495.
[3]	 Riley, W. J., Handbook of Frequency Stability Analysis, Time Frequency Division, Physics 
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Publication 1065, 
Boulder, CO, July 2008, https://safe.nrao.edu/wiki/pub/Main/ToddHunter/nist1065.
pdf.
[4]	 Cheah, Jonathon Y. C., Practical Wireless Data Modem Design, Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 1999, p. 148.
[5]	 Chang, Henry, et al., Surviving the SoC Revolution: A Guide to Platform Based Design, 
Boston: Kluwer, 1999.
[6]	 Larson, Lawrence E., editor, RF and Microwave Circuit Design for Wireless Communica­
tions, Artech House, Boston, MA, 1997, p. 134.
Figure 8.23  Transmitted spectra for 16QAM, without and with pre-distortion.

294 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
[7]	 Agilent Technologies, “Spectrum Analyzer Basics,” 5/13/2002, http://literature.agilent.
com/litweb/pdf/5965-7920E.pdf.
[8]	 Recommendation ITU-R P.618-11 (09/2013), “Propagation Data and Prediction Meth­
ods Required for the Design of Earth-space Telecommunications Systems,” International 
Telecommunication Union, Geneva.

295
9
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals
A user terminal is a satellite communications earth station designed to be used 
and operated by the end user. Examples of end-user situations, reviewed in 
Table 9.1, include cable TV systems and TV stations, branch offices of com­
panies and government agencies, military units, schools, aircraft, vehicles and 
vessels, and homes of individual subscribers. Unit costs are usually held down 
because of the potentially large quantities involved (numbering in the hundreds 
of thousands to millions for a particular model) and a requirement for afford­
ability by end users who may make the financial commitment themselves. In 
fact, large industry segments like DTH TV and satellite broadband Internet 
service can only exist and prosper if user-terminal costs are within reach of mass 
markets.
The design of a user terminal is usually highly tied to the particular re­
quirements of the intended service and end user. For example, a DTH receive-
only TV terminal is able to receive the wideband Ku-band digital downlink of 
a GEO satellite, demodulate and process the data stream, and produce video 
and audio of the desired quality. It incorporates all of the technical features of 
a receiving earth station as well as those of a modern digital TV set-top box. 
Advanced features like reception from multiple satellite locations on one cable, 
centralized recording and playback to multiple TVs, and integration with the 
Internet have been incorporated. A VSAT, on the other hand, is an interactive 
data and, if required, voice earth station within a package about the size of a 
cable modem. Unlike the closed architecture of the DTH receiver, a VSAT can 
be configured for service through selection of appropriate modules and soft­
ware. Therefore, VSAT terminals behave more like traditional earth stations, 
although their cost is substantially lower to justify their application in corporate 
branch offices and retail stores. A user terminal intended for use by military, 

296 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
police, or safety services must be designed to satisfy security and durability 
requirements. Consumer terminals behave more like home routers and require 
no technical knowledge.
Table 9.1
User Terminals Used in Satellite Commuincations, GEO, and Non-GEO Systems
Application 
(Satellite System)
Terminal Type
RF Terminal
Baseband and User 
Interface
Cable and broadcast 
TV (GEO FSS bent pipe, 
C or Ku band)
Fixed earth station at 
cable head end or TV 
station
Receive-only, fixed dish 
(2 to 10m); outdoor 
electronics; transmit 
may be included
Analog or digital 
receivers (one per 
channel) to recover 
baseband; includes 
network control 
facilities
Direct-to-home TV 
broadcasting (GEO BSS 
bent pipe, Ku band)
Individual fixed earth 
station at home
Receive-only, fixed dish 
(45 to 90 cm); outdoor 
electronics
Digital set-top box to 
recover baseband and 
deliver programming 
through friendly user 
interface
Private business 
networks, low to 
medium date rate, 
voice, TVRO (GEO FSS 
bent pipe, C or Ku or 
Ka-band)
VSAT installed at 
remote locations
Transmit and receive, 
fixed dish (1.0 to 2.8m); 
outdoor electronics 
with SSPA module
Digital indoor unit 
containing modem, 
multiple access 
controller, and routers; 
includes network 
management facilities
Shipboard voice/data 
communications and 
distress (GEO MSS 
bent pipe, L band and 
Ku-band)
Inmarsat maritime 
terminal; Ku-band 
VSAT
Transmit and receive 
dish (1m); outdoor 
electronics with SSPA 
module
Digital indoor unit 
containing modem, 
multiple access 
controller, and user 
interface
Mobile and 
transportable 
(including “fly away”) 
terminals for remote 
TV origination (GEO 
FSS bent pipe, Ku, Ka 
band)
Mobile van or trailer 
containing equipment 
and operating console
Transmit and receive 
dish (1.0 to 3m); 
electronics either 
inside van or outside in 
close proximity, TWTA
Rack or cabinet of 
equipment containing 
modulator and 
demodulator, operator 
console with control 
capabilities, optional 
editing bay, and 
telephone for network 
operation
User terminals for 
personal mobile 
telephone, fax, 
and data two-way 
communications 
(GEO and non-GEO 
MSS, bent pipe or 
processing, L and S 
band)
Handheld devices 
similar to second- 
and third generation 
cellular units, GPS
Transmit and receive 
omnidirectional 
antenna; all RF 
electronics packaged 
inside handheld unit 
as in handset, may 
include dual band/
mode feature
Also contained 
within handheld unit, 
implemented in DSP 
and custom VLSI 
with high degree of 
integration to reduce 
manufacturing costs 
and provide reliable 
and user-friendly 
operation, facility for 
user authentication, 
roaming, reacquisition 
after a dropout

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
297
A final category of user terminal is the handheld variety currently avail­
able for MSS systems. Because of the unique requirements for handheld termi­
nals, we address this subject in Section 9.6. In the following sections, we dissect 
the typical user terminal in order to gain a better understanding of what makes 
it tick.
9.1  General Configurations
We will use the interactive VSAT as a general model of a user terminal, shown in 
block diagram form in Figure 9.1. This configuration allows us to discuss both 
the receive and transmit functions in much the same way as we did in Chapters 
2 and 3. Of course, a greater degree of integration and economy is part and par­
cel to this kind of facility, and thus many functions are either combined or not 
present in the first place (or only as needed for the intended use.) Receive-only 
terminals used for various DTH services would not have a transmit capability 
(this is the most direct reason why it is difficult to add a transmit function to a 
standardized receive-only terminal). What we will quickly see is that transmit 
function is the key enhancement in the interactive VSAT or multimedia termi­
nal (and why it has, for the time being, been so costly in comparison with TV 
receive-only, or TVRO, terminals). Another important aspect is the hardware 
and software architecture of the baseband section. With the widespread use of 
digital signal processing and fast computation under control of embedded and 
downloadable software, user terminals are employing fewer discrete and analog 
components. This is introduced in Section 9.3.4 under the general topic of 
software-defined radio (SDR).
Table 9.1  (continued)
Application 
(Satellite System)
Terminal Type
RF Terminal
Baseband and User 
Interface
Hybrid user terminals 
for multimedia and 
Internet access (GEO 
and non-GEO FSS, bent 
pipe or processing, Ku 
and Ka band)
Individual fixed earth 
station at home or 
small office/home 
office
Transmit and receive, 
fixed dish (60 cm to 
1.8m) for GEO, tracking 
dish, or phased array 
for non-GEO or COTM; 
outdoor electronics 
with SSPA module
Digital indoor unit 
containing modem, 
multiple access 
controller, and 
interface port cards; 
includes secure 
conditional access 
and monitoring for 
billing and network 
management
Satellite radio 
reception
Vehicle mounted
Receive-only L- or 
S-band patch antenna
Integrated with vehicle 
electronics; aircraft 
terminals

298 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Figure 9.1  Block diagram of a typical two-way very small aperture terminal for fixed satellite communications (specific configuration depends on network 
and applications).

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
299
9.1.1  RF Terminal
Much of the terminal cost in past years has been concentrated in the outdoor 
RF section, which sends and receives microwave power over the air interface. 
These are analog components that must tolerate an external environment under 
all operating conditions. With the introduction of low-cost designs and mass 
production, RF terminals are no longer the most costly element in many cases. 
In Figure 9.1, we see the antenna system and feed, low noise block converter 
(LNB), block upconverter (BUC), and power amplifier. These are familiar ele­
ments in earth stations and satellites as well. The antenna and feed combine to 
produce the desired gain, directivity, and polarization performance (linear or 
circular). Because the RF terminal provides the interface between IF and RF, it 
could be fairly generic and possibly be used for a variety of applications. The 
design driver is the link budget, which in turn depends on the frequency, power, 
bandwidth, MODCOD, and multiple access characteristics of the satellite and 
network.
The electronic elements are usually contained in the RF head, an integrat­
ed package with the essential elements of the outdoor portion of the terminal. 
The primary function of the RF head is to deliver the necessary downlink, and 
in the case of two-way transmission, the uplink as well. Sizing of the power am­
plifier follows directly the procedure provided in Chapters 3 and 7. Examples 
of the critical elements are covered in a subsequent section. An interfacility link 
(IFL) cable carries signals and power between the indoor unit and the RF head. 
Other functions such as control of the RF head and electrical power for heating 
of the reflector (e.g., deicing) are provided by the IFL, when required. Installa­
tion considerations for the RF terminal and IFL depend on where the system is 
to be located and other aspects of the application (Section 9.5.3).
9.1.1.1  Compact Antenna Design
The trend toward the use of Ku- and Ka-band satellites with elevated EIRP and 
G/T has allowed developers of user terminals to produce compact RF systems 
with apertures small enough to permit easy carry, installation, and operation in 
a variety of places and on vehicles and other modes of transportation. A case 
in point is a flat panel fly-away Ku-band terminal from JRC of Japan, shown 
in Figure 9.2. Flat panels have been with us since the early days of the DTH 
industry, but this is an example of what is now feasible in a two-way VSAT. The 
unit is simple in design as far as its physical appearance yet would be no less of 
a challenge to realize. Another example of a flat panel for Ku band for transmit 
and receive operation on an aircraft is shown at the left in Figure 9.3. In this 
design, the flat panel is attached to a motorized tracking system that assures that 
the antenna is pointed at the satellite as the aircraft flies, takes off, and lands. At 
the right is a more conventional reflector-type antenna from Mitsubishi Electric 
Company, which provides a very low profile. Both designs are in use on com­

300 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
mercial aircraft to provide Internet in the sky. Note the intricate nature of the 
waveguide and rotary joint structure that allows transmit and receive RF to 
reach the feed horn yet allow the system to have a low overall height.
9.1.1.2  Ku- and Ka-Band Outdoor Unit
Outdoor units for VSAT terminals have also benefitted from the availability of 
high throughput satellites at Ku and Ka bands. A good example is the compact 
Ka-band design provided by ViaSat for use with Eutelsat KaSAT, a multibeam 
system covering Europe and the Middle East. As shown in Figure 9.4, the RF 
Figure 9.2  Flat-panel fly-away terminal by JRC Ltd.
Figure 9.3  Compact tracking antennas for aeronautical installation.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
301
electronics are packaged with the feed horn so that the entire outdoor unit looks 
more like a DTH receiver than a typical VSAT terminal. To make this possible, 
the RF power requirement must be held under a few watts, which tends to re­
duce throughput. On the other hand, the dish diameter can be increased from 
the illustrated 65 cm to afford more capability yet retain the compact ODU. 
Through all of this, basic architecture of the network and the technologies em­
ployed have not appreciably changed from early introductions in the 1990s.
9.1.2  Baseband
The baseband section of the user terminal would normally be part of the indoor 
unit, as illustrated in Figure 9.1. We see the modem, multiple-access control­
ler, multiplexing, and channelization functions. These are configured for the 
service needs of the overall network design and functionality. Much of the pro­
cessing within the indoor unit is performed by DSP and application-specific 
integrated circuit (ASIC) devices (this is no different from commercial set-top 
boxes and smart phones, which are mass-market devices that perform to amaz­
ingly high levels). The service from consumer-type fixed interactive terminals 
would be delivered and controlled from a central hub or network control facil­
ity to monitor use and provide service management and billing. These aspects 
are part of DTH services like DIRECTV and SKY; transfer of this technol­
ogy to interactive fixed services was realized by Hughes Network Systems and 
Figure 9.4  A compact Ka-band design for the antenna and ODU, by Eutelsat and ViaSat.

302 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
ViaSat. One of the complications will be the massive software systems that 
one needs to manage this type of business, something that current terrestrial 
operations (such as Internet service providers and cable companies providing 
cable modems) are only now coming to grips with. This is an important issue 
because subscribers cannot be acquired and signed on, and revenues cannot be 
collected, if the software and necessary personnel are not in place and working 
effectively as an integrated system.
Now that many businesses have moved to e-commerce, consumers can 
place direct service orders and changes to their service packages over the In­
ternet. This can be an advantage to all parties because there is less opportu­
nity for misunderstanding between user and customer service representative, 
and the resulting action is implemented almost seamlessly. In DTH and other 
content-delivery systems, the conditional access (CA) arrangements combine a 
strong encryption service along with ability of the service provisioning system 
to configure individual users for their unique set of access services and applica­
tions. These involve point-to-multipoint delivery on a broadcast basis as well 
as greater dependence of two-way interactive features. Satellite networks have 
some special advantages in this regard because CA data propagates directly from 
the service provider to end user without passing through other networks be­
yond the providers control.
9.1.3  User Interface
The interface with the end-user device or person (depending on the applica­
tion) is the part of the user terminal most driven by the service. In the case of a 
self-contained terminal such as an MSS telephone, there may not be an inter­
face per se. Application of VSATs and DTH set-top boxes demand appropriate 
user interfaces that would replace a terrestrial communication device or service. 
The requirement then is to represent a standard interface sufficiently that the 
end-user device (PC, TV, or telephone, as appropriate) is served in as seamless 
a manner as possible. It goes back to the old adage in the PC world, to wit plug 
and play. Wireless interfaces such as WiFi and Bluetooth are extremely popular 
and need to be supported as well. Done right, any end user (possibly a con­
sumer) should be able to connect the satellite terminal interface directly into a 
common user device, turn the equipment on, and get to business (or play, as the 
case may be). The system designer has the task of specifying the functionality 
to be placed within the interface as opposed to the rest of the baseband section. 
Like a desktop PC, laptop or tablet, the terminal might be assembled from 
standard modules, the user interface being one of them.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
303
9.1.4  Standards for Small Terminals: DVB-RCS and IPoS
Small terminals used in two-communications are referred to as very small ap­
erture terminals (VSATs) and represent a visible and growing segment of the 
industry. We have stated that these primarily use DVB-S2 for the outbound 
carrier and a form of TDMA for the return. Thus, the outbound aspect is cov­
ered by a well-established and supported standard that has provided benefits 
in terms of bandwidth efficiency along with the ability to employ ACM. The 
suppliers are also introducing the DVB-Sx extensions to further enhance per­
formance and improve service reliability.
The situation with regard to the return channel has been relatively frag­
mented as different suppliers have chosen their own technology platforms to 
gain competitive edge and meet particular market demands. This has tended to 
inhibit the coming together of an industry around a single standard even though 
this would appear to be advantageous for reducing costs and making the hard­
ware interoperable. The DVB Return Channel by Satellite (DVB-RCS) system 
is one particular standard that was originally developed by SES of Luxembourg 
and then moved to ETSI. It has acquired a strong level of support from some 
suppliers and key customers. The fundamental scheme underlying DVB-RCS is 
a rather typical TDMA structure using turbo coding and QPSK. A second gen­
eration of the standard, DVB-RCS2, provides BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK, 16QAM, 
and constant-envelope phase modulation. The ability to spread the carrier to 
reduce spectral density is available as well.
Frame structure and formatting is unique to DVB-RCS but is consistent 
with applications in and around the Internet Protocol. However, this only ad­
dresses the physical layer of the satellite portion of the network, leaving all 
else to the particulars of the implementation. Venders that currently supply 
VSAT return that complies with DVB-RCS include ViaSat, Newtec, Advan­
tech and STMI. The U.S. Department of Defense has been supporting DVB-
RCS through purchases of customized modems from ViaSat and others. Also, 
DVB-RCS equipment is finding its way onto cruise ships and drilling platforms 
around the globe and on commercial aircraft.
Hughes Network Systems has the largest VSAT market share in the world 
with their proprietary system first introduced in 1989. They are promoting 
their own standard called IP Over Satellite (IPoS) and obtained endorsement 
from the U.S. Telecommunications Industry Association standard (TIA-1008) 
in November 2003.
The previous discussion was generic, as we were speaking of the overall 
requirements and allocation of functions. In the following sections, we consider 
the details of each of the major sections, drawing on the fundamentals pre­
sented in the previous chapters.

304 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
9.2  Antennas for User Terminals
Antennas for user terminals are electrically like those applied to major earth sta­
tions. The differences are mainly in terms of size (as discussed in section 9.1.1.1 
they must be physically smaller to permit simplified installation and use) and 
cost (which may be very low to complement that of the rest of the terminal). 
The resulting lower gain and broader beamwidth must be taken into account 
in the system design and, specifically, the link budget. Antennas that operate at 
the lowest extreme of size and gain may be restricted in terms of their ability to 
communicate through a bent-pipe satellite with other terminals of like size. For 
example, VSAT antennas in the 0.8-to-1.2-m range at Ku band would normally 
be used in a star network with all links terminating at the much larger hub sta­
tion. An exception to the rule would be if the satellite could compensate for 
low uplink EIRP through high-gain spot beams or a regenerative repeater, or a 
combination thereof. The following sections provide a review of user terminal 
antennas, divided into directional designs and omnidirectional antennas, e.g., 
those with low gain and no directionality.
9.2.1  Directional Antennas 
The prime focus offset fed parabolic reflector antenna is the dominant design 
for user terminals in satellite communications. As illustrated in Figure 9.4, off­
set geometry is favored because sidelobe radiation from energy scatter by the 
feed and feed support is avoided. This design also permits rain and snow to 
drain more easily, a natural result of the more acute angle of the feed. Gain and 
beamwidth are determined by the diameter and operating frequency, as dis­
cussed in Chapter 3. Additionally, smaller reflector size assures minimum gain 
loss due to pointing error and surface accuracy. At the same time, the antenna 
must be aligned correctly to control adjacent satellite interference. Operation 
at Ka band places greater demands on the reflector for surface accuracy. In gen­
eral, stamped or spun solid aluminum reflectors provide good performance for 
microwave frequencies through Ka band.
Feedhorn design must take account of the required radiation distribution 
across the reflector, which is a function of the ratio of focal length to diameter 
(F/D) and the frequency of operation. While typical antennas operate with a 
single beam from one feedhorn, DTH operators in the United States and Eu­
rope have introduced dual and triple feed/beam designs to allow simultaneous 
reception from close-by GEO satellite orbit positions. Including the transmit 
function requires an ortho-mode transducer (OMT), such as that illustrated in 
Figure 9.5 for linear polarization. The challenge comes in low-cost hardware 
that operates over the required frequency band with acceptable loss. This has 
been achieved to date for DTH receive-only antennas that sell for under $100 

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
305
with feed, LNB, and mount. Producing adequate hardware with dual-mode 
transmit and receive service at Ka band will place demands on designers and 
manufacturers.
Mounts of reflector antennas at diameters under about 3m are relatively 
simple and inexpensive. The key aspect is the type of structure that will anchor 
the antenna (see Section 9.5.3). The supporting structure must be sufficient to 
withstand the physical weight of the antenna to permit the beam to be aligned 
with the satellite in the first place and maintain that pointing without adjust­
ment. The latter point will depend on the weather conditions in the area, the 
most critical of which is wind loading. In benign climates like the west coast of 
the United States, wind is usually not a concern and so antennas can be placed 
on almost any structure. However, the extremely high winds associated with 
typhoons make antenna installations in Hong Kong and other Pacific locations 
quite problematic. Here, there are two factors: whether the antenna can stay on 
target during the storm or whether it will survive at all (without breaking or 
Figure 9.5  Arrangement of an OMT used to combine transmit and receive in the same fee: 
(a) illustration, (b) drawing.

306 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
causing harm if broken free). Antennas on vessels and oil platforms generally 
employ rigid radomes like those shown in Figure 9.6.
An alternative to the passive reflector is the phased array consisting of 
several broadbeam radiating elements that are combined to produce a single 
directional beam. The individual elements may take any of the following forms:
• Half-wavelength dipole (producing linear polarization);
• Crossed dipole (which is effectively two half-wavelength dipoles phased 
to produce circular polarization);
• Open-ended waveguide or horn (typically with small dimensions to 
produce a broad beam);
• Waveguide slot (an attractive approach, since it allows the waveguide to 
distribute the power between slots).
An array of these elements can be formed using phase and power combin­
ing. While the efficiency of a properly designed and manufactured array anten­
na can be as good or better than a passive reflector, the fact that it costs more to 
Figure 9.6  Radomes in use to protect satellite antennas on a cruise ship.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
307
manufacture has limited its position in the marketplace. Phased arrays may also 
suffer loss due to the incident angle of the incoming (or outgoing) radio wave. 
When the angle between the perpendicular and the line of incidence exceeds 
approximately 60°, the net gain is returned by at least 3 dB (i.e., the cosine of 
this angle). There are designs that physically adjust each element like a Venetian 
blind, to counteract the cosine loss.
9.2.2  Communications-on-the-Move Antennas and RF Terminals
The past 10 years has seen the introduction of a variety of Ku- and Ka-band 
antenna and RF systems for installation on vehicles and aircraft. These COTM 
terminals address requirements in the government and industrial fields. For 
vehicles, the critical aspect is the ability of the mechanical, servo, and control 
system to keep the beam aligned with the desired satellite and minimize inter­
ference to the alternate polarization and to adjacent satellites. Some examples of 
such terminals are shown in Figure 9.7, as developed by L-3 Datron. On the left 
at (a) are receive-only antennas intended to receive satellite TV or other digital 
content; both are installed in low-profile radomes attached to the top of the 
aircraft. The dish antennas at (b) on the right are capable of two-way transmis­
sion to provide VSAT type service to aircraft, COTM vehicles, and alternatively 
temporary situations where extremely quick installation is required. With dish 
diameters of less than 1m, these terminals usually employ spread spectrum to 
reduce the power spectral density into adjacent satellites. Another example of a 
COTM terminal is discussed in Section 11.3 in the context of operations issues 
associated with in-motion transmitting stations.
9.2.3  Broad Beam
In cases where orientation of the terminal-to-satellite link may be unpredict­
able, it is a general practice to use a broad beam. This is only possible when 
Figure 9.7  Mobile VSAT antennas for installation on vehicles and aircraft. (Courtesy of L-3 
Datron.)

308 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
satellites are spaced far apart and share rather than reuse spectrum, which is the 
case with MSS systems operating below C band. The throughput capability is 
therefore less than 1 Mbps, which is consistent with the bandwidths available 
at L and S bands, and with uplink transmit power less than 5W. Examples of 
MSS devices with broad beam antennas are presented in Figure 9.8. On the left 
at (a) is a portable data terminal for access to the Internet with the capability 
to transmit and receive at up to 492 kbps. The front of this device must point 
in the general direction of the satellite in orbit with the actual satellite modem 
installed within. The gain of the antenna contained below the cover is sufficient 
to support this link and the beamwidth is of the order of 25 degrees. The MSS 
handset in (b) employs an omnidirectional antenna that the user must maintain 
in a vertical position; antennas of this type are used with GEO and non-GEO 
satellite phones (but not at the same time). Omni antennas are usually associ­
ated with non-GEO satellites that may appear anywhere in the sky. The advan­
tage of not favoring any direction is balanced by the following characteristics:
• Omnis have low gain, approximating that of an isotropic radiator 
(0dBi), but potentially negative (in dBi) in some directions (and positive 
in others, since the integrated pattern over a sphere produces the same 
total power).
• They lack directional properties and therefore cannot control co-chan­
nel interference from other visible satellites.
• Polarization performance may be poor as well, whether linear or circular.
A useful property of omnidirectional antennas is that they tend to be 
physically small, making them ideal for mobile and handheld applications.
Figure 9.8  MSS terminals with broad beams. (a) Inmarsat BGAN terminal capable of trans­
mit/receive at 492 kbps (courtesy of Hughes Network Systems). (b) Thuraya MSS handset for 
voice service wit an omni-directional antenna (courtesy of Thuraya).

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
309
Examples of common omnidirectional antennas are presented in Figure 
9.9. The notched printed patch antennas in (a) are applied in situations where 
a low profile is desired. In (b), the patch is driven by a phase shifter to produce 
circular polarization, which is required for many of the mobile satellite sys­
tems. The crossed-dipole antenna in (c) is easily driven by the transmission line 
and produces a well-formed circularly polarized pattern. An enhanced version 
called the drooping crossed dipole is shown in (d) and in the photograph in 
Figure 9.10. The individual elements of the drooping dipole are made thick to 
increase bandwidth (in percentage terms). Below the drooping dipole elements 
can be found a metal ground plane which improves performance by providing 
a uniform reflector. This can be made part of the antenna, or devised from the 
skin of the structure that it is attached to (e.g., if it were mounted on a vehicle 
or aircraft). While this design is excellent in its performance it nevertheless is 
not common for user terminals because of its bulkiness. The radiation pattern, 
Figure 9.9  Circularly polarized omnidirectional antennas suitable for mobile satellite appli­
cations: (a) symmetric patch with perturbation notch, (b) symmetric patch with balanced feed, 
(c) orthogonal dipoles, (d) inverted vee (drooping dipoles), (e) quadrifilar helical antenna.

310 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
however, provides a good reference as to what one can obtain with a practical 
antenna.
Figure 9.10  Illustration (a) and performance (b) of a drooping-dipole antenna with crossed 
elements to achieve circular polarization and symmetrical coverage of the sky.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
311
Formed by winding four wires along a cylinder, the quadrifilar helix an­
tenna ((e) in Figures 9.9 and 9.11) is very popular for handheld applications 
requiring omnidirectional radiation. It is in fact the type of antenna in Figure 
9.8(b). Each of the diagonal lines represents a loosely wound turn on the same 
cylinder. The number of turns, length, and diameter of the assembly determine 
the bandwidth, radiation pattern, and impedance. The shape of the pattern 
above the horizontal is very similar to that of the drooping crossed dipole, with 
more pronounced backlobe radiation due to its lack of a reflecting groundplane.
9.3  Power Amplifiers
User terminals applied to two-way satellite communication services must be 
capable of producing the required uplink carrier power level, as dictated by 
the link budget. There is the obvious tradeoff to produce the required EIRP in 
terms of antenna gain versus transmitted power at the antenna port. The latter 
is the responsibility of the power amplifier (PA), a device that introduces the de­
sired amount of gain, per the transmit gain budget, and conversion from either 
DC or AC prime power into the RF transmit power. In small terminals, the PA 
is mounted directly to the antenna feed to reduce losses and thereby minimize 
the transmit power required. There are additional requirements on the ampli­
fication function (as for any amplifier), such as bandwidth, linearity, efficiency, 
and operating stability over the expected temperature range. The terminal may 
employ constant envelope modulation (e.g., MSK) to allow maximum power 
out without spectrum regrowth.
In the following paragraphs, we review common amplifier types that can 
be found in a variety of user terminals, for fixed, portable, and mobile applica­
tions. Wireless communications has benefited from transistor technologies, cir­
cuit designs, and monolithic microwave integrated circuit (MMIC pronounced 
mimic) modules that were also introduced into the satellite communication 
marketplace [5, 9]. This is because many satellites operate in microwave bands 
that are either adjacent to or overlap the bands common to cellular and wireless 
local area networks (wireless LANs).
Key amplifier parameters are shown in Table 9.2. Solid-state power am­
plifier (SSPA) designs, which simplify installation and operation, are available 
over 30 GHz. Introduction of Ka-band satellites was sufficient motivation for 
manufacturers to invest in the development of the hardware and production 
processes. 
As with satellite power amplifiers, SSPAs have not entirely replaced 
TWTAs. Rather, there are many applications in the user terminal area for which 
a TWTA may be appropriate. The key driver is the power output and efficiency. 
Gallum nitride (GaN) devices discussed in Chapter 7 are another option.

312 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
A useful measure of performance of wideband amplifiers is the gain-
bandwidth product [1]. Assuming that the amplifier has N individual amplifier 
Figure 9.11  One-half turn quadrifilar helical antenna (a), indicating its symmetrical radiation 
pattern at 1.537.5 MHz (b).

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
313
stages, then the gain-bandwidth product is:
	
(
)
(
)
=
1 N
N
GBW
Gain
BW 	
where N is the number of stages, Gain is the total midband gain (as a ratio), 
and BW is the overall bandwidth. Because amplifiers with fewer stages have bet­
ter gain-bandwidth performance (and cost less as well), most applications try 
to work within the constraints of one or two stages in tandem. An individual 
stage would have the typical equivalent circuit shown in Figure 9.12. The prin­
cipal bandwidth-limiting element is the input capacitance, Cin. The electronic 
operation of PA is usually defined according to the letter designations given in 
Table 9.2
Design and Performance Parameters for RF Solid-State Power Amplifiers Used in Satellite 
Communication User Terminals
Parameter
Properties
Impact on Terminal
Impact on System
Power output
Between 1 and 
40 watts
In combination with antenna 
gain, produces EIRP
Lower power 
preferred to minimize 
interference to 
adjacent satellites and 
other services
Gain
10 to 40 dB
Determined by individual 
stage design and number of 
stages
No direct impact 
Bandwidth
Sufficient 
for carrier 
transmission; 50 
kHz to 50 MHz
Narrowband amplifier 
may limit utility over time; 
wideband design best for 
flexibility over satellite 
bandwidth
Determines how the 
terminal will operate in 
the network, including 
degree of flexibility 
for operation on other 
frequencies
Efficiency
40 to 70%, 
depending on 
design and 
operation
Low efficiency pushes DC or 
AC power requirement up, 
which may be acceptable for 
fixed installations. Mobile 
terminals require higher 
efficiency to conserve power
No direct impact 
Linearity
Requirements for 
signal fidelity, 
inter-modulation, 
and spectral 
regulation will 
drive design
Can select from classic 
amplifier design 
alternatives: Class A 
amplifiers are most linear, 
Class B highly non-linear 
unless configured for push-
pull. Class AB represents a 
compromise. Linearization 
also an option
Potential for adjacent 
channel interference or 
out-of-band emissions 
Thermal requirements
Dissipation 
determined by 
efficiency and 
power level
High-frequency operation 
makes temperature 
control more difficult due 
to small dimensions and 
compactness
No direct impact 

314 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 9.3. An example of an actual transistor circuit can be seen in Figure 9.13, 
which is for a Class A amplifier with stabilizing feedback between the collector 
output and the base input. Efficiency has two measures: the conventional DC 
to RF efficiency,
	
η =
RF
DC
P
P
	
and the power added efficiency,
	


=
-




1
1
RF
DC
P
PAE
G
P
	
where G is the RF gain of the amplifier at the value of RF power out being 
achieved.
There will be situations where the gain of a single transistor stage is in­
sufficient to meet the gain budget requirement of the user terminal. A direct 
approach is to employ multiple stages; however, as these equations indicate, the 
more stages we employ, the less bandwidth we might expect to deliver. This is 
not a problem for elevated frequencies like Ku- and Ka- band, where the re­
quired 500 MHz of operating bandwidth is a relatively small percentage of the 
center frequency. Operation at L and S band might be less satisfactory, but this 
can be addressed in the overall design of the terminal. For example, employing 
a high gain BUC ahead of the SSPA can reduce the gain requirement from the 
final PA.
Low-power consumption PAs of the type found in portable and handheld 
terminals are limited in their RF output to about 10 watts at Ku band and 2 
watts at Ka band. Efficiency of DC to RF conversion is a major concern. An­
other important consideration is linearity, since this impacts the end-to-end 
quality of the link and the possibility of adjacent channel and out-of-band in­
terference. There is a tradeoff among these parameters, as evident from Table 
9.3: better linearity means lower efficiency or power output. Constant envelope 
Figure 9.12  Simplified high-frequency small-signal transistor amplifier model.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
315
signals like minimum shift keying can tolerate a certain degree of nonlinearity, 
but signals with significant peak to average variation like standard QPSK (with 
raised-cosine pulse shaping) require a somewhat linear transmitter.
Table 9.3
Characteristics of Classes of RF Power Amplifiers
Class
Waveform
DC-to-RF      
Efficiency
Linearity
Comments
A
Full cycle (positive 
and negative going)
Low: 25 to 50%
Linearity 
depending on bias 
point; optimum 
possible
Lowest efficiency and 
best linearity; consumes 
power even if no signal 
present at input
B
Half cycle (positive 
going only)
Medium: 30 to 
55%
Nonlinear due to 
negative clipping 
and operation 
across zero 
conduction
Good efficiency at the 
sacrifice of linearity. 
Does not conduct if 
no signal present. 
Push-pull operation of 
balanced pair of Class 
B amplifiers alleviates 
most of the problems of 
this type
C
Partial cycle (positive 
going only)
High: 50 to 80%
Very nonlinear.Only 
acceptable for 
constant envelope 
signals
Not popular for most 
satellite applications
AB
Full positive half 
cycle with partial 
negative cycle
Medium: 35 to 
60%
Moderate linearity. 
Conducts without 
signal present
Push-pull operation 
yields good linearity 
with good efficiency.
D
Square wave switch 
mode, push pull 
mode of operation; 
pair of switches 
operating in parallel, 
out of phase, across 
resonant tank circuit 
[2]
Medium to high; 
50 to 70%
Digital pulsed 
mode of 
transmission 
(requires harmoinic 
filtering); suitable 
for constant 
envelope 
modulation.
Progress made at 1 
watts using current 
mode Class D at 
microwave frequencies 
up to 4 GHz
F
Switching-mode 
amplifer using 
harmonic filters
Medium to 
high; 100% 
theoretical, 
reduced by 
filtering to as 
low as 50% (in 
Class A)
Unbalanced design 
using harmonic 
filters for partial 
linearization
Possible application 
using saturated 
amplifier, causes 
spectral regrowth
E
Another switching-
mode RF power 
amplifier
Medium power
Employs an L-C 
tank circuit to 
smooth the output 
cycle
Requires an inductive 
load
Doherty
Employs two 
amplifers that 
operate on segments 
of the wave (base 
and peak) [11]
High: typically 50 
to 70%
Quasi-linear 
design
Has been applied at L 
and C bands; capable 
of high power based on 
transistor performance.

316 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
As shown in Table 9.3, the most linear type of design is achieved with 
the Class A amplifier. By biasing the transfer characteristic correctly, the Class 
A can produce near optimum performance. Enhancement is possible using a 
predistortion technique, also referred to as linearization. The drawback of Class 
A is the lower efficiency that one expects from a transistor circuit that is always 
conducting with or without signal present. An example of a stable Class A tran­
sistor amplifier is shown in Figure 9.13 (a junction type transistor is shown for 
illustrative purposes; alternatively an FET could be substituted). If one needs 
high efficiency, then Class B and AB would normally be the standard for design. 
Class B, in particular, has the added feature of not drawing current when no 
signal is present. An example of a Class B push-pull amplifier employing GaAS­
FETs is provided in Figure 9.14.
The forgoing classes of amplifiers (A through AB) have been in use for 
many decades. More recently, Classes D, E, and F have found applications at 
audio and lower RF frequencies. While they offer good efficiency, their reliance 
on pulsed or switching modes has made them less common for satellite com­
munications due to poor linearity and a trade between efficiency and band­
width. This has been alleviated by artful circuit design and analysis work since 
the year 2000. Classes D, E, and F still employ switching mode amplifiers 
where the transistors produce a square wave at the output. However, a tuned 
circuit at the output (tank circuit) removes harmonics to the extent feasible to 
provide for near linear amplification. Also, components are arranged to counter 
losses in the transistors and circuit elements during switch transients.
The Class F amplifier, in particular, has its origins in old AM broad­
cast transmitters using vacuum tubes but has found recent application in 
Figure 9.13  Basic Class A RF amplifier using a junction transistor.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
317
switching-mode transistor amplifiers [3]. It uses a single amplifying element in 
switch mode with a resonant output circuit to reduce harmonics. Output power 
is reported in the 1-W region and efficiency can exceed 60%. The current mode 
Class D amplifier (CMCD) design has been demonstrated at microwave fre­
quencies below 5 GHz and with output power of 15W for a push-pull pair of 
GaAs FET transistors [3, 4]. The design has an inherently high efficiency but 
is degraded to the range of 50% to 70% by device and circuit imperfections. 
It has been shown useful for transmission of constant envelope signals such as 
GMSK.
The Doherty Power Amplifier (DPA), developed in the 1930s using vac­
uum tubes, was introduced in satellites in the late 1990s to exploit its efficiency 
and linearity [11]. It uses two tandem stages, one to amplify to lower voltage 
part of the signal and the second to fill in the remaining part. Thanks to its dual 
structure and careful design, its power added efficiency approaches 70% [11]. 
Figure 9.16 provides the typical circuit diagram of the DPA. The transistor 
module designated as Carrier provides the bulk of the amplification and power, 
while the module designated as Peaking is used to complete the cycle to achieve 
the desired degree of linearity. The C/IM performance is on par with amplifiers 
operating in Class A or Class AB.
Transistors for low-power microwave amplifiers are not purchased as dis­
crete components but rather are assembled into modules for ease of design, 
manufacture, and operation. Importantly, the package provides reliable con­
nection points into the active sections of the amplifier, appropriate conduction 
to spread heat across the base, and protection from vibration and moisture. 
Figure 9.14  Push-pull Class B RF amplifier using a pair of microwave FET amplifier modules 
and two 180° hybrids.

318 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Examples of typical microwave power modules, using MESFET and GNFET 
technology, are shown in Figure 9.15. The following are top-level characteristics 
of these packaged amplifiers.
Figure 9.15  Examples of typical microwave SSPA modules: (a) 21–31 GHz 5 watt (courtesy of 
TriQuent), (b) 5–7 GHz 2.5 watt (images courtesy of ITT).
Figure 9.16  Circuit diagram of the Dougherty Power Amplifier.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
319
Figure 9.15 provides an example of a 5-W Ka-band power amplifier mod­
ule for use in small terminal applications. Employing GaN transistor technol­
ogy, its technical characteristics are provided in Table 9.4.
• ITT model 2205AF, a 0.5W RF output L-band amplifier comprised 
of three stages. Operating range: 1,800 to 2,000 MHz, with typical ef­
ficiency (PAE) of 49% in Class B. The gain is 29.3 dB at 1,900MHz and 
3.6V supply voltage. The second harmonic of the carrier is 34 dB below 
the carrier. The unit will operate in a high VSWR environment of 8:1, 
indicative of severe RF reflections back from the antenna.
As a general observation all power devices are limited by their thermal 
power density so that the power handling capability falls off as f   2: this applies 
to vacuum tubes and solid state.
The RF head of an interactive terminal must include a low noise block 
converter (LNB) and a block upconverter (BUC). This type of design is op­
timum for VSATs and other installations (including onboard ships, aircraft, 
and vehicles). An important objective of LNB design is to achieve the lowest 
system noise temperature while providing the required gain for the downlink 
gain budget. Laptop and handheld terminals may in fact use a lower intermedi­
ate frequency to be consistent with the operation of the demodulator contained 
within the same piece of equipment. On the transmit side, the BUC is attached 
to or even part of the power amplifier.
The PA section of the user terminal can be constructed from power am­
plifier modules of the type just described. A suitable power supply will often 
need to be included in the package. It is also possible to integrate the PA with 
the modulator and upconverter, producing a complete transmit section under 
Table 9.4
Technical Characteristics of the TGA2594 27–31GHz 5-W GaN Power Amplifier
Frequency Range 
27–31 GHz
Psat:
37dBm (typical across frequency)
Power-added efficiency (PAE) 
28%
Input power, CW, 50Ω, 85°C 
30 dBm
Small signal gain 
23 dB
Input return loss 
10 dB
Third-order intermodulation IM3 at 25-dBm/tone:
–36 dBc
Fifth-order intermodulation IM5 at 25-dBm/tone 
–45 dBc
Bias: VD = 20V, IDQ = 140 mA, VG = 
–3.0V typical
Chip dimensions 
3.24 × 1.74 × 0.10 mm
Power dissipation, 85°C 
22W

320 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
one case. The interface back to the user side would be the baseband signals. 
The following section reviews digital signal processing technologies that have 
been applied to the baseband section, a technique that has been described as 
software-defined radio since MODCOD and other characteristics can be repro­
grammed by download over the satellite.
9.4  Baseband Functions
While the RF elements are critical to the link budget, the baseband functions of 
a user terminal provide the essential information processing and access control 
that are central to an effective end-user service. In the past, user terminals relied 
heavily on analog technology, particularly baseband shaping (e.g., preemphasis 
and companding), frequency division multiplexing, FM reception, and trans­
mission as well. Implementation of this functionality was possible with analog 
ICs as well as discrete transistors and other electronic components. The circuit 
boards could be assembled manually or by machine to reduce costs. One diffi­
culty of the analog approach was the variation in performance and quality from 
board to board, requiring custom tuning at the factory and retuning from time 
to time when in operation (a source of network service variation and possible 
instability). Terminals of this type are no longer in production or active use.
The baseband section of the terminal insures that the user input and out­
put signals are properly formatted for the particular application and satellite 
network. Involved are such functions as analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion (if 
the content is not already digitized), compression, encryption, multiplexing of 
data streams for information transfer and network control. As discussed for the 
DTH receiver, these functions have become highly integrated with the hard­
ware and software of the user terminal, and may be contained within a single 
IC. As suggested, the baseband section would control access by the end user 
and application, corresponding to the particular type of device (e.g., telephone, 
PC, TV receiver, etc.) and the manner of operation of the overall service. This 
could be transparent (as in the case of telephone service or Internet access) or 
tightly coordinated so that every element from end to end provides a necessary 
function (as in the case of DTH and MSS services).
The circuits to perform analog functions were less complex than today’s 
digital processing and software techniques that one finds in all varieties of user 
terminals. With transistor counts in the billions and software requiring GBytes 
of ROM and RAM, we see wide adoption of very large scale integration (VLSI) 
and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). This allows the developer 
to create highly effective baseband systems at relatively low cost, provided that 
sufficiently large quantities are manufactured and sold. Another important in­
novation is the digital signal processor (DSP), a class of high-speed chip that 

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
321
can rapidly perform complex mathematical operations akin to the math copro­
cessor found in many PCs.
Owing to the complexity of the baseband section of a user terminal, it is 
critical that the requirements be understood and to a large extent fixed when 
hardware and software are developed. It is a truism that you can do anything 
with software; the caveat is that the ultimate capability of the terminal will be 
limited by what the hardware can physically do. Therefore, one must establish 
early the boundaries of the service requirement and the manner in which the 
terminal is to be used. We call this the “who, what, and where” of terminal 
definition. The “how” is the domain of the systems and product designers (the 
“why” is up to the marketing folks). A key element is the initial block diagram 
of the terminal, reflecting the network topology and service specifications. This 
is not a difficult task but it does require that some decisions be made about the 
basic technologies to be employed and how the terminal will interface on the 
user side as well as over the satellite path. Between these inputs and outputs we 
find the processing and modem functions discussed previously in this section. 
There may in fact be an “off-the-shelf” platform requiring little or no modifica­
tion. Or, a new approach may be needed as determined by the “who, what, and 
where” aspects of the need.
9.4.1  Software Design Process
The first step in the design process is to create a computer model of the base­
band functions using an appropriate software design tool. An attractive ap­
proach is to use a signal analysis tool like Simulink, which allows the user to first 
analyze the performance of the theoretical configuration prior to creating the 
actual software design. What this means is that the engineer can build a visual 
model in block diagram form on the computer screen, simulate the signal flow 
through the model, examine the results, and draw inferences about next steps. 
This is an iterative process that should produce a workable model of the actual 
circuit. Then, the tool will output the definition of the very large scale inte­
gration (VLSI) circuits and software code to actually implement the baseband 
functions in silicon. This definition is typically expressed in a programming 
language called VLSI Hardware Definition Language (VHDL). It is a formal 
notation intended for use in all phases of the creation of electronic systems. 
Because it is both machine readable and human readable, it supports the devel­
opment, verification, synthesis, and testing of hardware designs.
An example of a popular methodology is that offered by Synopsys of 
Mountain View, California, one of the leaders in the area of DSP design and 
verification tools. The following is a typical flow of the process:

322 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
1.	 Specify your design (block diagram, signal flow, allowable impair­
ments, operating constraints, etc.).
2.	 Set performance, area, environment constraints, and optionally, pow­
er.
3.	 Perform translation and architectural optimization of VHDL compo­
nents.
4.	 Compile the VHDL code.
5.	 Select a technology library supplied by the desired semiconductor ven­
dor.
6.	 Optimize the design under various speeds, area, and power constraints 
and select the implementation that best meets needs.
In many cases, the approach of using a single tool does not quite sat­
isfy all of the requirements, including the flexibility to handle many modes of 
transmission and different codes or multiple access methods. The designer will 
therefore have to resort to working one level down in the hardware/software 
design, using more powerful (but less friendly) software tools. Generally, mak­
ers of programmable hardware also sell dedicated programming and debugging 
tools.
9.4.2  Software-Defined Radio Applications
With the adoption of fast microprocessors and DSP, complex software tools and 
techniques, and VSLI, there are much greater possibilities for using all of the 
advances of the last decades plus new ones as they appear. The greatest power of 
these technologies might have more to do with rapid application development 
and quick time to market than with the fact that more circuits can be put on 
one chip (although this is certainly important as well).
Advanced by Brad Brannon of Analog Devices, software-defined radio 
(SDR) is a recognized paradigm in hardware and software and as a consequence 
has many potential uses in satellite and terrestrial wireless communications. 
Through software control or download, an SDR can change its frequency, 
bandwidth, coding and modulation scheme. The alternate of a hardware re­
configuration would only provide a limited range of flexibility. True software 
programmability offers a range of operations that individually can be highly 
tailored to a specific application. To offer a range of operation, several things 
must happen. First, data must be manipulated with a high-speed digital signal 
processor (DSP), which forms the heart of a software radio. In addition to a 
general-purpose DSP, numeric accelerators are required to process the carriers 
digitally [7].

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
323
The following discussion uses a particular terminal design as a basis to 
review a software-based implementation approach. The receiver front end con­
sists of an analog RF downconverter that converts the desired signal band to a 
convenient IF frequency for digitization (Figure 9.17). The downconverter is 
followed by a high performance A/D converter, which digitizes the entire IF 
spectrum bandwidth (typically 100 MHz). The A/D converter output is pro­
cessed with a receive signal processor (RSP) which is responsible for individual 
channel selection and filtering. The output of the RSP consists of a filtered 
digital IF signal requiring only demodulation by the DSP. The RSP is a numeric 
preprocessor that can replace a local oscillator (LO), quadrature mixer, channel 
select filter, and data decimation filter (Figure 9.18). Decimation is the process 
of reducing the quantity of data per unit time by passing a fixed percentage of 
samples and neglecting the rest (e.g., using 10% and discarding 90%). In a typi­
cal application, one RSP provides the necessary channel selection and tuning 
functions. The channel characteristics that are programmable may include data 
rates, channel bandwidth, and channel shape.
To function correctly, the SDR device must be capable of handling the 
data rates required by the A/D converter interface. Considering the number of 
concurrent operations, the RSP may be processing data at a sustained rate of 
several billion operations per second (BOPS), which includes the numerically 
controlled oscillator (NCO), quadrature mixer, decimation filters, and finite 
impulse response (FIR) filters. The next specification of interest is the internal 
parallel data bus width, which must be wide enough (contain enough bits) to 
preserve signal integrity. Although the A/D converter may only be 14 bits wide, 
oversampling followed by narrowband filtering improves the effective signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR); this processing gain can amount to up to 30 dB for the 
channelization scheme of the air interface. This is the equivalent of 5 more bits. 
Therefore, internal bus widths must have the equivalent of at least 19 bits to 
preserve signal integrity. 
Figure 9.17  Software-defined radios combine the functionality of A/D conversion, receive 
signal processing (RSP), transmit signal processing (TSP), and D/A conversion.

324 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
It is important that the RSP include flexible decimation and filtering con­
figurations that allow for a wide variety of data rates and filter bandwidths. 
One of the distinct features of an RSP is the ability to select the desired ana­
log frequency very precisely. Most RSPs have a 32-bit NCO, which provides a 
frequency resolution of about 1 in 4 billion. This is usually much more than 
adequate, but gives great flexibility. In addition to the flexibility, frequency hop­
ping is greatly simplified. Since a phase-locked loop (PLL) is not used, chang­
ing frequencies is instantaneous. This can be a great benefit in time-division 
applications, such as TDMA, where hopping must occur within the guardband 
of a few Hz. The transmit signal processor (TSP) is a numeric postprocessor 
that replaces the first LO, quadrature modulator, channel filtering, and data 
Figure 9.18  In a software-defined radio, the receive signal processor (RSP) is designed to 
replace an LO, quadrature mixer, channel filter, and data decimator.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
325
interpolation. As with the RSP, the TSP sets the transmitter apart from tradi­
tional designs because all channel characteristics are now programmable (e.g., 
data rate, channel bandwidth, and channel shape).
There are several specifications that are important when selecting a TSP. 
First, the device must be capable of generating data at the rates to preserve Ny­
quist sampling over the spectrum of interest. Therefore, the TSP must be capa­
ble of generating data at least twice as fast as the band of interest and preferably 
three times faster as reasoned earlier for anti-aliasing filter response. Similar to 
the RSP, the TSPs bus widths are important, yet for different reasons. If the TSP 
is used in a single-channel mode, then the issue is simply quantization noise. It 
is usually not desirable to transmit excess in-band (or out-of-band) noise as this 
wastes valuable transmitter efficiency. 
Timing design and testing is an area of critical importance in the design of 
SDR systems. The tools available to designers allow them to create a functional 
structure and then identify timing problems quickly [7]. This must be done at 
the chip level, followed by a similar exercise at the integrated unit level. The 
objective is to develop a complete product that performs like it was formed 
from discrete components. Once the circuit and system are defined, the next 
step is to verify that timing relationships are correct and that the combination 
performs as near to expected as possible. This usually involves much iteration 
with the hardware and software, using a variety of tools and software testing 
methods.
One final component necessary to develop a proper software-defined ra­
dio is the D/A converter. The first specification of interest is signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR). SNR is primarily determined by quantization. If quantization is 
too large, then the noise of the D/A converter will dominate the overall signal 
chain noise. Another important specification for the D/A converter is spurious 
response. In the worst-case scenario, out-of-band spurious emissions may vio­
late local or international rules and regulations. This impacts the choice of sam­
pling rate and number of bits per sample. Most air interface standards require 
approximately 65 dB rejection of spurs at the antenna. In allowing for margin 
and degradation in the following stages, typical D/A converter requirements 
dictate that such spurs be 75 dB below the carrier (a difficult specification ac­
cording to traditional analog design principles). Also, the resulting design must 
be tested over the range of expected conditions, as initially delivered and as may 
be deired with future software modifications.
This discussion was meant to introduce readers to the approach and 
methodologies in practice for creating hardware and software baseband ma­
chines. Representing the result of many years of investigation and practice in 
digital signal processing and complex IC development, one cannot expect to 

326 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
put the complete story down for all time. Instead, we hope to instill a useful 
notion of the style and capability of the design process.
9.5  Fixed Terminals
Fixed user terminals are intended for permanent or semipermanent installations 
on buildings and other stationary locations. They typically include some type 
of directional antenna system which is itself fixed in orientation; alternatively, 
the antenna may have a tracking system to maintain pointing on satellites (a 
requirement in non-GEO operations). The electronics within the terminal nor­
mally would use prime AC power of the type locally available. This can be a 
concern, since power supplies vary from country to country and even region to 
region. For this reason, modern user terminals (like laptop PCs) are designed 
to operate from any AC voltage in the range of 100 to 240 VAC. A battery and 
charger may be included to provide a complete uninterruptible power system 
(UPS) that isolates the circuitry from power variations. These features make 
user terminal designs more practical and enhance their adoption around the 
world. As we have discussed, the electronics are configured into the RF terminal 
that is associated with the antenna and the indoor electronics that provide the 
modem and baseband functions [6]. Examples of typical fixed terminal classes 
and their particular requirements are discussed below.
9.5.1  Receive-Only (TVRO)
The receive-only class of user terminal has been with us since Neiman Mar­
cus offered the first home dish system back in 1977. Costing nearly $20,000, 
this home TV system was definitely an oddity; today, any TV home can afford 
the type of TV receive-only (TVRO) terminal that has proliferated throughout 
the world. While the first units were capable of receiving one FM TV channel 
within a transponder, the digital models allow the user to recover 200 or more 
digitized channels (using the MPEG format) from multiple satellites operating 
in a single orbit position. Ancillary services like pay per view (PPV), onscreen 
program guide, music, and Internet-based data broadcasting have become avail­
able on a wide scale. The technology that facilitates these services is the artful 
combination of traditional RF terminal components with digital processing 
commonly found in mobile phones and the home PC. The difference here 
is that the downstream bandwidth and data rates are measurable in the Gbps 
instead of the kilobits- or megabits-per-second range. Broadband satellite com­
munications are already commonplace, provided on a broadcast if not interac­
tive basis.
A basic block diagram of a basic digital TVRO is provided in Figure 9.19, 
based on the configuration for DIRECTV Satellite System (DSS). Capable of 

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
327
receiving any of the 32 transponder channels within the 12.2-to-12.7-GHz 
range of the Region 2 BSS plan, this receiver can demodulate the selected car­
rier to recover one of N (e.g., up to 12) digitally encoded MPEG streams. 
The simple RF terminal is composed of a 45-cm solid reflector on an azimuth 
over elevation mount, a circularly polarized dual or triple feed and low noise 
block converter (LNB). Channel capacity was increased further with a dual 
feed design to allow reception from more orbit positions separated by 10 to 
20° (the range is limited by the gain loss from scanning away from the reflector 
centerline). The output of the LNB is the full 500-to-1,200-MHz bandwidth 
in either the right-hand circular polarized (RHP) or left hand circular polarized 
(LHP) downlink, delivered in an IF range of 950 to 2,150 MHz. This allows 
the use of low-cost coaxial cable to carry signals to one or more set-top boxes in­
side the home. Selection of RHP or LHP is achieved electrically within the feed 
polarizer; alternatively, each feed can be fitted with two LNBs to permit both 
polarizations to be carried indoors. Blocks of transponders undergo frequency 
translation (stacking) to extend the capacity of a single coax cable. In this way, 
there can be multiple set-top boxes within the same dwelling. In addition to 
transferring multiple polarizations from multiple orbit positions, the current 
generation of DTH systems provides central access to a common digital TV 
recorder (DTR) along with the ability to view and record several simultaneous 
broadcasts. Thus, the set-top box is one element of a home installation that 
Figure 9.19  Generic block diagram of a digital direct-to-home integrated receiver-decoder 
(MPEG-2).

328 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
provides services akin to what fiber-optic systems deliver. DC voltage and tones 
over the cable controls selection of received polarization and satellite.
The digital satellite equipment control (DiSEqC) specification was intro­
duced by Eutelsat as a scheme to control the electronics at the DTH antenna 
feed system [12]. It greatly expands on the previous method of using a DC 
voltage and tone to activate switches within the feed system. There is a standard 
protocol in terms of digital commands, allowing different levels of complexity 
for enhanced functionality. These signals are generated within the set to box 
and are conveyed over the coaxial cable in the reverse direction.
The set-top box provides all of the facilities to select channels, control 
operation, and deliver analog video and audio to the TV receiver. A discussion 
of the DVB standards is provided in Section 5.1.2. The tuner section of the box 
selects the appropriate satellite transponder channel according to the channel 
desired for viewing. Demodulation of this carrier produces a digital baseband 
containing errors from the uplink and downlink. Most of these errors are cor­
rected through a combination of the outer and inner forward correction codes, 
allowing an essentially pure stream of data to reach the demux section of the 
receiver. The purpose of the demux is to select the desired TV channel from the 
combined data stream and provide the data to control operation and service to 
other end-user applications (if provided).
Decryption is performed under control of the conditional access (CA) 
module using the key provided by a subscriber interface module smart card. 
The principles and standards for CA are reviewed in Section 6.2.5. Control is 
further exercised over the satellite link with data that was inserted by the sub­
scriber management center of the DTH service provider. In this manner, the 
selection of programs is delivered according to the particular subscribers service 
package and service-level agreement.
The output of decryption is the multiplex stream of MPEG-formatted 
video and audio channels, along with data in various forms. The latter includes 
the control information needed to activate the subscribers service mix, provide 
the onscreen program guide, and control the overall operation of the box. In 
particular, the unit includes one or more microprocessors (shown at the center 
of Figure 9.19) that also includes ROM and RAM memory. The final data 
stream is made available as a composite signal at baseband. An Internet con­
nection allows further download of content and means of reporting a variety of 
viewing data for billing and analysis.
The principal user interface is a remote control unit (or channel changer). 
Universal remote controllers can be programmed to control the TV set and PC, 
in addition to the set-top box. The front panel of the box is usually very clean, 
including a power-on light and a few buttons for a limited set of functions. 
The back of the unit provides a variety of sockets and connectors, primarily 
for the connections described previously. User terminals of this type have been 

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
329
manufactured in the hundreds of millions and represent the first true consumer 
product within the satellite communication industry.
9.5.2  Fixed Transmit-Receive Terminal (VSAT)
The standard term for a transmit-receive earth station with a relatively small 
fixed dish is the very small aperture terminal (VSAT). VSAT systems with an­
tennas as small as 1m are installed at filling stations, office supply stores, and 
branch offices of brokerage firms. Traditional VSATs were largely intended for 
enterprise and other private data communication applications, and their use for 
public network services is now established and growing. 
The consumer broadband VSAT was introduced around 2000 and it has 
established its strong position in Ku and Ka bands with the launch of high 
throughput satellites such as ViaSat 1, KA Sat, IP Star, and Echostar 19 (origi­
nally called Jupiter). As discussed previously, the consumer terminal benefits 
from the greater bandwidth of the HTS architecture along with mass produc­
tion techniques in the outdoor unit. Regardless of the size of antenna, SSPA 
and resulting throughput, the general block diagram of Figure 9.1 remains un­
changed. This is because the network topology is generally that of a star, with 
the large antenna at the hub compensating for the small size and power of the 
remote terminal. 
For example, a traditional fixed VSAT used in a star network over a typi­
cal Ku-band satellite with 50 dBW of EIRP and a G/T of approximately 3 
dB/K would employ an antenna of around 0.8m in diameter and an SSPA 
of less than 2W. The return data rate thus supported would be up to about 
2 Mbps. Greater throughput of about 20 Mbps would increase power by the 
same factor of 10 to about 20W unless the antenna diameter were to double 
(increasing gain by a factor of four). This would accomondate an SSPA of ap­
proximately 5W. A move to Ka band and the multibeam design of an HTS 
would allow the throughput to increase as discussed without increasing antenna 
size or SSPA power because of the greater EIRP and G/T afforded by this ap­
proach to the satellite payload. Propagation in heavy rain in a tropic region will 
impact this discussion as the outages at Ka band could be unsatisfactory for the 
particular service and user. Dynamic features such as ACM within DVB-S2 will 
counteract rain attenuation by temporarily adjusting MODCOD and reducing 
throughput until propagation improves.
In almost all cases for standard VSATs, the indoor electronics are housed 
in a separate chassis about the size of a small PC or a cable modem. This allows 
the unit to be placed within a computer room or a typical office that has access 
to the computer and telephone systems to be supported. Port cards, shown to 
the left side of the indoor unit, provide standard interfaces for the locally at­
tached devices. For example, one or more of the data ports could accommodate 

330 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
an Ethernet attachment at 100 Mbps; another type of data port supports a 
direct connection to other equipment.
The electronics and software within the indoor unit can be configured 
for the desired services. However, the air interface is driven by the particular 
data rates, MODCOD, and multiple access that are employed over the link. 
We see in Figure 9.1 the channel control elements of the terminal that support 
the multiple access system (FDMA, TDMA or CDMA), the modulator and 
demodulator, and the interfacility link (IFL) cable between the indoor unit and 
the RF electronics. This cable also provides DC power as well as a means to 
monitor and control the outdoor electronics.
9.5.3  VSAT Installation Considerations
User terminals for fixed applications must, of necessity, be easy to install and 
operate, providing an unobstructed line of sight to the satellite or satellites that 
provide the service. This is the most important installation requirement, but it 
is not the only one. As suggested below, the task may be challenging in terms of 
time and cost. This is why it is normal practice to perform a site survey before 
ordering equipment and starting the installation project, taking into account 
the following:
• Orbit visibility—ability for line of sight toward the desired orbit posi­
tion; consideration should be given to pointing at other positions that 
might be usable in case of a satellite change; for non-GEO satellite con­
stellations, the entire sky should be viewable above a minimum elevation 
(e.g., 20°).
• Frequency clearance—(shared band) suppression of potential RF inter­
ference with terrestrial microwave stations operating on the same fre­
quency (a concern at C band).
• Available real estate—adequate physical space for the antenna, its mount, 
and any supporting equipment or cables. Along with the next item, this 
requirement often leads to negotiation with the landlord; in the worst 
case, the antenna and indoor equipment may have to be moved to a dif­
ferent building or location.
• Roof access and roof rights—permission to place the antenna on a roof­
top and access to that location for installation purposes (including cable 
runs), determined by existing property leases or other contractual lan­
guage; may be negotiated into an existing agreement or the subject of a 
new one.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
331
• Local zoning restrictions—government approval of the type of instal­
lation and the specific configuration; these may be determined by pub­
lished building codes, or on the spot by inspectors.
• Aesthetics—any need to beautify the external view by obscuring part or 
all of the antenna, or modifying the physical appearance to comply with 
either informal or formal demands of local inhabitants.
• Safety—measures taken to protect life and property from falling objects 
or wind-blown debris from the external or internal installation. Also 
includes safety measures that relate to electrical hazard, a particular con­
cern with high-power amplifiers that require high voltage power supplies 
and RF radiation.
• Local weather conditions—consideration of possible high wind, rain­
fall, ice and snow, blowing dust and sand, humidity, or other external 
conditions that could harm the operation of the terminal. It may be pos­
sible to relocate the terminal so as to avoid some or all of the difficulty. 
The antenna may be placed inside a structure with a clear glass window 
(without metallic tinting) or an appropriate radome.
Common VSAT network antenna installation options are shown in Fig­
ure 9.20. The nonpenetrating roof mount (non-pen mount) is appropriate 
where the terminal is to be placed on top of a large flat building such as a su­
permarket or department store. To prevent movement during heavy winds, the 
truss is weighted down by a ballast consisting of sandbags or concrete blocks. 
Rocks or gravel may be swept aside to allow a rubberized blanket to be placed 
between the roof and mount. This provides the friction to hold the antenna 
in place. The pole mount provides a permanent ground mount for convenient 
Figure 9.20  Installation options for a VSAT antenna (approx. 1.8m): nonpenetrating roof 
mount requiring sufficient ballast to prevent motion in high wind; pole mount for ground-level 
installation.

332 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
access and stability. It may either be attached to the building or the ground 
itself. Permanent installations often require additional approvals from landlords 
and local authorities, but may provide superior strength to withstand heavy 
winds and ice. A structural engineering study and building modifications may 
be required as well.
Consumer terminals that are less than 1m in diameter and using an SSPA 
with less than a few watts may be installed like DTH antennas. The assumption 
is that the weight and wind loading of the outdoor equipment are compatible 
with this type of installation (i.e., that the roof or building provide a strong 
enough foundation and that the antenna cannot detach itself in high winds and 
under loading from snow and ice).
The previous discussion is to provide guidance and is not intended as spe­
cific installation instructions or authority to use a particular technique. Before 
proceeding with a particular project, it would be best to have a staff professional 
or consultant perform a study and arrange for the required clearances.
9.6  Design Requirements for Portable and Handheld Terminals
Portable and handheld communications devices, having dominated the ter­
restrial mobile radio and cellular scene, move into satellite communication. 
Systems like Inmarsat, Globalstar and Thuraya demonstrated that a lightweight 
user terminal is both feasible and practical. Applications are developing in 
remote-site communications, emergency services, security, and even personal 
convenience while, for example, one is on safari in Africa or mountain climbing 
in the Himalayas.
To understand the design process for a handheld satellite user terminal 
we must first examine the architecture of its cellular counterpart (we will refer 
collectively to all terrestrial mobile radiotelephone systems as cellular). Figure 
9.21 provides a simplified block diagram of a generic mobile phone suitable for 
a digital cellular application similar to existing satellite schemes. Understanding 
this, we will be able to see how the experience on this side of the industry has 
been adapted to satellite use (which requires frequency, modulation, and multi­
ple-access changes as well as other changes to the air interface). The RF section 
at the upper right of the figure contains familiar elements of the RF terminal 
found in the transmit/receive earth station. The exception is that the modulator 
is packaged along with the driver and power amplifiers to simplify interfaces 
within the handheld unit. This reduces RF transmit loss and, consequently, DC 
power consumption from the battery. Stray radiation within the unit is mini­
mized as well. Both the modulator and receiver (containing the downconverter) 
may operate on a range of frequencies by way of a common synthesizer. The RF 
section interfaces with the baseband section through an IF module.

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
333
Figure 9.21  Block diagram of generic handheld mobile phone, based on application of ASIC and programmable DSP components.

334 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The baseband section of the mobile phone contains both analog and digi­
tal elements. We are most concerned with the digital aspects of the unit, since 
these determine the services and operation of the phone as part of a network. 
In Figure 9.21, all digital baseband processing is performed by digital signal 
processor (DSP) chips as well as custom application specific integrated circuits. 
These devices process data under software control, which is introduced through 
read-only memory (ROM). The latter could be reprogrammed through soft­
ware download, which is attractive for updating service features and various as­
pects of the air interface. We see that DSP chips (supplied by Texas Instruments 
in the example) perform speech encoding/decoding (including compression), 
forward error correction, channel encoding/decoding (e.g., bit interleaving to 
minimize the effect of burst errors), demodulation, and encryption.
The functionality of a compact mobile phone is provided and controlled 
by an onboard microprocessor customized for this application. Functions of 
the microprocessor include radio resource management (selection of operating 
frequency and various aspects of channel alignment), connection management 
(control of off-hook and on-hook conditions), mobility management (handoff 
between cell sites and roaming features), and human factors related to the con­
trol keypad, subscriber interface module (SIM), and the user display. The latter 
would employ a small computer screen that switched between normal phone 
use and other applications such as Internet access and fax display. The handoff 
and roaming feature are also needed in satellite service since users can move be­
tween satellite beams (and between satellites in the case of non-GEO systems.)
The wireless nature of handheld terminal use brings with it many op­
portunities for variation in service quality and even dropouts. This cannot be 
overcome within the terminal alone, since it is a function of the uplink and 
downlink design. The link should stay up with a specified length of dropout. 
This is one of a number of ways of allowing graceful degradation or a fail-safe 
form of interruption. As an example, the terminal could anticipate the loss of 
connection and alert the user to this condition. The user could then alert the 
other end of the connection that a redial will be required. For networks that 
extend beyond the reach of one satellite, there is also the need for a roaming fea­
ture currently found in cellular networks. A user when arriving in a new service 
region (e.g., another country), will activate the terminal and wait during the 
authentication interval. This allows the network to pass messages in the back­
ground between the visited region and the subscribers home network. Once it 
is verified that the subscriber is valid, the service can automatically be activated.
Several other functions are needed to create a complete handheld mobile 
phone, whether this is for terrestrial or satellite use. The phone requires a speak­
er and microphone, which are analog in nature. The amplifiers, noise, and echo 
cancellation features are contained within the audio interface. Also, there could 
be provision to connect a PC or other external device. Indicated at the lower 

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
335
right of Figure 9.21 are supporting operational amplifiers (op amps), switches, 
and DC regulators. The antenna for the phone would be optimized for trans­
mit/receive operation in the desired frequency band. Also of concern is the 
coverage of the antenna, an aspect that was considered earlier in this chapter.
Dual band and dual mode features are important to some markets. The 
simplest multiband phone is one that works equally in two different frequency 
ranges, e.g., L band and S band. In the case of terrestrial cellular, dual band 
refers to the ability of the same unit to function in the 800-to-900-MHz as 
well as the 1,800-to- 1,900-MHz range. It is assumed in either case that the 
same standard and air interface are employed. In contrast, dual mode operation 
means that two different standards may be used, such as:
• CDMA cellular and GSM in the cellular frequency band;
• TDMA satellite (Thuraya) and GSM;
• CDMA satellite (GlobalStar) and CDMA cellular.
An approach to providing two TDMA modes of operation is suggested 
in Figure 9.22: terrestrial GSM cellular and satellite (L-band) TDMA. We see 
that the RF section is switchable between the two bands and the baseband 
section can format it for either of the two access schemes. The functionality 
can be seamless, meaning that the user cannot tell which mode the phone is 
in (although the satellite mode offers different constraints on the user.) Figure 
Figure 9.22  Modifications to the design of a standard GSM mobile phone to accommodate a 
satellite GMPCS mode of operation.

336 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
9.21 provides the example of an L-band satellite device that cradles an iPhone 
(courtesy of Thuraya)
This chapter provided an introduction and outline of user terminal design 
and technology. Because this field is in constant and tremendous flux, it is very 
difficult to specify a long-term approach to the definition, performance, and 
manufacture of these important devices. This is because of the rapid evolu­
tion of services from satellites and other radio communication systems. Voice 
and video services, the mainstay of user terminal focus during the 1990s, will 
likely give way to a wide variety of data and multimedia systems. As this same 
transition is under way in terrestrial networks, one cannot predict how satellite 
systems will look ten years from now. Technology is also improving, offering 
greater integration and miniaturization of functions within ASICs and DSPs, 
bringing functions normally associated with high-speed computer systems 
down to handheld proportions. While the specifics are impossible to predict, 
we can be fairly sure that the basic building blocks and RF requirements will 
remain the same.
References
[1]	 Larson, Lawrence E., ed., RF and Microwave Circuit Design for Wireless Communications, 
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1998.
[2]	 Raab, Frederick H., “Class-F Amplifiers with Maximally Flat Waveforms,” IEEE Transon 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 45, No. 11, November 1997, p 2007.
Figure 9.23  Example of an L-band mobile satellite device that cradles an iPhone. (Courtesy 
of Thuraya.)

 
Fixed and Mobile User Terminals 
337
[3]	 Kobayashi, H., J. M. Hinrichs, and P.M. Asbeck, “Current Mode Class-D Amplifiers 
for High-Efficiency RF Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Tech­
niques, Vol. 49, No. 12, December 2001, p. 2480.
[4]	 Long, A. L., “High Frequency Current Mode Class-D Amplifiers with High Output Pow­
er and Efficiency,” M.S. thesis, University of California, Santa Barbara, May 2003, http://
www.ece.ucsb.edu/rad/pubs/master/along_2003.pdf.
[5]	 Schellenberg, James, “High-Efficiency, Packaged Ka-band MMIC Operating at 24Volts,” 
IEEE MTT-S Digest, 1998, p. 577.
[6]	 Yeung, Ping et al. “Design of All-Digital Wireless Spread-Spectrum Modems Using High-
Level Synthesis,” Signal Processing in Telecommunications, Ezio Biglieri and Marco Luise, 
eds., Proceedings of the 7th International Thyrrhenian Workshop on Digital Communi­
cations, Viareggio, Italy, September 1014, 1995, London: Springer-Verlag, 1996, p. 409.
[7]	 Chang, Henry et al., Surviving the SOC Revolution: A Guide to Platform-Based Design, 
Boston: Kluwer, 1999, p. 9.
[8]	 Mouzingo, Robert A., and Thomas W. Miller, Introduction to Adaptive Arrays, Scitech 
Publishing, Inc. Raleigh, NC, 2004.
[9]	 Barter, Andy, The International Microwave Handbook, RSGB, Naffield Press, Oxford, UK, 
2002.
[10]	 Rumney, Moray (ed.), LTE and the Evolution to 4G Wireless, Agilent Technologies, 
Cornwall, UK, 2009.
[11]	 Colantonio, P., et al., “The Doherty Power Amplifier,” The International Journal of 
Microwave and Optical Technology, Vol. 5, No. 2, November 2010, p. 419.
[12]	 Eutelsat, 
“Digital 
Satellite 
Equipment 
Control 
(DiSEqC™)—Update 
and 
Recommendations for Implementation,” Version 2.1, February 25, 1995.


339
10
Earth Station Facility Design and Site 
Selection
Earth stations are like other complex technical facilities such as computer rooms, 
TV broadcasting sites, and wireless switching centers. All require reliable and 
complete support from the buildings that house them. Simple user terminals 
of the VSAT or TVRO class do not require special provisions; however, a ma­
jor earth station that acts as a broadcast center or gateway needs an integrated 
system to reliably power and house the electronics, and allow on-site personnel 
to perform their roles. One key requirement is that heat-generating electronic 
equipment must be temperature controlled and protected from moisture and 
contamination to assure reliable long-life operation. Also, the first installation 
is usually not the last, as the facility must be modified and upgraded to account 
for changing requirements. There is also the matter of outdoor equipment, in­
cluding antennas and RF electronics, which are exposed to the local environ­
ment conditions. Facilities of this type also tend to attract attention (sometimes 
unfavorable) and therefore need to be secured or possibly concealed.
The best way to think of the supporting facility is as the spacecraft vehicle 
that carries the communications payload of the satellite itself. The space envi­
ronment that the satellite is exposed to is, in some ways, much more benign 
than what an earth station in Hong Kong (typhoons) or Siberia (arctic condi­
tions), for example, might experience. We are speaking of the following needs, 
all of which must be continuously met so that reliable services are rendered:
• Prime power, supplied by the commercial power grid;
• Backup power, to supplement prime power during outages;

340 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Uninterruptible power supply (UPS), to overcome brief outages and 
prevent damage to critical electronics due to glitches and other forms of 
electrical surges;
• Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC), the environmental 
controls needed to maintain equipment operation, promote long life, 
and provide a comfortable working environment;
• Building design, layout, and construction, to provide appropriate space 
for equipment and promote easy access to all aspects of the site by opera­
tion and maintenance (O&M) personnel;
• Protection for people and equipment from natural and manmade dis­
ruptions and disasters, like fire, flooding, ice and snow, earthquake, un­
lawful entry, and civil unrest;
• Grounding, shielding, and lightning control, often neglected or inad­
equately addressed during design and installation phases;
• Protection from RF radiation that can cause human hazard or interfer­
ence between satellite networks and local microwave systems.
Figure 10.1 provides a system-level block diagram showing the general 
relationship and interconnection of these elements with the electronic systems. 
The interesting thing about facility design is that there is no such thing as a 
standard arrangement. Instead, the facility is laid out according to the custom 
needs of the earth station and its operators. The facility may exist and need 
modification, or it could be a new build. In this chapter, we review the various 
systems and some of the more important aspects of their selection and sizing. 
The specific design will likely be a collaboration of the architects, engineers, 
and operations team that have a stake in a properly working overall system. The 
following are some important recommendation in this regard [1]:
• Flexibility is key to a successful design—consider current and future 
needs, taking account of technology that may not exist at initiation of 
the project.
• An efficient design assures that both the initial investment cost as well as 
the O&M expenses are at their respective minimums. A proper design 
allows the staff to do their jobs effectively and in an environment that 
promotes job satisfaction.
• Involve in the design process everyone who has a significant stake in the 
outcome. This includes the architect, engineers, consultants, contrac­
tors, equipment suppliers, businesspeople, and the O&M staff who have 
to live with the result.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
341
Figure 10.1  General arrangement for a major earth station and its supporting facility, indicating information flow and critical connections.

342 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Develop a practical schedule for the implementation of the station and 
follow the principles of modern project management. The key phases 
involved are: (1) schematic design, (2) design development, (3) make 
versus buy decisions, (4) construction documents, (5) request for bid 
or proposal, (6) contractor selection and negotiation, (7) construction 
(which may have several phases), and (8) acceptance.
This discussion is an introduction to the general topic of facility design, 
intended to inform satellite ground segment engineers, who usually arrive at 
this issue from the standpoint of electronics specification and design, software 
development, or service operation. These aspects require the expertise of the 
architect, civil engineer, and electrical power engineer, as well as numerous spe­
cialists with years of experience in the issues identified above. Often, the re­
quired expertise is obtained from local specialists who understand the building 
styles, codes, and environments that have an effect on the design and operation 
of the facility.
10.1  Prime Power and Uninterruptible Power Systems
The single most critical function of an earth station facility is the provision of 
electrical power to the equipment. The prime power and UPS aspects of earth 
station design cannot be treated as an afterthought; anyone who has been in­
volved with the installation and operation of an earth station has experienced 
the difficulties of power failures (in fact, you don’t have to be an earth station 
operator to know the meaning of a power failure). Fortunately, the design of 
these systems is well understood and there are good technologies to provide 
high confidence. The key is to understand the nature of the local power system, 
the needs of the equipment, and practice as to the configuration and O&M of 
these systems.
According to the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), many dis­
turbances are beyond the control of the typical commercial power utility com­
pany [2], requiring major users to take their own respective corrective action. 
Insurance underwriters who provide coverage for service interruption have a 
similar view. The following are some of the types of disturbances that produce 
undesirable disruptions of electrical power flow. Some only reduce the available 
current and voltage, while others can either damage equipment or cause it to 
go offline:
• Large load changes from other customers on a random basis (due to the 
sudden shutdown or turn-up of another customers facility). This can 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
343
produce an under voltage condition or, for a brief period, an overvoltage 
condition;
• Power factor (PF) correction switching within the power grid (i.e., au­
tomatic controls to correct for lead or lag of current phase with respect 
to voltage phase);
• Lightning (the most dangerous single type of event);
• Accidental system faults (i.e., loss of input due to a line or transformer 
failure outside the users facility).
• Natural disasters (flood, storms, earthquakes, etc.)
The amount and type of protection will depend on the particular situa­
tion and needs of the facility. A simple VSAT could be protected with a low-
cost surge protector, common in personal computers; economical small UPS 
systems are also available, selling for under $200. A major earth station, on the 
other hand, will require a customized (and expensive) protection system and, in 
most cases, a UPS to assure reliable and continuous operation.
A general arrangement of a complete power system for a major earth sta­
tion is shown in Figure 10.2. This illustrates the principles, but, should not 
be used as an actual design. The primary purpose of the UPS is to assure con­
tinuous and stable power to critical electrical loads. These loads consist of the 
Figure 10.2  Simplified installation diagram for a power system incorporating dual utility 
feeds, a standby motor generator, and an uninterruptible power supply.

344 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
telecommunications equipment (baseband and RF), computers, interfaces to 
users, electrical controls, and emergency power for lighting and other functions 
(such as the break room and the central coffeepot). A motor generator can be 
added to cover situations where the disruption or outage may last more than 
the typical 30 minutes that the UPS batteries are designed to cover. One criti­
cal need for generator backup is to power air-conditioning to maintain station 
temperature within an acceptable range. Large earth stations typically require 
at least one motor generator for these and other reasons. A second motor gen­
erator would be useful if the outage could last more than a day, as in a remote 
location.
The following is a list of the types of specifications that a reliable power 
system would satisfy:
• Basic power requirements, including voltage, which is country-depen­
dent—e.g., 115V 60 cycles in the Americas, Japan (actually 100V 60 
cycles), Korea, and the Philippines, and 220V 50 cycles in Europe and 
most of the rest of the world; current; power factor; harmonic content; 
and transformer configuration. These requirements are determined by 
the quantity and type of electronic equipment to be installed at the site, 
initially and at any time in the future.
• Voltage regulation requirements of the load. Computer and telecom­
munications equipment (baseband and RF) are particularly demanding 
regarding voltage regulation, and so it is normally expected that external 
regulation by a UPS will be used.
• Frequency stability and the slew rate, which is the maximum rate of 
change of frequency.
• Effects of unbalanced loading, e.g., across three phases. This can be bal­
anced within the station itself.
• Overload and inrush current capacity and requirement.
• Bypass capability, e.g., the inclusion of switching to bypass the UPS or 
noncritical loads in order to keep the system alive. (In too many cases, 
this bypass switching system is the single point of potential failure in 
what otherwise would be a fully redundant system.)
• Primary-to-secondary-path transfer time (e.g., the time to switch from 
UPS battery to backup generators), during which protected equipment 
will operate on batteries and noncritical loads will be dead.
• Maximum standby power reserve time, consisting of the power that the 
UPS batteries will deliver, as well as the maximum duration of generator 
operation. The latter will come into question where commercial power 
could be disrupted for several hours due to a major storm, natural disas­

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
345
ters such as an earthquake, or human errors or actions, including civil 
unrest.
• General system reliability and maintainability, which are requirements 
driven by a demand to keep the station working under known and un­
known situations. One example might be a general brownout situation 
such as existed on the wast coast of the United States due to power 
shortages.
• Operating efficiency. Meeting power requirements while reducing the 
quantity and cost of energy to the extent possible. For example, it might 
be desirable to run the site on generators to limit commercial power 
demand (called load shaving) to avoid a penalty fee for exceeding a fore­
casted load.
The specification of UPS and other load requirements is one of the most 
important budgeting processes associated with designing the earth station in 
the first place. This is especially important for large earth stations used as broad­
cast centers and hubs. Every item of critical and noncritical load must be identi­
fied, estimated, and recorded for analysis. Suitable margins must be included, 
since requirements for newly designed equipment may not be known ahead of 
time. It is always much better to err on the high side, thus allowing for growth 
in demand (something that is almost always going to happen). Expanding the 
basic wiring, UPS, and generator systems after installation and while the station 
is in operation is a very complex, risky, and costly matter. The more years of 
smooth and convenient operation you can buy at the beginning, the better for 
the station during its principal years of service.
The following advice from the NAB should also be taken to heart:
The environment in which the power conditioning system operates will 
have a significant effect on reliability. Extremes of temperature, altitude, hu­
midity and vibration can be encountered in various applications. Extreme con­
ditions can precipitate premature component failure and unexpected system 
shutdown. Most power protection equipment is rated for operation from 0°C 
to 40°C. During a commercial power failure, however, the ambient tempera­
ture of the equipment room can easily exceed either value, depending on the 
exterior temperature. Operating temperature derating typically is required for 
altitudes in excess of 300 meters (1,000 feet).
10.2  Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning
Readers who have spent time in earth stations, a major computer center, or 
broadcast facilities know that the internal temperature is usually on the low side 

346 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
(around 20°C or 68°F), uncomfortable unless you are wearing a long-sleeve 
shirt or a jacket. This standard requirement is designed to allow the electronic 
equipment to function normally, relying on the conditioned air to control tem­
perature. In addition, the HVAC systems keep the humidity within a safe range 
for equipment, lest it be exposed to more moisture than manufacturers allow. 
Because these factors are critical to safe functioning of technical equipment, the 
performance of the HVAC system must be stable and reliable, often requiring 
a fully redundant design.
More recently, HVAC systems have been designed to reduce energy con­
sumption by allowing a wider band of temperature. As a result, energy con­
sumption for cooling in summer and heating in winter is reduced with minimal 
or no impact of equipment. The resulting extremes of internal temperature are 
more limited by what personnel find acceptable or can tolerate. It might work 
out to plan for more comfortable temperature control in affected zones during 
their periods of planned maintenance. More information and guidelines for ef­
ficiency of a facility are provided later in this chapter.
The preferred means of providing conditioned air to racks of equipment 
is through the bottom, allowing the cooler air to replace warm air that exits 
from the top. The air reaches the rack underneath the flooring or through spe­
cial ducts. Normal practice in major earth stations and computer centers is to 
install equipment on top of raised computer flooring. This has the additional 
advantage that the flooring panels, which are supported by a structural frame­
work, can be removed to allow access underneath the racks. This space is also 
employed to route the cables within the station, which simplifies the job for 
technicians and engineers who install and upgrade the systems. The simplest 
approach, however, is to allow the equipment racks or units to take in the air 
directly from the room itself. Regardless of the approach, the HVAC system 
will be required to maintain temperatures in the required range. One caution­
ary note: water used for humidification should be filtered to remove chemicals, 
particularly chlorine, to prevent damage to sensitive electronic parts.
The H in HVAC stands for heating; however, it usually turns out that 
the electronic equipment itself provides sufficient waste heat to keep the tem­
perature from falling too low. This may not always be the case, particularly in 
very low temperature regions during winter. Most facility designs focus on the 
air-conditioning aspect of the HVAC system. The key, then, is to have high 
confidence that it is working at all times. In an unattended station, a good 
monitoring and alarm system will provide early warning of HVAC difficulty. 
Immediate attention to these types of problems will ensure that a major station 
failure, with ensuing equipment damage, does not occur.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
347
10.3  Building Design and Construction
The building that houses an earth station or other major ground segment fa­
cility is very much a part of the entire system. If the service and technical re­
quirements are determined properly in the first place, the building will likely 
come together in an effective way and meet these requirements. Costs can then 
be estimated with reasonable accuracy and the project can follow its planned 
schedule, resulting in a completed facility that is on time and within budget. 
Organizing this overall effort is usually the responsibility of the facilities engi­
neering manager, who supervises the architectural engineering team and the 
construction manager; they work as a team to collect requirements, design the 
building to accommodate the mission, equipment, and people, and oversee the 
construction to a proper conclusion. Building design does not end when the 
building is complete. This is because there is always a need to add capabilities to 
the building to accommodate changes in requirements. In fact, the lifetime of a 
major earth station facility can be substantially longer than that of the baseband 
and RF electronics that are providing specific services at any given time.
10.3.1  New Construction and Site Development
A new building is a major challenge for an organization, complicated by the 
number of people involved in the requirements and the task of properly sup­
porting the technical equipment and its operation. Earth station sites are often 
located in isolated places where ground access may be restricted. Site selection 
and preparation is often a lengthy and expensive process. Any given site must 
have strong benefits in terms of physical space and satisfaction of the technical 
requirements of orbit visibility and isolation from RF interference. Unfortu­
nately, what might be an ideal site for technical reasons could be a nightmare for 
the construction crew or the operators who have to work there on a round-the-
clock basis. All of these factors have to be considered in advance, before the site 
is selected and construction begins. Turning a project around after it is under 
way is extremely hard, and the O&M staff may suffer (and complain) for years 
to come as a result.
The task of the facilities engineering manager is often as difficult as that 
of communications project managers who put the satellite network together. 
Ideally, this person starts to work during system development and construction, 
and remains with the operating facility in an O&M role. In this way, the par­
ticular individual can help with new requirements that come along from time 
to time, ensuring that operations continue smoothly as the changes are imple­
mented. Site upgrades are often more difficult than the original design and 
construction task because the work must be performed on a revenue-producing 

348 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
or vital station. Some of the responsibilities of this position include the follow­
ing [3]:
• Collecting requirements for and planning of the facilities that will house 
the earth station and the personnel who will operate and maintain it 
(including the building and its systems) the more detail the better;
• Converting these requirements into technical specifications that can be 
used to engineer and design the facility;
• Engineering and design of the building and its systems; consideration 
for esthetics and ease of upkeep.
• Engineering and design of modifications to the building and its systems, 
required from time to time after the earth station goes into operation;
• Engineering and design of maintenance and repair systems, all the more 
necessary if the site is in an isolated location;
• Construction of the facilities and installation of the earth station equip­
ment;
• Maintenance and repair of facilities and equipment;
• Generation, purchase, and maintenance of utilities systems;
• Cost management, to evaluate ways to reduce costs (fixed and variable), 
possibly by replacing obsolete equipment to save energy costs or to im­
prove operational efficiency.
The facilities engineering manager will likely be more of a generalist than 
a specialist in architecture or civil engineering. He or she would understand 
the technical and operational requirements for the facility once it is completed 
and would also be able communicate those requirements to the specialists who 
know the business of building design and construction. This means that the 
organization will probably enlist the services of an architectural and engineer­
ing (A&E) firm to put the design down on paper, estimate costs, contribute 
to the selection of a construction management firm, and oversee the various 
inspections that are needed to assure that the facility comes out as expected. 
The construction manager job could be provided by an outside group, like 
a general contractor, who selects subcontractors and negotiates the associated 
subcontracts.
The design and construction will likely have to meet building code re­
quirements, which would be set at both national and local levels. There is a vital 
need for good communication at every step of the process, especially because 
errors made in the beginning can have big consequences later, when it will be 
very expensive or possibly even impossible to effect full and proper correction.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
349
If a governmental organization is implementing the facility, then it will 
already have internal construction requirements. The U.S. Federal Government 
constructs many technical buildings and has processes that have been applied 
for more than a hundred years. For example, the U.S. General Services Admin­
istration (GSA) issues its Facilities Standards for the Public Buildings Service, 
a 366-page document [8]. At the state level, public universities also engage in 
the construction of technical facilities with many similarities to earth stations. 
An example is the Construction Standards Manual by Facilities Management 
of Colorado State University, which is intended to assist and guide architects/
engineers/designers. The manual provides criteria for designs leading to con­
struction [9]. Documents such as these probably exceed what is needed in a 
practical situation and they do not address the details of facilities for earth sta­
tions. However, they represent an excellent source of guidelines and checklists 
that can be culled and refined for the task at hand.
The number and scope of documents can be bewildering, which is why 
it is helpful to work with a firm that his done similar work (in similar loca­
tions) before. As an example, a completely new facility needed to be added on 
a common plot of land with an existing facility used for a different but related 
mission. We sought out the A&E firm that had been involved with the original 
construction project and they were able to take on the new effort. It resulted in 
a massive new facility that worked alongside of the one that had already existed 
for nearly two decades.
There are particular construction issues that relate to a facility used to 
house and support an earth station. Most of these are covered in this chapter, 
including electrical power, HVAC, AC and RF safety, and security. As stated 
before, items left out in the beginning can become extremely difficult to address 
at a later stage. One of the more challenging questions regards the amount of 
excess room or capacity that the facility has at inception. Some forethought here 
will make life easier later if the facility needs to be expanded to support more 
services or even a different mission or business. This is not easy to assess, but 
simply making the building larger (even if the excess area is unimproved) will 
provide valuable room for growth. One concern is that work associated with 
a later expansion should not interrupt an ongoing operation. These issues are 
best addressed by the people who will construct the facility and later have to live 
with it during its operating life. It is a matter that requires a lot of brainstorming 
by the engineering team and the operations and maintenance teams.
10.3.2  Initial and Ongoing site Expenses
We can see from this summary that the tasks cover a very broad range of time 
and activity, starting when the project is conceived and lasting to the end of the 
useful life of the earth station. This is a lot like building your own home and 

350 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
then having the pleasure of living in it for many years. Much of the effort has to 
do with identifying and controlling costs: initial costs (investment) and recur­
ring annual operating costs. The following list provides the categories of typical 
costs that are encountered in facilities of this type.
• Site development costs:
• Survey and license expenses;
• Purchase of land;
• Access roads;
• Clearing, grading, and preparing land;
• Extension of water, sewer, commercial power, and telecommunica­
tions (fiber-optic or microwave);
• Fences, gates, guard station, TV monitors, alarms, and other security 
measures;
• Internal roads, walkways, overhead covers, and parking areas;
• Exterior lighting;
• Landscaping.
• Construction costs:
• Foundations for buildings, utility connections, antennas, generators 
and fuel tanks, and cable trays or trenches;
• Buildings (new construction or renovation);
• Utility distribution systems;
• Storage yards for materials and other resources;
• Power generation systems;
• Antennas and towers;
• Special facilities for storage and testing (if required);
• Storage tanks for water and fuel;
• Waste processing (if required);
• Site RF shielding (if required).
• Operating costs:
• Utilities usage (electrical, water, gas, etc.);
• Telecommunications costs (telephone, wideband connections [e.g., 
fiber optic], wireless/cellular, LAN and WAN, etc.);
• Maintenance and repair of facilities;
• Operation of power generation and other facilities equipment;
• Custodial services (e.g., cleaning);
• Operation and maintenance of automobiles, snow-removal equip­
ment (if appropriate), and other vehicles;

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
351
• Trash collection and disposal;
• Inspections and corrective actions;
• Fire and police protection;
• Insurance, licenses, and other routine fees;
• Information technology security, maintenance, and upgrades.
• Support equipment costs (fixed items that must be replaced from time 
to time):
• Office furnture, lab benches, and miscellaneous installed items;
• Automobiles and other support equipment for the site;
• Electrical and communications cabling;
• Additional licenses and permits as required;
• Moving costs;
• Lost productivity (opportunity) costs;
• Computers and software.
Earth station buildings differ from typical buildings used for manufactur­
ing or R&D. Like the spacecraft they use as a relay, earth stations are laid out 
for the transmission function they perform. Below is a list of the flows that need 
to be considered.
• Signal transfer and routing:
• Transfer of user information from the terrestrial interface to the base­
band equipment that initiates the transmission function of the facil­
ity;
• Routing of baseband signals between racks of equipment and com­
puter systems, as appropriate;
• IF and RF transmission within the building, leading to the HPAs and 
LNAs on the uplink and downlink, respectively;
• Transmission between antennas and the RF equipment, accom­
plished by the interfacility link (IFL);
• Reference frequency and/or station time;
• Intercom.
• Acquisition and distribution of services:
• Power distribution, between commercial sources and backup systems;
• Distribution of reliable power from the UPS to critical electronics;
• HVAC distribution to maintain temperature and humidity;
• Water for various purposes, such as sanitation, safety, humidification, 
and cooling;

352 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Dry air or nitrogen for waveguide purging.
• Efficient flow for staff during the care and operation of equipment and 
the building systems themselves. Stations located in extreme climates 
pose a special problem to staff who will, at times, have to go outside 
into the elements to reach equipment and parts of the facility needing 
attention. This needs consideration in site selection and facility design.
• Access to electronics for O&M activities, including repair and replace­
ment of units and components, and modifications and upgrades from 
time to time.
• Providing a safe environment for staff, no matter what their task (during 
all phases of construction, operation, and future modification).
• Providing a comfortable temperature range (18° to 22° C), sufficient 
lighting, and tolerable levels of noise for an extended period.
Even though every earth station uses similar elements and facilities, there 
is no such thing as a standard facility design. Every design effort must begin 
at the beginning, addressing the special requirements for the particular system 
and physical situation. Large facilities that combine an earth station with a tele­
communications gateway or TV broadcast operation center must address the 
needed services to support the added staff and functions. For example, a typical 
earth station providing a few uplinks and downlinks can probably be operated 
by a team of six; however, expanding the function to include video origination 
for a DTH network would see staff requirements grow to nearly 100. It is best 
to work closely with the architects and specialists who can interact with the 
designers and operators of the system. It is also best to allow for changes during 
the project, and to maintain a constructive attitude toward new ideas and ques­
tions. We have covered many of the issues and standard needs for design of the 
facility; however, this cannot replace a close collaboration among the interested 
parties, particularly those who have to live and work within the earth station 
once it is completed.
10.4  Grounding and Lightning Control
The electrical power and communications signals within an earth station flow 
through a complex network of physical/electrical connections that are supposed 
to allow for a smooth operation of systems and the building itself. The electrical 
codes and other rules for wiring dictate proper practice, which when followed 
provides for safe operation under most conditions. However, an earth station is 
much more complex than the standard industrial building in terms of electrical 
and electromagnetic energy transfer. For example, we have high-power energy 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
353
in some cases competing with very low level electrical and microwave signals 
that must pass from rack to rack undisturbed. Another factor is the possibility 
of low-quality commercial electrical power and the need for backup, coupled 
with danger from lightning strikes on the electrical lines or to local metal struc­
tures such as antennas, towers, and the building itself. What you end up with 
is an overall environment that can contribute to system disruption and possibly 
a reduction to the safety of on-site staff. Many of these problems, even if an­
ticipated, do not show up until the facility is completed and the first operation 
is attempted (or possibly months later). The corrective action may require a 
considerable expenditure of money and even take part or all of the earth station 
out of service. Of course, both of these outcomes are better than a situation in 
which people are at risk. The following paragraphs provide some guidelines for 
addressing the basic issues of grounding and lightning protection to provide an 
appreciation for the need for proper design and verification. However, this is no 
substitute for a detailed investigation and testing program at appropriate phases 
of building construction and while in service. Part of the plan should include 
checking and following local electrical codes and other relevant regulations, 
which can differ from country to country, state to state, and even city to city.
10.4.1  Principles of Grounding and Noise Control
According to the IEEE, the term grounding refers to a conducting connection, 
whether intentional or accidental, that causes an electric circuit to be connected 
to earth or to a conducting body of large extent that serves the same purpose 
in electrical terms [4]. To be a ground, the earth (which may be augmented 
with a wire grid to improve conductivity) or large conducting body (such as 
equipment racks or a metal structure of some type) must establish a constant 
potential to allow conductors to be connected to it. There are at least four rea­
sons for this ground:
• To provide personnel safety by limiting the electrical voltage difference 
between metal parts around the station and the ground itself;
• To prevent or control ground loops, which are unintended paths for 
noise and stray signals to find their way into sensitive receiving and data 
processing elements of the earth station;
• To control electrostatic discharge (ESD), which will damage sensitive 
electronic components and cause unpleasant human shocks, by limiting 
voltage difference between noncurrent-carrying metal elements;
• To provide fault isolation and equipment safety by giving a low imped­
ance fault return path to the power source.

354 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Noise control is very important in earth stations and computer facilities. 
Ideally, the ground should be at the same potential throughout the station, and 
connectors and cables should be provided with excellent shielding to resist the 
radiated transfer of noise and other undesired signals. However, there is always 
a voltage difference across cables and between racks; if there are separate rooms 
and even buildings making up the station, the situation is made even worse. 
Where the physical separation is large enough, there could be a requirement to 
isolate one section from the other. It is preferable to connect rooms and build­
ings using fiber-optic cabling, because such cabling will not, as a rule, allow 
conducted noise to be transferred. This is one excellent application of fiber 
optics within the earth station facility.
10.4.2  Lightning Protection
Lightning is one of the biggest concerns in earth station safety, both for the 
people and equipment, particularly in tropical and semitropical regions where 
thunderstorms are prevalent. Electronic equipment that is interconnected by 
wire cables and provided electrical power from commercial sources is vulnerable 
to damage or destruction from lightning-induced electrical transients [5]. As 
shown in Figure 10.3, a direct strike to the building, metal structures (towers 
and antennas), commercial power lines, or the ground itself can pose a threat. 
In many cases, the lightning may not even hit the earth station but involve 
flashover, electromagnetic induction caused by cloud-to-cloud discharge, or 
Figure 10.3  Direct and indirect paths for lightning to reach the interior of an earth station.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
355
shift of ground potential caused by currents from a strike dissipating through 
the ground itself. According to Murphys Law, some of this energy will find 
its way to and possibly damage the most sensitive equipment (RF electronics, 
baseband and computer systems, UPS components, and computing devices). 
Also, the power supplies used to convert AC to DC throughout the station are 
always the first point of entry of lightning-induced current surges. The failure 
can come through a subtle mechanism involving transistor junctions within a 
specific circuit, even though the actual lightning hit might occur many kilome­
ters away. Telephone wires can also transfer lightning-induced surges.
There are two major issues regarding lightning protection: (1) designing 
the building and equipment installation so that the majority of lightning hits 
do not cause disruption or harm, and (2) taking measures to reduce the inci­
dence and intensity of these hits in the first place. The first point involves taking 
all the right steps in providing grounding and appropriate isolation, while the 
second is much more difficult to achieve in practice. We use various forms of 
surge protection to provide a nondestructive path for surge current to flow to 
ground, rather than through the equipment. At the same time, the protector 
will limit the voltage across the protected component to again improve ground 
electrical flow. Surges can occur in common mode, meaning between a set of 
signal wires and ground, and difference mode, meaning across a pair of wires in 
a signal path. The common and difference modes are also how noise and spu­
rious signals are conducted between racks of equipment and buildings (fiber-
optic cables are a good cure for conducted noise and surges).
Lightning-induced surges can be rather broadband, meaning that they 
contain high frequency energy. Surge protection must have a low inductance 
path to earth so that the surge does not produce a momentary voltage increase 
(and hence damaging current flow). This suggests that surge protectors are ap­
propriate at both ends of every long cable run. Note also that metal conductors 
of coaxial cables and waveguides offer pathways for surges and noise.
The topic of lightning protection is perhaps the most complex and least 
well understood of all the critical areas of station facility design. The techniques 
are all specific to the particular situation, e.g., a good solution at one facility 
in one particular location may be totally ineffective for another application 
somewhere else. Of course, old standbys of lightning rods and proper earth 
grounds will be the standard approaches. But when the first actual lightning 
strike occurs, the outcome is never easily predicted. Stations that have received 
damaging strikes must have the attention they deserve. The basic grounding 
systems are always suspected when outages occur, and the necessary corrective 
action probably won’t be quick and easy. In one particular case in the tropics, 
the process lasted more than a year and involved a series of particular improve­
ments. Among these were: converting from coax to fiber to connect buildings 
within the same site; installing more ground straps and buried wires; greater 

356 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
use of surge protection at equipment racks; and providing improved lightning 
rods on nearby structures. These changes reduced the occurence of equipment 
failure from lightening almost monthly to less than once per year. This operator 
subsequently obtained a recommendation for a new and extensive ground grid, 
but declined to make the investment due to its cost and uncertain benefit.
10.5  Designing the Sustainable Ground Segment
Considerable attention has been paid by major corporations like Wells Fargo 
and government agencies like NASA to the design of sustainable buildings and 
facilities, an objective associated with the general need for efficiency and the 
reduction of energy usage. This is a question of accomplishing the mission 
or business in as efficient a manner as possible. Benefits include reduced cost 
of operation, reduction of waste products that otherwise must be removed, 
and simplifying the supply chain related to the construction and operation of 
earth stations in a particular system. As presented by Robert Ioanna, PE and 
VP of Syska Hennesy Group, a New York engineering firm, a facility such as 
a data center or large earth station has a carbon life established by the three 
phases of design/construction (cradle), operations, including equipment refresh 
(O&M), and decommissioning (grave) and electronic equipment demolition. 
Figure 10.4 illustrates what Syska calls the elements of the carbon life of a data 
center. For a typical facility, the largest demand is made by electronics equip­
ment (about 50%) and electrical facilities (about 30%). The remaining 20% is 
divided among the initial design/construction phase, water usage, manpower, 
hardware, and decommissioning. The bottom line is that efforts to save on 
electrical power throughout the operating lifetime will pay the largest dividends 
in terms of savings. To the extent that nature plays a role in heating, cooling 
Figure 10.4  Illustration of the constituents of the carbon life of a facility (Syska Hennessy 
Group). Note that electrical power for technical (IT) resources along with electrical power for 
the facility itself consume about 80% of the lifetime resources.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
357
and support, the operating costs (representing 80% of the lifetime costs) will 
be reduced. 
During the operation, the 80% breaks down into the following:
1.	 Electrical energy usage for communications and data processing;
2.	 Electrical energy usage for facilities (HVAC, lighting, etc.);
3.	 Hardware (3-year refresh)
4.	 Personnel
5.	 Water usage
6.	 Transportation (reduced traffic in and out of the facility);
7.	 Heat island (the heating of surrounding structures by energy emission 
from the facility, and vice versa).
We will concern ourselves with the first and second items as these relate 
to the function of the equipment and its support within the facility. There 
are a few variables with regard to the first item since it relates to the type of 
electronics (HPAs, antenna mounts with or without tracking, baseband sys­
tems, computers, displays and test equipment, etc.). RF power translates into 
AC power based on amplifier efficiency, the number of carriers, EIRP, and size 
of antenna(s). Baseband and data processing equipment expenditure is deter­
mined by the applications and how they are processed for transmission by satel­
lite. Other equipment is needed by on-site personnel as well as to allow remote 
control where appropriate. Facility energy usage in item 2 is derived from the 
power requirements, HVAC demands, and other facility support functions.
The following are some possibilities identified by Syska:
• Cooling options
• Airside economizer for all data spaces/support spaces;
• Adiabatic coolers/humidifiers;
• Improved control strategies for AHUs;
•  “Relaxed” thermal envelope;
• Dewpoint control.
• Energy recovery
• Data floor air management
• Stratification of air in data space;
• Containment/partial containment of hot aisles/cold aisles;
• Reduction/elimination of bypass and recirculation air flows,
• Overhead air distribution
• Equipment selections

358 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
• Large-scale, built-up air handling units;
• Optimized chiller selection;
• Efficient use of water at cooling towers;
• Variable frequency drive (VCD) and electronically commutated 
(ECM) motors on fans and pumps.
• Ground-coupled heat rejection
Following the guideline that “what is controlled must be measured first,” 
Syska recommends that a measure of facility energy efficiency be defined and 
used. They suggest a figure of merit called the power utilization effectiveness 
(PUE), which is the ratio
	
TOTAL FACILITY POWER (kW)/UPS OUTPUT POWER (kW)	
The basic approach is to start out when the system enters service and 
determine the PUE at that point. Let’s assume total facility power input (from 
commercial) is 150 kW and the UPS consumption is 100 kW. This means that 
the UPS power is two thirds of the total power. The PUE at the start is com­
puted as follows:
	
PIU = 150/100 = 1.5	
This is considered to be a good starting point as exemplified by well-
designed facilities in the data processing field. Over time, say that we are able to 
reduce the facility-dedicated power by 20%; the PUE will decrease to the ratio 
of (150–50 · 0.2)/100 = 1.4. This represents a small but valuable improvement. 
On the other hand, we might reduce the UPS requirement by 20% (by chang­
ing to more efficient HPAs); then the PUE calculation is (150–100 · 0.2)/80 = 
1.625. This is still considered to be good, and yet we are saving 20 kW of peak 
load. There is opportunity to bring the PUE back to a value of 1.5 by reducing 
the facility load by 10 kW. We see that PUE is a useful tool for measuring and 
diagnosing the efficiency of the facility as a whole when its context is under­
stood. Suffice it to say that the total facility power demand should scale as a 
constant multiplier of the UPS to preserve the PUE. In general, the design load 
of the UPS and the overall station need to undergo a careful budgeting process 
that includes PUE as well as attention to areas of energy wastage.
10.5.1  Facility Control Systems
In this section, we consider how the facility itself can be controlled to manage 
energy usage and cut costs. Some strategies identified by Syska include:

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
359
Monitoring
• Holistic, continuous, real-time with dashboard displays;
• Electrical system;
• Environmental;
• HVAC system;
• Server equipment;
• Data floor environmental.
Control
• Take collected data and control
• Economizer equipment at optimum temperature;
• Chiller plant to work in concert with power management equipment;
• Cooling towers to work with power management equipment/chiller;
• Cooling capabilities at specific room locations.
These features are provided through an integrated environmental moni­
toring and control system. Akin to the M&C used for RF and baseband equip­
ment, the environmental side of the equation will provide efficient energy use 
and assure the best response to variations in temperature inside and outside the 
overall plant.
10.6  Radio Frequency Clearance and Interference Analysis
It is a fundamental principle of radio communications that other users and 
services share the frequencies we employ. Thus, there is no such thing on this 
planet as a dedicated sole-user frequency assignment as any frequency is sub­
ject to occupancy by more than one independent transmitter. Of course, there 
are many factors that allow us to effectively reuse frequencies without mutual 
interference. The techniques that we apply fall under the broad category of 
radio frequency clearance; if clearance is not guaranteed, then we embark on 
frequency coordination, a potentially laborious process of interference analy­
sis, test, and negotiation. Specifically, frequency coordination is a process of 
discussion, investigation, and negotiation among the affected parties, under 
the general principle of first come, first served. In other words, whoever is first 
to use a frequency provided they have completed all of the required regula­
tory processes to achieve a protected position has some domain over the use of 
that frequency. The degree of domain and control that the first protected user 

360 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
has depends on the particular part of the spectrum, the rules that apply under 
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), and the local government 
rules and regulations in the country of interest. There are exceptions to the first-
come-first-served principle, primarily in cases where the ITU has devised an a 
priori plan for that part of the spectrum (e.g., Broadcasting Satellite Service at 
Ku band). Authority to transmit under the ITU is called registration and under 
a local government is called licensing.
10.6.1  Role of the ITU in Frequency Coordination
Founded in 1865, the ITU is the oldest and most prominent of international 
organizations in the field of telecommunication regulation. As a specialized 
agency of the United Nations and with its origins dating back before the age 
of radio, the ITU has proven itself in a changing and turbulent world. Today, 
it has nearly 200 member nations, with its headquarters in Geneva, Switzer­
land. The ITU allocates global radio spectrum and satellite orbits, develops 
the technical standards … “that ensure networks and technologies seamlessly 
interconnect, and strives to improve access to information and communication 
technologies to under-served communities.” Membership is restricted to gov­
ernment telecommunication agencies, called administrations; each is required 
to contribute to the Unions financial support more or less in proportion to 
its economic strength. Telecommunication service providers, satellite and earth 
station operators, and users are represented through their respective govern­
ments and attend meetings along with their government counterparts.
Generally speaking, the ITU does not have direct power to regulate radio 
transmission, as this is considered to be the right of sovereign states. However, 
because the ITU is a common body among governments, its regulations and 
recommendations are followed by the member nations out of the practical need 
for a realistic framework. There have been instances where politics has entered 
into the process when particular interests see the opportunity to work as a block 
and pursue parochial goals. On the other hand, developing countries have a 
special place in the ITU because of the shared objective of improving world­
wide telecommunication services. A country with a poor telecommunication 
infrastructure cannot provide international telecommunication services of good 
quality. Furthermore, there is the more general UN mission of improving the 
living conditions of the world’s population, for which the ITU carries out its 
telecommunication aid program.
A principle area for the ITU is management of the radio frequency spec­
trum, a critical role because individual countries and operators of radio trans­
mitters need rules of the road. Otherwise, radio stations would transmit on any 
frequency they choose and interference would be an inordinate burden on ev­
eryone; therefore, no one would be able to count on reliable radio broadcasting 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
361
and point-to-point radio communication by satellite or any means. Through 
international conferences, the Radio Regulations, and its full-time regulatory 
efforts, the ITU oversees the use of radio frequencies and orbit resources and 
provides an effective forum for the resolution of interference difficulties. How­
ever, it does not actually police the airwaves.
The Radio Regulations of the ITU (also called the Red Books, due to 
their color) contain the rules and procedures for the planning and use of all 
radio frequencies by administrations, who in turn assign individual frequencies 
to their respective government and private satellite and earth station operators. 
Unlike legal codes, the Radio Regulations are usually not drafted by lawyers but 
rather by experts in frequency management and telecommunication. A key sec­
tion shows the allocations of frequency bands to particular services, such as the 
Broadcasting Satellite Service (S and Ku bands), the Fixed Satellite Service (C, 
X, Ku, and Ka bands), and the Mobile Satellite Service (L and S bands).
In addition to being a horizontal division of the total spectrum by service, 
there is a vertical division by geographical region: Region 1 includes Europe and 
Africa, Region 2 North and South America, and Region 3 Asia and the Pacific. 
The Table of Frequency Allocations, which presents the division between ser­
vices and regions, also contains dozens of footnotes allowing administrations to 
make exceptions to the rules. For example, a footnote may permit country A in 
Region 1 to assign a terrestrial microwave radio user to a frequency in a micro­
wave band allocated exclusively to the Mobile Satellite Service. 
The ideal procedure for an administration to follow is to assign frequen­
cies only in accordance with the Table of Allocations and Rules of Frequency 
Coordination. If the transmission can potentially cause interference, then the 
administration must follow the somewhat convoluted process of frequency co­
ordination, which is also defined in the Radio Regulations. This gives the other 
administrations a chance to decide if they want to allow this particular station 
to go on the air. A successfully coordinated frequency assignment can be re­
corded in the Master International Frequency Register (the Master Register) of 
the ITU and thereby gain international status. 
What follows is a brief overview of the Radio Regulations; it should not 
be used in an actual application. 
There are basically two types of frequency coordination: terrestrial coor­
dination, for earth stations and land-based microwave transmitters, and space 
coordination, for radio transmitters and receivers on satellites. Terrestrial coor­
dination (discussed in Section 10.6.2) involves any terrestrial radio transmitter 
that can potentially radiate signal power across a border into a neighboring 
country. Included are earth stations and other types of terrestrial microwave 
transmitters with sufficient power to cause transborder radio frequency interfer­
ence (RFI).

362 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The process for coordinating a new satellite can be very lengthy because 
of the potentially wide radiation pattern across the earth and because more 
frequency bandwidth is usually involved. Coordination is required with other 
satellite networks that fall into one of the following three categories: 
• Those that have been recorded in the Master Register of the ITU-R;
• Those that have already completed coordination;
• Those that have entered coordination before the new network in 
question.
Coordination of satellite networks is a bilateral activity in which the new­
comer must approach the incumbent and obtain their agreement regarding the 
potential for interference between systems. Such discussions and negotiations 
can take months or even a year or more in particularly difficult or acrimoni­
ous situations. This difficult process could be helped by efforts of the ITU to 
remove phantom satellites from the rolls.
Most of the time, coordination and registration are accomplished in a 
straightforward manner, taking anywhere from six months to three years, de­
pending on the number of administrations involved and the complexity of the 
technical analysis of potential interference. Occasionally, an administration 
locks its heels and refuses to allow coordination of a new frequency assign­
ment by another administration. In such a case, the ITU can be brought in to 
mediate.
Because the previous discussion was a brief summary, readers wishing 
more background can consult the very informative Web site of the ITU, www.
itu.int. This site allows download of many useful technical documents, free of 
charge. Our focus from here on is the RFI mechanisms that affect earth stations 
and the services they render, and the general process that engineers go through 
to determine if a site is acceptable and can be coordinated.
10.6.2  Terrestrial Interference and Coordination
Terrestrial coordination relates to terrestrial radio stations, particularly micro­
wave relays, that operate in bands shared with space service. The location of 
an earth station can be determined by many factors, such as closeness to a 
company headquarters or business accommodations, availability of utilities or 
other services, presence of a good community where the staff and their families 
can live, and connection to existing telecommunication facilities, roads, and 
the like. These are certainly important factors, but our focus here is on the 
control of RFI that the earth station may either cause or receive. In the first 
generation of C-band earth stations for INTELSAT, the same frequency band 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
363
was in use extensively around the world for terrestrial line-of-sight microwave 
radio links. Often operated by the same communications service provider as 
the earth station, siting was a definite challenge since microwave radio was used 
for the space link as well as the terrestrial tail connection back to the telephone 
exchange or TV station. These considerations produced earth station sites that 
were very far from cities, needing long-haul microwave or cable tails that would 
not cause RFI into the earth station (and vice versa).
In time, C-band became more stable to use, both because the frequencies 
are applied more to satellite services and the satellites themselves transmit with 
higher power and therefore can overcome the RFI posed by terrestrial micro­
wave systems. We now have C-band earth stations that operate close to down­
town districts of major cities like New York, London, Beijing, Hong Kong, 
and Rio de Janeiro. In many cases, the natural RF shielding provided by the 
curvature of the earth, hills, trees, and construction must be enhanced through 
artificial techniques like concrete and metal walls, metallic mesh screening, or 
containment of the antenna in a pit. However, the fact that C-band-transmit 
earth stations have a potential to interfere with terrestrial microwave links (even 
those hundreds of kilometers away) places on them a greater burden of fre­
quency coordination.
Adoption of Ku band offered for the first time the potential to place earth 
stations literally anywhere the operator or user desired. Thus began a revolution 
in the use of satellite communications, where TV receive-only terminals and 
two-way voice and data communications earth stations began to spring up in 
cities and suburbs as well as on roving vehicles and even aircraft. The modern 
VSAT exemplifies the kind of flexible earth station that can be operated from 
almost anywhere. The FCC of the United States even adopted simplified rules, 
called blanket licensing, that allowed developers of VSAT and later DTH at Ku 
band to create large-scale networks with a single license and without identifying 
specific locations.
Many principles first introduced in the United States by the FCC have 
been adopted in Europe, Latin America, and Asia. Many countries in Latin 
America follow blanket licensing at Ku band. C-band still must be coordinated 
with terrestrial microwave systems, an often laborious and time-consuming 
process. Yet C-band still offers the advantage of less fading due to rain, making 
it more suitable for high-availability applications in rainy climates particularly 
in the tropics.
10.6.3  Interference Sources and Evaluation
RFI that is on the same frequency (cofrequency) as our desired signal, or over­
laps our bandwidth, is potentially a disruption to communication. The other 

364 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
side of the coin applies as well: our signal can potentially interfere with other 
channels of communication. Listed below are four levels of impact from RFI:
1.	 Interference that cannot be detected (and hence does not exist for all 
intents and purposes);
2.	 Interference that can be detected but that does not cause unacceptable 
disruption of another service (e.g., acceptable interference);
3.	 Interference that causes unacceptable disruption (e.g., interference 
that, while disruptive, would not render the service totally unusable);
4.	 Harmful interference, which is interference that prevents usable com­
munications for the interfered-with service.
While it is difficult to provide general rules of engagement for coordina­
tion, we can offer some typical examples of how the four levels of interference 
may arise in the real world. These are suggested in Table 10.1. For a particular 
service by satellite, it would be appropriate to develop more specific or quantita­
tive measures for the impact of RFI.
There are a number of standard interference paths, called interference 
mechanisms, that we encounter in satellite and terrestrial microwave com­
munications (illustrated in Figure 10.5). These are controlled through various 
regulatory mechanisms, including frequency coordination, as will be discussed 
later in this chapter. Normal operation of the respective links is indicated by 
the solid arrows, which provide full duplex transmission. The terrestrial link 
in this illustration operates in both the satellites uplink band (assumed to be 6 
GHz) and simultaneously in the downlink band (assumed to be 4 GHz). Other 
bands, such as 11 and 18 GHz, which are shared between terrestrial and satel­
lite, would have similar interference paths. The interference paths, indicated by 
the numbered gray arrows, can be described as follows:
Table 10.1
How Interference Affects Satellite Communication Services
Level of Interference
Impact on Digital TV
Impact on Data
Level-1 (RFI cannot be 
detected)
None
None
Level-2 (RFI can be detected 
but effect is acceptable)
None, unless the signal is 
close to threshold
Increase in error rate that is 
less than specified %
Level-3 (RFI causes 
unacceptable interference)
Causes threshold to occur at 
nominal signal levels
Significant increase in error 
rate, such as by order of 
magnitude
Level-4 (RFI causes harmful 
interference)
Receiver cannot acquire digital 
stream: picture, locks and no 
sound
Data reception is unusable

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
365
• Path 1—6 GHz terrestrial radio interference into the uplink receiver 
of the satellite. The satellite is protected by a maximum radiated power 
limit of the terrestrial microwave antenna and by a stipulation that these 
antennas should not be directed at the GEO. As a result of the low 
radiated power from terrestrial stations, interference of this type is not 
experienced in practice. The one possible exception is high-power tro­
pospheric scatter links that employ billboard-sized antennas. These must 
not be pointed at the GEO in any instance.
• Path 2—6 GHz earth station interference into the 6 GHz terrestrial 
radio receiver. This is the most important interference case for determin­
ing if a transmitting earth station can be operated in a particular loca­
tion. The radiation along Path 2 is in the sidelobes of the earth station 
antenna and propagates along a variety of paths to the terrestrial receiver. 
The national government in a given country asserts that new transmit­
ting earth stations validate that their operation will not cause unaccept­
able (or harmful) interference to the operation of existing or planned 
terrestrial microwave stations in proximity to the proposed earth station 
site. The ITU has regulations and procedures to coordinate earth sta­
tions in one country that could interfere with terrestrial microwave links 
in adjacent countries.
• Path 3—4 GHz terrestrial radio interference into the downlink receiver 
of the earth station. A common term for this is terrestrial interference 
(TI) and has been one of the reasons why DTH services use Ku. The 
Figure 10.5  Interference potential between satellite links and terrestrial microwave links 
that use the same frequency band. Paths 2 and 3 are of direct concern in terrestrial coordina­
tion; paths 1 and 4 are covered in the radio regulations of the ITU.

366 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
earth station antenna could be shielded from the terrestrial transmitter, 
a technique that has been applied to Path 2 as well.
• Path 4—4 GHz satellite interference into the 4-GHz terrestrial radio 
receiver. The radiation level from a satellite is typically too weak to be of 
much concern to terrestrial receivers. Still, the ITU places a maximum 
allowed power flux density (PFD) from the satellite on the surface of 
the earth.
Path 2 is of concern for transmitting earth stations while Path 3 must 
be addressed for any satellite receiving system on the ground. Most Ku-band 
receiving earth stations are protected from Path 3 TI because the band is not 
shared with terrestrial microwave (except in some situations). Operation of user 
terminals at L and S band should likewise not experience either Path 2 or 3, but 
there are a number of instances where exceptions were granted for particular 
countries. As a result, any new operation at these frequencies should be evalu­
ated ahead of time to assure the system designer that terrestrial stations are cur­
rently not in operation.
10.6.4  Analysis Methods
Interference to satellite communication ground stations as well as to terrestrial 
stations that share the same frequency bands can be evaluated using the familiar 
technique of carrier-to-interference (C/I  ) calculation [7]. For the receive earth 
station geometry illustrated in Figure 10.6, the C/I equation can be expressed 
in dB as follows:
	
( )
( )
[
]
]
(
)
0
20log
t
t
t
C I
G
G
P
P
G
G
R R
θ
=
-
+
-
+
-
-
′
′
′




	
where G(0) is the gain of the earth station antenna in the direction of the satel­
lite; G(q) is the gain of the earth station antenna in the direction of the terres­
trial station; Pt is the transmit power of the satellite into its antenna; tP ′ is the 
transmit power of the terrestrial station into its antenna; Gt is the gain of the 
satellite antenna in the direction of the earth station; G ′ is the gain of the ter­
restrial antenna in the direction of the earth station; and R and R ′ are the range 
between the earth station and the satellite and terrestrial station, respectively. 
Note that the sum of Pt + Gt is the satellite EIRP in dBW.
This equation shows the terms that are differences (in dB) between the 
desired and interfering contributors. Perhaps a simpler way to examine the 
problem is in terms of an interference budget, which is nothing more than two 
link budgets: one for the desired path and the other for the undesired (interfer­
ing) path. The C/I is the difference, in dB, between the desired and interfering 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
367
received carrier powers. An example of an interference budget ispresented in 
Table 10.2 for the interference geometry indicated in Figure 10.6.
There are several significant issues that come about when evaluating C/I 
in this manner. Some relate to the actual physical characteristics being modeled 
(e.g., the sidelobe gain of the earth station and terrestrial microwave antennas 
and the amount of expected terrain shielding or blockage to be realized), while 
others are statistical in nature (e.g., atmospheric absorption and tropospheric 
scatter propagation of the terrestrial microwave signal). Another extremely im­
portant aspect of the study is how the interference actually affects the desired 
signal.
The analysis in Table 10.2 is straightforward and makes certain assump­
tions about the strength of the interference. The terrestrial station is 8.5 km 
from the earth station and the path is partially obstructed (e.g., with 20 dB of 
shielding from hills). At a C/I of 28.6 dB, the interference would be detectable 
and may affect reception at the earth station. The degree of degradation will be 
determined by the following factors:
• The center frequency of the interference relative to the desired carrier. 
The worst-case assumption would be cofrequency (e.g., both carriers 
centered on the same frequency).
• The bandwidth of the interference relative to the desired carrier. The 
worst case will depend on the type of modulation used on each. For PSK 
on both carriers, the worst case is equal bandwidths.
• Whether the interference has constant modulation or time-varying 
modulation. The worst case depends on the factors in the previous case, 
Figure 10.6  Interference geometry (top view) for terrestrial interference to reception at an 
earth station with a large-diameter antenna.

368 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
coupled with the time occupancy of the interference within the band­
width of the desired signal. Analysis of this type of interference situa­
tion is quite complex and may require computer simulation and possibly 
laboratory measurement.
Interference criteria in terms of C/I are determined ahead of time using 
commonly agreed standards as well as values set during coordination. Table 
10.3 provides examples taken from ITU-R recommendations. Some entries 
contain a single value that provides assurance of acceptable interference (e.g., 
neither harmful nor unacceptable, but could be measurable). Alternatively, a 
formula takes account of the difference in bandwidth of the interfering signal 
as compared with the desired signal. The term B/b is simply the true ratio of 
the bandwidth of the interference to that of the desired signal (assumed to be 
less). In the case of wideband digital interfering with narrowband digital data, 
this is the fraction of interfering carrier power that falls on top of the desired 
carrier bandwidth. A general practice where two standard QPSK carriers are 
interfering with each other is to treat the interference as an equivalent amount 
of thermal noise.
Table 10.2
RF Interference Budget for a C-band Digital Video Link Interfered by a Terrestrial 
Microwave Transmitter Operating on the Same Frequency Channel
Factor
Value
Units
Desired signal (transmitted by satellite)
Satellite transmit power per carrier at antenna port
20
Watts
Satellite antenna gain in direction of earth station
30.0
dBi
Satellite EIRP in direction of earth station
43.0
dBw
Free space loss
196.2
dB
Atmospheric loss (no rain)
0.1
dB
Earth station antenna gain (3m dish)
39.8
dBi
Received desired carrier power
–113.5
dBW
Undesired signal (transmitted by terrestrial microwave station)
Transmitter power per carrier at antenna port
10
W
Transmit antenna gain in direction of earth station (worst case)
0.0
dBi
Terrestrial microwave EIRP in direction of earth station
10.0
dBW
Free space loss (8.5 km path)
132.1
dB
Terrain shielding (actual path)
20
dB
Earth station antenna gain in direction of terrestrial microwave 
station (worst case)
0
dBi
Received interference power
–142.1
dBw
Carrier-to-interference ratio (C/I)
28.6
dB

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
369
Propagation losses, other than free space loss, may represent a significant 
challenge for anyone trying to put a realistic interference budget together before 
field measurements can be made. A process for doing this is suggested in the 
next section. Some of the other factors relating to earth station and terrestrial 
antenna performance, particularly in the backlobe and sidelobe regions, are also 
difficult to assess. Sometimes these become the focus of dispute and eventual 
negotiation between the operators who are party to the coordination process. 
Values of C/I likewise become part of the negotiation, since they determine 
how the interference is to be considered in the first place. The newcomer, seek­
ing approval from the incumbent operator, would tend to accept more interfer­
ence than the latter. Just how many dB there are between the two parties will 
often depend on factors (such as competition) outside the technical aspect of 
the negotiation.
10.7  Site Selection
The selection of an earth station site, particularly one that operates in a fre­
quency band that is shared with terrestrial microwave radio systems or near 
locations with high RFI potential, can require a significant expenditure of time 
and money. Our objective is to meet all of the technical requirements for the 
station and to minimize the possibility of receiving or causing unacceptable 
interference. 
The steps in RFI evaluation for site selection include the following:
1.	 Performing a preliminary survey of existing microwave stations that 
operate in the same frequency band. This involves researching the re­
cords of past frequency assignments in the particular area and locat­
ing those transmitters and/or receivers on a map of sufficient scale to 
indicate all potential problems. This considers all stations that operate 
Table 10.3
Examples of Recommended C/I Values for Use in Coordination
Type of Desired 
Carrier
Type of Interfering 
Carrier
Recommended 
C/I (dB)
Comment
Digital TV
Digital TV
23–30
ITU-R Rec BO.1297
Digital TV co-channel 
adjacent channel
Digital TV
15–22
ITU-R Rec B0.1297
Narrowband digital 
data (SCPC)
Wideband digital 
data
21 + 10log(B/b)
Estimated
Wideband digital data 
(TDMA)
Wideband digital 
data
21
Estimated

370 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
on the same frequency channel as well as adjacent channels that allow 
for spectral overlap.
2.	 Creating a topological map representation of the potentially interfer­
ing and interfered-with stations (including the earth station itself), 
and projecting the radiation beams to show how they would intersect. 
This is done without regard to local site shielding from hills, trees, and 
buildings (these factors are brought into the picture later, if their pres­
ence is required to meet the C/I criterion). The antenna or antennas of 
the earth station would be drawn with their respective beams pointing 
toward the satellite or satellites that might be employed. An example 
of such a map is shown in Figure 10.7. Terrestrial stations whose an­
tennas would not pose a problem can be removed from the study (this 
process is said to cull terrestrial stations that can be ignored in the site 
selection process).
3.	 A detailed evaluation of path profiles is then performed for the terres­
trial stations that could be exposed to RFI threat (and vice versa). This 
will resolve which paths could produce RFI, taking account of the 
natural shielding afforded by the curvature of the earth, land topology 
(mountains, hills, etc.), and permanent buildings. We have found that 
shielding can be greater when trees are covered with foliage as opposed 
to the situation in winter. An effort of this type can be costly and re­
quires the right detailed information as well as the maps and technical 
skills to carry out the investigation. It is common to use the services 
of a frequency coordination firm, such as Comsearch, for this effort. 
Part of the complexity is that the analysis must consider temporary 
propagation phenomena like rain scatter and ducting that would al­
low RFI to get from transmitter to receiver under other than standard 
clear-weather conditions. 
Another TI concern is where an earth station is located near a high-power 
station such as an FM radio tower or L-band radar station. These frequencies 
fall within IF ranges of earth stations, making radiated or conducted interfer­
ence a possibility. The energy can enter the IF chain of the earth station through 
connections between equipment or within the racks. Also, RFI in microwave 
bands can be so powerful that normal filtering in the earth station is insuf­
ficient to protect the LNB from overload. Additional protective filtering, with 
its concomitant insertion loss, may be justified. This is an area where excellent 
shielding and grounding can provide a cure. Figure 10.8 presents a photograph 
of a well-organized earth station in Norway.
If the previous process indicates that some RFI may persist, then there 
is still a last search technique that involves on-site measurement of microwave 

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
371
Figure 10.7  Example of an interference path study for a mountaintop microwave station and a well-shielded earth station antenna.

372 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
signals. The approach involves using a standard receive antenna connected to 
an LNA and portable microwave spectrum analyzer, and literally sniffing for 
signals at the desired location. The process is simplified because the direction to 
the terrestrial transmitters is known from recorded data. However, it is not un­
usual for unrecorded transmitters to be uncovered. The potential for the earth 
station transmitter to cause RFI to the terrestrial station cannot be assessed so 
easily with field measurement (unless the earth station is already installed or a 
temporary transmitter can be put in place). For the receive RFI case, the test an­
tenna should be raised to the same height as the installed earth station antenna. 
This in and of itself can be a challenge if the required antenna is of the 10-to-
20-m variety. Otherwise, the potential for interference cannot be adequately 
measured at the particular location.
For larger earth stations, the objective of the RF clearance process is to 
prove that the operation of the RF terminal will not cause or receive unaccept­
able interference under any condition. The ideal situation is to obtain this type 
of clearance for the full frequency spectrum (typically 500 MHz for uplink as 
well as downlink) and the full GEO arc (or hemisphere, as appropriate). There 
will be cases when this is not possible, due to presence of strong emitters in 
particular directions that enter through the earth station main beam or primary 
sidelobes. This could be cleared through local shielding or agreeing not to point 
the earth station in particular directions or additional filtering.
Figure 10.8  Example of an attractive and well-organized earth station site—Telenor’s tele­
port in Nittedal, which commuicates with radio, TV, telephone, and computer satellites. It is 
the biggest earth station in the Nordic region and has over 50 antennae. (Telenor Satellite 
Broadcasting.)

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
373
10.8  Facility Implementation Guidelines and Scheduling
Earth station facilities can be implemented in a variety of ways, such as an ad­
dition to an existing building or location or the implementation of a new earth 
station on relatively undeveloped land. Updating an existing building could be 
a simple task unless there is insufficient room and/or resources, such as power 
and HVAC. A new site and building are perhaps the greater challenge because, 
although we have the benefit of a clean sheet of paper, we start without a base of 
operations. In either case, the activity should be viewed as a project and deserves 
the same treatment as any such endeavor where money, time, and technical 
performance must be managed properly. To support a proper approach to these 
challenges, we offer the following discussion of project steps and a general esti­
mate of the timeline for its accomplishment. This should be taken as a guideline 
and it is appropriate to tackle this from a fresh perspective based on the specific 
technical and operation requirements, as well as the resources of the organiza­
tion taking this on.
We will assume that the technical requirements for the earth station are 
known and that the RF and baseband equipment have been identified and pos­
sibly sourced to manufactures and/or a system integrator. Likewise, the build­
ing has been defined along with the HVAC and electrical power, as discussed 
earlier in this chapter. From there, there will be an effort lasting approximately 
six months to one year (or longer) to take the design from paper to physical re­
alization and into operation. Specifics will depend on such matters as the scope 
and details of the technical requirements (number of uplinks, type of baseband 
system, and need for human O&M support). We must also consider the general 
nature of the services to be provided: a commercial facility to originate video 
will need to be attractive, as this would likely be visited by a variety of notables, 
while one used for government or military applications demands higher degrees 
of security (including operating in a hostile environment).
Table 10.4 provides steps in this process along with rough estimates of 
duration. Different activities and resources are needed for each step, and there 
will likely be decisions and costs associated with each. While this is a general 
overview of the process, it is recommended that there be a knowledgeable proj­
ect manager who develops and maintains the schedule and work assignments 
using a software tool such as Microsoft Project. Associated with the schedule 
of this project are the payments occurring at milestones in the process. This 
allows the buyer of the facility and overall earth station to closely manage and 
control progress, ensuring that the earth station will perform as expected when 
completed, and that the money expended will remain within the budget (or, 
if changes are needed, at least be within the bounds of reasonability). Most 
of the steps are sequential and depend on adequate completion of all prior 
steps. As indicated, a few can be conducted in parallel with prior steps. This 

374 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 10.4
Framework for an Earth Station Implementation Plan and Schedule 
Earth Station Project 
Activity
Portion of the Facility 
involved
Duration and Comments
Pre-Construction Phase
Requirements definition
Based on uses and applications, 
as well as network architecture 
and RF systems (satellite links, 
earth station characteristics, 
etc.). Consider which satellites 
are to be employed (orbit/
location, frequency band, 
coverage, performance, 
lifetime) and how the earth 
station will be incorporated into 
the overall system or network.
1 – 3 months; will be resolved 
through overall network 
architecture, systems 
engineering, and specification 
of earth station capability (EIRP, 
G/T, throughput, connectivity, 
etc.).
Engineering design and layout
RF and baseband systems and 
components; EIRP, G/T, and gain 
budgets; equipment lists and 
specifications; AC power HVAC 
requirements; initial site layout 
(antennas, building, generators, 
etc.) and floor plans.
1 – 6 months, depending on the 
scope, ability to use off-the-
shelf equipment (for purchase) 
or existing equipment. New 
development will require 
additional time.
Cost estimating
Based on the engineering 
design and layout; building 
requirements; other expenses 
to be incurred.
1 – 3 months. Can involve 
staff experts, equipment 
suppliers, and consultants with 
experience in the particular 
technology and facility.
Site selection and acquisition
For the expected general 
location but taking account of 
local conditions, accessibility, 
RFI, and needs of staff. 
Requires assurance by seller 
that an earth station will be 
allowed to operate.
1 – 3 months. Will involve 
site visits and surveys. Having 
at least one alternate site is 
recommended as the preferred 
site my fall out due to a 
variety of factors (purchase 
and development costs, 
environmental issues, etc.).
Licensing and permitting
Must be licensed to transmit 
by local country. Local building 
codes, etc., will require 
permitting. Environmental 
impact and other regulatory 
issues will need to be resolved.
3 – 6 months. Local experts, 
legal and engineering, should 
be engaged to insure that 
licenses and permits are 
obtained in a timely manner. 
Can be initiated before the site 
is acquired.
Floor plan
Draw the floor plan to 
accommodate equipment 
(inside and outside), people and 
anticipated growth.
Less than one month. Subject 
to review by stake holders 
(engineering, O&M, facilities 
staff, administration, etc.) and 
others.
Building design
Detailed architecture and 
engineering design.
1 – 6 months.

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
375
provides a starting point for a more detailed project timeline (Gantt chart), 
work breakdown structure (WBS), and allocation of resources among internal 
staff, vendors, and subcontractors. This should be prepared and maintained by 
the project manager throughout construction and until O&M takes over.
A simple addition of the best- and worst-case time durations might seem 
excessive (18 months to 3 years), but these durations have been experienced 
in the past. Specifics will depend on the size and complexity of the facility as 
well as its location. In the case of an existing building with adequate space, 
both the steps and the timeline can be reduced. Expanding an existing build­
ing and resources can represent as big a project as starting from scratch, and for 
this reason it makes sense to consider a new facility before committing to the 
Table 10.4  (continued)
Earth Station Project 
Activity
Portion of the Facility 
involved
Duration and Comments
Site Development
Ground breaking, site 
preparation and access roads
On-site work to prepare for 
construction of the building and 
facilities.
1 – 6 months. Will depend 
on location (developed or 
undeveloped area), size 
and scope of building, 
environmental impact.
Connections to local services 
(power, water, sewer, telecom, 
etc.)
Some of these connections 
will be required during 
construction, as determined by 
the construction manager or 
general contractor.
In parallel with building 
construction.
Construction
Building construction
To be performed by general 
contractor familiar with earth 
stations or similar technical 
facilities; buyer must actively 
monitor progress and release 
funds as milestones are 
completed.
3 – 6 months. Will depend 
on location (developed or 
undeveloped area), size 
and scope of building, 
environmental impact.
Installation of HVAC and 
electrical systems (UPS, 
generators, surge protection 
and electrical distribution); 
installation of grounding 
system and lightening 
protection
Evaluate local codes and 
standards for power and 
receptacles/plugs. Safety and 
lightening protection should 
be audited by experts. Test the 
HVAC and UPS for performance 
and reliability.
1 – 3 months. Can be in parallel 
with later stage of building 
construction.
Acceptance of building and 
associated facilities
Use a detailed test plan that 
considers every aspect of the 
building and facilities. This 
must consider the equipment 
and staff, as well as safety and 
reliability.
1 – 3 months before occupancy 
can be granted.

376 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
upgrade approach. A new facility begins with a clean sheet of paper and will 
be created on what is likely to be barren land. In some ways, this is easier that 
having to modify/expand an existing facility that happens to provide a good 
base of operations.
However done and whatever is included, the steps involved in Table 10.4 
will have to be performed methodically and in logical order, or they will happen 
by circumstance. In the latter case, the timeline (and cost) could expand and/or 
the ability of the earth station to meet its needs may be jeopardized. It’s a classic 
case of the adage, “Pay me now, or pay me later.”
Table 10.4  (continued)
Earth Station Project 
Activity
Portion of the Facility 
involved
Duration and Comments
Technical Facilities
Factory acceptance tests of 
technical equipment
Tests are performed at the 
vendor(s) locations (not on site) 
following manufacture and 
assembly.  Use test procedures 
in accordance with contract 
test requirements. Customer 
should witness critical 
performance tests.
1 – 3 months. Will be in parallel 
with building construction.
Transfer and delivery of 
technical equipment (RF and 
baseband)
Once testing is satisfactorily 
completed, all equipment is 
packed and shipped via the 
most reliable means (generally 
air) to the closest port of entry. 
From there, arrangements 
are made for delivery on site. 
Consider import issues such 
as customs clearance, freight 
forwarding and delivery on site.
1 – 3 months. Could extend 
longer if import issues arise.
Training of staff (at factory and 
on site)
The quantity and degree of 
training will depend on staff 
experience and their familiarity 
with the equipment and its 
operation.
On-going during earth station 
development. At vendor site, 
staff can train on equipment 
prior to shipment, and on 
site once it has completed 
acceptance testing. May 
require more fundamental 
satellite communications and 
operations training for new 
staff.
Installation of technical 
equipment on-site
Installation will be performed 
by a combination of vendor 
technicians and buyer staff 
(or third party contractor 
technicians).
1 – 6 months, depending on 
quantity and complexity of 
equipment and interconnection 
(wiring, cabling, testing 
facilities, data processing, etc.).

 
Earth Station Facility Design and Site Selection 
377
References
[1]	 Rees, Frank Jr., “Broadcast Facility Planning and Construction,” National Association of 
Broadcasters Engineering Handbook, 9th ed., Washington, D.C.: National Association of 
Broadcasters, 1999, p. 1423.
[2]	 Whitaker, Jerry C., “AC Power Conditioning,” National Association of Broadcasters Engi­
neering Handbook, 9th ed., p. 1427.
[3]	 Lewis, Bernard T., and J. P. Marron, Facilities and Plant Engineering Handbook, New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1973.
[4]	 DeWitt, W. E., “Facility Grounding Practices,” National Association of Broadcasters Engi­
neering Handbook, 9th ed., p. 1445.
Table 10.4  (continued)
Earth Station Project 
Activity
Portion of the Facility 
involved
Duration and Comments
Acceptance Testing
On-site testing of equipment
The installed technical 
system should be tested 
according to a pre-arranged 
test plan that verifies key 
specifications, proper operation 
of all elements and functions, 
terrestrial interfaces, and that 
the system can be maintained 
by staff.
1 – 3 months, depend 
depending on quantity and 
complexity of equipment 
and interconnection. These 
tests will often uncover 
defects in elements and their 
interconnection, potentially 
delaying initiation of service.
Testing over the satellite
Verify the performance and 
operation of the earth station 
over the assumed satellite or 
satellites. Will involve links 
to other earth stations and 
terminals.
1 week to 1 month
Testing end-to-end
Verify performance of the 
end-to-end service, based on 
anticipated applications and 
the expected loading of the 
earth station.
1 week to 1 month. Can take 
longer to resolve and correct 
functional or software issues.
Gearing up for the operation
The trained O&M staff will 
be briefed on all aspects of 
the earth station; their ability 
to perform the necessary 
duties will be evaluated—this 
may result in a combination 
of adjustments to the earth 
station configuration, additional 
training, and plans for modified 
hardware and software where 
needed.
1 week to 1 month. Operation 
may begin with vendor/
contractor personnel with staff 
observing and participating to 
the extent possible.

378 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
[5]	 Braithwaite, I., “Lightning Protection of Electronic Equipment: An Arms Length View,” 
IEEE International Conference on Electrical Installation Engineering in Europe, Confer­
ence Publication no. 375, 89 June 1993, Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, p. 
106.
[6]	 Ionna, Robert, “Carbon Footprint reductions for Data Centers,” Data center Dynamics, 
new York 2010, March 3, 2010.
[7]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 2d ed., Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 1999, p. 223.
[8]	 U.S. General Services Administration, “Facilities Standards for the Public Buildings Ser­
vice,” P100, November 2010, http://www.gsa.gov/graphics/pbs/2010_P100_Final.pdf.
[9]	 Colorado State University, “Construction Standards,” June 8, 2011, http://www.
fm.colostate.edu/construction/constr_standards.cfm.

379
11
Principles of Effective Operations and 
Maintenance
Once the earth stations and user terminals are installed and activated, it be­
comes the responsibility of the operations and maintenance (O&M) organiza­
tion to deliver the services and keep all ground systems in working order. In the 
analog past, most of the effort involved testing, tuning, repairing, and replacing 
components and subsystems; the conversion to digital technology eliminated 
much of the tuning and component repairs, but made some operations more 
complex through new optimization tools, service options and an ability to add 
new users on the fly. The title of this chapter refers to effective O&M; it is 
our objective to effectively address the needs of the operating station. In this 
context, better is the enemy of good enough. In other words, we need to work 
smart, doing the right job not just doing the job right.
A general architecture for modern satellite network management is il­
lustrated in Figure 11.1. From a user-terminal perspective, O&M is little more 
than applying power and making connections to end devices like personal com­
puters, set-top boxes, display systems, and digital telephones. As the size and 
complexity of the ground segment grows, O&M begins to look more like tele­
communications or IT network management than equipment maintenance. 
The testing requirements have also become complex because the data must 
be encrypted, compressed, and packetized. Also, there is heavy emphasis on 
software to configure equipment, control data flow, and manage the overall 
network.
Earth station O&M is central to the proper functioning of the entire 
network. Like the human body, health of the whole depends on health of the 
constituent parts. Network well-being is tied to the well-being of the earth sta­
tion (an operating organ), and the well-being of the earth station results from 

380 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
healthy components. The components covered in this chapter are addressed by 
the on-site O&M staff. Operations people with the aid of computers keep an 
active eye on things and are alerted to problems when they are still potentially 
minor in nature. Maintenance staff may not have the benefit of continuous or 
direct observation and so depend on operations for first indications. There is 
another player that may or may not even be on scene. The engineering func­
tion, which designs and installs the elements and subsystems of the station. Fi­
nally, the end user may be the first to experience what turns out to be an O&M 
issue. What we have is a partnership of these functions, each contributing to 
the overall success. However, this partnership does not happen automatically, 
as there is a normal tension between the four functions. Engineering takes re­
quirements primarily from outside the station (e.g., from the business side) and 
provides a solution. The operations staff has to take over control of this solution 
and, as we indicate later, is as much a customer of engineering as is the business 
side. Maintenance sits between engineering and operations, seeing both points 
of view. The maintenance staff’s technical competence will often be close to 
that of engineering, and so these staff members can (and do) take issue with 
the selected solution. They can also help operations understand the capability 
offered by the new system and adapt to it. Customers and users generally only 
care about results and not how they are obtained. But, knowledgeable and pow­
erful customers can encourage beter response to problems.
Figure 11.1  Modern satellite network management system. Management data flows over 
existing satellite paths (along with user data) as well as via alternate paths that will remain up 
in the event of satellite service failure.

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
381
Table 11.1 provides a summary of the main functional areas of an earth 
station and the issues involved with providing proper O&M. These are guide­
lines for planning purposes and are not intended as maintenance practices. 
Specific requirements and specifications would be found within the O&M 
documentation published by equipment manufacturers and software providers. 
These must be expanded and further developed by O&M staff on an ongoing 
basis, based on experience with the equipment and services at the particular site. 
The purpose of this table is to identify the differing O&M needs across systems 
of a typical earth station. As a result, staff training and assignment tend to be 
appropriately specialized.
From a staff perspective, the expertise of engineers and operators at a ma­
jor earth station correspond generally to the classes of equipment listed in Table 
11.1. Training programs (both formal classroom/laboratory and on the job) are 
usually focused in the areas shown. Overall exposure to the earth station only 
comes on the job, either by coaching or through daily work. This is why new 
staff work as apprentices to the seasoned engineers and managers who have suf­
ficient technical experience. The challenge is multiplied for any new installation 
because of limited exposure to the complete system and a lack of processes and 
procedures that mature and improve over time (which only happens if lessons 
learned are constantly identified and incorporated). Whether written or oth­
erwise, these processes and procedures are essential to consistent and effective 
O&M of the site and the overall network (particularly if the earth station is a 
central communications hub and network management node).
Much of what is provided in this chapter is based on personal experience 
along with that of professionals working in this field. In discussing this subject 
with real-world earth station engineers and O&M managers, we find consensus 
that earth stations are a demanding type of telecommunications facility. This 
is not difficult to understand: most large earth stations employ and depend 
upon customized systems of many types, along with the unique RF terminal 
and baseband equipment only employed in satellite applications. The people, 
services, and equipment that carry out the O&M function must act quickly and 
thoughtfully in all situations that arise during expected and unexpected events, 
staying focused on required technical tasks throughout all manner of distrac­
tions. Once a network of users depends on a satellite network, any failure of 
service can take with it the very means of communication needed to coordinate 
problem resolution, creating an additional imperative to keep all systems up.
11.1  Structure of Earth Station O&M
On any given day in the life of an earth station staff person, events are routine 
and probably nothing much happens. An exception is for video broadcast fa­

382 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 11.1
Earth Station O&M Requirements by Functional Area or Subsystem
Equipment
Characteristics
Operation 
Requirements
Maintenance 
Requirements*
Antenna system
Fixed pointing
Check operation
Periodic inspection and 
protective care
Tracking (limited 
motion, GEO)
Align on satellite and 
monitor performance; 
testing of tracking 
system
Periodic inspection, 
lubrication, cleaning, and 
protective care (painting, 
replacement of flex 
waveguides, waveguide 
pressurization filter element 
changing)
Tracking (full motion, 
GEO and non-GEO)
Configure for orbits 
(ephemeris), monitor 
tracking performance; 
testing of tracking 
system
Periodic inspection, 
lubrication, cleaning, and 
protective care (painting, 
replacement of flex 
waveguides, waveguide 
pressurization filter element 
changing)
RF terminal 
electronics
Solid-state 
electronics
Power On status, gain 
and level verification
Periodic inspection
TWT or klystron
High-voltage operation, 
redundancy switching
Performance measurement 
and periodic inspection; 
amplifier replacement; air 
filters
IF chain
Proper configuration and 
function
Monitoring and periodic 
inspection and testing
Modem
Continuous, low and 
medium speed
Power on status; initial 
acquisition; BER
Performance measurement 
and periodic inspection
TDMA, medium and 
high speed
Power on status; 
acquisition; burst 
operation; BER
Performance measurement, 
periodic inspection and tests
Baseband 
processing and 
multiplex
Constant bit rate, 
TDM
Configuration for 
services; monitor status
Periodic inspection; 
replacement of boards
Variable bit rate, 
TDMA
Configuration for 
services; network 
operation; monitor status
Periodic inspection; 
replacement of boards
Packet switching 
(routing)
Configuration for 
services; routing 
tables; monitor status, 
performance, and 
congestion
Periodic inspection; detailed 
load testing; replacement of 
boards
Matrix switches
Identify failure modes 
and poor performance
Check full range of operations 
yearly

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
383
cilities where short-term program feeds are uplinked or downlinked on short 
notice. Even in the latter case, modern facilities are programmed to operate 
more or less automatically. The result is that experience in earth station O&M 
is rather like a soldier in ground combat long periods of boredom punctuated 
by moments of stark terror (an exaggeration, of course, but to the point). In 
fact, a military organization provides an excellent example of how the people 
and equipment systems need to be organized. 
Table 11.1  (continued)
Equipment
Characteristics
Operation 
Requirements
Maintenance 
Requirements*
Computers and 
peripherals
Servers and RAID 
drivers
Computer administration 
according to operating 
system requirements; 
configuration of 
databases and 
application programs 
per the operating need; 
control of access lists; 
software updates
Periodic inspection; 
replacement of boards; 
installation of software 
patches and upgrades, as 
required; filter replacement
Workstations and 
monitors
User operation according 
to operating system 
requirements
Periodic inspection; software 
upgrades as required; 
attention to peripherals
Video monitoring Video monitors
For continuously 
operating monitors, 
gradual degradation of 
quality
Periodic replacement
Monitor and 
control
Internal M&C system
Operation of earth 
station equipment from 
central location
Periodic inspection; software 
modification as required
External M&C 
system
Operation of network of 
earth stations or user 
terminals
Similar to computer system 
maintenance
Facilities 
systems
Power systems
Monitor performance; 
checking and testing 
of UPS
Frequent inspection and 
load testing; replacement of 
filters, lubrication and other 
maintenance according to 
supplier recommendations; 
routine generator and fuel 
supply maintenance; UPS 
battery testing, servicing, and 
replacement; power panel 
inspection and testing
HVAC
Monitor of HVAC system 
operation
Periodic inspections; 
alignments as required to 
provide temperature balance; 
filter replacement; lubrication
Building
Monitor for leaks and 
other problems
Perform repairs as needed, 
immediately when needed
*These are general guidelines; appropriate manuals from equipment manufacturers should be consulted for specif­
ics. Further guidelines are provided in Table 11.2.

384 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
11.1.1  Operations Organization
The operations portion refers to the human and machine aspects of control­
ling the equipment within the earth station and to which the earth station 
is connected (whether directly or over the satellite network). People involved 
with operations need to understand the functions associated with the systems, 
not necessarily how they work (and don’t work). Good operations people can 
understand much about the systems they operate and manage, but their focus is 
on the services the earth station provides or controls. The maintenance portion, 
on the other hand, tends to be very technical in nature. These staff must under­
stand how the various components are connected together, how they function 
individually and as a system, and the normal and abnormal behavior thereof. 
As an analogy in ground transportation systems, the bus is operated by a driver 
but maintained by the garage mechanic, jobs that are very different in terms of 
training and activity.
Operations covers most daily activities, like monitoring signals and acti­
vating services, checking for continued performance from the RF equipment 
and antenna, and response to alarms. Maintenance is called upon when re­
quired. Management of this function requires a good understanding of the rou­
tine nature of the job along with its value to the enterprise. A high degree of 
esprit de corps is essential. In the end, service to users is mediated by the opera­
tions group, not by maintenance or even engineering. Engineering must sell off 
any new capability to operations. Being able to reject a project is one important 
power that operations must retain. Engineering has to have a strong hand, but 
the enterprise will not reach its goals (such as making money) without ongoing 
operations. However, operations staff need to be careful in applying this power. 
In summary, tension exists and there must be a balance of authority among 
engineering, operations, and maintenance, and this must be shared effectively 
and constructively.
11.1.2  Preventive Maintenance Scheduling and Conduct
One of the most important skills of O&M staff is to be able to identify and 
troubleshoot problems quickly, before they expand into service disruption or 
major failure of ground or even on-board satellite equipment. Inexperienced 
and/or ill-equipped maintenance staff will ignore or identify the wrong source 
of the problem; in doing so, they can allow the problem to remain and even 
multiply. Some guidelines and organizational approaches to preventive and cor­
rective maintenance are offered in the following subsections.
Modern telecommunications systems used to process video channels, 
switch telephone calls, and route information over the Internet are inherently 
reliable and maintainable through computerized control systems. In satellite 
communications, preventive maintenance tends to be as complex as the design 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
385
of the systems themselves: different manufacturers have supplied hardware and 
software, and interfaces are often proprietary in nature. Similar requirements 
for user terminals, particularly VSATs, may be difficult because of the special­
ized nature of these devices coupled with the geographic area of the network. 
Success in this field demands a well-thought-out plan and a capable organiza­
tion (which can use outside groups under contract). The plan should define 
responsibilities for maintenance functions, the specialized systems needed to 
facilitate O&M, and the processes to be used during routine activity (nonrou­
tine activity is covered in the next section).
Table 11.2 provides a framework for developing a strategy for consistent 
and effective preventive maintenance of a major earth station facility (user ter­
minals are discussed in Section 11.3). Even though the typical earth station 
is composed of equipment from several suppliers, we can assume that some 
type of centralized M&C system is installed and functioning properly, usually 
operated by the operations side of the organization. The best time to install an 
M&C system is when the earth station is established in the first place. This can 
be done using an integrated approach (common in VSAT hubs and MSS gate­
way stations) or with a custom-designed system to support equipment supplied 
by different vendors. Older facilities can be fitted with a new M&C capability, 
provided that the original equipment can be operated remotely. This may still 
require a significant investment for special controllers, software, as well as a 
LAN to provide the necessary intercommunication.
Routine preventive maintenance is a team effort of the O&M staff (with 
engineering, marketing, and management playing a supportive role). By defini­
tion, the station is just one single point failure away from total customer dissat­
isfaction. Operations personnel can handle activities that are performed more 
frequently. This includes routine measurements that can be performed remotely 
using standard measurement and test facilities, along with simple maintenance 
actions like replacing air filters and adjusting power levels. The two most im­
portant places of standard test equipment, the oscilloscope and spectrum ana­
lyzer, are presented and compared in Figure 11.2. These are the critical eyes for 
examining signals and their interaction.
More recently, important RF test and measurement functions have been 
incorporated into handheld devices that are battery powered. As indicated in 
Figure 11.3, Agilent provides several models in the same compact package. 
These are used extensively and have replaced many of the older “luggable” or 
“rollable” pieces of test equipment that still exist but cannot be moved about 
freely. Functions include spectrum analysis, vector scopes, RFI searches, micro­
wave measurements such as S-parameters, and Smith charts, and power mea­
surements. Calibration can be accomplished using an internal standard thus 
avoiding the need to send instruments in for frequent recalibration.

386 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Table 11.2
Preventive Maintenance Plan Structure for a Major Earth Station Facility Used as a VSAT Hub 
with Internal Monitor and Control (M&C) System
Major Section
Type of Preventive 
Maintenance
Frequency*
Typical Activity+
Outdoor RF 
equipment
Inspection and 
performance 
verification
Daily (Opns 
responsibility)
Correct beam alignment and 
gain; keep foundations clean 
and clear of debris
Thorough test 
(requiring taking 
the antenna out of 
service)
Quarterly
Assess gain and polarization 
degradation; prevent moisture 
buildup leading to damage to 
waveguide; power wash and 
paint reflectors as needed
Lubrication and 
surface restoral
Annual
Same as quarterly testing; 
detect change in mechanical 
and RF performance; remove 
caked lubricant and check for 
wear
Monitoring of 
performance though 
M&C system
Continuous (Opns 
responsibility)
Detect any drop in transmit 
and receive power; frequency 
instability; monitor for loss of 
service
HPA inspection
Monthly
Measure power output at unit; 
inspect high-voltage power 
supply and connections, front 
and back; sweep KPAs and 
TWTs
LNA, LNB, up-, and 
downconverter
Monthly
Inspect LNA and feed for rust, 
fungus, etc.; visual inspection of 
connections; record noise floor
RF and IF backup 
equipment
Monthly
Verify function; check and 
replace filters and other 
consumables as needed
Performance check: 
EIRP and G/T
Annual
Perform measurement of RFT 
characteristics using calibrated 
satellite carrier and/or test loop 
translator (TLT)
Replace TWT or 
klystron
As and when 
required
Typically every three years, 
depending on loading and 
cycling
Baseband section
Monitoring of 
performance 
through network 
management or 
M&C
Continuous (Opns 
responsibility)
Measuring acquisition time, bit 
error rate (BER), lost frames and 
packets, time delay, dropped 
connections, availability, mean 
time, time to repair, etc.
Detecting failed or 
degraded boards
As required
Based on internal fault 
monitoring and troubleshooting 
capability

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
387
Maintenance engineers who have a detailed understanding of such de­
vices and equipment failure modes and immediate corrective actions can per­
form tasks that require a significant effort or may involve taking something 
out of service. One thing that is of paramount importance is that all of the 
staff communicate with one another about what is or is not working correctly 
and any actions that were or should be taken. The best attitude to develop is 
Table 11.2  (continued)
Major Section
Type of Preventive 
Maintenance
Frequency*
Typical Activity
Computers and 
operating systems
Performance 
monitoring and load 
balancing
Continuous (Opns 
responsibility)
Based on internal CPU and LAN 
monitor and control system
Routine maintenance 
of hardware and 
software
Periodic
According to manufacturer 
recommendations
Power and UPS
Monitoring of UPS, 
power and  HVAC 
systems
Continuous (Opns 
responsibility)
Based on facility design, using 
centralized monitor system
Routine maintenance 
of general plant 
and equipment, 
especially 
generators and fuel 
tanks
Periodic
According to manufacturers and 
special requirements of this 
location (e.g., tropical, arctic, 
or desert)
*These frequencies are for illustrative purposes, to gain an understanding of the relative timing of maintenance.
+Specific and appropriate values should be obtained from the relevant equipment suppliers.
Figure 11.2  Standard test equpiment for use in time domain and frequency domain analysis.

388 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
that operations is the primary customer of maintenance (not only a source of 
irritation).
11.1.3  Corrective Maintenance
“Corrective maintenance” is a nice way of referring to the act of fixing things 
that are broken. In satellite communications, there are countless ways for fail­
ures to occur—we could say that Murphy’s Law was really written around our 
industry. The good news is that the simplicity of satellite footprints and links 
can overcome the technical complexity of the components and systems that we 
need to meet service obligations. Within a common footprint everything that is 
going on can be monitored from one or a few locations to more easily identify 
and remove the cause in a short time frame. Our M&C capabilities are now so 
good that much of the corrective maintenance action is accomplished online, 
sometimes without human intervention (but always with humans being in­
formed and involved). Multiple spot beam satellites tend to increase complexity 
as there are more connection points distributed over the service area.
It can be hard to define the requirements, processes, and skills needed for 
effective corrective maintenance. In virtually every real earth station facility this 
author has either managed or visited, the quality and experience of the staff were 
the most important success factors. Some years ago, COMSAT embarked on 
a project called the Unattended Earth Terminal (UET), the objective of which 
Figure 11.3  Innovative handheld test devices that provide many important measurements 
features. (Source: Agilent Technologies.)

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
389
was to create earth stations and associated facilities that could be governed en­
tirely through remote M&C capabilities. Efforts like this greatly improved the 
state of the art for centralized management and even corrective maintenance in 
some cases. However, experience continues to show that earth stations serving 
a large user community will require 24-hour attention and immediate on-call 
maintenance staff. The people who have this charge need the appropriate skill 
level, supporting test equipment and spare parts to perform earth station main­
tenance in a professional and timely manner.
The timeliness of maintenance response to failure contributes greatly to 
the overall availability of the operating facility. The outage percentage is gov­
erned by the mean time to between failure (MTBF) and the mean time to repair 
(MTTR). The electronics and mechanical components that make up a given 
device combine to yield the MTBF for that element of the earth station; the 
manner in which devices connect together and how redundancy is introduced 
yield MTBF for the entire station. The failure rate is simply the inverse of the 
MTBF and follows the classic “bathtub curve” illustrated in Figure 11.4. We see 
high rates of failure during the first months and year due to “infant mortality” 
weaknesses in parts and manufacture that first show up. Later, the device stabi­
lizes and the failure rate drops to its lowest where it more or less remains for an 
extended duration of healthy service. Finally, critical elements exhibit wear-out 
such as due to oxidation, depletion of material, repetitive motion or exposure 
to the environment, and the like. This final phase of equipment lifetime brings 
with it more frequent failures requiring more attention. Along with this, the 
equipment item is probably not supported by the manufacturer and parts may 
no longer be available. A strategy often followed in later years is to have a col­
lection of units that can be cannibalized for necessary parts.
MTTR, on the other hand, relates to how fast the right resource can be 
put in place to troubleshoot the problem and execute repair action. Local staff 
Figure 11.4  Classical “bathtub curve” that presents teh failure rate of a given piece of elec­
tronic equipment over its operating lifetime.

390 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
can accomplish this fairly quickly, but a technician not on site must first be no­
tified and then travel (with the correct provisions) to the required location. The 
author has experience with the latter operating within the United States and it 
was surprising how effective a reasonably sized staff of good technicians can be 
in maintaining a network of earth stations within the continental United States, 
providing high availability with MTTR of 4 to 8 hours. One the other hand, 
we have dealt with a situation where the earth station was on a remote Pacific 
Ocean island and even with the technician available on site, action was delayed 
until the parts and the correct piece of test equipment could be delivered by a 
scheduled airline flight (operating twice a week). If the remote location is well 
established, then possibly local resources could be employed. The windings of 
a motor used for antenna motion blew at a site on Guam and the technician 
found an electric motor repair facility on the island where the rewinding could 
be accomplished.
A suggested overall strategy for corrective maintenance is given in Table 
11.3. Some specific troubleshooting guidelines are provided in section 11.1.3.2. 
Probably the most interesting and challenging aspect of this issue is problem 
source identification. Just how urgently one moves from examination to action 
depends on the degree of knowledge of the problem/solution as well as the se­
riousness of the service disruption itself.
The mechanical and microwave components of the antenna system are 
frequent causes of service difficulties. For this reason, there must always be 
someone either on site or readily available who knows the equipment and cor­
rective actions that can be applied quickly. As potentially the weakest link in 
the system, the antenna deserves both the attention of the maintenance staff 
and the realization from management that the delivery of services is completely 
dependent on proper RF performance. Antennas with autotracking are a fre­
quent cause of difficulty and for this reason the M&C system must include 
antenna operation as a central feature. Troubleshooting procedures are usually 
not offered by the antenna manufacturer, so the team must develop their own 
approaches for identifying and resolving problems. This depends on the experi­
ence base of staff coupled with what has been learned at the particular site. It 
is always beneficial to log corrective actions for review and inclusion in a pro­
cedures manual.
Outages may occur due to outdoor RF electronics attached to the antenna 
structure or located immediately adjacent to it. As we discussed in the last chap­
ter, the people who take corrective actions must have safe and convenient access 
to high-power and high-voltage parts of the RFT. This author had the experi­
ence of having to work on the RF electronics within a poorly designed equip­
ment container during a heavy rainstorm. The only solution was to quickly 
construct a crude tent over the container so that it could be opened safely. 
Working in pairs is another requirement when examining TWT and klystron 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
391
Table 11.3
Selected Corrective Maintenance Activities, Required Skill Levels, and Supporting Facilities
Symptoms
Possible Action*
Performed by
Support Equipment or 
System Required
Loss of RF link
Restore pointing 
toward GEO satellite 
(or tracking system 
operation for non-GEO 
large antenna or 
constellation)
RF maintenance 
(electronic/mechanical 
engineering)
Antenna control unit 
(ACU) adjustment; 
manual antenna mount 
adjustment; repair or 
replacement of motors, 
servo system or ACU
Troubleshoot poor 
receive performance; 
identify failed unit, 
such as LNA or 
upconverter
RF maintenance 
(electronic engineering)
Detailed measurements 
of C/N using spectrum 
analyzer, RF power 
meter, frequency 
counter, etc.
Loss of uplink signal, 
as measured at distant 
site; isolate down to 
the HPA and determine 
which component to 
adjust or replace
Network control and RF 
maintenance
Detailed measurement 
of C/N at distant site; 
use of local RF test 
equipment to verify loss 
of uplink power; failure 
of amplifier may require 
replacement of TWT or 
SSPA module
RF interference
Check polarization and 
adjust for minimum 
interference
Operations
Spectrum analyzer or 
power meter
Check for adjacent 
satellite interference
Operations, in 
cooperation with network 
control
Spectrum analyzer
Check for terrestrial 
interference
Operations and 
maintenance, supported 
by engineering
Spectrum analyzer and 
test antenna
Unstable service 
performance
Troubleshoot poor link 
BER or synchronization; 
replacement of circuit 
boards or entire unit
Baseband engineer or 
datacomm specialist
BER test set, spectrum 
analyzer, end user 
equipment
Restore service 
to remote sites 
due to inadequate 
performance of link 
or end-user service; 
replacement of circuit 
boards or entire 
unit; remote device 
replacement from 
stock
Network control or 
management, aided by 
field repair staff and 
RF maintenance (if 
necessary)
BER test set, spectrum 
analyzer, end user 
equipment

392 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
HPAs, since the high voltages involved represent a serious danger. There was a 
death at an earth station where the unfortunate individual was working alone 
on an HPA.
Modem and baseband equipment are typically supported by the M&C 
and network management systems, allowing staff to identify the nature of the 
problem and correct it in an online fashion. On the other hand, the complex 
nature of the hardware and software within these systems sometimes makes the 
problem difficult to identify and resolve. The key here is to know the system 
intimately and to have at least some channels of redundancy to permit com­
parisons and changeouts as part of the troubleshooting process. The software 
and firmware in these systems quite frequently must be rebooted in the process, 
which can cause a problem in one area to propagate across a much larger range 
of services. The same can be said of the computers and their operating systems, 
which control and manage baseband equipment and user access. One useful 
tool is to employ webcams that can point to potential problem spots.
Facilities, particularly electrical power and UPS, represent a potential 
weak link within the earth station service chain. This system is designed to pro­
vide reliable and stable power to the critical electronics throughout the facility; 
certain types of failures will be corrected automatically if the system is working 
Table 11.3  (continued)
Symptoms
Possible Action*
Performed by
Support Equipment or 
System Required
Failure of control 
functions
Conventional 
computer hardware 
troubleshooting; 
replacement of 
components or entire 
CPU; upgrading to 
latest software version 
if necessary
Computer support 
engineers; network 
administrator
Computer systems 
management interface; 
protocol analyzer
Network management 
or M&C software 
failure
Network operations and 
computer support
Network management 
and computer systems 
management interface
Power disruption
Specialized 
troubleshooting 
and repair of UPS 
electronics, switching, 
battery systems, etc.
Facilities engineering, 
aided by UPS on-call 
expertise
Power monitoring 
and management 
(particularly alarm 
systems); generator 
repair
Environmental 
failure
Identification of nature 
and source of difficulty 
(e.g., HVAC system)
Facilities engineering
Temperature and 
humidity monitoring 
system
Building problems 
affecting operations or 
personnel safety
Facilities engineering
Water leakage, broken 
systems, cracks, etc.
*For example only; specific recommendations should be obtained for manufacturer or supplier 
documentation. Some suggestions for troubleshooting are given in Table 11.5.

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
393
correctly. Every facility that this author is aware of has had at least one failure of 
the combined power and UPS system, requiring some form of quick action. Of­
ten, this is due to a component failure, or an external cause, such as a very heavy 
rainstorm or fire. Sometimes it is human error during routine maintenance or 
installation of new equipment (including modifications to the power system it­
self). Such situations of increased risk should justify adding a temporary second 
level of backup, such as a mobile generator or alternate connection to the local 
power grid. Problems with or failure of the HVAC system (including the loss 
of power) produces discomfort for staff and a potential for equipment failure in 
time. These types of events may be uncontrollable and unpredictable, but cor­
rective maintenance actions must be directed toward a solution.
Fairly routinely, the same staff involved with preventive maintenance 
can be called upon for corrective action when needed, since they are in rela­
tive proximity to problems when they occur. The trend toward fully integrated 
M&C systems reduces some skill levels for preventive maintenance, which may 
work against the corrective side of O&M. An approach to this problem might 
be to provide more in the way of active standby equipment and software, rely­
ing less on the staff to provide the direct fix to the problem. The cost of doing 
this must be traded off against that of hiring and training experts who can react 
like paramedics and doctors in the medical profession.
An important source of formal education and training is that provided by 
the equipment manufacturers for the RF and baseband portions of typical earth 
stations. These courses are directed toward the particular pieces of equipment, 
but vendors often put their devices in context in an overall network or earth sta­
tion. The difficulty that management has is to select the most effective courses 
and provide them within an overall framework. In this manner, a particular 
course will provide the maximum benefit. For example, it makes no sense to 
send a new technician to a specialized course on TWT power amplifier mainte­
nance until he or she has been introduced to the RF uplink configuration, types 
of amplifiers, and the principles of the gain budget (covered in Chapter 7).
Recruiting and training appropriate maintenance staff are decided chal­
lenges in our fast-moving industry. Training curricula that are specifically de­
signed for satellite communications engineers and maintenance specialists are 
lacking. This is unlike the situation of standardized computer networking sys­
tems, like the highly recognized certificated programs of Novell, Microsoft, and 
Cisco Systems. For some years, Applied Technology Institute (ATI) has pro­
vided more specialized sequences in satellite communications engineering, sys­
tems engineering, antennas, and the like. These training approaches are good in 
that they deliver technical content. However, what they cannot readily provide 
is actual field experience with real-world problems and issues that arise every 
day and every year for operators of satellite communications earth stations and 
networks. For this reason, it is always advisable to seek out competent outside 

394 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
technical resources among the equipment suppliers, system integrators, and 
consultants who address satellite communications.
11.1.3.1  Recordkeeping of Configuration and Maintenance
Once an earth station is put into service, the thought of keeping detailed re­
cords seems bureaucratic and unimportant. However, the lack of adequate doc­
umentation from the beginning and throughout the operating life of the facility 
will be detrimental to reliable operation. The same goes for the situation where 
the station needs to be modified or updated to address new requirements and 
replacement of components that reach obsolescence. As the title of this section 
states, recordkeeping relates to the configuration of the station and its equip­
ment and to the conduct of maintenance activities. It is much like how you 
treat a vehicle that begins its life as a new and shinny object with essentially no 
wear. The manufacturer provides that neat little book that identifies what main­
tenance is needed and when, and it is your job to follow this script. If you were 
to purchase a used vehicle, it would be very desirable to have the book with the 
proper stamps for maintenance performed and supported by the actual work 
orders. This leaves almost nothing to chance or the imagination.
What is different about an earth station is that unlike most vehicles, it is 
a custom design that is composed of elements obtained from many different 
sources. As we discussed previously in this chapter, the maintenance require­
ments differ among the elements and must be addressed both on a routine basis 
and in response to failures or anomalies that have a negative impact on service. 
The first aspect of recordkeeping relates to the configuration of the earth station 
resulting from the initial construction and production of the earth station along 
with any changes over time to the design or interconnection of the important 
components. In some industries, this is called “configuration control”, more 
recently extended to “configuration management”. This can be as simple or 
as complicated as you want to make it. But, some basic level of configuration 
control is essential so that those who need to know will have available up-to-
date and accurate paper (or electronic) definition of what is there and how it is 
supposed to work. As stated, the first point of departure is the documents that 
are delivered with the equipment and the entire station if it is provided by a 
system integrator. Figure 11.5 presents an example of an as-built block diagram 
of the RF terminal of a C-band station. Along with it are photos of the exterior 
and interior. Such images, here taken with the now ubiquitous digital camera 
or smart phone, provide a record and should be added to over time preferably 
from original sources to maintain a complete picture, so to speak. Proper engi­
neering design, installation, and maintenance will result in an attractive facility 
(in the eyes of engineers and technicians at the least), and by displaying these 
on a Web site helps encourage the same. Furthermore, block and level diagrams, 
procedures, lists, photos, and other records must be up to date and accurately 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
395
reflect what is installed and operating. Otherwise, the wrong inferences and 
steps are likely to be taken.
The second aspect of recordkeeping addresses the maintenance of the sta­
tion, covering scheduled routine maintenance as well as any maintenance ac­
tions that were needed to restore from a failure or other problem. So, we need 
a plan for scheduled maintenance, like those shown in Tables 11.1 and 11.2, 
which are prepared expressly for this station and the equipment within it. Since 
configurations change, the maintenance actions that are required will change 
as well. It includes periodic inspections as well as maintenance such as lubrica­
tion, calibration, filter replacement, and functional testing. This is the place 
for ongoing documents that contain lists of routine actions and the results, 
maintained for easy access during completion and afterward for review and 
analysis of trends. Some of this data can be obtained from software systems used 
for M&C and operational control. Others will be manually recorded by staff. 
In either case, they are useful for trending, design of station upgrades, and for 
troubleshooting (discussed next).
11.1.3.2  Troubleshooting Techniques
Earth station maintenance and, importantly, the troubleshooting process are 
skills acquired by experience and aided by a variety of test equipment and de­
vices. We have emphasized the importance of knowing what the earth station 
contains and how it functions; lacking this, staff cannot efficiently troubleshoot 
a problem. The question is always, “Where is it?” followed by the next question, 
“What is causing it?” There is always talk of software called an “expert system,” 
Figure 11.5  Example of as-built drawing and images of an earth station facility.

396 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
but this is nothing more than a collection of previously known methods de­
scribed by those who have been through it before. If you know your system, 
you can certainly create checklists that you and others can follow in the event 
of repeatable issues. But, it’s the problem that you have not experienced before 
that poses the greatest challenge (remember Murphy’s law).
Troubleshooting methodology follows a well-known sequence of steps of 
investigation, analysis, and implementation, as suggested here by the Princeton 
University Office of Information Technology [8]:
• Investigation
• Problem statement: Create a clear, concise statement of the problem.
• Problem description: Identify the symptoms. What works? What 
doesn’t?
• Identify differences and changes: What has changed recently? What 
is unique about this system?
• Analysis
• Brainstorm: Gather hypotheses: What might have caused the prob­
lem?
• Identify likely causes: Which hypotheses are most likely?
• Test possible causes: Schedule the testing for the most likely hypoth­
eses. Perform any nondisruptive testing immediately.
• Implementation
• Implement the fix: Complete the repair.
• Verify the fix: Is the problem really fixed?
• Document the resolution: What did we do? Get a sign-off from the 
system owner.
These steps, if followed, can resolve the issue and put in place a means 
of avoidance in the future. However, the devil is very much in the details and 
the process cannot be accomplished in a generic fashion. Instead, we must rely 
on our understanding of the technology and systems in operation at the earth 
station and over the satellite path. For that reason, we need to employ and un­
derstand the devices to provide the data for the first major step: investigation. 
Table 11.4 provides a detailed list of test equipment (including those in Figure 
11.2) and other devices that may be found in the earth station and are useful 
for troubleshooting problems.
Gathering the data for analysis can be time consuming and complex; 
therefore, it makes a lot of sense to have a trouble ticket system with searchable 
database (small operations can use a spreadsheet) and a plan of regular recorded 
checks of important parameters (for instance, uplink power). Associated with 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
397
Table 11.4 
Examples of Test Equipment and Other Devices that Are Useful for Troubleshooting 
Problems Encountered in the Operation of an Earth Station or Satellite Network
•
• Spectrum analyzer
•
• Microwave band (RF)
•
• L-band and below (IF)
•
• Oscilloscope
•
• Bit error rate test set (BERTS)
•
• Vector scope (to observe modulation constellation)
•
• Network analyzer (microwave parameters)
•
• Waveguide devices
•
• Directional coupler (power measurement)
•
• Hybrid (power divider and combiner)
•
• Thermistor power detector (measure RF power)
•
• Test loop translator (TLT)
•
• Radiometer system (space noise temperature, an optional measurement requiring 
careful calibration)
•
• Time domain reflectometer (TDR), to indicate breaks or kinks in transmission line
•
• Waveguide (microwave)
•
• Cable (RF and IF)
•
• Optical
•
• Spectrum analyzer
•
• Microwave band (RF)
•
• L-band and below (IF)
•
• Single measurement instruments
•
• Volt-ohm meter (VOM)
•
• Power meter (RF)
•
• Frequency meter
•
• Protocol analyzer
•
• Physical and Layer 2 (Ethernet)
•
• Layer 3 and Layer 4 (routing)
•
• Application layer testing
•
• Mock applications (based on existing and planned applications)
•
• Embedded scripts (simulation of actions and programs)
•
• Daemons (embedded processes that inject test files and measure 
performance)
•
• Power quality analyzer (AC)
•
• Measure standard electrical (AC) parameters, single-phase, two-phase, and 
three-phase
•
• Harmonics
•
• Voltage sags and swells
•
• Transients and inrush current
•
• Oscilloscope or specialized computer to capture events

398 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
this, one wants to have the right equipment already positioned and some staff 
who are familiar with its proper use. It also makes sense to conduct trouble­
shooting exercises where problems are simulated and the methodology refined 
within the organization. Technicians know how to exercise the equipment and 
collect data: engineers know how to think about problems and various solutions 
that can be tried. The idea is to bring these basic skills together in a positive, 
collaborative environment. The most powerful approach is to have frequent 
meetings with those involved to share data and ideas. Thanks to IT networks 
and collaboration tools like Microwoft SharePoint and LiveMeeting, everyone 
can contribute and follow up even if not physically on-site.
It makes sense to identify early on the possible sources of problems within 
the earth station environment. These usual suspects are listed in Table 11.5 
Don’t assume that the cause is on this list but create an appropriate list to col­
lect those sources that are the reasonable culprits. One amusing example can 
be taken from the original research into pulsars, those sources of pulsing light 
or other radiation deep in the galaxy. Various ideas were examined, and at the 
bottom of the list was what the astrophysicists called the “ultimate cop-out”: 
extraterrestrial life. This possibility once arose when a C-band satellite experi­
enced interference only in the eastern half of the United States. An errant satel­
lite was drifting past a particular orbit position. The examples in Table 11.5 are 
a point of departure for thought and consideration now and when problems 
occur. It is useful to consider which indications could be related to each other 
(i.e., problems that come in pairs as opposed to those that occur individually).
11.2  Earth Station Alignment with the Satellite
Satellite transmissions can be received readily using the various forms of ground 
antennas discussed in previous chapters. This amounts to locating the satellite 
with respect to the point on the earth, pointing the antenna in the correct direc­
tion (assuming we are using a directional antenna), adjusting the pointing and 
polarization for maximum received signal strength and minimum interference, 
and adjusting the receiving chain for proper detection and operation of the ser­
vice. When we are speaking of a transmitting earth station or user terminal, we 
must take many additional precautions to provide the proper signal through the 
satellite and to the receiving terminal, and protect the operation of the satellite 
and overall network from harmful RF interference. Experience has shown that 
the best way to accomplish this is through a centralized network operation facil­
ity that has the following capabilities:
• Can maintain direct communication and remain in contact with all 
transmitting earth stations, both at the time of initiation of service and 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
399
throughout the service period. This can be done manually using human 
operators or in an online fashion over the network.
• Can monitor transmissions through the satellite to assure signal quality 
and to identify the possibility or existence of RF interference.
• Can control transmitting stations so that interference can be removed 
as quickly as possible. This control can be exercised manually by human 
communication or directly via a network. In the latter case, it is best if 
the network used for this control is separate from the satellite network 
Table 11.5 
Possible Sources of Issues and Outages at Earth Stations*
Issue
Portion of the Earth Station
Possible Causes
Loss of uplink carrier 
(reported by satellite 
operator)
RF terminal, transmit section
HPA failure or loss of AC power; 
antenna mispoint; break in 
waveguide; loss of drive carrier 
from uplink
Loss of downlink carrier 
(loss of lock in demodulator 
or disappearance from 
spectrum display)
RF terminal, receive section
LNB failure or loss of power; 
antenna mispoint; break in 
waveguide; remote uplink site 
went down
Demodulator loses lock
RF terminal or baseband 
equipment, receive section; uplink 
site or satellite issue
Loss of uplink or downlink 
carrier
End user complains of loss 
of service
Any place in the RF or baseband 
section, as well as the terrestrial 
interface and tail connection to 
end user
Isolate to earth station, 
terrestrial interface, or tail 
connection
Link is working but BER 
increases to unacceptable 
level
Any place in the RF or baseband 
section or on the satellite path
Uplink power has dropped (at 
remote site if problem is with 
local reception); moisture in 
waveguide; aging of amplifier; 
transponder loading; radio 
frequency interference (RFI); 
transponder overload;
Link is working but service 
is taking hits or dropouts
Any place in the RF or baseband 
section or on the satellite path
RFI: local to the earth station or 
possibly on the satellite; EMI 
within the earth station due 
to leaks or breaks in cables or 
equipment cases
Antenna unexpectedly 
moves off of the satellite 
RF terminal, especially the tracking 
antenna
Anomaly within the antenna 
control unit (ACU); may relate to 
repointing action with satellite 
motion
Undervoltage condition at 
equipment racks or UPS
Electrical power, including UPS and 
distribution
Deterioration of electrical 
connections or unexpected load 
within the station or vicinity
*This table is provided for thought and cannot be considered to be all-inclusive.

400 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
being controlled (so that RF link loss or interference does not block 
management actions).
The type of facility that provides all of these functions is shown in Figure 
11.6. We see here the consoles used to monitor signals over the satellite links, 
workstations with computers and telephones used for various forms of com­
munication and analysis. Network control staff perform the real-time actions 
that maintain services and respond to situations involving RF interference and 
other problems that arise from time to time. In this world of computer automa­
tion and instant communication, much activity can be performed by software 
and monitoring systems. The people, however, oversee this automation and are 
available at all times when the unexpected occurs.
Along with the network, major earth stations are under local human con­
trol as well. The procedure or protocol that they follow includes human con­
versation with network control, according to a script that is either written down 
or understood by virtue of experience with the overall operation. For example, 
when a transmitting TV earth station needs to bring up a carrier on the satel­
lite, the network control function must first establish the authenticity of this 
operator. Then and only then can the process move through the predetermined 
steps of qualifying the earth station and aligning the signals through the satellite 
Figure 11.6  Network operations group of a satellite operator, the control point for access 
to satellite transponder capacity; it may also serve as the management point for part of the 
ground segment.

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
401
repeater. Conducting this process for a two-way link adds the same steps for the 
second earth station (which is usually not physically located with the network 
control facility). These steps assure that the signals are on the right frequencies 
and within proper operating bounds in polarization, power and bandwidth. 
Then and only then can the earth stations perform end-to-end tests and com­
mence revenue service. A detailed discussion of the organization and processes 
involved can be found in Chapter 11 of our previous work [1]; the following 
is a summary of the key points as they relate to maintaining earth station and 
network performance.
11.2.1  Prequalification of a Transmitting Earth Station
Prequalification is the process of measuring the specific technical parameters 
of an earth station prior to allowing access to the satellite or space segment. 
The idea is to provide the satellite operator with a high degree of assurance 
that this particular earth station will provide a satisfactory service without in­
troducing more RF interference than allowed under existing operating rules 
and prior frequency coordination with other satellite systems. Traditionally, the 
long-established satellite operators like INTELSAT, EUTELSAT, and Inmarsat, 
have required very detailed tests that parallel the factory acceptance tests of the 
original equipment manufacturer. In time, testing cycles have been simplified 
to reduce the cost and delay associated with bringing an earth station into ser­
vice. However, the fact remains that any earth station must operate correctly 
within its design limits.
Typical prequalification test criteria are:
• Antenna pattern, sidelobe levels—this guarantees that RF radiation out­
side the main beam is bounded correctly. Measurement of these param­
eters is restricted by the calibration of the test systems at the network 
control center. Often, the satellite operator will accept the pattern and 
sidelobe measurements from the antenna manufacturer, which were tak­
en at the factory or even on a different test antenna of the same design. 
This may or may not be sufficiently accurate for the installed antenna, 
since the reflector and feed might not be aligned correctly or there could 
be reflections from nearby structures and terrain features (e.g., hills or 
buildings). Specialized antennas on vehicles require additional attention 
due to the potential for increased adjacent satellite interference.
• Cross-polarization isolation—this is critical to the operation of essentially 
every transmission over GEO satellites at C-band and above. With iso­
lation values in the range of 25 to 45 dB (for relatively large reflector 
antennas), it can be difficult to measure the full range of values due to 
a particular ground antenna. This is complicated by the fact that the 

402 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
satellite itself may only perform to the 27 to 33 dB isolation level. For­
tunately, a cross-polarization test of the main beam is relatively quick 
and should be performed both as part of prequalification and at the 
start of every transmission. Isolation in a linearly polarized system will 
change with time due to satellite motion and Faraday effect; hence, rou­
tine testing of cross-polarized interference is the norm. Circular polariza­
tion cannot be adjusted after installation, so any difficulty may require 
disassembly of the feed system.
• EIRP—this is determined by the transmit gain budget of the earth sta­
tion (reviewed in Section 7.3), resulting in the uplink power radiated 
toward the satellite. During prequalification, the transmit power is mea­
sured at the input to the ground antenna and then combined by analysis 
with the gain of the antenna. Assuming that the antenna gain is known 
with reasonable accuracy (say 0.5 dB), the EIRP may be specified with­
out an actual measurement in the far field of the antenna. The final mea­
sure would be over the operating satellite at the network control facility, 
using another known carrier as a reference. EIRP can be adjusted up or 
down using an attenuator located on the input side of the HPA and a 
power meter that is connected to the output side through a directional 
coupler.
• G/T—the ratio of receive antenna gain to system noise temperature, in 
dB/K, measured at the input to the receiving system. We assume that 
the factory-measured value of main beam receive gain is known ahead 
of time (this may not be feasible for antennas greater than about 9m 
in diameter). System noise temperature can be determined by analysis 
according to the procedure in Section 7.4. There are techniques for mea­
suring system noise temperature directly, as indicated in Figure 11.7. In 
this approach, the received noise within a known bandwidth is com­
pared with noise from a standard source. An attenuator permits the nec­
essary adjustment of the standard to produce the final value. It is often 
Figure 11.7  Measure of broadband RF noise using the Y-factor technique, where a compari­
son is made between the reference temperature source and the system under test.

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
403
best to measure G/T directly through the antenna using a calibrated 
carrier from the satellite as this is a system measure. This amounts to a 
backward link budget, where the measured C/N is used to calculate the 
unknown G/T, i.e.,
	
G/T = C/N - EIRP + A + 10 log (BW) - 228.6, dB/K	
Of course, this calculation is only as good as the accuracy of the individ­
ual terms. For example, we require a very accurate value of satellite EIRP 
(measured from another well-calibrated antenna system), and the total 
path loss, A, must be calculated precisely for the specific earth station 
location and satellite orbit position. Note that A includes atmospheric 
loss, which is usually assumed to be the clear air value. The received car­
rier bandwidth, BW, should be a standard value using a calibrated filter 
on the spectrum analyzer of power meter. Another approach is to use a 
calibrated transmitting EIRP source located on a nearby mountaintop 
or tower (called a boresight). The difficulty is that the boresight is prob­
ably not located in the same direction as the satellite and thus there can 
be problems with terrain reflections or scatter. Accurate calibration data 
might be available from using a celestial microwave source such as the 
moon or a hot radio star (e.g., Cygnus A or Cassiopeia A) [2, 3]. These 
methods offer potentially high accuracy but involve a considerable ex­
penditure of time and money. For that reason, they are only appropriate 
where the antenna diameter is large (in excess of 10m) for an earth sta­
tion that must receive very weak signals. In general, it is most common 
to use a satellite as the reference as there are many to choose from. A 
well-calibrated earth station antenna to verify satellite EIRP provides the 
highest assurance of an accurate G/T calculation.
• Antenna pattern characteristics—main beamwidth, cross polarization, 
sidelobes, and backlobes. These are important characteristics for the 
operating system and service. If any of these measurements are not sat­
isfactory, then it is likely that the antenna is defective or not installed 
correctly.
11.2.2  Uplink Access Test Prior to Service 
An earth station that has passed its acceptance and prequalification tests is ready, 
in principle, to access the satellite for revenue-bearing services. The specifics of 
this procedure are normally defined and distributed ahead of time by the par­
ticular satellite operator. The process of the uplink access test (UAT) is fairly 

404 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
well understood by earth station operators around the world. Still, it would 
be appropriate to check with the operator of the desired satellite well ahead of 
time to assure that everything is in order. The following is a typical process for 
uplink access testing as would be used on a GEO satellite for the transmission 
of wideband video or data services. These tests would employ specialized test 
equipment from Agilent (and others), who also can supply integrated test sys­
tems under software control.
• Uplink carrier check. This is a quick test to verify that the EIRP, sid­
elobes, and cross-polarization isolation have not changed since preau­
thorization testing.
• Carrier frequency. It is necessary to determine the precise frequency of 
the carrier when unmodulated. Measurements made with a microwave 
frequency counter, while unmodulated, should be limited in time due to 
a high-power spectral density that poses a greater interference threat to 
other satellite networks. In most cases, center frequency can be measured 
with a digital spectrum analyzer.
• Modulation bandwidth. This important characteristic determines the 
transponder occupancy and is determined by the data rate and MOD­
COD. The satellite operator would have assigned a particular band­
width and the earth station operator would ensure compliance with an 
IF or RF filter on the uplink side. In the case of a saturated transponder, 
the bandwidth will likely spread due to sibeband regeneration by the 
earth station and/or satellite power amplifier, requiring careful adjust­
ment of transponder backoff under direction from network operations. 
Bandwidth can be measured with a calibrated spectrum analyzer.
• Burst and bit timing (if needed). These are checks done for a digital satel­
lite network using a particular carrier modulation, bit rate, channel cod­
ing, and synchronization scheme. For example, in a TDMA network, 
stations transmit bursts that must fall within nonoverlapping time slots. 
Receivers on the ground must be capable of synchronizing to the car­
rier, bit stream, and code sequence for the network to operate properly. 
This is performed automatically, both at initiation of service and again 
after any service interruption when a station must reenter the network. 
These properties are best measured by VSAT hub equipment aided by 
the oscilloscope.
• RF channel amplitude response (if needed). Depending on the type of car­
rier to be transmitted, it may be necessary or desirable to perform an IF 
or RF amplitude frequency response for the end-to-end link. Narrow­
band carriers (i.e., less than about 5 MHz in bandwidth) are normally 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
405
not affected by earth station or transponder amplitude response. How­
ever, if the carrier bandwidth is 50% of the transponder bandwidth or 
greater, amplitude response can introduce baseband distortion. Carrier 
sidebands that are generated in the HPA of the earth station or satellite 
transponder would also need investigation to prevent out-of-band sig­
nal energy from overlapping into adjacent transponder channels. Typical 
equipment used to perform this test is illustrated in Figure 11.8. An­
other useful device is the microwave link analyzer.
• RF channel group delay response (if needed). Like amplitude response, this 
is a frequency-dependent characteristic that affects wideband signals. 
The measurement of group delay is more complicated than amplitude 
because of the need to track phase as the frequency is changed. A vector 
network analyzer can be used to measure group delay directly.
• Threshold performance. This is performed on the receiving side to verify 
that adequate link margin is provided. What we are looking for is the 
value of clear-weather C/N and the margin that exists before a receiver/
demodulator goes to threshold. The procedure can uncover a variety of 
potential problems, such as low satellite EIRP in a particular area of the 
Figure 11.8  Amplitude-frequency response measurement system, using a synthesized sig­
nal generator as the input to the unit under test (UUT).

406 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
footprint, excessive loss or high noise within the receiving system (in­
ternal or external to the receiving earth station), RF interference, or an 
improperly designed or configured demodulator.
• Frequency stability and drift. This is broken down into short-term and 
long-term frequency stability. Long-term stability is important to control 
the center frequency of the carrier to prevent adjacent channel interfer­
ence and assure that ground receivers can maintain lock. A shift in center 
frequency in one direction over time is also referred to as frequency drift. 
Slowly varying frequency can potentially push the signal to the edges 
of the transmitting or receiving filters, producing amplitude or phase 
distortion. The effect of short-term stability depends on the associated 
time constants. If the frequency varies rapidly, then we can consider it 
as a form of phase noise that adds to other noise sources in the receiver. 
• Bit error rate performance. Once the digital transmissions are synchro­
nized correctly, the next step would be to measure the end-to-end bit 
error rate (BER). This can be performed using standard BER test equip­
ment, a transmission impairments measurement set, or with capability 
built in to the modem or baseband equipment. The most common ap­
proach is to use a known bit sequence that is stored at the receiving end. 
The same sequence sent over the satellite link would produce errors at 
the same rate as the user information. Then, the incoming sequence is 
compared with the locally stored value and the errors are counted as they 
are detected (by a simple comparison with what was sent). Alternatively, 
an estimate may be provided by monitoring the data check-sum bits of 
normal traffic flow.
Uplink access testing by a commercial satellite operator is generally lim­
ited to those functions that affect transponder loading, interaction with other 
users on the same satellite, and RF interference. There is a strong desire that 
the service work correctly, but the satellite operator is generally not responsible 
for the end result. This means that access to the satellite only serves to provide 
confidence that the carrier is aligned correctly and that modulation and data are 
transferred. Assuring that the user service is satisfactory involves other aspects 
such as frame synchronization, circuit performance, and encryption. The satel­
lite operator is not in a position to validate these functions as they may lack 
the necessary resources. Furthermore, there may be regulatory limitations such 
as those protecting the privacy of user data that are to be considered. The only 
exception to this is an evolving requirement for carrier identification (CID) to 
help resolve RFI as quickly as possible. Carrier ID is now required on some ma­
jor satellite systems for DVB-S and DVB-S2 carriers, where the ID is provided 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
407
in the Network Information Table (NIT) of the MPEG format. Another form 
of CID employs a spread spectrum signal transmitted below the actual com­
munication carrier.
11.2.3  Network Monitoring and Control During Service
An earth station that has been granted access to a satellite network is subject 
to continuous monitoring and control by the network operations facility. The 
processes depend on the transmission system design and approach to network 
intercommunication. The following are some top-level suggestions for con­
ducting this aspect of the operation.
Network operations plays a critical role in real-time coordination or in 
case of RF interference or other difficulty. This role comprises:
• Operator communication and control. Earth stations and user terminals 
that can transmit to a satellite must be under the direct control of a net­
work operations facility. As mentioned previously, this can be through 
manual operators or via an automated network of some type. The re­
quirements for communication and control would be defined in a user 
agreement or contract, making these provisions binding on all stations 
that can transmit. The specific requirements will differ from application 
to application and system to system, but the need is nevertheless the 
same.
• Contact information. All stations must have a direct communication 
link with network operations. In an automated system, this type of data 
can be sent over the satellite link during station acquisition. Location 
data (if required) can be derived from GPS measurements or preset for 
the particular latitude and longitude. For manual operations, the in­
formation would be transmitted via voice or a data signal. Carrier ID, 
where provided, includes critical information such as uplinker name, 
and contact phone number.
Operations teams associated with network monitoring and control as well 
as with like aspects of earth station O&M will need to respond to questions and 
issues raised by customers and users. This demands an organization structure 
that provides access to an actionable person during expected hours of operation 
(typically 24/7). Staffing must reflect this need along with the realities of bud­
gets and human resources within the organizations in question. Consequently, 
the staffing plan and staffing schedule should be maintained and communi­
cated to those involved.

408 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
The typical structure is usually in three layers: the first line is a 24/7 call 
answering service by a group that can identify valid users and knows the partic­
ulars of their service requirements. They may have limited ability to take imme­
diate corrective action but they need to know who to call to make that happen 
in a timely manner. The next level is typically technical staff that provide expert 
assistance to the first line or take over the conversation to improve communica­
tion of problem nature; the latter is preferred because corrective action could 
involve both the user and the operator. Such a structure will probably handle 
95% of situations, which are generally of a routine nature. The third and final 
line of escalation is to a supervisor or even an executive/officer-in-charge who 
can take extraordinary action to allocate resources. All during the process, there 
needs to be a system of collecting and sharing data (i.e., the trouble ticket and 
problem database) since problems can involve more than one element of the 
system.
The concepts and operating processes discussed in this section are limited 
to the introductory level. In a real-world situation, these would be embodied in 
plans and procedures that are maintained by the network control facility and 
shared by each accessing earth station. Manually controlled satellite networks 
used for TV transmission follow these guidelines directly. For automated net­
works that provide online services to VSATs and mobile user terminals, the 
procedures are contained in thousands of lines of computer code. Thus, it can 
be a complex matter to identify and eliminate problems that are caused by the 
control system itself. No matter what happens, operators and earth stations 
and networks need to understand that they are using RF propagation over long 
distances, and that all frequencies are shared by a wide range of users. For this 
reason, a good attitude toward all users of the spectrum is the best approach for 
minimizing incidents of actual RF interference and providing the highest assur­
ance of quality services via satellite.
11.3  Service Support for User Terminals
Delivery of services by user terminals capable of transmitting signals to satel­
lites introduces several complexities to the overall operation and maintenance 
process. Users include purchasers of VSAT networks, satellite mobile devices 
(such as mobile phones), and specialized two-way terminals used by military 
or emergency communications groups. We must assume that the user terminal, 
while being capable of transmitting, is not directly operated by users (other 
than aligning the antenna and turning the device on or off). In fact, com­
munication with the user would not be possible until the terminal is working 
correctly within the overall network. Loss of direct communication should re­

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
409
sult in automatic disabling of uplink transmission to the satellite. Some mobile 
terminals mute transmit if the antenna is misaligned.
The best parallel to this is a land-based mobile phone that automatically 
registers itself with the local wireless network when it is first activated. When 
the mobile phone is turned on, it seeks the strongest control carrier within its 
operating bandwidth and then transmits a request for entry into the network. 
Subsequently, the cellular network accepts the station and allows it to place calls 
or use applications on demand from the user. The user is notified that service is 
ready by an appropriate readout on the screen of the mobile phone. Similarly, 
a satellite network of user terminals must be capable of this type of automated 
alignment when the user turns on the device. For example, a user who has just 
turned on a terminal and aligned it with the satellite should not have to perform 
many complex functions to initiate communication; contact should be achieved 
simply by making a phone call to a customer support center, for example. The 
satellite network should be capable of initiating transmission from the terminal 
and incorporating it into the network. Of course, this presents more potential 
for RF interference, due to the wider coverage of a satellite as compared with a 
given cellular base station. The network control facility still provides that single 
point of service monitoring and control, although the vast majority of activity 
is fully automated using software that runs in the network and the terminal 
devices. As long as user terminals and hub earth stations behave correctly, there 
is no need for intervention by human operators at the network control facility.
VSATs contained in vehicles and aircraft are a very special case since the plat­
form may be in motion and changing direction and orientation rapidly. To 
provide COTM, the terminal has to go through the following steps:
1. Establish its location and direction (can be done with GPS and a 
compass);
2. Locate the satellite and point the antenna properly (using a processor, 
software, and a database of satellite locations);
3. Acquire the signal from the satellite and initiate the connection (stan­
dard VSAT access practice);
4. Maintain the antenna beam on the satellite, including polarization 
alignment for linear polarization (compensating for a range of plat­
form motion);
5. Reestablish connection if lost due to temporary blockage by obstacles 
or to rapid platform motion (depends on a highly-precise antenna 
pointing and tracking system).
The technology and processes to accomplish steps 1 through 5 are well 
known and mature, resulting in a thousand or more COTMs and aeronautical 

410 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
VSATs being in operation at the time of this writing. The technical specifica­
tions of the COTM antenna system, presented in Table 11.6 for one example 
from Cobham TracStar, are extensive and result in a fairly expensive device.
Operation of a COTM terminal on the ground at the halt poses little 
challenge and the service is essentially the same as that of a fixed VSAT. When 
motion is started and the terminal activated to provide service, the additional 
steps and technologies take over and it is expected that as far as the satellite 
and network are concerned, there is no change. But, depending on dynamics 
of speed change, direction change, and attitude change, the antenna tends to 
become an interference source to other users on the same and adjacent satellites. 
There is also the consideration that the antenna is undersized relative to a fixed 
VSAT, which necessities spreading the carrier over a wider bandwidth to reduce 
the power spectral density on the uplink side to what would be produced by a 
fixed VSAT.
11.4  Management of O&M 
Recognizing that it would be difficult to generalize with respect to O&M man­
agement, we can take a rather positive and proactive view of the task. The vari­
ous functions within O&M are vital to the system and deserve the best from 
everyone. Management must be able to play the game along with the working 
operators and maintainers. This is a place for MBWA (management by walking 
around). You can learn a lot by observing and asking simple questions.
Here are some points learned on the job over the last several decades:
• People are the solution, not the problem. When things go wrong, don’t 
automatically assume that someone has made a mistake. Most employ­
ees do their jobs according to what they understand the requirements to 
be. Failures involving people are more often than not failures of proce­
dures and management.
• Manage with loose reins. This philosophy (as well as the next one) was 
promoted by the late Col. John Sedano (USAF, retired), former vice 
president of operations at Hughes Communications. It is clear that 
management in O&M has to be very active and involved. At the same 
time, people should be allowed to do their jobs without too many strings 
attached. See also the last item in this list.
• Anticipate Murphy. Expect the unexpected, and plan accordingly.
• Believe the data. Any indication of difficulty, no matter how small, 
should be taken seriously. This is the approach taken by the U.S. Navy 

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
411
Table 11.6 
Technical Characteristics of the Cobham TracStar iMVS450 COTM 
Antenna Illustrated in Figure 11.9
•
• Electromechanically steered AZ, EL, and POL Axes
•
• No special test equipment for alignment
•
• No computers or peripheral equipment to operate the antenna
•
• External inertial navigation unit (INU) not required
•
• Complete remote-site operation
•
• Control software from commercial markets
•
• Comes equipped with the following standard equipment:
•
• Tracking antenna and LNB (HPA optional);
•
• Built-in attitude, heading, and rate sensors;
•
• Power interface unit and interface cables;
•
• Adjacent satellite transmit mute protection.
•
• Antenna controller
•
• One button operation; automatic satellite acquisition with integrated GPS/
compass;
•
• Level sensors and user-configurable satellite selection.
•
• Size: 45-cm elliptical equivalent
•
• Weight (25W or 40W BUC included): 64.4kg
•
• Dimensions : 114.3 × 29.2cm
•
• Mount geometry: elevation over azimuth
•
• Polarization: linear phase shift
•
• Travel
•
• Azimuth 360° continuous;
•
• Elevation 20-70°;
•
• Polarization ±95°.
•
• Tracking
•
• Acceleration >200°/s2;
•
• Velocity >100°/s;
•
• Meets FCC Part 25.222.
•
• Wind: 153 kph
•
• Temperature
•
• Operational –30° C–50° C;
•
• Nonoperational –40° C–50° C.
•
• Humidity: 100% at –30° C–+30° C
•
• Altitude: 4572 m
•
• Rain: 50 mm/hr at 64 kph 
•
• Shock and vibration tested to MIL-STD-810F 514.5 Category 4

412 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
in its nuclear submarines. Likewise, believe what someone on the team 
(or a customer) is telling you. Do the homework to check it out.
• Include backup, particularly if you don’t have to pay extra for it (El­
bert’s First Rule). Backup and alternate paths are often expensive when 
purchased as such. Better to include it with the initial system when the 
cost is relatively low. Also, if there is a working capability in place when 
a new one is being introduced, think about keeping it running as a low-
cost backup.
• Don’t pass the buck (or expect someone else to take care of the prob­
lem). As managers, the task and problem are yours. With a competent 
staff, any problem can be solved. It may be a matter of time, so don’t 
rush the cure.
Figure 11.9  Cobham TracStar iMVS450COTM Antenna.

 
Principles of Effective Operations and Maintenance 
413
• Check your end first. There is a tendency to point fingers at the other 
end or at the satellite. But it is worth the time and effort to be sure that 
your own house is in order.
• Choose the best people. Use a thorough evaluation process, such as that 
described by Bradford Smart [4].
• Put the right person in the right job, and vice versa. In terms of our 
personal contributions, we are not all created equal, as each person has 
a unique ability, talent, and interest. As managers, we need to identify 
these strengths and help others to reach their potential. Also, motivation 
is in there for all of us, but we are not motivated by the same package. 
Technical staff are perhaps a bit unique in this regard, as discussed by 
Douglas Soat [5].
• Build a culture of innovation, integrity, and customer focus. We are 
in a New Economy, where telecommunications and the Internet have 
changed all the rules. But have they? In a technical organization, it is 
important that people feel that they and their contributions are valued, 
and that the organization counts for something. We can all take a lesson 
from Charles Schwab, a leading online/offline stock brokerage, on how 
important culture still is [6].
• Lastly, shift the load of responsibility to the employee. According to 
Chuck Hollins, supervisor of Los Angeles County’s extensive wide area 
network, if we give our staff the tools they need, we can expect them to 
shoulder the responsibility. In this way, we drive accountability directly 
to the user interface so problems are resolved quickly.
11.5  A Final Word
The first edition of this book was innovative in its cohesive treatment of ground 
segments for satellite communications. The second edition updates the tech­
nology and adds to the process base. We have tried to put in one place as much 
information as our experience suggests. Clearly, there is a lot more that can 
be said and explored. The nature of the ground segment and earth stations is 
constantly changing, as new applications appear alongside those that have been 
around for 40 years. Certain aspects never change—we still speak of the uplink 
and the downlink, and information must be processed and distributed through 
the broad coverage capabilities of satellites. We hope that this effort has helped 
reduce the obstacles for those who want to apply ground segment technology 
to practical communications problems on earth.

414 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
References
[1]	 Elbert, Bruce R., Introduction to Satellite Communication, 3d ed., Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 2008.
[2]	 Baars, Jacob W. M., The Paraboloidal Reflector Antenna in Radio Astonomy and Communi­
cation, Springer, New York, 2007, pp. 143–146.
[3]	 Kraus, John D., “Radio-Telescope Antennas,” Chapter 41, Antenna Engineering Hand­
book, 3d ed., ed. Richard C. Johnson, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993, p. 41.
[4]	 Smart, Bradford D., Topgrading: How Leading Companies Win by Hiring, Coaching and 
Keeping the Best People, Paramus, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1999.
[5]	 Soat, Douglas M., Managing Engineers and Technical Employees: How to Attract, Motivate 
and Retain Excellent People, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1996.
[6]	 Pottruck, David S., and Terry Pearce, Clicks and Mortar: Passion Driven Growth in an 
Internet Driven World, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000.
[7]	 Krešimir, Malari, EMI Protection for Communications Systems, Artech House, Boston, 
MA 2010.
[8]	 Princeton University Enterprise Servers and Storage, “Troubleshooting Methodology,” 
http:/www.princeton.edu/~unix/solaris/troubleshoot/methodology.html, 2011.

415
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in 
Satellite Communications
3G  Third Generation Digital Cellular
3-IMP  Third order intercept point
8PSK  8 Phase-Shift Key
A/D Conversion  analog-to-digital conversion
APSK  Amplitude and Phase Shift Keying
ARQ   Automatic Request for Retransmission 
ASK  Amplitude Shift Keying
Asymmetrical link  a data link where the speed of the return is less than that 
of the forward link 
AWGN  Additive White Gaussian Noise (white noise)
Bandwidth  number of Hz occupied by a signal or modulation; in digital 
systems, the measure of the amount of information that can be transferred per 
unit time. 
BCH  The Bose, Chaudhuri and Hocquenghem block code (FEC)

416 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
BER  Bit Error Rate  the fraction of bits with errors divided by the total 
number of bits that have been transmitted (typically expressed in scientific 
notation, e.g. 10–7) 
BERT  Bit Error Rate Test set
Block Code  A code word with a fixed number of bits. 
BSS  Broadcasting Satellite Services (ITU designation)
BUC  Block Up Converter. 
Buffer  A temporary storage space in a computer system or subsystem
Byte  Digital word containing eight information bits. 
CDMA  code division multiple access, a digital spread-spectrum modulation 
technique. 
Coax  Coaxial Cable. 
Code Rate  In error correction, the ratio of information divided by information 
plus redundancy bits
Codec  device containing both an encoder and a decoder for FEC or voice 
digitization and compression
Coding Gain  the improvement in dB that a particular type of FEC offers over 
the ideal channel without FEC. 
Compression  Any of several techniques that reduce the number of bits 
required to represent information in data transmission or storage (thus 
conserving bandwidth and/or memory), in which the original form of the 
information can be reconstructed; also called “compaction.” 
Compression Ratio  The ratio of the number of original data bytes to the 
number of compressed data bytes. 
Continuous Phase Frequency Shift Keying  (CPFSK) Digital modulation 
format where information is conveyed in the frequency of a carrier signal 
ensuring that the phase is continuous between symbol transitions. 

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in Satellite Communications 
417
COTS  Commercial Off-the-Shelf
D/A Conversion  Digital-to-analog conversation; the opposite of A/D 
conversion.
DAB  Digital Audio Broadcasting; generic name for radio broadcasting by 
satellite; also called digital audio radio service (DARS).
DAMA  Demand Assignment Multiple Access; a technique of resource 
allocation that allows many users to share a limited assignment of transponder 
capacity. 
dBc  The level of a signal in dB relative to a wanted carrier signal level. 
dBm  The level of a signal in dB relative to 1 mW (0 dBm). 
DBS  Direct Broadcasting Satellite; may use BSS or FSS frequency allocations
DES  Data Encryption Standard; the encryption technique approved by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) specified by Federal 
Information Processing Systems (FIPS) Publication 46. 
DoD  Department of Defense
DSIN  Defense Information Systems Network
DSSS  Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum
DVB  Digital Video Broadcast, the primary standards for DBS maintained by 
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI).
DVB-S  Digital Video Broadcasting via satellite 
DVB-S2  Digital Video Broadcasting via satellite 2nd Generation
DVB-Sx  DVB-S2 extensions
DVB-RCS  Digital Video Broadcast, Return Channel via Satellite 
EIRP  Effective Isotropic Radiated Power
ET  Earth Terminal or Earth Station

418 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
FDD  Frequency Division Duplex
FDMA  frequency division multiple access  allocates a single frequency 
channel to one earth station or user at a time
FEC  Forward Error Correction  technique which reduces the BER of a 
channel by adding redundant bits to the data being transmitted through the 
channel. 
FSK  Frequency Shift Keying  Digital modulation format where information 
is conveyed in the frequency of a carrier signal. 
F-TDMA  Frequency division multiple access combined with TDMA, 
allowing terminals to access more bandwidth. 
G.711  Describes the 64-kbps PCM voice coding technique in the ITU-T 
standard in its G-series recommendations. 
G.723  Audio (Voice) Compression Protocol reducing the required bandwidth 
per call, per direction to 8 kbps using adaptive multi-rate wideband. 
Geostationary Orbit  circular orbit at 35,786 km altitude that are maintained 
in the plane of the earth’s equator; the satellite appears stationary at the assigned 
longitude. 
GHz  Gigahertz
GMSK  Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying  Digital modulation format where 
information is conveyed in the phase of a carrier signal, where the incoming 
data is first shaped with a Gaussian low-pass filter. 
GPRS  General Packet Radio Service
GSM  Global System for Mobile Communication  A cellular radio standard 
using TDMA and GMSK modulation. 
G/T  Gain to Noise Temperature Ratio
H.323  is a protocol for the transmission of real-time audio, video and data 
information over packet switching-based networks.
HNA  Host Nation Agreement 

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in Satellite Communications 
419
HPA  High Power Amplifier
HTTP  HyperText Transfer Protocol  The application layer protocol for 
moving Web pages across an IP network.
I/F  Interface
IF  Intermediate Frequency
IM  Intermodulation
IP  Internet Protocol, the five layer protocol family that is the basis of the 
Internet. 
IPSEC  Internet Protocol Security, the basis of the Virtual Private Network 
(VPN)
IRD  Integrated Receiver Decoder
IT  Information Technology
JTRS  Joint Tactical Radio System
Ka Band  frquency band from 20 to 40 GHz (30 GHz uplink/20 GHz 
downlink)
kbps  Kilobits per Second 
KPA  Klystron Power Amplifier
LAN  Local Area Network, network of interconnected computers employing 
Ethernet or WiFi, or a combination
Latency  In a network, latency, a synonym for delay. 
LEOP  Launch and Early Operations
LHCP  Left Hand Circular Polarization
LNA  Low Noise Amplifier  Special type of amplifier used in communication 
systems to amplify very weak signals captured by an antenna. 

420 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
LNB  Low Noise Block Converter, an LNA combined with a block 
downconverter (to the range 950–1450 MHz or higher)
LNC  Low Noise Converter, an LNA combined with a frequency-agile 
downconverter (to a 70 MHz IF)
LO  Local Oscillator
Lossless compression  compression algorithms such that when compressed 
data is decompressed, it is identical to the form it had prior to compression. 
Lossy compression  compression algorithms in which compressed data may 
not decompress exactly to its original form; typically capable of very high 
compression performance, and is used primarily on data which may be slightly 
changed without significant effect.
Mbps  Megabits Per Second
MCPC  Multiple Channel per Carrier, typical of DBS carriers containing 
multiple TV channels
Mesh Topology  earth stations or VSATs are connected with many 
interconnections where every node has ability to connect to every other node in 
the network (without passing through a hub). 
MHz  Megahertz
Minimum Shift Keying  (MSK)  Digital modulation format where 
information is conveyed with phase change but without variation of envelope 
(i.e., a constant envelope form of PSK) 
MPLS  Multi-Protocol Label Switching, used in high-performance IP net­
works to reduce delay and allow efficient interconnection of subnets.
MSC  Mobile Switching Center
MTBF  Mean Time Before (or Between) Failure(s)
MUOS  Mobile User Objective System, the generation of US UHF satellites 
that includes features of 3G WCDMA
NAT  Network Address Translation 

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in Satellite Communications 
421
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
NMS  Network Management System
NOC  Network Operations Center 
O&M  Operations & Maintenance.
OC-3  A telecommunications standard for data rate speeds of 155 Mbits/
second. 
ODU  Outdoor Unit 
ON-OFF Keying (OOK)  Digital modulation format where information is 
conveyed by switching on and off a carrier signal. 
OPSEC  Operations Security
P1dB  One dB compression point
PDN  Packet Data Network, networks before advent of the Internet
PEP  performance enhancing proxy (see spoofing)
PER  Packet Error Rate
PIM  Passive Intermodulation
PLL  Phase Locked Loop
POTS  Plain Old Telephone Service (dialup or dial tone)
PSD  Power Spectral Density, measured in watts/Hz or watts/4 kHz
PSK  Phase-Shift Keying, bits are quantified by phase changes
PSTN  Public Switched Telephone Network (POTS)
QAM  Quadrature Amplitude Modulation, information is conveyed in the 
amplitude and phase of a carrier signal. 

422 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
QoS  Quality of Service, referring mainly to assignment of priorities to 
different classes of service
QPSK  Quaternary Phase-Shift Keying where each pair of bits of the incoming 
sequence causes a change in the carrier phase between four possible states
RF  Radio Frequency, e.g., any frequency that can be radiated from an antenna 
via electromagnetic wave propagation in free space; RF can also propagate along 
an electrical conductor.
RFI  Radio Frequency Interface
RHCP  Right Hand Circular Polarization
RIP  Routing Information Protocol, a common routing protocol for IP 
packets
RS  Reed Solomon Code, a block-based FEC code used in DVB-S. 
RS-Viterbi  Reed-Solomon block code concatenated with Viterbi convolu­
tional coding.
RTP  Real-time transport protocol, Internet-standard protocol for the 
transport of real-time data, including audio and video. It uses the UDP network 
layer protocol and not TCP since packets are cannot be acknowledged in real 
time. 
RX  receive 
Sat Ops  Satellite Operations
SATCOM  Satellite Communications 
SCPC  Single Channel Per Carrier 
SER  Symbol Error Rate  The fraction of symbols that are received in error 
(not to be confused with BER or PER) 
SIP  Session Initiation Protocol, used within H.323 and VoIP neworks
SIPRNET  Secret Internet Protocol Router Network

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in Satellite Communications 
423
SMTP  Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
S/N ratio  Signal-to-noise ratio 
SNMP  Simple Network Management Protocol
SOC  Satellite Operations Center 
SOHO  Small Office, Home Office 
Spoofing  the adaptation of TCP/IP to satellite links for the purpose of 
improving throughput and/or reducing latency, involving a performance 
enhancing proxy that converts TCP/IP into a satellite-optimized protocol and 
back to TCP/IP at the distant end.
SSL  Secured Sockets Layer  an Internet application layer security protocol 
maintained by VeriSign used primarily for ecommerce but applicable to other 
uses. 
SSPA  Solid State Power Amplifier
Star Topology  Network designed in the shape of a star, where all end 
points are connected to one central device, or hub on a single hop to access 
central resources and external networks, e.g., the Internet. Remote-to-remote 
connections must pass through the hub and hence experience a double hop.
Symmetrical link  the forward and return data rates are the same; used for 
voice communications and teleconferencing. 
TCP/IP  Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol  the suite of 
communications protocols used to connect hosts on the Internet; uses several 
protocols, primarily TCP and UDP.
TCP  Transmission Control Protocol, the transport layer protocol of the 
Internet that provides 100% accuracy by employing automatic retransmission 
(ARQ); introduces delays when packets must be retransmitted due to errors and 
propagation delay.
TDD  Time Division Duplex, allowing transmit and receive on the same 
frequency and without the need for a duplexer. Currently in use in the Iridium 
system.

424 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
TDMA  time division multiple access is digital transmission technology that 
allows a number of users to access a single radio-frequency (RF) channel without 
interference by allocating unique time slots to each user within each channel. 
May be combined with the ALOHA protocol, or in a reservation mode to 
provide constant bit rate. 
TT&C  Telemetry, Tracking and Command 
TPC  Turbo Product Code, a proprietary form of turbo code that processes 
data in blocks within a matrix.
TWT  Traveling Wave Tube (Amplifier)
TX  Abbreviation for Transmit 
UDP  User Datagram Protocol, the transport layer protocol of the Internet 
that provides the shortest time delay by riding on top of IP. No retransmission 
is provided and the error performance is not guaranteed.
UFO  UHF Follow-On, the US UHF satellite system prior to MUOS
UHF  Ultra High Frequency (300–3000 MHz)
UMTS  Universal Mobile Telecommunication System, the formal name for 
3G which employs WCDMA
UTRAN  UMTS Terrestrial Access Network
VLAN  Virtual Local Area Network. allowing the use of Ethernet NIC 
addressing across a wide area network
Viterbi Encoding/Decoding  the most common form of convolutional coding 
and decoding. 
VLR  Visitor Location Register in GSM and 3G cellular
VoIP  Voice over Internet Protocol  A technology for transmitting voice, 
such as ordinary telephone calls, over packet-switched data networks. Also 
called IP telephony. 
VPN  Virtual Private Network Network scheme in which portions of a 
network are connected via Internet, but information sent across the Internet 

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations Used in Satellite Communications 
425
is encrypted. The result is a “virtual network” which is also part of a larger 
network entity. This allows users to privately share private information over a 
public infrastructure. Typically employs IP Sec. 
VSAT  Very Small Aperture Terminal small receive/transmit earth station 
installed at dispersed sites connected to a central hub via satellite using small 
diameter antenna dishes (0.6 to 3.8 meters). 
WCDMA  Wideband Code Division Multiple Access, the CDMA technique 
used in 3G cellular
X Band  8–10 GHz
XTP  Xpress Transport Protocol, used in networks with large delay


427
About the Author
Bruce R. Elbert, author of eight Artech House books on satellite communica­
tions and information technology, has 45 years of technical and management 
experience in these fields. As president of Application Technology Strategy, a 
consulting and training firm based in Texas, he assists corporations and gov­
ernment agencies in developing their technical and operational capabilities in 
satellite and broadband communications systems. Mr. Elbert was with Hughes 
Electronics for 25 years. He held several key management positions, including 
director of marketing and engineering for the Galaxy satellite system, and senior 
communications engineering manager for Indonesia’s first domestic satellite 
network, Palapa A. His first industry position was as a satellite systems engineer 
with COMSAT back in the early days of communications satellites. He holds 
masters degrees in business administration (Pepperdine University, 1985) and 
electronics engineering and computer science (University of Maryland, 1972), 
and obtained his bachelor of electrical engineering from CCNY in 1965. Mr. 
Elbert served in the U.S. Army as a captain and radio communications officer, 
including a tour in Southeast Asia with the 4th Infantry Division. He is series 
editor of two Artech House Libraries: Space Technology and Applications and 
Technology Management and Professional Development.


429
Index
16QAM
	
received signal constellation, 292
	
transmitted spectra for, 293
Adaptive carrier cancellation
	
defined, 112
	
principle illustration, 113
Adaptive coding modulation (ACM), 73, 
170
Adaptive differential PCM (ADPCM), 126
Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), 289
Adjacent channel interference (ACI), 49, 
50, 64
Adjacent satellite interference (ASI), 64
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), 176
Amplifiers
	
intermodulation, 235
	
low noise (LNA), 194, 195, 197–98
	
noise temperature, 193
	
See also Power amplifiers (PAs)
Amplitude distortion, 262–63
Amplitude limiting, 268
Analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion, 320
Antenna and microwave design
	
objective of, 206
	
overview of, 206–7
	
waveguides and transmission lines, 
207–12
Antenna gain
	
calculating and measuring, 199–202
	
direct measurement of, 199–200
	
relative directivity pattern and, 202
	
reverse link budget and, 201
	
standard approach, 201–2
Antennas
	
basic principles, 44–47
	
beamwidth estimation, 204
	
broad beam, 194, 307–11
	
center-fed reflector configurations, 46
	
communications-on-the-move, 307
	
cross-polarization performance, 232–34
	
directional, 304
	
elemental, 215
	
feedhorn, 46
	
helical, 312
	
horn, 212–19
	
main beam, 232–34
	
offset-fed reflector, 47
	
omnidirectional, 308–9
	
pattern characteristics, 403
	
phased-array design, 47, 48
	
pointing and tracking of, 203–6
	
polarization properties, 232
	
power combining, 235–38
	
reflector, 44–45, 219–32
	
RF filtering, 235–38
	
sidelobe, 232–34
	
temperature distribution, 193
	
user terminal, 304–11
	
VSAT, 304
Application layer (layer 7), 103–4
Application-specific integrated circuit 
(ASIC) devices, 301, 320

430 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Architecture
	
baseband, 150–61
	
capacity and distribution of services 
and, 148–50
	
definition and design, 143–50
	
QoS and, 146–48
	
service objectives and, 143–46
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), 28–29
Atmospheric absorption, 43
Attenuation
	
characteristics of coaxial and waveguide 
transmission lines, 190
	
cumulative distribution of, 69
	
rain, 43
Automatic gain control (AGC), 73
Backhaul circuits
	
baseband architecture, 152–53
	
terrestrial interface shielding of, 153–54
Backups, 412
Band-edge droop, 262
Bandwidth
	
cancellation, 170
	
dynamic allocation, 159–60
	
efficiency, 157–58
	
resolution, 275–76
	
SCPC network, 86–89
	
UAT, 404
Baseband architecture
	
allocation of requirements and 
functions, 151
	
backhaul circuits, 152–53
	
dynamic bandwidth allocation, 159–60
	
generic illustration, 151
	
information preprocessing for 
equipment, 154–55
	
modulation and demodulation, 156–59
	
multiple access processing and control, 
155–56
	
multiplexing or packet routing, 155
	
service management, 160–61
	
terrestrial interface, 153–54
	
user interface, 152
	
working from outside to inside, 150–52
Baseband equipment
	
design, 161–63
	
information preprocessing for, 154–55
	
subsystem, 162
Baseband functions
	
overview of, 320–21
	
SDR applications, 322–26
	
software design process, 321–22
Baseband section, user terminal, 301–2
Baseband systems
	
interface, 180
	
protocol gateways, 175
	
for scientific missions, 178–81
	
security and encryption within, 175–77
	
telemetry processing, 179–80
Base station controller (BSC), 96
Base transceiver station (BTS), 96
Beamwidth
	
estimation of, 204
	
reflector antennas, 219
Bent-pipe satellites, 262, 266
Binary PSK (BPSK), 166
Biphase shift keying (BPSK)
	
bit error probability, 51
	
defined, 48
	
demodulator block diagram, 50
	
modulator block diagram, 49
	
time domain waveforms, 49
Bit error rate (BER), 48, 406
Block code performance, 169
Block conversion, 197–98
Block upconverter (BUC), 319
Broad beams
	
advantages, 307
	
MSS terminals with, 308
	
use of, 307–8
Broadcast, 26
Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS), 36–37
Building design and construction
	
construction and site development, 
347–49
	
initial and ongoing expenses, 349–52
	
See also Earth station facilities
Business support systems (BSSs), 160
Cable TV (CATV)
	
broadcast distribution, 118
	
systems, 14
Call setup delay, 91–92
Capacity, 148–50
Carrier in carrier (CinC), 113
Carrier-to-IM (C/IM), 259–61
Carrier-to-interference ratio (C/I)
	
antenna diameter and, 74
	
recommended values for use in 
coordination, 369

 
Index 
431
	
uplink, 74–75
Carrier-to-noise-temperature ratio (C/T)
	
C/IM and, 259–61
	
formula, 42
	
nominal value, 68
	
reduction due to rain fade, 70
	
uplink, 68
Cassegrain geometry, 222
Circular aperture
	
maximum, 204
	
power pattern of, 203
Circular polarization, 216, 217
Circular waveguides
	
defined, 207
	
illustrated, 208
	
propagation modes, 213–14
Class A amplifier, 316
Class B amplifier, 317
Class F amplifier, 316–17
Clock timing, slippage of, 98–99
Closed-loop uplink power control (UPC), 
186
Coaxial transmission lines
	
attenuation characteristics of, 190
	
characteristics, 207–9
	
operating frequency, 207–8
	
properties of, 189
Cobham TracStar antenna
	
illustrated, 412
	
technical characteristics, 411
Code division multiple access (CDMA)
	
adaptive carrier cancellation and, 
110–14
	
advantages, 53–54
	
bandwidth management, 159–60
	
baseband architecture and, 156
	
control, 54
	
defined, 33, 52–53
	
DSSS and, 110
	
spectrum arrangement, 53
	
spread spectrum, 159
	
time and spectrum illustrations, 51
	
use of, 83
	
wideband (WCDMA), 97
Code Reuse Multiple Access (CRMA), 113
Communication on the pause (CoTP), 15
Communications on the move (COTM)
	
antennas, 307
	
defined, 15–16
	
installations, 19
	
terminal, 18–19
	
terminal examples, 19
	
terminal steps for, 409
Communications Satellite Corporation 
(COMSAT), 10, 15
Conditional access (CA)
	
in digital DTH ground segments, 
177–78
	
major components of, 178
Conjoint analysis, 145
Connection establishment and termination, 
172–73
Connectivity
	
defined, 22
	
multipoint “interactive,” 24–26
	
point-to-multipoint, 24, 25
	
point-to-point, 22–24
	
types of, 22
Constant bit rate (CBR), 109–10
Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems (CCSDS), 105, 179–80
Content distribution networks (CDN)
	
core of, 133
	
defined, 132
	
DVB-S2 and, 133
	
requirements, 134
	
satellite-based concept, 134
Convolutional code performance, 168
Corrective maintenance
	
activities, 391–92
	
“bath tub curve,” 389
	
defined, 388
	
education and training, 393
	
mean time between failure (MTBF), 389
	
mean time to repair (MTTR), 389–90
	
network monitoring and control during 
service and, 407–8
	
prequalification of transmitting earth 
station and, 401–3
	
recordkeeping of configuration/
maintenance and, 394–95
	
recruiting and training staff, 393–94
	
skill levels, 391–92
	
strategy, 390
	
supporting facilities, 391–92
	
troubleshooting techniques, 395–98
	
uplink access test prior to service and, 
403–7
	
See also Operations and maintenance 
(O&M)

432 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Cross-polarization isolation, 401–2
Cross-polarized signals, 64
Current mode Class D (CMCD) 
amplifier, 317
Decibels, conversion between ratios and, 38
Decryption, TVRO, 328
Delay
	
call setup, 91–92
	
categories, 90
	
end-to-end, 89
	
propagation, 92
	
speech processing (compression/
decompression), 92
	
switching and queuing, 92
Delay equalization, 266
Delay-induced impairment (echo), 92–93
Demand assignment (DA), 33, 100
Demand assignment multiple access 
(DAMA), 54, 81
Demodulation, 156–59
Demodulators, QPSK block diagram, 165
Digital audio radio service by satellite 
(S-DARS)
	
coverage footprint, 137
	
defined, 137
	
requirements, 137–38
	
vehicular terminal concepts, 138
Digital satellite equipment control (DiSEqC) 
specification, 328
Digital signal processor (DSP), 320
Digital subscriber line (DSL), 29, 85
Digital TV recorder (DTR), 327
Digital TV signals, 119
Digital Video Broadcast (DVB), 16, 62
Digital video broadcasting-satellite (DVB-S)
	
basis, 127
	
defined, 127
	
DVB-S2 standard comparison, 131
	
See also DVB-S2 standard
Direct broadcast satellite (DBS) receivers, 1
Directional antennas, 304
Directors, 217
Direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS), 
110
Direct-to-home (DTH) satellite TV
	
antenna sizing alternatives, 136
	
DIRECTV, 15
	
Ku-band satellites, 118
	
point-to-multipoint property, 117
DIRECTV, 15, 16, 120
Discrete cosine transform (DCT), 122, 123
Distortion
	
amplitude, 262–63
	
frequency, 262–63
	
group delay, 263–66
	
intermodulation (IMD), 50
	
linear, 64
	
nonlinear, 64
Doherty Power Amplifier (DPA), 317, 318
Down-converters, 251–53
Downlink gain budget, 202–3
Downlink noise temperature allocation, 
192–96
DVB Return Channel by Satellite (DVB-
RCS), 303
DVB-S2 standard
	
applications, 128
	
capability of extensions, 170
	
capacity advantage, 132
	
code rates and block sizes, 129
	
coding parameters, 129
	
combined performance of, 130–31
	
DVB-S comparison, 131
	
end-to-end block diagram, 63
	
functional block diagrams of, 128
	
modulation and coding characteristics, 
130
	
principal benefits of, 127–28
	
transmission structure of, 128
Dynamic bandwidth allocation, 81–83, 
159–60
Dynamic equalization, 290–92
Earth station facilities
	
building design and construction, 
347–52
	
carbon life of, 356
	
construction costs, 350
	
control systems, 358–59
	
flows, 351–52
	
general arrangement, 341
	
grounding, 352–54
	
heating, ventilating, and air-
conditioning (HVAC), 345–46
	
implementation guidelines and 
scheduling, 373–77
	
implementation schedule, 342
	
noise control, 354
	
O&M, 381–88

 
Index 
433
	
operating costs, 350–51
	
overview of, 339–42
	
prime power, 342–45
	
radio frequency clearance and 
interference analysis, 359–69
	
recommendations, 340–42
	
requirements of, 339–40
	
site development costs, 350
	
site selection, 369–72
	
support equipment costs, 351
	
sustainable ground segment design, 
356–59
	
typical costs, 350–51
	
uninterruptible power system (UPS), 
342–45
Earth station RF design
	
antenna and microwave design, 206–38
	
downlink noise temperature allocation, 
192–96
	
EIRP budget, 183–84
	
gain budget, 202–3
	
G/T budget, 196–202
	
high-power amplification, 238–51
	
pointing and tracking of antennas, 
203–6
	
transmit gain budget, 188–91
	
up- and down-conversion, 251–53
	
uplink design, 183–84
	
uplink power control (UPC), 184–87
Earth stations
	
alignment with satellite, 398–408
	
connectivity, 22
	
design characteristics comparison, 34
	
design philosophy, 21–57
	
development timeline, 4
	
end-to-end satellite networks and, 
54–55
	
first, 8–10
	
future of, 19
	
gain-to-noise-temperature ratio (G/T), 
41–42
	
lightning protection, 354–56
	
major, 30–34
	
microwave systems engineering, 36–47
	
modem design, 47–50
	
multiple-access control, 50–53
	
multiple carrier transmission, 259
	
network topology and information 
formats, 21–30
	
operation of, 56
	
possible sources of issues and outages, 
399
	
prequalification of transmitting earth 
station and, 401–3
	
RF performance requirements, 71
	
satellite systems engineering and 
operation and, 55–57
	
in tracking, telemetry, & command 
(TT&C), 8
	
user terminals, 34–35
Echo cancellors, 93
Effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP)
	
budget, 183–84
	
defined, 41
	
dish diameter relationship, 136
	
in prequalification, 402
	
uplink earth station, 67
Electrostatic discharge (ESD), 353
Elemental antennas, 215
Emergency safeguards, 34
Encryption
	
AES link, 176
	
application layer, 176–77
	
within baseband system, 175–77
End-to-end satellite networks, 54–55
Equalization
	
dynamic, 290–92
	
group delay, 266
Ericsson, 97
Erlang, A. K., 93, 94, 95
Eye diagram, 265
Facilities engineering manager, 347, 348
Facility control systems, 358–59
Facility implementation
	
building construction, 375
	
building design, 374
	
connections to local services, 375
	
cost estimating, 374
	
engineering design and layout, 374
	
factory acceptance tests, 376
	
floor plan, 374
	
gearing up for operation, 377
	
ground breaking, 375
	
guidelines, 373–77
	
HVAC installation, 375
	
licensing and permitting, 374
	
plan and schedule, 374–77
	
requirements definition, 374
	
site selection and acquisition, 374

434 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Facility implementation (continued)
	
on-site testing of equipment, 377
	
staff training, 376
	
technical equipment delivery, 376
	
technical equipment installation, 376
	
testing end-to-end, 377
	
testing over the satellite, 377
	
See also Earth station facilities
Figure of merit (FOM), 146, 147
Filter amplitude responses, 263
Finite impulse response (FIR) filters, 323
Fixed-frequency converters, 252
Fixed Satellite Service (FSS), 36
Fixed terminals
	
receive-only (TVRO), 326
	
transmit-receive (VSAT), 329–32
	
use of, 326
	
See also User terminals
Flanged waveguide horn, 216, 217
Forward error correction (FEC), 48
Frame-to-frame compression, 123
Frequency coordination, 360–62
Frequency distortion, 262–63
Frequency division multiple access (FDMA)
	
bandwidth management, 159–60
	
baseband architecture and, 155–56
	
defined, 52
	
demand assignment and, 33
	
modems, 156
	
time and spectrum illustrations, 51
	
time frame, 53
	
use of, 83
Frequency domain analysis test equipment, 
387
Frequency stability
	
local oscillators and values of, 271
	
long-term, 270–71
	
of microwave oscillators, 270–71
	
phase noise and, 268–72
	
ratio, 270
	
short-term, 268
	
uplink access test (UAT), 406
Gain budget
	
defined, 188
	
example, 202–3
	
transmit, 188–91
Gain slope, 262
Gain-to-noise-temperature ratio (G/T)
	
defined, 41
	
purpose of, 42
Gallium Arsinide field effect transistor (GaAs 
FET), 240
GaN SSPA, 237, 238, 242
Gateways
	
in continuity-of-services, 77–78
	
protocol, 105–6
Gaussian MSK (GMSK), 166, 167
Geostationary earth orbit (GEO)
	
defined, 61–62
	
orbit spacing, 72–75
Geostationary earth orbit (GEO) satellite 
links
	
adjacent channel interference (ACI), 64
	
adjacent satellite interference, 64
	
characteristics, 62–72
	
cross-polarized signals, 64
	
linear distortion, 64
	
link budget example for downlink, 66
	
link budget example for uplink, 67
	
nonlinear distortion, 64
	
simplicity, 62
	
stable unfaded condition, 64
Geostationary earth orbit (GEO) satellites
	
ground antenna elevation angle and 
azimuth to, 73
	
locating, 72
	
network architecture, 84
	
space segment, 2
Globalstar, 76–77, 89
Goldstone tracking station, 8–9
Government use, 15–16
Greenbank Telescope, 7, 8
Gregorian geometry, 222
Grote Reber’s telescope, 5
Grounding
	
augmentation, 353
	
principles of, 353–54
	
reasons for, 353–54
Ground locus of satellite, 205
Ground segments
	
architectural elements, 142
	
architecture, 141–61
	
capacity and distribution of services, 
148–50
	
commercialization of, 10–15
	
components of, 27
	
conjoint analysis, 145
	
defined, 1–3
	
development timeline, 4

 
Index 
435
	
DTH, conditional access in, 177–78
	
equipment, 161–78
	
integrated, 13
	
introduction to, 1–20
	
operation of, 56
	
optimizing, 292–93
	
quality of service (QoS), 146–48
	
service objectives, 143–46
	
sustainable, designing, 356–59
Ground station, 27
Group delay distortion
	
characteristics of, 264
	
correction, 266
	
defined, 263
	
delay equalization and, 266
	
eye diagram, 265
	
measurement, 264
GSM standard, 96–97
G/T
	
antenna gain and, 199–202
	
budget, 196–202
	
evaluation of, 196
	
low-noise amplification and, 197–98
	
noise temperature and, 198–99
	
in prequalification, 402–3
Handheld test devices, 388
Handheld user terminals
	
cellular phones and, 332–34
	
defined, 297
	
design requirements, 332–36
	
dual band and dual mode features, 335
	
L-band, 336
	
wireless nature of, 334
Harmonics, 272, 273
Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning 
(HVAC)
	
characteristics of coaxial and waveguide 
transmission lines, 33
	
early warning, 346
	
earth station facilities, 345–46
	
humidity, 346
	
specifications, 33
High efficiency video coding (HEVC), 124
High-electron mobility transistor (HEMT), 
237
Highly elliptical earth orbit (HEO), 75, 118
High power amplifiers (HPAs), 238–51
	
application guidelines, 248–51
	
as critical active component, 238
	
KPA, 245–48
	
Ku-band, 237
	
multicarrier system, 237
	
multiple, outputs of, 235
	
SSPA, 239–44
	
technology, 239–48
	
transmitted power, 40
	
TWTA, 244–45
Horn antennas
	
characteristics of, 212–15
	
circular conical, 216
	
circular flanged, 217
	
corrugated, 216
	
pyramidal, 215
	
See also Antennas
Hubs, 26
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http), 105
iDirect, 97
Impedance mismatch, 215
Improved Multi-Band Excitation (IMBE) 
voice compression technology, 18
In-band ripple, 262
Information types and formats, 28–29
Inmarsat, 17
Integrated ground segments, 13
Integrated receiver-decoder (IRD), 64, 119
Interference
	
adjacent channel (ACI), 49, 50, 64
	
criteria, 368
	
geometry, 367
	
paths, 364–66
	
path study, 371
	
potential, 365
	
radio frequency (RFI), 361, 364
	
satellite communication services and, 
364
	
sources and evaluation, 363–66
	
terrestrial, 362–63
Interference analysis
	
degradation degree, 367–68
	
methods, 366–69
	
propagation losses and, 369
Interference budget, 368
Intermediate frequencies (IFs), 32
Intermodulation distortion (IMD), 50
Intermodulation noise
	
narrowband products, 259
	
from nonlinear distortion, 258–62
	
thermal noise and, 258

436 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
International Telecommunications Satellite 
Organization (INTELSAT), 
10–12
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 152
Internet Protocol, 54–55
Intersymbol interference (ISI), 158
IP Over Satellite (IPoS), 303
Iridium constellation, 75, 89
ITU
	
coordination of satellite networks, 362
	
management, 360–61
	
as mediator, 362
	
Radio Regulations, 361
	
role in frequency coordination, 360–62
Jansky, Karl, 4
Ka-band broadband systems, 18
Keyhole, 76
Klystron power amplifiers (KPAs)
	
compact designs, 245–48
	
defined, 245
	
in earth stations, 34
	
generalized block diagram, 249
	
Ku-band, 248
	
specifications, 250
Ku-band SSPAs
	
indoor, 244, 245
	
outdoor, 243
	
specifications, 241
	
See also Solid-state power amplifiers 
(SSPAs)
Ku-band VSAT networks, 112
Launch and early operation phase (LEOP), 
75, 76
LDPC codes, 129
Lightning protection
	
approaches to, 355–56
	
direct and indirect paths and, 354
	
importance of, 354
	
issues, 355
	
surges and, 355
	
See also Earth station facilities
Linear distortion, 64
Link budget
	
for downlink, 66
	
reverse, in antenna gain calculation, 
201
	
with SatMaster, 279–87
	
for uplink, 67
	
See also Geostationary earth orbit 
(GEO) satellite links
Link layer (layer 2), 102
Link margin, 79
Long Term Evolution (LTE) broadband, 19
Low earth orbit (LEO)
	
defined, 60–61
	
satellites, 9–10, 75
Low noise amplifier (LNA)
	
analysis, 195
	
block conversion and, 197–98
	
block diagram, 194
	
gain, 197
	
noise temperature, 195
	
Low-noise block converter (LNB), 197, 
198, 319, 327
Major earth stations
	
functions, 31
	
intermediate frequencies (IFs), 32
	
operating elements of, 31
	
RF terminal (RFT), 31, 32
Marconi, Gugliemo, 3
Marisat 1, 13
MATLAB, 287
Mean opinion score (MOS), 86, 88–89, 90
Mean time between failure (MTBF), 389
Mean time to repair (MTTR), 389–90
Medium earth orbit (MEO), 61
Mesh network topology, 27
Mesh VSAT networks, 109–10
Microstrip, 208, 209
Microwave
	
bands, 36
	
development, 5–8
	
frequencies, 207
	
in long-haul communication lines, 6
	
spectrum, 36–37
Microwave systems
	
antenna principle, 44–47
	
engineering, 36–47
	
gains, losses, and decibel, 37–38
	
range equation, 39–43
	
uplink and downlink elements, 39
Minimum shift keying (MSK), 166, 167
Mobile Satellite Service (MSS)
	
defined, 37
	
examples of, 17

 
Index 
437
	
Inmarsat and, 17
	
L-band, 15
Mobile switching center (MSC), 96–97
MODCOD technology, 168–69, 330
Modems
	
bandwidth efficiency, 157–58
	
defined, 156
	
design, 47–50, 164–71
	
FDMA, 156
	
link performance, 166
	
spread spectrum, 159
Modern satellite network management 
system, 379, 380
Modulation, 156–59
	
digital tree, 164
	
systems, 164–71
Modulators, 156, 165
Monitor and control (M&C) systems, 33
Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG)
	
affiliation, 123
	
standards, 123–24
	
See also MPEG-2; MPEG-4
MPEG-2
	
bit rate, 125
	
levels and associated parameters, 126
	
profiles and standards, 125
	
stereo audio, 126
	
structure of, 126
	
tools and formats, 125
	
transform coding of, 122
MPEG-4
	
efficiency and delivery, 123
	
HEVC and, 124
Multibeam torus antenna geometry, 223
Multichannel microwave distribution service 
(MMDS), 153
Multiple access
	
alternatives, 50, 51
	
control, 50–53
	
defined, 22
	
processing and control, 155–56
	
VSAT networks, 100
	
See also specific schemes
	
Multiplexing, 155
Multipoint “interactive” connectivity
defined, 24
	
illustrated, 25
	
inbound channel, 26
	
two-way (duplex) transmission, 26
Narrowband IM products, 259
Network architecture, segments of, 27–28
Network control center (NCC), 78
Network Information Table (NIT), 407
Network layer (layer 3), 102–3
Network monitoring, 407–8
Network operation facility, 398–400
Network topology, 21–30
	
generic illustration, 22
	
mesh, 27
	
star, 26
	
terrestrial, example, 23
Noise control, 354
Noise temperature
	
allocation, 192–96
	
amplifier, 193
	
computation, 193
	
defined, 192
	
distribution, 193
	
LNA, 195
	
predicting and measuring, 198–99
	
receiving system, 196
Non-GEO satellites
	
application of, 75
	
constellation characteristics, 76–77
	
continuity-of-service issues, 77–78
	
key parameters for constellations, 77
	
link characteristics, 78–79
	
for TT&C, 75–76
Nonlinear distortion, 64
NovelSat NS3000 modem
	
data rates, 167
	
DVB-S2 extensions, 170
	
technical specifications, 171
Offset QPSK (OQPSK), 166
Omnidirectional antennas, 308–9
One-way (broadcast) service
	
broadcast center functions, 121
	
data broadcasting and content 
distribution networks, 132–34
	
digital audio radio service, 137–38
	
digital video broadcasting and 
backhaul, 118–32
	
MPEG-2 and, 122–23, 125–26
	
MPEG-4 and, 123–24
	
overview of, 117–18
	
program distribution systems, 120
	
receiving dish selection, 135–37
	
requirements, 117–38

438 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Open-loop uplink power control (UPC), 
186
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model
	
application layer (layer 7), 103–4
	
defined, 102
	
link layer (layer 2), 102
	
network layer (layer 3), 102–3
	
physical layer (layer 1), 102
	
presentation layer (layer 6), 103
	
protocols, 104
	
session layer (layer 5), 103
	
transport layer (layer 4), 103
Operations and maintenance (O&M)
	
antenna system, 382
	
backups and, 412
	
baseband processing and multiplex, 382
	
best people and, 413
	
complexity of, 57
	
computers and peripherals, 383
	
corrective maintenance, 388–98
	
culture of innovation, integrity, and 
customer focus and, 413
	
data, believing and, 410–12
	
earth station alignment with satellite, 
398–408
	
effective, 379, 381
	
facilities systems, 383
	
function elements, 381
	
importance of, 379–80
	
load of responsibility, 413
	
loose-reins management, 410
	
management of, 410
	
modem, 382
	
monitor and control (M&C), 383
	
Murphy, anticipating, 410
	
operations organization, 384
	
people as solution, 410
	
preventative maintenance scheduling, 
384–88
	
principles of, 379–413
	
requirements by functional area or 
subsystem, 382–83
	
RF terminal electronics, 382
	
service support for user terminals, 
408–10
	
structure of, 381–88
	
user end and, 413
	
video monitoring, 383
Operations support systems (OSSs), 160
Orbital characteristics
	
geostationary earth orbit (GEO), 61–62
	
low earth orbit (LEO), 60–61
	
medium earth orbit (MEO), 61
Orbit visualization, 277–79
Ortho-mode transducer (OMT), 220, 304, 
305
Packet loss and retransmission, 172
Packet routing, 155
Paired Carrier Multiple Access (PCMA), 113
Palapa A light-traffic earth station, 11
Performance enhancing proxy (PEP), 103–4, 
105
PESQ, 89
Phased-array antenna system, 47, 48
Phase-locked loop (PLL), 270, 324
Phase-locked loop feedback system, 271
Phase locking, 268
Phase noise
	
sideband profile, 270
	
spectral distribution of, 269
Phase nonlinearity, uncompensated, 267
Physical layer (layer 1), 102
Plesiochronous mode, 98
Point-to-multipoint connectivity
	
broadcast, 24
	
defined, 24
	
illustrated, 25
Point-to-point connectivity
	
defined, 22
	
illustrated, 24
	
link establishment, 22–24
Portable terminals. See Handheld user 
terminals
Power amplifiers (PAs)
	
Cass A, 316
	
Class B, 317
	
Class F, 316–17
	
current mode Class D (CMCD), 317
	
defined, 311
	
Dougherty, 317, 318
	
GaN, 319
	
high-frequency model, 314
	
low-power consumption, 314
	
parameters, 311
	
RF, characteristics of classes, 315
	
See also Solid-state power amplifiers 
(SSPAs); User terminals
Power and utilities, 34
Power combining, 236–37

 
Index 
439
Power factor (PF), 347–52
Power spectral density (PSD), 111, 112
Power systems, specifications of, 344–45
Predistortion technology, 170
Prequalification
	
antenna pattern, sidelobe levels, 401
	
antenna pattern characteristics, 403
	
cross-polarization isolation, 401–2
	
EIRP, 402
	
G/T, 402–3
	
of transmitting earth station, 401–3
Presentation layer (layer 6), 103
Preventative maintenance
	
complexity of, 384–85
	
handheld test devices, 388
	
plan structure, 386–87
	
RF test and measurement functions 
and, 385
	
routine, 385
	
scheduling, 384–88
	
strategy, 385
	
See also Operations and maintenance 
(O&M)
Prime power, 342–45
Program distribution systems, 120
Programmable T&C processor (PTP), 179
Program tracking system, 228
Project Echo, 9
Propagation delay, 92
Propagation losses, 369
Protocol gateways
	
in hub, 106
	
as part of baseband system, 175
	
TCP/IP acceleration and, 171–75
	
in VSAT, 106
Public switched telephone network (PSTN), 
54–55, 84, 85
Pyramidal horns, 215
Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), 
47
Quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK)
	
modulator/demodulator block diagram, 
165
	
offset (OQPSK), 166
	
with raised-cosine pulse shaping, 315
	
spectral re-growth, 260
Quality of service (QoS)
	
in broadband networks, 146–48
	
defined, 147
	
from design standpoint, 147
	
operations and, 56
Radio, first space application, 3–5
Radio Detecting and Ranging (RADAR) 
systems, 5
Radio frequency clearance, 359–69
Radio frequency interference (RFI), 361, 
364, 372
Radio telescopes
	
construction of, 6–7
	
development, 5–8
	
Greenbank Telescope, 7, 8
	
tropospheric-scatter terminal, 7
Radomes, 306
Rain attenuation, 43
Range equation, 39–43
Receive signal processor (RSP), 323–24
Receiving dish
	
EIRP and, 136
	
selection, 135–37
	
sizing, 135
Rectangular waveguides
	
defined, 207
	
illustrated, 208
	
propagation modes, 210–11
Reflector antennas, 219–32
	
alternatives, 221
	
angular travel and motion, 226
	
azimuth-elevation, 226
	
beamwidth, 219
	
center-fed configurations, 46
	
concepts, 221
	
electrical performance, 224
	
functional requirements, 229–31
	
general requirements for, 225–26
	
geometric optics model and, 45
	
geometry, 222
	
large, 222, 223–24
	
lifetime, 231–32
	
linear polarization, 45
	
maintainability, 231
	
mechanical properties, 226–29
	
mounts of, 305
	
multibeam torus geometry, 223
	
offset-fed, 47
	
polar arrangement, 226–27
	
principle of, 44
	
remote operation, 231
	
SNG system, 230

440 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Reflector antennas (continued)
	
system requirements, 229–32
	
tracking, 228–29
	
two-axis monopulse feed, 230
	
X-Y system, 227
	
See also Antennas
Request for Comment (RFC), 30, 152
Resolution bandwidth (RBW), 275–76
RF clearance process, 372
RF directional filter, 237
RF filtering, 235–38
RF terminal (RFT)
	
antenna design, 299–300
	
COTM antennas, 307
	
electronic equipment, 32
	
functioning of, 31–32
	
Ku- and Ka-band outdoor unit, 
300–301
	
overview of, 299
	
See also User terminals
Satellite motion, 205
Satellite news gathering (SNG) antenna 
system, 230
Satellite operators, 400
Satellite systems, engineering and operation, 
55–57
Satellite Tool Kit (STK)
	
browser window, 278
	
Close Approach (CAT), 278
	
defined, 277
	
ground track illustration, 278
	
path generation, 277
	
RF element representation, 279
	
support, 277
SatMaster, 279–80
SatMaster Pro
	
calculations at saturation, 282
	
carrier/link input parameters, 282
	
defined, 72
	
detailed link budget with, 279–80
	
downlink calculation, 284
	
earth station power requirements, 285
	
EIRP density calculations, 285
	
general calculations, 283
	
input window, 280
	
interference evaluation, 286
	
link input parameters, 281
	
output, 280–86
	
satellite input parameters, 282
	
space segment utilization, 286
	
totals per carrier, 285
	
uplink calculation, 283–84
Saturation flux density (SFD), 67–68
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), 176–77
Service delivery, locations, 148
Service management, 96–97, 160–61
Service objectives, 143–46
Session layer (layer 5), 103
Short-term instability, 268, 269
Signal impairments
	
allocation between space and ground, 
255–74
	
allocation process, 256
	
amplitude and phase nonlinearity, 
266–69
	
amplitude versus frequency distortion, 
262
	
AM-to-PM, 272
	
assignment of allocations, 257
	
contributions, 256
	
group delay distortion, 263–66
	
harmonics, 272, 273
	
intermodulation noise, 258–62
	
not directly associated with 
transmission, 272–74
	
spurious products, 272
	
timing irregularity, 272, 273–74
	
typical, 256, 257–58
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 325
SimRF, 288, 289
Simulsat 7 multi-beam Earth station 
antenna, 223
Single channel per carrier (SCPC) networks, 
85–99
	
bandwidth and quality, 86–89
	
delay and latency, 89–93
	
service management, 96–97
	
synchronization with terrestrial 
networks, 97–99
	
traffic engineering and throughput, 
93–96
Sites
	
development, 347–49
	
initial and ongoing expenses, 349–52
Site selection
	
interference path study and, 371
	
objective, 369
	
path profiles evaluation, 370
	
preliminary survey, 369–70

 
Index 
441
	
RFI evaluation for, 369–70
	
topological map representation, 370
Slot antenna elements, 218
Slow start and congestion avoidance, 172, 
174
Software-defined radio (SDR)
	
applications, 322–26
	
defined, 322
	
receive signal processor (RSP), 323–24
	
system design, 325
	
user terminals, 297
Software design process, 321–22
Software design tools
	
dynamic equalization, 290–92
	
link budget, 279–87
	
MATLAB, 287
	
orbit visualization, 277–79
	
overview of, 276–77
	
Satellite Tool Kit (STK), 277–79
	
SatMaster, 279–80
	
SatMaster Pro, 270–87
	
SimRF, 288, 289
	
system simulation and communication 
analysis, 287–90
Solid-state power amplifiers (SSPAs)
	
CoTM, 35
	
earth station, 34
	
GaAs FET, 240
	
GaN, 237, 238, 242
	
indoor Ku-band, 244, 245
	
indoor X band, 246
	
introduction of, 239
	
Ku-band, specifications, 241
	
large-capacity, 241
	
lower-power, 240–41
	
outdoor Ku-band, 243
	
uplink RF carriers, 238
Space Communications Protocol 
Specifications (SCPS), 105
Space game, 149
Space-ground interface
	
GEO link characteristics and link 
budget, 62
	
GEO orbit spacing, 72–75
	
link margin, 79
	
non-GEO satellites, 75–79
	
overview of, 59–60
	
requirements, 59–79
	
satellite orbital characteristics and, 60
Space segment
	
defined, 1–3
	
design of, 148
	
elements of, 26–27
Spectrum analyzers, 275
Spectrum monitoring and analysis, 274–76
Speech processing (compression/
decompression), 92
Spreading loss, 67
Spread spectrum, 159
Spurious products, 272
Star network topology, 26
Star VSAT network
	
hub-based, 108, 109
	
interface requirements, 107
	
strength of, 106
	
VSAT placement, 106–7
Step track system, 229
Stripline, 208, 209
Subscriber authorized system (SAS), 178
Sustainable ground segments
	
breakdown, 357
	
cooling operations, 357
	
data floor air management, 357
	
designing, 356–59
	
energy recovery, 357
	
equipment selections, 357–58
	
facility control systems, 358–59
	
ground-coupled heat rejection, 358
	
monitoring, 359
	
overhead air distribution, 357
Switching and queuing delay, 92
Synchronous mode, 98
TCP/IP acceleration, 171–75
Telstar 1, 9–10
TE modes
	
circular waveguide, 213
	
rectangular waveguide, 210
Terrestrial interface
	
baseband architecture, 153–54
	
implementation options, 154
Terrestrial interference and coordination, 
362–63
Terrestrial network topology, 23
Throughput, 93–96
Time division multiple access (TDMA)
	
baseband architecture and, 155
	
complexity and flexibility, 33
	
coordination of timing and bandwidth 
usage, 83

442 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Time division multiple access (TDMA) 
(continued)
	
defined, 52
	
time and spectrum illustrations, 51
	
use of, 83
	
wideband, 53
Time division multiplex (TDM), 85
Time domain analysis test equipment, 387
Timing irregularity, 272
TM modes
	
circular waveguide, 214
	
rectangular waveguide, 211
Tracking
	
automatic, 205
	
monopulse feed system, 206
Tracking, telemetry, & command (TT&C)
	
defined, 8
	
non-GEO satellites for, 75–76
	
stations, 27–28
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS), 
180
Tracking antennas
	
beam, 227
	
drive control, 228
	
functional block diagram, 228
	
step system block diagram, 229
Traffic engineering, 93–96
Transmit gain budget, 188–91
Transmit signal processor (TSP), 324–25
Transport layer (layer 4), 103
Traveling-wave tube (TWT), 158, 267
Traveling-wave tube amplifiers (TWTAs)
	
applications, 244
	
defined, 244
	
earth station, 34
	
features, 244–45
	
Ku-band, 247
Tropospheric-scatter terminal, 7
Troubleshooting
	
methodology, 396
	
techniques, 395–98
	
test equipment and devices for, 397
TV receive-only (TVRO) terminal
	
block diagram, 327
	
decryption, 328
	
defined, 326
	
DiSeqC specification, 328
	
set-top box, 328
	
user interface, 328–29
Two-line element sets (TLEs), 278
Two-way communications services
	
characteristics of, 82
	
requirements, 81–114
	
single channel per carrier (SCPC) 
networks, 85–99
	
VSAT broadband networks, 99–114
Uniform resource locator (URL), 105
Uninterruptible power system (UPS)
	
batteries, 344
	
earth station facility, 342–45
	
fixed terminals, 326
	
as potential weak link, 392–93
	
primary purpose of, 343–44
	
specification of, 345
	
types of specifications, 344–45
Up-converters, 251–53
Uplink access test (UAT)
	
bit error rate performance, 406
	
burst and bit timing, 404
	
carrier frequency, 404
	
defined, 403–4
	
frequency stability and drift, 405–6
	
modulation bandwidth, 404
	
RF channel amplitude response, 404–5
	
RF channel group delay response, 405
	
threshold performance, 405–6
	
uplink carrier check, 404
Uplink gain budget
	
active/passive elements and, 189
	
defined, 188
	
illustrated, 188
Uplink power control (UPC)
	
applied to Ku-band BSS broadcast 
centers, 187
	
closed-loop, 186
	
control loop and, 187
	
earth station, 184–87
	
EIRP requirement, 190
	
function of, 64
	
open-loop, 186
	
potential problems, 185–86
User interface
	
baseband architecture, 152
	
TV receive-only (TVRO) terminal, 
328–29
	
user terminal, 302
User terminal antennas
	
broad beam, 307–11
	
communications-on-the-move, 307

 
Index 
443
	
directional, 304
	
omnidirectional, 308–9
	
overview of, 304
User terminals, 295–336
	
baseband, 301–2
	
baseband functions, 320–26
	
behavior of, 296
	
delivery of services by, 408
	
design of, 295
	
in earth station design, 34–35
	
fixed, 326–32
	
flat-panel fly-away, 300
	
general configurations, 297–303
	
handheld, 297
	
handheld, design requirements, 332–36
	
introduction of, 16–18
	
portable, design requirements, 332–36
	
power amplifiers, 311–20
	
RF, 299–301
	
in satellite communications, 296–97
	
service support for, 408–10
	
small, standards for, 303
	
software-defined radio (SDR), 297
	
steps for CoTM, 409
	
user interface, 302
	
VSAT, 295, 298
Variable bit rate (VBR), 110
Vehicular terminal concepts, 138
Very large scale integration (VLSI), 320, 321
Very small aperture terminals (VSATs)
	
aesthetics and, 330
	
antennas, 304
	
application demand, 101
	
block diagram, 298
	
broadband data communications with, 
81
	
configuration, 295
	
consumer broadband, 329
	
defined, 295, 303
	
equipment suppliers, 105–6
	
examples defining uses of, 101–2
	
examples of, 14
	
as fixed transmit-receive terminal, 
329–30
	
frequency clearance, 330
	
indoor electronics, 329–30
	
installation considerations, 330–32
	
installation options for antenna, 331
	
operation of, 101
	
orbit visibility, 330
	
roof access and rights, 330
	
safety and, 330
	
in star network, 329
	
terminal suppliers, 18
	
use of, 1, 99
	
ViaSat and, 18
	
weather conditions and, 330
	
zoning and, 330
	
See also VSAT networks
Virtual Circuit, 29
Virtual private network (VPN), 106
VLSI Hardware Definition Language 
(VHDL), 321
Voice over IP (VoIP)
	
access, 88
	
adoption of, 85
	
bandwidth and quality, 86–89
	
core, 86
	
defined, 85
	
distribution, 86–88
	
quality objectives, 87–88
Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 271
VSAT networks
	
application requirements, 101–6
	
CDMA and adaptive carrier 
cancellation, 110–14
	
conclusions concerning, 114
	
defined, 99
	
demand assignment (DA), 100
	
hub-based, 108, 109
	
introduction of, 99
	
Ku-band, 112
	
mesh, 109–10
	
multiple access system, 100
	
protocol gateway, 105–6
	
star, 106–9
	
TDMA, 113
	
topologies, 100–101
	
topology comparison, 113
	
See also Very small aperture terminals 
(VSATs)
Waveguides
	
circular, 207, 208
	
ortho-mode transducer (OMT), 220
	
propagation modes, 209, 210–11, 
213–14
	
rectangular, 207, 208

444 
The Satellite Communication Ground Segment and Earth Station Handbook 
Waveguide slot arrays, 219
Waveguide transmission lines
	
attenuation characteristics of, 190
	
properties of, 189
Wideband CDMA (WCDMA), 97
Windowing TCP, 171–72, 173
Work breakdown structure (WBS), 375
Xpress Transport Protocol (XTP), 105
Yagi-Uda array, 217

