
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

A complete professional course for artists
Barrington Barber
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

This edition published in 2006 by Arcturus Publishing Limited 
26/27 Bickels Yard, 151–153 Bermondsey Street, 
London SE1 3HA
Copyright © 2006 Arcturus Publishing Limited
All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without written permission in accordance with the provisions
of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended). Any person or persons
who do any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may
be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
ISBN-13: 978-1-84193-448-8
ISBN-10: 1-84193-448-8
Printed in China
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

Contents
Introduction ................................................................
6
Getting started ..........................................................
8
Drawing still life in colour ....................................
56
Landscape ..................................................................
78
Animals ........................................................................
98
The human figure ....................................................
114
Portraits ......................................................................
144
Drapery ........................................................................
166
Composition and colour ........................................
178
Significant colours ..................................................
194
Index ............................................................................
208
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

6
‘Drawing in colour’ is a slightly unusual title, because the obvious
comment is, ‘How does that differ from painting?’ Well, in this
book I examine no fewer than four methods of drawing in
various colour mediums, only one of which is connected with
painting. I will be showing examples – and how to go about them
– of drawing in coloured pencil, pastel or crayon, coloured inks
and watercolour painting, which can be heavily conditioned 
by drawing.
It is very easy to get confused by the many techniques of
introducing colour into the already complex area of drawing in
tone, line and texture. I believe the solution is to approach it as
though learning to draw afresh. Understanding colour is quite a
complex affair, and the book begins by assuming that readers will
benefit from an introduction to the basics of colour theory. This
need not delay you, however, because even if it is not wholly
grasped at once, the simple practice of applying colour in your
drawings will provide you with valuable experience, leading you
to work out tonal values to your own satisfaction. And please
don’t believe that there is only one correct way; try out every
variation that occurs to you while working, and you may discover
yet more interesting ways of manipulating colour schemes.
I have set as many exercises in the use of colour as seemed
practical, and have tried to include all the really essential
methods. You will find it useful to look at the work of other
artists, both living and dead, and to observe how they worked out
the chromatic schemes in their own pictures. Some are exponents
of very subtle and restrained values, while others are far more
vibrant or strident in the way they use their pigments. The key
always seems to come down to two things: first, harmony; and
second, contrast. Of course, all artists have used both at some
time in their careers, but they often have a tendency to favour
one or the other. In this book I have tried to show the effects of
both approaches.
The addition of colour to your drawing can increase the
enjoyment both to yourself in creating it and, afterwards, to your
viewers. The power of colour to enhance a subject is most evident
when you compare a black and white reproduction of a painting
with the same picture in colour. Not only that, the natural
symbolism of colour, or at least the type of symbolism that we
attach to the colour of an object, brings further meaning to the
subject matter.
Introduction
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

7
The different mediums that you experiment with should add
further to your enjoyment. Don’t worry if, at first, you might
make rather a mess of the exercises; no one ever became any
good at art without making lots of mistakes to start with. As long
as you consider carefully everything you’ve done, no matter how
unsatisfactory or disappointing it might be, you will soon learn
not to repeat your mistakes too many times. Experimentation is
the way that art evolves; it is not just the preserve of scientists.
So, prepare to have a good – if occasionally difficult – time with
the exercises in this book; with my heartfelt good wishes on the
expansion of your artistic ability.
Barrington Barber, 2006
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

8
To start drawing in colour is to take a step into the area of
painting, although in this volume we will mainly be looking at
colour as an adjunct to drawing. There are various methods and
media to explore, beginning with the materials and how to get
used to them through a series of exercises. We will be concerned
mostly with drawing in coloured pencil, pastels, coloured inks 
and watercolour.
So we start with a list of the materials that will be useful to
your work. You may not want to use them all but it is a good idea
to try them out, if only in a limited way. Then your choice of
which medium to use will be based on knowledge and experience
rather than mere guesswork. This is a much more practical way of
ensuring that you have some control over your medium.
Go through all the exercises shown here because they will
familiarize you with a range of mediums and also provide you
with practice, which every artist needs. You may even find you can
invent a few exercises of your own, which is a sign that you are
engaging with the medium in depth. It is also more fun for you
when you play around with different mediums. Most of the
exercises are simple enough but don’t be misled into thinking 
that therefore they are not worth trying out. In fact, simple
repetition of straightforward technical practices is the bedrock of
all artistic expertise. When you see a young artist doodling with
patterns and repetitive marks on a sheet of paper, he or she is in
the process of learning the manual dexterity that is so important
for any artist.
Drawing is always drawing, whether in colour or not. So do 
not be put off if you know nothing or little about it. The way to
learn is by experimentation and experiencing both success and
failure. When you are drawing easily without any problems, it is
only because previously you have overcome difficulties of some
sort.  And remember, when you appear to be having difficulties,
that is when you are learning most. It will become easier if 
you persevere.
Getting started
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

9
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
10
Materials and mediums
Here is a selection of the materials required for drawing in
colour.  I have chosen those most easily obtained from art or
stationery shops. As an artist you will always want to use the best,
but occasionally less specialized materials can be just as good.
1. Coloured pencils – don’t concern yourself
too much with the brand, although some are
better than others. Go for as many variations
in colour as you can find. Thinner pencils can
be of superior quality but not always. Try
them out and make your own judgement.
Watercolour crayons are similar to ordinary
coloured pencils but you can use a brush
with water to spread their colour over larger
areas. There are several brands available.
2. Fineline graphic pens – these pens are
good for drawing and behave similarly to a
coloured pencil but with a more intense
colour value.
3. Brushes – the best are sable but there are
many varieties of hair and synthetic fibre.
You will only need two or three brushes,
especially if they come to a fine point. A size
0, one 3 and perhaps one 7 or 8 would be
sufficient. For extending pastels you might
need a hog hair or some other stiff brush.
4. Soft pastels – these tend to be expensive.
They come in a wide range of colours but
get used up quickly. However, for some work
they can be essential.
5. Hard pastels – also known as conté
crayons, these are essentially the same
material as the soft ones but bound together
in a compressed form. Hard pastels are
square in section whereas the soft ones are
round. The range of colours is again
enormous, they last longer and are easier to
manipulate.
6. Stumps – these are just rolls of paper in a
compressed form, pointed at both ends and
very useful for extending the tones of your
pastels. They come in several sizes, but
1. Coloured pencil
2. Fineline graphic pen
3. Sable brush
5. Hard pastel
6. Stump
7. Scalpel
8. Felt tip  pen
8b. Felt tip illuminator
9. Watercolour box
4. Soft pastel
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

MATERIALS AND MEDIUMS
11
usually you will only want two, a large fat one
and a thin one.
7. Scalpel – the best knife for sharpening
pencils, crayons, pastels or anything, but they
are extremely sharp and not advisable for
students under 16 years. A craft knife is almost
as good and safer to use.
8. Felt tip pens and illuminators – these pens
allow thicker, more solid areas of colour to be put
on quickly and are useful for larger drawings.
9. Watercolour box – watercolours are easiest to
use from a box but they can be bought in small
tubes as well. 
10. Fine nib push or dip pens – these provide
variable line and pen strokes, from very fine to
fairly thick depending on the pressure applied.
Some nibs are more flexible than others.
11. Liquid water colour (concentrated) – these
colours are just like ink but may be diluted with
water. They can be used with a pen or a brush.
12. Indian ink – a more permanent ink,
available in many colours. Perfect for pen work
but can be used with a brush.
Paper:
Watercolour paper – ideal for anything where
water is the main solution. It takes the colour
well and helps to stop it going patchy.
Ingres paper – very good for pastel drawing, and
it comes in many shades. You will find it easier
to draw in pastel on toned paper because white
paper gives a rather too stark contrast.
Cartridge paper – this comes in various weights
(gsm = grams per square metre), so you will
have to try different types to suit your piece of
work. Generally speaking, a smooth surface is
better for pen and ink and rough is better for
pencil work.
11. Concentrated liquid water colour
12. Indian ink
10. Fine nib push or dip pens
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
12
Holding the tools
Holding your pen, brush, chalk or pencil doesn’t always have to be
the same as you would hold a fountain pen. Sometimes you get
better, freer results by holding them as you would hold a stick or a
house-painting brush. The only one that you will have to hold the
same way as a fountain pen is the dip pen with ink because it is very
difficult to manipulate any other way. We show here the variety of
ways of holding these implements. You may need to practise these
different ways to become good at them.
1.
2.
3.
4. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

HOLDING THE TOOLS
13
A pen line doesn’t have to be firm and precise
anymore than a pencil line or a pastel stroke
has to be: a rather wobbly and meandering pen
line often looks more convincing than a smooth,
hard-edged line. The main thing in holding an
implement for drawing is not to grip it too
tightly. Your grip should be as light as is
possible without losing control of the tool.
MASTERSTROKES
5.
6.
7.
1. Hold the pastel loosely
2. Fineline pen held conventionally but with
your little finger supporting it
3. Large sable brush held like a wand
4. Small brush held like a pen
5 and 6. Pencil can be held either like a
wand or more conventionally 
7. Push or dip pen held normally
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
14
Drawing positions
In order to draw well, make sure that you are comfortably positioned –
try different positions to find the one most suited to you. It is nearly
always best to have your drawing supported on a sloping board. This
is particularly useful when using watercolours because it allows the
water to run down the paper and makes it easier to control the
intensity of your colour. But a sloping surface is just as useful when
using chalk, pastel, pencil or pen. For most drawing, except with pen
and ink, I prefer to stand up using an easel, but sometimes it is not
convenient nor does it always give the best results. When working
with pen and ink, you should keep your paper surface less upright,
otherwise the ink does not flow properly to the nib, and the same is
true to a certain extent with brushwork in watercolour. But having the
paper absolutely flat is not a good idea because you tend to view it
too much from one angle, which can give rise to distortion.
2. Sitting down with the board supported by the back of
another chair
1. Standing at an easel
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING POSITIONS
15
3. Drawing with pastels on a board
propped up on a table
5. Probably the best position for
drawing in pen and ink
4. Standing up with a sketchpad
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
16
This simple device is very useful for demonstrating
the relationships between the different colours of
the spectrum and holds true for any of the
mediums that you will be using.
The diagram shows an inner circle of colour
containing the three primaries, red, yellow and
blue. ‘Primary’ means you cannot break them
down into any components. They are the three
basic colours from which all others are made.
In the outer circle we have a number of
secondary colours which combine two of the
primary colours, and also the gradations of the
spectrum in between. Starting at the top and
moving in a clockwise direction the colours are:
green, blue-green (turquoise), the primary blue,
violet, purple, crimson, the primary red,
vermilion, orange, deep yellow, the primary
yellow, yellow-green, and then back to the first
colour, green.
Note that the results of mixing each of the
secondary colours (two primaries mixed) yield
strong red and weak blue in crimson; strong
blue and weak red in violet; strong blue and
weak yellow in turquoise; strong yellow and
weak blue in yellow-green; strong yellow and
weak red in deep yellow and strong red and
weak yellow in vermilion.
Now have a look at the colours on the wheel
that are opposite one another. They
‘complement’ each other as they render the
greatest contrast between themselves and, as a
result,have the most impact when placed next to
each other in, for example, a picture.
Tertiary colours are mixtures of all three
primaries, which make darker, subtler or more
neutral colours, such as brown, beige, grey and
variations on green and purple.
The colour wheel
Colour control
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE COLOUR WHEEL
17
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
18
Coloured pencil
Coloured pencils are one form of colour that almost everybody
has had some experience of using, from quite an early age. You
will need a good range of colours, and different brands produce
slightly different ranges, so sometimes a mixture of brands can be
to your advantage. Make sure all your pencils are well sharpened
before you start, because you get a better texture for the colour
intensity if you do. Have several of each colour ready so that you
can just change pencils when one gets too blunt. This saves time.
To start with, give yourself an idea of the
relative colour power of the different pen-
cils by making a chart, drawing a patch of
colour, as shown, as strongly as you can without
breaking the lead. As you will see, there is a limi-
tation on the intensity of these colours com-
1
pared with paints or pastels. This means that
when you are drawing pictures in this medium
you will be producing a rather soft and gentle
colour impact. The best results will be from
careful and delicate drawing.
Having made your chart, next try drawing with
fairly gentle strokes all in one direction, like
shading with an ordinary pencil. Keep the
strokes as close together as you can in order to
produce a uniform effect.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOURED PENCIL
19
Then make a series of 
short marks in various
directions, producing an overall
texture that looks a bit like wood.
I’ve used brown here.
2
Now try different ways 
of covering a surface, as
shown; first a wandering line
which doubles back on itself to
produce a sort of scribble area.
I’ve used green, but try several
colours yourself.
3
Now you can attempt overlaying one colour with another. 
To keep it simple, I have just done strokes all in one
direction for the first colour and in a contrary direction for the
second. My combinations are yellow-green then green, green
then brown, yellow then red, and yellow then blue. But any
combination is worth trying, so do experiment.
6
Finally, practise controlling your pencil by starting with a 
hard stroke that softens off. Then select another colour; its
complementary contrast (the pairs of colours that lie opposite
each other on the colour wheel – see page 16) would be best.
Start off gently with this one before making the stroke, and
colour, stronger towards the end. 
7
Lastly, try the exercise of 
taking closely marked
straight lines alongside and across
each other to build up a rather
denser texture.
5
The next series of marks 
are almost dots and you can
decide whether you prefer a
scattering of dots or very short
marks. Cover the area as uniformly
as you can.
4
Yellow-green then
green
Green then brown
Yellow then red
Yellow then blue
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
20
Pencil work in greater detail
These sketches show different ways of producing texture with
coloured pencils and give some idea of both their possibilities
and limitations. Because pencils are easy to control, they are
frequent favourites among beginners. Later on, of course, one
realizes that the control doesn’t come from mental determination
but purely from constant practice. Then you can let go of all the
controls and allow the eye to direct the hand without effort.
First of all, just a simple patch of colour 
where the pencils have been scribbled in
all directions to produce a texture. The three
colours used were brown, then pink and then
ultramarine blue. The blue was put on more
heavily than the other two. This produces a
smoky texture, which can be built up quite easily.
1
Now we take two areas of colour, a dark 
background behind a lighter piece of
cloth. The cloth is drawn with loose strokes in
red, yellow and a touch of blue. There is no
attempt to build up a strong colour. For the
background, a closely shaded dark blue was first
applied, followed by brown and red, and then
even heavier strokes of violet. The build-up here
is stronger, to create a dark space.
2
Next, we have two parts of a drawing by 
Mary Cassatt, the American Impressionist.
The first part is a leg-of-mutton sleeve of the
period, drawn with rapid light strokes of the
pencil. The sleeve itself is in green, yellow
ochre, brown, blue and violet, in that order.
Some areas are more closely covered, others less
so, to give change of tone. The background is a
heavily drawn-on texture of red and yellow, with
some violet in the shadows. Having worked up
the colours to the desired intensity, they are
given added strength by the black outlining of
the sleeve shape and deepening of the shadows
in the space behind.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PENCIL WORK IN GREATER DETAIL 
21
The Toulouse-Lautrec figure in the 
fur-trimmed evening coat is done with far
less texture, keeping everything very spare and
lightly drawn. This creates a sort of delicacy
which is quite elegant.
Coloured pencils are best used where you
would rather create soft or delicate images.
5
An example based on a 
Picasso drawing of 1923.
Here the two tones of pink
and blue help to provide the
dimensional aspects of the
head, while the yellow ochre
and a brown give shadowy
areas on both head and hair.
Again, a few black lines
sharpen up the image.
4
The second Mary Cassatt drawing is of a small
child held in its mother’s arms. First, a light
layer of yellow ochre was smoothed on, then
pinker areas around the thigh, stomach, chest
and shoulder. When that is done, areas of light
and dark blue help to bring out the shaded
parts, with a little added green. The background
areas are on one side dark blue and violet, and
on the other side greenish-yellow. To finish,
once again a black pencil has been used to
define the rounded edges of the figure.
One way of making a distinction between the
different effects of light falling on both sides of
the face or figure is to make one side of the
face a warm, bright colour – a pink or light
yellow; and the other side, a cool blue or 
green colour. This effect of warm and cool
colours on the edge of a form helps to create an
effect of roundness. 
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
22
Coloured ink
Fineline fibre-tipped pens in a range of colours represent
coloured ink in its simplest commercial form. You can buy them
separately or in packs of a complete colour range. The other
option is to use a fine dip pen and nib and bottles of either
coloured Indian ink or concentrated liquid watercolours that also
come in bottles. These work just as well as fibre tips and last
much longer.
The first task is to test their 
effect by scribbling a patch of colour with
each individual pen. Lay them alongside each
other to see how they contrast or harmonize.
With this type of ink, the colours are usually
quite sharp and strong so that the only problem
is how to soften them and combine them.
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOURED INK
23
Next, try overlaying strokes of two different colours with 
the strokes of one colour opposed by strokes of another at
almost right angles over the top. I show blue over green, blue
over pink, brown over grey and brown over red.
3
In order to get a gentler variety of tone in your colour, do the 
outlines in ink lines and then use another medium to produce
areas of tone within the outlined shapes. I have used coloured pencils
inside the square outline of ink. This can work quite well.
4
Lastly, I show a set of marks made by 
thicker felt-tipped markers which, as you
can see, will strengthen any colours where you
feel you need a more powerful emphasis.
5
One way of pulling two colours together
is by making very small marks of colour
starting heavily on the left and gradually
dispersing them more widely as you move to the
right. Then do the same thing with another
colour from the right towards the left. If one
2
colour is a lot stronger or darker than the other
you may have to fade it out more quickly. In my
examples, I’ve done from yellow to red and
from red to green. Note that the yellow-green
was helped a bit towards its stronger end by
another deeper green.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
24
Pen and ink in greater detail
The problem with drawing in colour in pen and ink is rather similar
to the situation with coloured pencils. Large areas take so many
strokes of the nib to fill them that inevitably there is a large amount
of white paper left showing through, and this tends to produce more
of a tint than a solid colour. Other problems are building up tones
sufficiently densely to hold the form and taking care that marks
aren’t so strong they dominate. Pen and ink drawings are never quick
to produce although this does have the advantage of allowing you to
be more careful in building up your picture. Some people love the
medium while others try it only once. See how you get on.
In these two drawings – one in pencil and the
other in paint – I have used David Hockney as
my inspiration. Here, the multitude of overlaid
reddish tones give some idea of the man’s
strong rubicund complexion. The hair and the
shirt are not too difficult, although the shirt in
the original is much stronger in colour.
Hundreds of pen strokes are needed to build
the colour, so you will need patience. You will
also need a fair amount of confidence, because
it is impossible to remove the pen strokes once
they have been made. 
The face of the girl was harder
to get right tonally because the
pink complexion of the
original was quite delicate.
This version looks both
stronger and deeper in tone.
The small broken strokes are
better for reproducing a less
intense colour but even then,
as you can see, it remains 
quite strong.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PEN AND INK IN GREATER DETAIL 
25
In this study of Florence, based
on a work by Oskar Kokoschka,
the tones and colours are built up
by a mixture of small and large
strokes, many of them packed
quite closely to give an effect of
solid roofs and walls. You will have
to overlay your marks several
times in order to get the tonal
qualities you need, and each time
you do that, try to vary the
direction of your strokes. 
Based on an impasto brush
painting by Frank Auerbach,
of Mornington Crescent in
London, this example will test
your patience. The less solid
medium of pen and ink will
force you to build up the areas
more gradually. This is where
your talent in mixing colours
becomes important, because
each layer of pen strokes
changes the colour of the area
being drawn. You will have to
decide how many layers of
marks you give each area. I
made the sky with one layer,
which helps the buildings to
look more dense and solid.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
26
Coloured pastels and chalk
The most expressive way of drawing in colour, as opposed to
painting, is by using artists’ pastels or chalk, which are made of
the same pigments as paints, but held in the form of a stick. Most
artists will use both the hard and the soft variety of pastel,
depending on the effects they are after, but if you are an absolute
beginner at this medium, the hard pastels are easier to start with.
They are often also called conté crayons. 
When using pastels or 
conté crayons, work on
tinted stock such as Ingres
paper, testing your colours by
selecting a creamy-beige toned
paper and a darker brown-
grey. On the lighter paper, first
make a sort of chart with one
stroke of each colour using the
thickness of the pastel. This
will give you some idea of the
density of tone and brightness
of colour for each crayon.
1
Now make a patch of 
colour, scribbling chalk
back and forth over a small
area. Then with your finger or
thumb, smudge about half of it
along the bottom section to
see what happens when the
colour is worked over. You will
not need to treat every colour
like this, but do enough to give
you an idea of how it looks.
2
Next, make an overall 
scribble of tone starting
lightly and getting heavier and
heavier – without crushing the
crayon – but getting the most
solid colour value from each
one. This will show how 
the colour can be varied 
in intensity.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOURED PASTELS AND CHALK
27
Now have a go at doing the same thing
on the darker of the two papers. Note
how different colours stand out in different
ways. A red that looks quite dark and strong on
the beige paper, looks vibrant and glowing on
the dark brown. Notice how the dark tones look
heavier on the light paper and more subdued
on the dark paper. See how the tonal variation
4
This is a medium favoured by professional artists
because it is like dry painting: easier to transport
and with much the same possibilities as
watercolours or oil paint. However, you will have
to invest in a good spray-on fixative to hold
loose particles of chalk and prevent your picture
fading away. Some artists don’t like fixing their
work because it sometimes affects the colour
also applies to the smudging exercise. Smudging
the colours allows you to produce a larger mass
of smoother colour if you require it. Most 
artists tend to use a mid- to dark tone for
working in this medium, but some eighteenth-
century artists working on whitish paper
produced pictures that looked, from a distance,
like oil paintings.
values, especially when the pastel is overlaid
thickly, one colour over another. Instead, they
shake off the excess pastel by tapping it gently,
and keep putting on and tapping off until they
get the result that they desire. Nevertheless, to
keep it safe, the work will have to be overlaid
with a sheet of acid-free tissue paper or put
immediately under framed glass.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
28
Pastels in greater detail
Drawing with pastels, you have a greater colour range at your
disposal than for anything else, except paint. You will find it most
advantageous to work on toned or coloured paper, and there are
many kinds available, from cheap sugar paper to more expensive
stock, such as Canson or Ingres papers. Any art shop carries a
variety of pads or sheets and it is worth trying out several
different types until you find the one that suits you best. One
pastel artist I know of draws straight onto thick board and I have
many times worked on ordinary brown or grey cardboard.
Do different textural exercises
just to get the hang of working
with them. Remember, if you
are using soft pastels be much
gentler in your handling.
Put a patch of some 
light tone onto brown
paper and then smudge it with
your finger until it looks like
smoke or a cloud. Work over
the top of this with strokes in
lighter and darker tones to see
how they can blend in with the
soft background.
1
Then try making various
marks in a fairly random
manner, building up darker
colours onto the dark brown
paper. Don’t smudge this, just
note how dark colours still
show up against the dark
background.
2
Next, try stroking on the colours in one 
direction only, starting with a light colour.
Don’t smudge this either, but work over it with
something darker in a slightly different direc-
tion. Add other dark colours to deepen 
the tone one side of the patch.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PASTELS IN GREATER DETAIL
29
Look at this highly simplified copy of a 
Renoir nude, drawn in pastel on a dark
brown paper. First of all, the outline shape was
lightly sketched in with a warm pink. Then
strokes of a light pink and a light yellow ochre
were drawn across the lighter parts of the figure,
to build up the rounded shapes of the limbs and
torso. Then darker, redder colours were put in
around the shadowed sides, increasing the
three-dimensional effect. Darker colours were
further added for the hair, the dark outlines and
deeply shadowed areas. I used purple, blue,
brown, carmine and a touch of green.  Finally,
the dark background was put in with various
colours, finished by all the very lightest areas,
such as the towel and the flesh highlights in
white, sometimes tempered with a little yellow.
Note how the pastels tend to follow the contours
of the figure, so there is no single way to put on
your strokes of colour.
4
Three simple exercises where the aim is 
to keep everything to a minimum; with
pastels this can be very effective. I used a deep
blue paper and for the plant drawing used a
light green, a dark green, and then put in a
background across the top, finishing with a dark
brown touch on the stalks and the fence behind.
5
The girl’s head in the second drawing was
outlined first in a dark brown. The pale
pink followed in gentle strokes over the lightest
areas of the face and hand. Next, a richer,
warmer reddish tone was used for the shadows
on the face and shoulder and, after that, yellow
and pink to pick up the highlights. I put a touch
of light blue on the back of the hand where the
light was reflected.
6
In drawing the final head, I simply scribbled light pink and 
yellow marks to suggest hair and face, not too precisely. After
that, I used a touch of dark pink for shadows on the face and darker
ochre for shadows on the hair – note that none of these marks is
very heavy. Lastly, I added a bit of red for the mouth, a little black or
dark brown for the eyes, nostrils and chin, and a couple of
highlights in white on the nose and cheekbones. I also added a light
blue reflected light on the dark side of the face. A relatively
acceptable head has been produced without too much work.
7
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
30
Watercolour
When you come to use watercolour, first familiarize yourself with the
quality of the paint and its covering power. Watercolour is a very
flexible medium and can produce brilliant results in the hands of a
practised painter. But even with a beginner, the results can often be
quite marvellous because, some of the time, you rely on what are
called ‘happy accidents’. That is when you get an interesting result
even though you didn’t know how it came about.
Having made a patch 
for each colour in your
paintbox, find out how the
intensity can be reduced by
adding water to it. Starting
with a solid patch (I started
with yellow), brush out from
left to right, add more and
more water until the colour
has almost faded to nothing.
Try to do it as evenly as you
can. You will improve with
practice but, as you can see
from my examples of red,
blue, viridian, brown and
purple, some have come out
much patchier than others.
However, this only shows that a
patchy quality is sometimes
quite acceptable.
2
Take a large soft brush 
(a size 7 sable would be
ideal) and wet it, then take the
strongest tone you can on your
brush and lay strokes of each
colour next to one another so
that you get a clear idea of
their relative power. Do this
exercise on a piece of white
watercolour paper for the best
results. Thin paper will only
cockle and go wavy.
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

Drag the loaded brush across the paper horizontally, 
allowing each stroke to flood into the one above. Do all
this with your paper attached to a sloping board. This allows the
water to run smoothly down the paper. Whatever you do, try to
avoid the mistake of going back over the painted areas because
this always produces patchy colour effects.
5
WATERCOLOUR
31
Get accustomed to the idea of drawing with the brush. 
As you can see from the next set of exercises, coloured
shapes have been formed by pulling the tip of the brush across
the paper with various twists and turns that are sometimes thicker
and sometimes thinner. Try the same method with the brush,
making short strokes and small blobs.
3
Having done all this,
repeat the exercise with
a size 2 brush, which has
a narrower point.
Using two colours, make downward strokes where 
each stroke floods into the next one, producing an 
all-over patch of colour. Try it with the strokes going up and 
down alternately. 
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
32
Watercolour in greater detail (1)
A garden scene
Here are two fairly straightforward exercises. Don’t hurry, and 
try to be precise. The garden table picture needs a soft-edged
approach and the Venetian buildings (over the page) need a more
sharp-edged resolution. Both will produce highly effective
pictures with a bit of practice.
First lay out the scene simply but with a
degree of accuracy. Draw with a brush
(size 2 sable) using a light greenish-brown or
greenish-grey to give a clear, almost diagrammatic
outline. Simple outlines are best, leaving large
areas to flood with colour.
Next put in the basic tones and colours. 
The light lies beyond the shade of the
trees and bushes, so nothing will be strongly lit
except where the sun filters through. Spot in
some yellow, as shown. The tablecloth may be
white in reality, but in the shadow of the trees
looks more purple-mauve. Go over the tablecloth,
the chairs and parts of the jugs, outlining the
shadows. Now use warm red-brown for the
ground, the section of wall at the back and some
of the foliage. Take it right up to the edge of the
2
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

WATERCOLOUR IN GREATER DETAIL (1)
33
Over the entire dark-green background 
splash in leaves in a deeper green or a
dark brown. Some splashes of blue will also help
to liven the density of the foliage. The chairs
and table should now be defined more with
overlays of purple or blue. The tablecloth should
consist of blue and pink tones, with the edge
defined in a darker blue. The chairs can have a
bit of green mixed in with the tones over them;
they need to look slightly darker than the table top.
Splash browns and greens over the ground in
flickering shapes so almost covering the original
red-brown with these darker tones. Notice how
3
lighter mauve tablecloth and chairs but wait until the former is
dry before you lay in this sienna tone. 
The last colour base is the dark olive green of the background
vegetation and the tree trunk. This needs to be a tone or two
darker than the ruddy tone of the ground. Where you have put
patches of brown on the vegetation, just paint straight over it.
Again, do this after the red-brown has dried. Flood the green over
the vegetation and along the tree trunk, leaving a sliver of the
brownish colour to indicate the edge. Outline the chair shapes,
including the spaces between back rungs and the legs. With equal
care, go around the objects that project beyond the far edge of
the table. Notice how the unpainted parts of the objects on the
table really stand out, and the table and chairs now look quite light.
the brushwork hints at the ground’s unevenness
and the dappled light through the leaves.
For the objects on top of the table, leave the
roses almost untouched, except for a splash of
pink on one bloom. Blue and purple tones for
the vase will help to give the impression of glass.
The bottle and coffee pot should be done in
browns, greens and blues. Don’t be too exact
about the shapes. A loose, wobbly edge helps in
this sort of picture. The big jug in the
foreground should be treated the same way, but
don’t totally cover the splashes of yellow that
were put on at the beginning.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
34
Watercolour in greater detail (2)
Venetian scene
As with the garden scene, this picture is begun by drawing with a
brush. Select a size 2 sable with a good point. Use watercolour
paper, the thicker the better, to avoid the paper buckling.
To start, mix up your watercolours in three basic
tones. The colour should be watery but reasonably
strong in order to get sufficient contrast between
the paint and the white paper, some of which will
be left showing at the end of your picture.
Start with the outline. The colour 
could be ultramarine but a fairly 
watery mix. Then define all the blocks of
architecture and the line of the base of the
buildings where they meet the water. 
Indicate their reflections in the canal. Keep 
it all relatively simple, only putting in a few of
the most obvious features. You will end up with
a drawing as shown, which gives you quite
enough information to start on the next stage.
1
Now you can do the sky. 
Use a size 7 brush with a
good point. Turn the outline
drawing upside down, resting
it on a sloping board or desk.
This helps you to flood the
watercolour on easily and,
after each stroke, the colour
runs down to the place where
you will make your next one.
Start carefully, putting in the
sky along the lines of the
rooftops, allowing the watery
colour to run down towards
what will be the top of the
paper. As the colour washes
down towards the edge of the
paper it gathers more of the
pigment so that when you have
finished, the strongest part of
the colour is nearer the edge
of the paper. 
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

WATERCOLOUR IN GREATER DETAIL (2)
35
Lastly, the domes have to be put in, using 
a very light warm grey. That means it will
have a little yellow in it. Don’t forget the boat
hulls. As you can see, the colours and tones are
building up steadily, giving more depth and
interest to the details of the buildings. 
Cover the areas of distant vegetation with a
green tone. Then with a much deeper version of
the original colour of the canal, put in the
reflection of the buildings over the water area,
with a broken edge to simulate the ripples.
Make a few tiny strokes outside the edge of the
mass of reflection to give a flickering impression
of wavelets on the surface. Now, with an even
darker brown, touch in a few special effects like
the windows in the houses and the shadowed
sides of the boats.
5
Now reverse the process. This time you 
will be doing the water of the canal, so mix up a
good deep blue with a slightly green tinge to it.
Start at the point where the base of the
buildings meet the water; you won’t have much
trouble getting nice smooth horizontal strokes
of colour across the paper. As the watercolour
floods down to the bottom edge of the picture,
be aware that the colour will again be stronger
towards the bottom edge. 
Mix up an ultramarine blue with a bit of 
purple in it and paint in the areas of the
buildings that are in shadow. Leave a few strokes
of white paper where anything catches the light.
A few fine lines of shadow can be placed
towards the left edge of the domes. Don’t forget
the shadows of the chimney pots cast onto 
the rooftops. 
3
With a good Naples yellow, paint in the 
sunlit side of the buildings that are closest
to the water, but leave the church and the
Custom House building (on the left) as the
unpainted white of the paper.
4
Some of this colour should also go over the
shadowed faces of the buildings, allowing for a
toning down of the purple. Then with a warmer
brown tone, you can mark in some of the 
darker windows and roofs and the front façade
of the buildings. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
36
One-point perspective
Your skills as an artist should include the technique
of constructing a drawing to give the appearance of
spatial dimension on a two-dimensional plane. 
One-point perspective shows the apparent
objects (blocks on the ground or in the air, and
cylinders placed vertically or lying on the
ground) with all the vertical poles diminishing
in size as they proceed along the limiting lines
of perspective towards a central vanishing point
lying in the centre of the horizon. This creates
an illusion, on the flat surface of a picture, of
objects shrinking uniformly in scale as they
recede in space and helps to convince us that we
are looking at a genuine three-dimensional
situation. Of course, these objects would have to
be expertly drawn or painted to appear as
convincing of their reality as a photograph.
Perspective theory attempts to regulate the
appearance of the natural world with a
constructive formula that makes it easier to
draw. Linear perspective was developed in the
Renaissance by such great artists as Brunelleschi,
Masaccio, Donatello and Uccello. To the human
eye, all lines appear to converge on a vanishing
point at the horizon, and we see distant objects
as much smaller than things that are close to.
We know, for example, that a row of telegraph
poles stretching away from us along a road are
all the same height, yet, from our point of view,
those closest to us appear larger than those
further away. If our view is distant enough, the
poles eventually seem to disappear altogether
on the horizon. Here, and overleaf, are two 
of the basic systems of perspective for you to
look at. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ONE-POINT PERSPECTIVE
37
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
38
Two-point perspective
The second diagram shows two-point perspective to be more
complex, because now we have a vanishing point at each end of the
horizon line, with the pair as far apart as our paper will allow. This
produces a good impression of three-dimensional objects in space,
and I have placed three blocks or buildings on the ground (the area
below the horizon line). They appear to occupy space exactly as we
would see a similar series of buildings in real life. The blue
construction lines indicate the areas of the blocks that would be
hidden if they were truly solid. Note how that includes all the
overlapping areas. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

This system is more complicated to construct
than the first diagram, but also more convincing
in its illusion of depth and solidity. When you
come to draw buildings, these technical devices
will be helpful. There are other even more
complex diagrams for depicting three-
dimensional objects but these two are sufficient
for most ordinary drawing purposes.
TWO-POINT PERSPECTIVE
39
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
40
Aerial perspective
This is the name given to perspective as seen through tone and
colour. The principle is that if an object is closer to you it will
appear more distinct, more textured and with more intense
colour than if separated by distance. Technically, the volume of
air, with its accompanying moisture, between you and the object
of perception creates a mist of refracted light, and produces the
effect that you notice when looking at distant mountains: they
always appear more blue than elements of the landscape closer to
you. Not only that, their texture is smoothed out and the edges of
objects seem less distinct.
In the first example, the
distant mountains are drawn
in blue without very much
detail on the surface of the
rock. As the eye travels towards
the foreground, it notices
more intense and warmer
colour and more distinct
detail, as in the fence post and
the close-up grass and bushes.
So when you produce a landscape, like the two
examples here, you can give a greater effect of
distance by varying the intensity of the colour
and the clarity of the outline.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

AERIAL PERSPECTIVE
41
The effect of the source of light on the appearance of
distance is also key. If your source of light is behind
your main features it has the effect of showing them
in silhouette, which tends to make them look closer
than they are. So if you wish to retain the effect of
distance, make sure that the shadowed parts of your
objects are shown in as much tonal detail as possible,
to ensure that they don’t become a silhouette. 
MASTERSTROKES
In the second example, a similar effect is
produced and this time it is much clearer that
the colours of the landscape and building close
to the observer are not only more distinct and
detailed in texture, but their colours are
generally much warmer in tone, using yellows
and reds to give a more immediate effect to their
position in space. Blue shades, which are cool,
tend to recede and red shades, which are warm,
tend to advance – or, at least, give the impression
of doing so. You can observe this effect for
yourself when looking at a large landscape,
especially on a damp day. So when you think of
perspective, don’t forget that colour usage will
also enhance the effects of distance and
proximity in your picture. Include lots of detail
and warmer colours in the foreground, and less
detail and cooler colours for the middle and
background. Put in the farthest distance features
only in blues and greys.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
42
Lighting
The artist usually encounters a straightforward situation of light
illuminating the drawing subject from one main source. With
artificial light, it may be more complicated, but for most
purposes you are dependent upon a single, directional light
source, which helps – as perspective helps – to produce a
convincing illusion of the solidity of objects.
This image shows a central
light surrounded by spheres or
globes and how this
illuminates one side of each
sphere, causing a shadow on
the opposite side. The sphere
placed on the ground will also
cast a shadow, stretching away
from the light source. Notice
that when the sphere is lit
directly from the front or
behind, it tends to lose a good
deal of its three-dimensional
qualities in the stark contrast
between the surface that is lit
and the other that is all in
darkness. The maximum
three-dimensional effect is
obtained by lighting an object
from one side or the other at
ninety degrees to the
observer’s line of vision. 
The second image shows how the appearance of
different objects is influenced by the direction
of the light. Coming from the top left, the first
schematic head is lit on the top, down one side
of the face, one side of the nose, the upper edge
of the upper lip, the lower lip and the top of the
chin. The eyes are both in shadow, the right one
more so, as are the right side of the nose,
underneath the nose, the upper lip and under
the chin and down the right side of the head
and neck.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LIGHTING
43
Looking at the tree drawing,
note how the lighter parts
occur at the top and the left
side, but are broken up slightly
by shadows, where the leaves
overlie each other in large
clumps. All down the right side
and under the branches is in
shadow, except where the side
of the trunk catches the light.
The tree will also cast a large
shadow to the right.
The second head is far less simple than the first,
with rugged features, including ears. A strong
light shines down from the same angle and once
again hits the top and left side of the head and
all the features. Even the eyelid catches some of
it and, where the bone structure juts out most
prominently, you get highlights on the
forehead, cheekbone, nose, lower lip and chin.
However, added subtlety is obtained from
reflected light, which often bounces back from a
pale surface (like a white wall), to ‘fill out’ the
shadowy side of the head. Reflected light will be
colder (blue here) and much smaller in area
than the main light falling on the left. Again, it
tends to catch the bony edges of the head. This
can give even more conviction to your drawing,
so remember to look for it when you are
drawing from life; and if you draw from
memory, don’t forget it may help give greater
dimension to your picture. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
44
Still-life groups (1)
When drawing several objects together, you must make sure the
same methods apply across the picture or else the final drawing
will not hang together as a unit. Here we have three groups in
different mediums, which will give you some idea of how to go
about your task.
The first subject – drawn in coloured pencil – is
a wooden bowl with three pears in it, which is lit
slightly from behind and from the left. To keep
it simple, I have not included any cast shadow,
which would be to the right of the bowl, nor any
background at all.
The first stage is to draw out the image in
one colour. I have chosen a yellow ochre which
is not too strong for the yellow pears or the well-
lit wooden bowl. Once you have got the shape
of the bowl and the outline of the pears, put in
the basic shadow, also in the ochre.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STILL-LIFE GROUPS (1)
45
When that is complete, put in yellow over the
pears except for the highlights. Then add a
warm reddish brown for the deeper tones and
colour, followed by green, particularly for the
fruit. The shadows on the bowl will also need a
touch of green. The method of shading should
be with short strokes in many directions. The
last colours you will use are blue for the deeper
shadows, particularly on the bowl, and black to
define some of the edges and where the shadow
is really deep.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
46
Still-life groups (2)
The next picture – in coloured pastels – is also of a bowl of fruit,
apples and bananas in a large, painted earthenware bowl. So you
will need a range of pastels and a good medium-toned brown or
grey paper. Sugar paper or Ingres paper is best for this.
The first stage requires a fairly loose brown line drawing on the
grey-brown paper and then filling in some of the more obvious
shadow areas, including, this time, the cast shadow on the table.
Keep the strokes loose and light in touch.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STILL-LIFE GROUPS (2)
47
You can now begin on the other colours. I put in
the blue edge to the bowl and then the basic yellow
of the bananas and the yellow and green of the
apples. Next, I drew the pattern on the plate and
also the very light areas on it. I then deepened the
shadows on the bananas and apples with blue and
green. The red strokes were added to the apples
and touches of highlights. Next, using purple, I put
in all the darker shadows in the bowl around the
fruit, and also the cast shadow. Lastly, I put in a
light green for the tablecloth in the background,
with some darker green over the cast shadow. It was
much quicker to do than the coloured pencil
drawing and quite strong and effective.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
48
Still-life groups (3)
Begin by drawing the outline with a size 2 sable
brush, using a light grey-blue. Then, with a
larger sable brush (size 8), wash in the main
areas of shadow, which is quite light, washing it
out at the edges with added water to create the
effect of light around curving surfaces. I have
assumed the light is coming from the right-hand
upper side. 
The last picture is of a jug and a cup and saucer, drawn in
watercolour. For this you will need two brushes (sable if possible),
one large and one smaller. But make sure that they both will come
to a point when wet. Then you will need watercolour paper or
board, the thicker the better, but try any weight. Have two pots
for water, one to wash the brush and one to use as fresh liquid
for a new colour.
A good way of getting your colours to flow
easily in watercolour is to wet the whole area
of the paper before you start. This allows you
to flood on colours quite easily without leaving
any edges or stains in the middle of your wash.
Be sure to let it dry fully before you start
putting in the more detailed colours.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STILL-LIFE GROUPS (3)
49
Having established the forms fairly clearly, put
in the blue pattern on the jug quite loosely and
then the red roses and green leaves on the cup
and saucer. Wait until everything is dry before
you add a bit more brown to the shadows on the
objects, to prevent it all from looking too cold.
The next step is to put in a brownish tone across
the background behind the top part of the jug.
It is important when you do this that the outline
of the jug is very carefully defined with a touch
of white left at edges where the light would creep
around the shadows. Then add a light green for
the tablecloth, floated on around the lower part
of the jug and the whole of the cup and saucer,
being careful again not to go past the edge of the
cup. This must be done when the previous
colours are dry. However, while this area is still a
little wet you can put in the dark green cast
shadows to the left of the objects. These should
be slightly blended at their outer edges.
Again, this is a fairly fast way of drawing in
colour, as long as you allow for the drying time.
You may find at first you have not enough
control over your brush technique to produce
the sort of effect you would like, but don’t give
up. Keep practising and soon your brush
handling will become more sure and your
picture more convincing. Watercolour drawing
is not too difficult but does require time and
repeated practice.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
50
Landscape
A landscape frame comes in very handy. Not the sort that finished
artworks are placed in, but a piece of card with a window cut out 
of  it, which corresponds to the shape of the picture you wish to
produce. 
In the large picture below, there are three
outlines superimposed on the general
landscape, and you might decide to use one,
two or three in your final composition. Each
has possibilities but you can choose for
yourself the one that is most satisfying to
your aesthetic sense.
Hold up the frame in front of
the landscape you are about to
draw, in order to decide which
part of the view you really want
to work on. You always need
some way of limiting the
parameters, so that the final
picture doesn’t become too
broad for your drawing base. 
3
2
1
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
51
1. The lake in the hills
2. A more concentrated version
3. A view to bring in closer
trees, etc
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
52
Figures and faces
With figures and faces you are presented with your biggest
challenge. They are, at one and the same time, both the most
satisfying and the most difficult things that you will have to draw.
So take some time before you start to consider exactly how you
will approach this piece of work. As you can see from these
examples, there is no set way of doing this: perhaps decide what
you can do and then try to go a little beyond that. Don’t worry if
it doesn’t always work – that is how you learn to draw well, by
making mistakes and then attempting to correct them. If it
becomes a mess, stop and start again.
The example here gives you
some idea of getting a face to
look convincing without too
much overworking. The head,
done in pastel, is simple and
sparely worked, but still 
comes across as an obvious
male head.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

FIGURES AND FACES
53
Let us take a quick look at how well the
human figure can also be drawn with just a 
little colour and form. The fluid drawing of
the nymph Psyche leaning over (Cupid) with
her lamp, contains not too much construction
and yet enough to show how the figure works.
The colour is muted and limited to showing
the figure of Psyche glowing in the yellow
torch light. This loose, fluid type of drawing is
very attractive and you can achieve good
results whilst still a beginner.
This pair of figures, based on a drawing by
Picasso, shows how an undulating pen line,
plus a touch of watercolour to give depth and
solidity, can very quickly give an impression of
the two bodies in space, lit rather softly. The
solidity of the figures is not emphasised but
they both look alive and breathing, which is a
good start. This fairly unmeasured figure 
drawing is very useful if you can achieve it,
although it may take a fair amount of practice.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GETTING STARTED
54
Animals
As an example of the animal world, these two drawings reproduce
the particular texture of the animals chosen. Selecting the animal
and a suitable medium together helps to get this across.
The rabbit has been drawn in pastel, and the
soft smudgy shapes go very well with the furry
pelt of the animal. Pastel lends a textural
quality, which emphasizes the way that this
animal is perceived by touch as well as by sight.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
55
The crab is smoother and harder than the rabbit, and
connected with water, so watercolour here seems to be a
good idea. Don’t forget to let the first colour dry if you want
sharp edges to any subsequent colour.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

56
Still life is in many respects the foundation of drawing practice
because it is the one discipline where you can control your
drawing set-up, and are able to return to it again and again, as
long as you need to. 
The great thing is to learn to love your subject matter. Don’t
choose objects that don’t arouse your interest in some way.
Consider carefully before you choose your subject, especially as
we are dealing in colour; the combination of colour values should
be a strong part of your composition’s attraction.
Alternatively, you could set up several still-life compositions
that consist of one colour only; for example, a red vase on a red
cloth with some strawberries or cherries and a glass of red wine.  
These experiments will not only be interesting, but will also teach
you the qualities that colours can give a picture. It is a good way to
understand the symbolism of colour, and also the way colours work
together – notice how the colours contrast or harmonize with each
other and how they look against their background. 
The actual material of the objects can produce interesting
results too, so that you might show five objects, all similar in size
or shape, but made of different substances. Also, the contrast
between soft and hard edges is always a good point to work on;
try placing a soft, draped cloth against a shiny, metallic object or
a clean-cut piece of glassware.
When composing a still life, always bear in mind whether one
object placed against another gives an interesting dynamic to the
picture. Try moving the objects around until you create the
maximum aesthetic interest between them – and that includes the
spaces between them. Sometimes, simply tipping an item on its
side gives a whole new set of shapes and a movement to the
setting. Note the reflections in the surfaces of glass, pottery or
metal things, or introduce a mirror into the arrangement, because
these change the feeling of the composition significantly. 
Having a theme is always a good idea, so for a picture that
might hang in a kitchen or dining room, you could show a
collection of food, cutlery and dishes, which are effectively the
preparations for a meal. Alternatively, you could arrange luggage,
clothing and travel items that suggest a trip to an exotic destination;
or a whole set of tools, to denote interest in woodwork and other
practical tasks. There are many ways to work at still life, and your
sole limit is the bounds of your own imagination. 
Drawing still life
in colour
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

57
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
58
Simple objects
The examples chosen here are fairly straightforward and easily
available. Often, when beginning to draw, people forget to include
any background to an object. However, with colour work it is better
to put in the immediate surroundings because they have an effect on
the colour of the object itself. 
This first example, a pair of spectacles, is
drawn in coloured inks, and is a nice, easy
exercise because the pen and ink line
complements the linear construction of the
glasses. The only really dimensional effect is
the shadow cast upon the surface they are
lying on, and the effects of dark and light in
the frames.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIMPLE OBJECTS
59
This second example, of an enamel jug in
coloured pencil, is a simple shape; a cone cut
off at the top with handle and spout added. The
colour is white, so all you have to consider is the
shadow colour and that of the background. The
reason that this jug stands out so boldly is that
the background colours are all stronger and
darker than the jug – the feeling of it existing in
three-dimensional space is due to the effect of
the background colour, as much as the jug itself.
The cast shadow across the table-top helps to
anchor the object to the surface that it stands
on. Notice how the lines of the background
shapes are made softer and less distinct than the
lines on the jug. This technique also helps to
define the space around it.
Remember that the materials and techniques
you use can be fitted to the particular objects in
your picture. Some things are quite difficult to
achieve in pen and ink, whereas others, like the
spectacles, lend themselves perfectly to the
process.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
60
Single and grouped objects 
This example, in pastel and chalk on toned
paper, is of a glass jar on a white table-top
against a darker background. The glass catches
the light, so you can use a lot of white chalk
here but, where there are dark tones, put them
in boldly. This contrast emphasizes the
transparency and materiality of the object. 
The trick with this type of drawing is to
remember the adage, ‘less is more’. Don’t
overdo the initial stages of the drawing –
simplify as much as possible and the drawing
will maintain its freshness. Make sure that your
deepest tones and your highlights are put in
simply but boldly. You have to take chances in
art, but if they don’t work, don’t give up trying.
It is all part of the fun.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SINGLE AND GROUPED OBJECTS
61
To demonstrate what happens when you put
several objects together, here are some jugs and
bottles placed at eye-level along a table-top. This
is a watercolour on a toned paper, which tends
to make the whole composition rather subdued
in colour: when you put in a few white
highlights, they jump out of the prevailing tone
and give a very solid look to what would
otherwise be a series of flat, coloured shapes. 
But before you try a group, choose objects of a
relatively similar type, so that you don’t have too
many drawing problems all at once. Just paint in
the simple shapes in one go; as silhouettes of
colour; then the background colour; and only
then, put in darker shadows and last of all, the
highlights. Keep it all very simple. The effect
always works much better than you might expect.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
62
Materiality
This exercise can go on forever because you will always come
across objects that you have rarely drawn before, and there is
always more to learn. However, try to find something made of
metal, something made of glass, and something natural, like fruit
or plants. The examples here are produced in watercolour
because it is a very flexible medium, rather difficult to start with,
but easy enough to handle when you’ve made the first steps. 
Here is an ordinary metal kettle, not very shiny, but reflective
enough. First, outline the shape with the brush, using a grey
colour. When that is dry, flood the main light areas at the top of
the kettle in a cool light blue-grey and a warmer brown-grey for
the lower parts. Don’t forget to leave little areas of white paper
unpainted to indicate the highlights on the handle, lid and spout.
When the first colour is dry, put in a dark neutral grey on the
lower part to give darker shadows, but wash it off to one side of
the main body of the kettle, so that the surface appears curved.
Then, sparingly, put in darker tones on the handle and lid.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

MATERIALITY
63
The next example is of a glass;
you have already attempted
this in pastel, so you know the
problems involved. You must
include the background here
because glass is defined by the
fact that the background
colour will show through.
Again, you have to leave areas
of unpainted white paper
around the edges of the glass
and across its broader facets,
to mimic the reflected light
that convinces the eye that this
is indeed a glass object. Once
you have put in the
background and the brightest,
lightest areas, you can put in
the dark ones. This contrast
between dark and light is the
standard way of showing
reflective surfaces. Parts of the
outline can be very dark, and
some left white.
When you come to fruit, which
I have chosen here, the method
is similar but the contrast
between dark and light is not
so great. The purple grapes are
painted smoothly round with
most of the colour towards the
edges of the fruit and,
occasionally, across more of the
surface. Leave one small area
of white paper on each grape
completely untouched to
achieve the effect of the tiny
highlight  that occurs on 
glossy objects like grapes.  
The edges can be darkened as
much as you like and any
spaces between the grapes can
be filled in very dark indeed.
Put in a bit of background 
tone also, to ‘anchor’ the
grapes in place.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
64
Simple arrangements
This exercise is to get you drawing still life in as many different
ways as you can, using the different colour systems. I have chosen
a simple set of objects: a basket, a glass bottle and a tomato, on
some blue cloth. One of the cloths has a chequered pattern, but
if you feel this makes it too difficult, leave it out. 
With pencil, you have to build up the
colour to achieve tonal strength. Use a
neutral colour for the outline then layer lighter
tones over the basket, the bottle and the blue
cloth. On the bottle, leave some white areas for
highlights. Build up your colours from light to
dark. Use your strongest, brightest red for the
tomato, except for the highlights. Leave the
pattern and shadows on the cloth until last.
2
2
When drawing in ink, less can
be more, so don’t overwork the
subject. To begin, draw in an outline
with neutral colour; I used brown, but
with a grey ink for both cloth and
background. Now decide what texture
you will use on each of the objects to
make them look convincing. Don’t
over-elaborate in the case of the basket.
A scribble effect will help to give
dimension where the shadows are. For the
bottle keep the transparent look by leaving
areas of white paper showing and indicate the
background through the glass shape. The
tomato needs a more solid colour – use your
brightest red all over, except for the highlight; I
put in the front highlight with a yellowy orange,
to tone it down a bit. The darker areas I put in
with a purple, but sparingly. The cloth can be
1
the least drawn over, the light blue kept fairly
open in texture so it doesn’t dominate the
picture. Lastly, the wall behind can be washed in
lightly in pale grey.
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIMPLE ARRANGEMENTS
65
This pastel version is drawn on a warm,
khaki-coloured paper, on which both
strong and light colours register well. Again,
sketch out the shapes. Put in the colours on the
basket; keep the marks of the weave to a
minimum. For the bottle, work in some dull
greens, dark brown and a few touches of bright
yellow for the highlights. Block in the light blue
cloth and the light background wall with varying
texture but enough strength to outline the
3
shapes of the foreground objects. The tomato
can be worked last as it is the most powerful
colour; a strong vermilion plus crimson to give
it solidity, and yellow and white spots of
highlight. If some of the highlights or shadows
appear too weak, strengthen them. Try not to
draw over your first marks, but here and there
you may need to emphasize an edge. Don’t try
to be too precise, and thus lose the soft-edge
charm of the medium.
3
4
Lastly, try watercolour. Draw the outline
in a light brown tone using a thin brush
with a good point. Leave a tiny edge of white
paper between each colour wash, to ensure that
two wet colours don’t flood into each other.
Block in the basket, bottle and cloth with the
palest version of your chosen colour;
don’t forget to leave unpainted
highlights on
4
the bottle. As before, use your most powerful
red for the tomato, except for the highlights.
When the washes are dry, put in all the dark
tones on the basket and bottle and the shadows
on the cloth. While the tomato is still wet, just
drop a touch of purple (not too much or it will
go dull) along the lower edge where the shadow
would be and let it merge into the bright red. A
pleasingly ‘spontaneous’ effect can be achieved
by allowing edges of white to show. These can
be touched in afterwards if you wish to get rid
of them. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
66
Composition (1)
More complex groups
Now let’s look at what happens when the group of objects is more
complex in form. For this it is important to be systematic and
follow a sequence so that you don’t leave bits out – this will make
the work easier for you. There is no value in difficulty for its own
sake. Method helps to reduce the most complex picture to a
manageable scheme.
The watercolour above, based on Cézanne’s still
lifes, shows some familiar objects on a wooden
sideboard, plus a rather sketchy large orange
object to one side. Drawing with a brush, use a
light brown for all the main shapes, including
the edge of the sideboard. Taking a larger
brush, wash a yellow-brown colour over
everything except the objects. Then, put in the
yellow on the apples, the orange area to the
right and the deep blue of the bottle. With
green, brown and purple, put in the texture on
the background areas and the surface of the
sideboard. Now for the reds and greens of the
apples; allow the reds to wash off into lighter
and darker shades. Put in the green on the
bottle and the pattern and shadows on the
china pot. Leave plenty of white paper showing
on the pot and as little highlights on the bottle.
The fruit bowl can be treated in a similar way to
the china pot. Finally, emphasize some edges
with extra dark colours, as shown. Put in a dark
line along the wavy edge of the sideboard. If
they don’t look strong enough, splash in any
really bright colours like the orange, red and
yellow areas. Notice how well this works without
it being a super-realist type of picture.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION (1)
67
Here we present only three objects, but each
one requires quite a bit of thought and care
when tackling it. The pine cone has a particular
texture and aspect, which is very different from
the shiny metal bottle and the earthenware pot.
First put down a pale outline of the three shapes
in a very light tone on the mid-toned paper. My
paper is a rich buff colour.
Once the shapes are there in essence, block
in the background colour, in this case blue with
some white. A good bit of work on the pine
cone should be the next stage, rendering all the
basic shapes of the scales in a warm brown
outline. This will enable you to put in the
projecting edges afterwards with a very light
yellow-buff, and to use a dark brown for the
deep shadows in between the scales. Play around
with several versions of red-brown, yellow-brown
and dark brown, to get the feel of this richly
textured object.
By contrast, the earthenware pot is much
simpler in its strong ultramarine and cobalt blue
with a creamy edge, but make sure that the
shadows and highlights have the right intensity.
With a pot like this, the dark shadows are less
obvious than the highlights. The metallic bottle,
which is a sort of bronze, can be given quite
dark shadows on the overall green-brown colour.
I used an olive brown, and the highlights in
yellow give it the appropriate bronze look.
Lastly, the cloth should be put in quite strongly
in light blue, white and grey, conveying some
idea of cast shadows.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
68
Composition (2)
More complex groups
The arrangement below demonstrates once
more the problem of many different objects
spread over a large surface. On toned paper, use
a brown for the outline that is not too different
from the colour of the paper, so that it doesn’t
become dominant. Block in the top shelf after
the dark green background, leaving an
indication of the row of wine glasses. Smudge all
this a little with your finger tip. Now, block in
the light grey of the earthenware bottle, the
yellow-green of the apples, the white of the
china bowl and the brown of the wooden bowl.
Lastly, block in the colours of the front and top
of the sideboard. 
Now put in dark blues and purple in the
background around the glasses, and use blue
and brown for the shadows around the bottle
and the bowls. Next, paint in all the bright red
apples and then with olive green, purple and
brown, make shadows and outlines to define the
fruit. Use brown to indicate the edges of all the
wood. Finally, put in the very brightest and
whitest touches, like the light blue highlights on
the glasses; also the highlights on the bottle, bowls
and apples and the front edge of the sideboard
and edges of the handles. Remember not to
overdo the detail here – that soft-edged look to
the pastel drawing helps to give it conviction.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION (2)
69
An even more abstract still life can be achieved by using pastel, as
demonstrated in my next example. Based on a painting by
William Brooker, who worked to simplify and emphasize the
essential qualities of still-life arrangements, the effort to capture
the effects of space and substance was undertaken quickly; rather
like the Zen masters who contemplated for several months and
would then produce their pictures in a matter of minutes. 
This example was drawn in pastel from the
painting, working on a dark brown paper. After
drawing an outline in a beige, the background
red was put in all over. All the light colours were
added quite simply like wedges of yellow, cream
and light blue; then the dark colours similarly.
After blocking in the tabletop and its leading
edge, the marks indicating the edges of the blue
pots, the lamp and the dark spaces between
some of the shapes were all put in. Touches of
extra colour went on top of existing colours,
either to tone them down or lighten them up.
The resulting still life looks good because there
is no detail to speak of and the basic shapes do
all the work. It shows how well the artist could
perceive the essence of the scene and put it
down with simplicity and power. It takes
prolonged practise to become as good as this.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
70
Settings
The setting of a still-life scene is important if you intend to
establish a theme or some narrative background for the objects
that you draw. Here are three examples of settings in which you
could display your talents.
This is predominantly a
neutral setting to which you
could add your ‘props’, such as
tea-time things on the table, or
drinks and cocktails. Maybe
you could arrange a small fork
and trowel, gardening gloves,
bulbs and a sun hat, as if
carelessly strewn across the
tabletop. The setting itself
then suggests some story or
ongoing action which your
choice of objects could
reinforce with some success.
This scene is set out for you,
this time using coloured pencil
to suit the lightness in tone. I
haven’t illustrated anything
beyond the conservatory
windows, but you could easily
show a bit of the garden. The
setting is fairly natural,
although it actually took time
and care to arrange. You could
choose different objects and so
change the scene’s narrative.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SETTINGS
71
In the following picture I have set myself a much more difficult
task, with a Pierre Bonnard-esque scene of a table spread with the
remains of a meal, mainly fruit and coffee jugs. Using a pen and
coloured inks, it is quite a tour de force to produce something as
brilliant as the Bonnard painting, with these strong contrasting
colours in very hot tones. 
I have attempted to produce the lighter colours by making marks
that don’t totally obscure the white paper underneath, and where
I require deeper colours I have scribbled away to build up denser
tones. As long as you can maintain the contrast between the
darker more solid colours and the lighter broken colours, then
this method can work quite well. But it does take time to put in
all these small marks, so don’t embark on this sort of task without
giving yourself plenty of time to complete it. The brilliance of the
coloured inks suits Bonnard’s strong colour range and the lunch-
table setting is a very good vehicle for a still-life composition.
One trick I sometimes use for setting up a still
life is to ask someone else to do it for me. You
can adjust it to suit your own ideas, but the
mere fact of someone else doing it brings a
certain element of surprise to your first view of
the composition. I often find that my wife has
placed objects down and they have fallen into
just the kind of arrangement that works well as
a still life.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
72
Large objects
Still life usually comes in small sizes which can be arranged on a table
top, but if you are feeling ambitious there are larger objects that you
might like to contemplate. These would require a different setting, of
course, but that is an essential part of their interest. 
The first object is a child’s brightly coloured bicycle
complete with stabilisers. Using a buff paper for the
pastels, I sketched the whole frame of the bicycle in
the red first, and then added greys and yellows for
the handlebars, crossbars, pedals, seat and tyres. I
increased the intensity of the main colour and then
put in the white wheel spokes and hubs, and the
black edges to the wheels, pedals, seat and brake.
Lastly, I dragged some dark red around the frame
to give more substance to the structure. It was all
kept very sketchy and done quite swiftly. The
background was approximately the right tone for
the setting, so I didn’t even put in shadows.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LARGE OBJECTS
73
The car is one of the largest items of still life to be found around
you. Either your own, or those vehicles that line the streets, are
good models for a large still life. I used coloured inks for this
effort but any medium would be as good. For the very dark areas
around the wheels and at the shadowed front of the car, I used a
thick felt-tipped marker to give a bit more solidity to the whole
effect. It is good artistic exercise trying to capture the reflections
on the shiny surface of the car.
Large objects are always tricky. You will find that they take up a lot
of space on the page and so need a bit more planning – some-
thing that may make you tend to leave them and choose some-
thing else. However, if you can rise to the challenge and bring in
some other objects into the picture, you again have the chance at
hinting at some kind of story for your picture. The child’s bicycle
might have a helmet or pump to go with it and the car might
have some luggage or a petrol pump behind it. And you don’t
have to draw all the objects at the same time. Just add them when
you can and be sure to maintain the correct proportions.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
74
Step by step still life
To produce a still-life picture you have first of all to decide what
effect you want your picture to have. When I produced the
original of this still-life composition, I collected together a
number of pots that I felt would make an interesting composition
against the backlight of a window. I chose large metal and pottery
objects, which were all fairly light in colour. As they were all
circular in shape, I decided that I would play on this feature by
choosing the perspective of looking down on them when they
were close to me, so that the deeper shadows in the interiors of 
the pots gave a sort of repeat motif and were very dominant in 
the picture. 
As all the items were lit from behind, the main light was 
diffused and helped to even out the colour values. I decided that I
didn’t want many strong colours, making this a rather muted piece
of work. 
This pot has vertical
sides and is a simple
shape. Because it is light in
colour, the interior will not
look too dark.
1
The conical pot with the
green interior is the
only splash of colour in the
composition but, as it is mainly
in shadow, it is not too
dominant.
2
The large white enamelled jug is a good
sturdy shape and will have a darker
interior due to the half guard around the top.
The enamel is slightly chipped.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP STILL LIFE
75
The light-coloured wooden bowl, which is smooth
and chunky, will give a touch of subdued colour.
4
The drinking tankard, 
which is made from
pewter, is the darkest object in
the composition. Its interior
looks almost black in contrast
to the other objects.
5
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAWING STILL LIFE IN COLOUR
76
Step by step still life
continued
Placing these objects close together, well below my eye-
level, I get a repeated pattern of circular, cylindrical shapes,
with the light behind them bouncing off the light surface they are
standing on. Notice the arrows showing the direction of the light
which means that all the shadows are facing the viewer. Draw a
sketchy outline of your arrangement before starting on your
finished drawing. 
6
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP STILL LIFE 
77
When you begin to draw these, you will realize that the light
colour of each of the objects, and the light background, are
assets when using coloured pencil. Because with pencil you can be
quite precise in your outline, take your time to get the shapes
exactly right in relation to each other. Remember that the space
between the objects is as important as the shapes of the objects
themselves. Don’t get too heavy with your shading or tone – only
the tankard and the jug call for strong, dark colours. Notice that
the darkest part of this pale still life is the interiors of the pots.
7
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

78
Actively searching for a landscape to draw may seem a rather
artificial approach – there are landscapes everywhere we look –
but you need an area with qualities that you find attractive.
Before you start rushing around in search of a good view,
consider the area you are working in and adapt your ideas to
make the most of a particular environment.
The first and most essential step is to compose your picture.
As shown earlier in the book, this can be done with the use of a
framing device made from a piece of card, so you will not be
overwhelmed by the immensity of a landscape. 
When you survey a landscape full of trees, bushes and grass,
take time to look at each area of vegetation carefully and note the
immense variety of green that exists in just one view. Distant areas
will appear more blue-green, with some greys – cool hues that
help to push those parts of the picture right back to the horizon.
Urban landscapes have an entirely different range of colour but,
even so, some of the same rules apply.
Most important is the effect of distance on colour and tonality;
so watch for their effects right at the start of your picture. The
ideal arrangement for the light is from the left or right of your
position, so that the objects in the landscape are lit up in a way
that shows their dimensions. 
Ideally, you should be able to see enough of the foreground
features to show scale and texture. A large middle-ground area,
where trees, rocks, streams, buildings and other features stand
closer or further from your viewpoint, will give an impression of
depth. Hills, mountains and large expanses of water in the
background, when diminished in the cool distance, also give a
very good sense of scale and depth to the picture. 
So, before chosing your landscape, decide how much detail
you want to include and how much of a feeling of space you wish
to give it. Adjust your viewpoint to achieve this, by lowering it to
get closer, or lifting it to get a greater sense of distance. 
Enjoy the qualities of the natural world when you are drawing
in the countryside, and likewise the drama and interest of the
man-made world in a cityscape, with all its verticals and mass of
buildings. Don’t worry if the piece doesn’t always go right. The
fun is in finding out how to do it in practice and, eventually, you
reach the stage where you just draw the whole thing by eye and
forget the science.
Landscape
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

79
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
80
Stepping out
This is a slightly simplified, redrawn version 
of a view from a window by Bonnard, which 
I’ve rendered in watercolour. The view is 
of darkening skies filled with rain clouds, 
with red-roofed, white-stuccoed houses in the
middle ground. Beyond these are indistinct 
tree-covered hills. On the table in the
foreground, there is a pile of books, an ink
bottle and a pen and paper. The interest is in
the transition from interior to exterior,
suggesting space beyond the cluttered
foreground. 
Your first landscape can be the view out of your window or a ren-
dering of your own garden. Here are three very close viewpoints
which take advantage of your view being restricted by the window
frame, or the limits of your garden fence. So don’t try to run
before you can walk – try out the easiest view that you can find. It
is a good test of your ability to make an adequate picture from a
limited viewpoint.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEPPING OUT
81
This view – drawn in coloured pencils – is from
a position on the raised decking immediately
outside my own back door. We can see a bit of
the Mediterranean pine and fig tree in one
corner, my studio/summerhouse and the potting
shed. I put the garden chairs on the lawn just to
give the scene a point of focus. Your garden or
backyard doesn’t have to be particularly
interesting or shown when the weather is good to
make a worthwhile drawing or painting.
A more difficult version of
this theme is taken from Eric
Ravilious’s Train Landscape
(1940), here recreated in
coloured inks. Beyond the
homely interior of an old
railway carriage is glimpsed
the panorama of a Wiltshire
landscape with its famed
white horse cut out of the
chalk downs.  Any train
journey allows you to draw a
changing landscape. You have
to be quick to get enough
down so that when you get
home you have an accurate
reminder to work up into a
finished drawing.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
82
Larger spaces
The really daring step comes next, which is to
venture out of the front door and into the street.
Most people are a little shy of drawing in public
but, if you want to get going, it is something you will
have to conquer.
I have eliminated all the
figures of passing people in
order to show an absolutely
simple view of the street and,
with the exotic touch of a full
moon, it becomes a very
effective picture. The lit-up
windows help, something that
ordinarily you might not
notice, but  I am sure
Hiroshige could have created
just as brilliant a piece of art
with any suburban road at
midday. This example was
done in coloured pencil and a
few lines of ink.
What you will see rather
depends on where you are
living, but I’ve chosen to
rework a street scene by
Hiroshige, the famous
Japanese master of the
nineteenth-century woodcut,
where he depicts a very
ordinary Japanese street that
has no remarkable
architectural features, rather
like any suburban high street
or a plain terraced street in a
medium-sized town. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LARGER SPACES
83
Somewhere near your home will be some sort of
open space such as a recreation ground, a field,
a park or even a common. This will take a little
more planning than you have so far required
but, as it is local, carrying your drawing
equipment and a portable stool should not
create too many problems and you can easily
retire if the weather turns against you. Also,
because of its proximity, you can easily go back
and look again if your first efforts don’t satisfy.
There is a common near Guildford, in Surrey,
where my sister lives. This is an ink-drawn
version of one of the painted sketches I did
during a morning expedition there with her. It
is essentially a very simple view, looking across
the common to houses on the other side, with a
row of large trees to the left and a park bench
immediately in front of me. When you can show
things simply but drawn well, you have gone
further into the learning process towards
tackling more complex situations.
In the instance of a familiar landscape, you need
to remember one of the key points about
drawing: make sure you choose an area that
holds some interest for you, or else you risk
becoming bored with your efforts. As this
always leads to a less interesting work, take a
little time to choose your scene and you will be
rewarded with more attractive pictures.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
84
Townscape and holiday scene
Having got out of the house, you might head next to a nearby town
where there is some dramatic architecture. Most places have at least
one or two buildings that stand out from the rest, and which could
make a good subject for a piece of perspective architectural drawing.
I am spoiled for choice, being close enough to London to get there
within twenty minutes by public transport, and where there are plenty
of extremely dramatic and even eccentric buildings.
This view, which I have drawn in watercolour,
was originally sketched by me in ink and then
photographed one day near the British
Museum. Later, I got out both the photograph
and the drawing and re-drew the whole thing in
watercolour as simply as possible, omitting
unnecessary complications like myriad street
signs and all the traffic. I concentrated on the
drama of the tower-like corner building, with its
two sides swept back like a great wedge of cake.
I’ve simplified the colour as well as the drawn
details, but if you wanted to make a more
detailed version it would not be difficult.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

TOWNSCAPE AND HOLIDAY SCENE
85
It is worth considering exotic locations and
taking drawing equipment on holiday with you.
Here is a typical seaside scene on the Greek
Peloponnese in the middle of summer, with
boats and umbrellas or sunshades set up. The
rocky island opposite the resort is covered in
light scrub, the sun is bright and the sea is blue.
It is all rather haphazard as I drew this originally
in coloured pencil, but although I’ve changed
things slightly as I reworked it in watercolour,
the basic ingredients are the same and the look
is as I remember it. The splashy technique of
putting in the colours with a medium-sized
brush, keeping lots of the white paper showing,
helps to emphasize the bright sunlight and the
easy atmosphere.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
86
Leaves, flowers and trees
Once you move out into the countryside, all that vegetation will
suddenly loom large so it is advisable at this stage to practise your
plant drawing. Here are two examples.
First, we have leaves simply
outlined in ink, using three
colours. Observe how leaves
grow in clusters and bunches,
so that you begin to see the
patterns they make. 
The second example is of
flowers, based on Emil Nolde’s
painting of a poppy in 1930.
The watercolour I have
produced is a fairly rough copy
of the brilliant red flower,
contrasted with the dark green
of the leaves and the yellow
blooms beside. A little bit of
background colour helps to
anchor the blossoms together.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LEAVES, FLOWERS AND TREES
87
The first, drawn in coloured ink, is from Myles Birkett Foster’s
Burnham Beeches, painted in 1860. These huge old trees with their
wildly spreading branches were painted in the autumn with all the
brilliance of yellow, orange, green and brown leaves, filtering the
sunlight. The trees themselves appear remarkably dramatic at that
time of year; the gnarled, twisted and split trunks, the interweaving
branches and the brilliant foliage create a really extraordinary
woodland scene.
The second scene, by another
Victorian painter, A.F. Garden,
is of willows on the River Ouse,
painted in1880. I’ve recreated
it in pastels on a beige paper.
Again the drama of the twisted
and split willow trunks, one of
which grows downward into
the stream, suggests living
beings rather than trees. The
wintry or early spring scene
sets the bare branches like a
network against the sky.
A logical step is taken from plants and flowers to
trees, and here are two examples of trees in
different locations in the British Isles.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
88
Water
In a landscape, the presence of water really gives a new liveliness
to the scene, both in its reflection of the sky and the vegetation,
and in its mobile, rippling surface, which is rarely still. Even a still
lake or stream has a twinkling effect as the light bounces off the
surface. The three images selected here are marvellous
evocations of watery scenes by master artists.
A rather more summery scene of trees
reflected in water is this simplified
version of Monet’s Seine at Giverny
(1897), which he produced in a range
of blues, greens and whites. Our version
gives a dramatic effect with the almost
monochrome range of strong blues and
whites, executed in pastels, which can
look very similar to oil paints. The
bright gap of white sky seen through
the heavily shaded trees is reflected
rather less sharply in the water. The
greens and blues of the trees are also
reflected there, less defined in a more
generalized colour splash. It is a very
rich and dramatic picture, although
tranquil at the same time.
Now let us look more closely at
trees reflected in water. I have
chosen Gustav Fjaestad’s snowy
scene Winter Evening by a River
(1907) where the water reflects
the trunks of the adjacent
trees in dark and light swirls.
Broken reflections in running
water is a difficult but very
interesting effect to attempt 
to draw and you can try it in
any season.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

WATER
89
Now for a scene with running water taken from
Joseph Wright of Derby’s version of Rydal Lower
Falls in 1795. Although the scene has hardly
changed to this day, our re-creation of it in
coloured pencil probably doesn’t have quite 
the power of his, which is partly due to the
medium. It is a good medium for gradation and
variety in colour, but not so punchy in effect as
other media.
The thing to remember about water is the
intense contrast between the lit parts and the
darker, shadowed areas. This contrast is part of
water’s charm and always lends a sparkle to a
landscape. You will need to study moving water
quite carefully, and the use of a camera is a
great asset here. But don’t just slavishly copy
the camera version – it always helps if you have
spent some time carefully studying moving
water and getting a feel for the way it looks.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
90
Different angles
The first is from Monet’s Railway Bridge at Argenteuil (1874) in
which his viewpoint is down near the level of the river, with the
bridge and the nearby trees and bushes looming above. The
puffing, rolling steam from the railway engine pours off the
bridge, the broad piers of which appear almost too big for the
minimal construction it supports. The reflections also help to
emphasize the height of the bridge over the rest of the scene.
These pictures show how to adopt a certain viewpoint to lend
drama to the scene. Drama and space are two important features
of a large landscape, and you can take advantage of this when you
are faced with drawing them. The examples here show one with a
man-made feature which helps to define the space dramatically.
The other is totally natural, with vast size and energy, the sheer
spectacle of this force of nature inspiring us with awe.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

91
The higher your viewpoint, the larger and
grander the landscape you can encompass. This
picture, after the painting of the Niagara Falls
by Heinrich Fuseli in 1776, is possibly one of the
largest and grandest landscapes you could ever
draw. I have used a mixture of watercolour and
coloured inks to recreate it. First, float on some
flat areas of watercolour and then draw in a few
details in coloured inks to define the scene
more clearly. The position of the artist was high
enough to observe the whole sweep of Niagara,
plus the distant landscape with the river winding
its way towards the Falls from the Great Lakes.
In the original, Fuseli had the figure of a Native
American standing in the foreground to give
some idea of scale, but the tall pine trees on the
lower bank give a decent sense of scale as well. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
92
Range of mediums
This first example is an antique Chinese landscape from c. 1685
by K’un Ts’an, with melting mountain ranges and sketchy trees.
This was done first with sepia ink and then green ink, carefully
portraying the intricate details of the rocky hills and twisted trees.
After this, keeping very subdued like the original, came softly
applied layers of coloured pencil, using the edge of a well-
sharpened point in violet, brown, green and blue.
The choice of medium can sometimes be particularly appropriate
to the type of landscape you are working on. ‘The medium is the
message’ said Marshall McCluhan in the 1960s and, in drawing,
this is no exception. Here are two landscapes that give quite
different effects, and the mediums seem particularly suited to the
type of scene being shown. One seems to be glowing with energy
and fiery, while the other is cool and gentle in effect. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

RANGE OF MEDIUMS
93
The second example shows a pastel version of one of Monet’s
Haystack paintings (a series of at least 25 variations), which glows
with golden light and gives the impression of the haystack almost
burning up. The original was done with oil paints, but can be
effectively imitated by pastel in the same way as Monet worked his
paint. These impressionistic strokes of brilliant colour allow you
to show the dazzling effects of hot sun when it is low in the sky.
The charm of painting landscapes is often in the pleasant
experience of sitting out in the open. Sometimes you have
to add bits to your work after you have returned home, but
this won’t hurt the main effect of your outdoor efforts. It
is, of course, possible just to take a photograph of the
scene and then start your painting when you return home.
But this is not quite the same exercise and you will find
that the results are quite different.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
94
Step by step landscape
To perform the exercise of producing a
landscape, you really need to go out somewhere
and draw from life. If you can’t manage this,
find some good photographs of interesting parts
of a landscape that you can put together.
First, you need studies 
of trees to get some idea
of what you want your
landscape to look like. Here
(right) I have made studies of
groups of trees and bushes and
also a staked wire fence
(below). These give me an
idea of the sort of scene I’m
interested in. 
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP LANDSCAPE
95
The practice of composing a landscape is partly done for you
by the area you happen to be painting in , and partly a
matter for your own taste and discrimination in what effect
you want your landscape to have. It is possible to adjust the
landscape that you see in front of you, by moving your
position a little or by leaving out parts of the scene, or even
moving them around a little. Many artists do this, but you
have to be careful that the results will all hang together.
MASTERSTROKES
What I really need is 
an impressive tree that
could be an item by itself. So
having found one and made
sketches (left and far left) 
and the drawing (below), I
now have to decide how all
these elements are going to 
fit together. 
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LANDSCAPE
96
Step by step landscape
continued
A quick design gives me an idea of how I 
shall allow the eye to be led up to the
main tree by the line of the fence. This helps to
give depth in the picture and acts as a natural
indicator to the big tree.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP LANDSCAPE 
97
Now all I have to do is to go ahead and 
produce my scene, giving it a summery
look with a blue sky, and making sure the dry,
yellow grasses play their part in bringing the
attention to the main tree. All the other trees
should be much more distant or otherwise
insignificant.
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

98
When drawing animals, the biggest problem is that they won’t
oblige you by staying still, so drawing them from life is quite
difficult. It is really easiest to photograph them and then to work
from the snaps you have taken. 
The best place to start is with the insect world because the
creatures are relatively small and not too complicated in shape.
Usually, when it comes to insects, museums hold dozens of
drawerfuls of them, and it is not too difficult to make quite
careful drawings on the spot. 
Probably the next easiest is the sea world, with fish of all sorts
and sizes. Again, they have simpler shapes than land animals and 
are quite wide-ranging in colour and pattern. A local aquarium, or
someone you know who keeps fish in a tank, can be good for
first-hand reference material and, of course, all that swimming
around makes the creatures more vivid than using a 
photographic reference. 
When you progress to animals on land, there are reptiles,
mammals and birds in multifarious shapes, colours and sizes.
Observe how the various species have similarities as well as
differences, and this should make it easier.
As an artist you will probably want to try your hand sooner or
later at a really large creature such as an elephant or rhinoceros.
If you cannot reach a zoo easily, then a visit to your local natural
history museum can be very instructive. Take your sketch book
and draw the stuffed or reconstituted animals on show. Their bird
collections are frequently comprehensive too.
Once familiar with the shapes of your chosen animals, the
next task is to convey some semblance of movement. Several
famous artists are renowned for their animal pictures and it’s
helpful to examine their work.
You can experiment right from the start with techniques for
getting the animals to appear more convincing; a drawing doesn’t
have to be precise in order to create the feeling of an animal in
action. An expressionist technique is more likely to conjure up
the essence of the animal than a careful, detailed drawing. But
whatever you draw from the immense range of animal life, have
fun experimenting with various ideas and effects.
Animals
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

99
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
100
Shape and colour
Animals and colour are interesting, because many animals have
such extremely strong colour combinations that you can really
start to enjoy yourself in representing them accurately. Of course
in northern climates you get a lot of rather subdued colour, but in
more tropical zones, colour is often quite extravagant. So look
around for the most interesting animals that you can find and
learn to put in your colour with confidence and enjoyment.
If you have access to a natural
history display, find a range of
mounted moths and
butterflies to draw at your
leisure. The example shown
here is a Monarch butterfly,
which I have produced by first
laying down an area of 
yellow-orange watercolour and
then drawing over the top of it
in black ink. Because the
shape presents itself with a flat
surface, there is no problem 
of representing depth, which
gives you an easier start.
The next example is from the
bird kingdom, showing the
characteristic shape of the
drake mallard. It can be kept
as a silhouette without any
need to show depth. The
patches of colour are well
defined and the whole drawing
has a very clear pattern and
decorative feel to it. You simply
draw in each area of colour
with the brush and fit them
together like a neatly 
slotting puzzle.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SHAPE AND COLOUR
101
Now we look at two more bird
drawings – done in coloured pencil –
of a goldfinch and a rainbow parakeet.
Once again, thanks to their colour
patterning, you do not need to pay
much attention to the solidity of the
creatures. Keep the areas of colour
fairly flat and the combination of
brilliant colour and design will be
sufficient to give a very attractive
impression of the types of bird that
you have drawn.
When painting or drawing in colour where the
colour is flat and unmodulated, it is often best
to outline the shape first and then fill in the
colour. Do the outline in the same medium that
the main colour is put in, or outline in very light
pencil, which you can afterwards rub out. You
can also draw the outline in pencil or ink on a
separate piece of paper, and then put it with
another on a light box or on a window and
trace the shape through in the main colour. 
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
102
Larger animals
When you come to draw larger animals, it is necessary to give a
more substantial impression of their bulk and range of
movement. This is not so easy and, for the best results, it is a
good idea to put in some time studying the animal you intend to
draw, before you actually start.
My first choice is the common
cat. Try drawing it at rest first of
all, just as I have done here,
using only one colour to
produce a reasonably structured
drawing. Note how this cat is
lying comfortably, although his
head is raised and he may move
at any time. Once you have
produced a couple of
preliminary sketches like this,
you will feel confident in trying
something more complex. Here
is where a decent photograph of
your cat in action could go a long way towards
making your next attempt quite realistic. Using
the photograph for reference, and with the
animal still around where you can see him, you
can a start on an authentic representation of
your cat on the prowl. Mine is done in coloured
inks because the texture of the fur lends itself to
this multi-stroke technique. So using grey,
brown, green, yellow and black you, too, can
build up a convincing effect.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LARGER ANIMALS
103
This second drawing is my own version of George Stubbs’ famous
painting of a great horse, Whistlejacket (1762). I’ve used pastel
here and kept it fairly loose in style so that the marvellously lively
horse doesn’t become too stilted. The shine on the animal’s coat
and the ripple of the light-coloured tail and mane give some idea
of the beautiful original, which of course is very large and kept in
the National Gallery in London.
If you have animals at home, this sort of drawing
becomes easier because you will have observed,
even when not drawing, how the animal moves
and what its fur or ‘covering’ feels like, which
will really help improve the quality of the
drawing. You should also make the effort to visit
a zoo or park where you can spend a bit of time
studying and drawing animals. It all helps to
produce a more convincing picture.
MASTERSTROKES
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
104
Animals in motion
Here is a frog drawn poised to hop, his shape
looking somewhat jerky and awkward in
comparison with the graceful lines of the horse
on page 103. However, you can approach a
subject like this in exactly the same way as you
would the horse, keeping the style simple and
loosely-drawn, in order to give some semblance
of movement to the finished product.
Next I show a lizard in mid-
scamper. It has a straight-
forward shape and, as long as
the texture of the skin looks
scaly enough, there are no
great drawing problems here
either. The colour can be kept
to a minimum, with just
enough to hint at the green,
sinuous body. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B
2 1 B D 1 A F 1 B A 6 2 4 A C F 8 6 8 F 5 8 8 A 4 2 3 B 5 2 5 B

ANIMALS IN MOTION
105
The following drawings
continue with the notion of
movement and how to
reproduce it, but this time I
have used coloured pencils 
in an effort to gain the 
right effect.
The arctic tern is contrasted
against the pure blue sky and
this use of a plain background
colour certainly helps to set off
the movement of the bird in
flight. The tern itself is put in
very sketchily with no clear
details, just as you would 
see it if it were to fly past 
you suddenly. 
In the next picture, I have a leopard running forward to pounce
on its prey. The drawing is similar in style to the bird, in that the
lines defining the animal are loosely drawn to give some idea of
the powerful muscular activity of the beast. I decided not to
represent the leopard’s spots very accurately but merely suggested
the arrangement of their pattern as this all helps to give an
impression of the animal moving at speed.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B
H D

ANIMALS
106
Animals in motion (2)
The next picture is of an American bald eagle,
which is the emblem of the USA. I have drawn
this one with a brush, in watercolour, and tried
to keep it straightforward in style, with all the
emphasis on the outspread wings and the arrow-
like body. Only two colours were used but you
could play around with blacks and browns and
other tints, as long as you don’t lose the active
effect of the flying bird.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS IN MOTION (2)
107
Another animal is on the move in the next picture – this time it is a
fox loping across the meadows by moonlight. I have splashed in the
foxy red of his coat without attempting too distinct a shape, putting
dark patches of colour on the feet, nose and ears, and leaving quite
a bit of white showing around the muzzle and on the tip of the tail.
You will have to be a little more careful when it comes to putting in
the green pasture and the night sky, making sure you stay clear of
the fox’s outline, so there is no danger of the colours running.
As our final example, we have
a dolphin leaping out of the
water in a shining arc. The
movement here is suggested by
the very curve of the creature.
The effect of the waves below
it and the wet shine on the
body help to convince the
viewer that the incident is
drawn from live observation.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
108
Animals in settings
For an added semblance of reality to your animal drawings, try fitting
your subjects into the type of landscape that they might normally inhabit.
This means that you need some pictorial references to draw upon.
Alternatively, do what the famous French painter Henri ‘Le Douanier’
Rousseau did, which was to create a magical jungle habitat that never
existed in real life but was a product of his sketching sessions amid the
lush greenery of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris – the equivalent of Kew
Gardens in London. 
Drawing a dog in its basket is fine while it sleeps,
although they often move in their sleep. So draw the
dog in first and the shape of the basket after, as 
the dog may wake up and invariably move off.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS IN SETTINGS
109
This image demands that
the cage is drawn with
care and precision, while
the bird itself is just a
colourful shape inside the
wire structure.
Fish in an aquarium are a colourful and fairly easy exercise,
because they continually repeat their movements across the glass
tank. Their colours can be very vivid and as their shape is so
streamlined they are not too difficult to draw. The difficulty is to
make them appear to be in the water. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
110
Step by step animal drawing
(after ‘Le Douanier’ Rousseau)
In composing a step by step animal picture I have taken my
inspiration from ‘Le Douanier’ Rousseau because his work is so
imaginative. The scene can be set by drawing enlargements of
plants that you see around you (plants from your own garden or
house plants) or work from photographic reference. The animal
needs to be an exotic type, like a tiger, to fit in with Rousseau’s
fantasical scenes. 
You will need to study plants close up, although
you do not need to have access to real jungle
plants because quite ordinary ones will do, as long as
you make them look much bigger than they actually
are. Also, you will need to vary the shapes of leaves a
little and make them look more luxuriant.
1
Having got enough in the
way of leaves, you will also
need to find some type of
flower to be your jungle
blossoms. Choose something
florid and pink or red.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

Having got your plants and wild animal, the
only thing left to do is to design your picture,
by sketching the main outlines of the scheme. You
can produce the details as you go along – it’s more
fun and probably produces better results in this
type of picture. Don’t hold back on the colour.
3
STEP BY STEP ANIMAL DRAWING
111
You will need tomake drawings of a tiger
or some other exotic animal. It is
probably easiest to work from photographs. 
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ANIMALS
112
Step by step animal drawing
continued
Using a toned paper to 
draw on, and using
pastels for their rich colour 
values, you can construct a 
jungle landscape where plant
shapes jostle and overlap 
each other. 
Next, show a little bit 
of sky and a moon or sun
glowing brightly in the deep
azure space of the sky. Make the
most of the decorative values of
the plant shapes and the 
animal’s markings – don’t try
to be too realistic. The whole
charm of this type of picture 
is in its decorative, dream-
like richness.
5
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP ANIMAL DRAWING
113
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

114
Drawing the human figure in colour provides certain obstacles for
you to conquer before you become really proficient. One major
fact is that coloration of the human body encompasses a wide
spectrum. There are few truly strong colours in the human skin
range, but a host of very subtle tones.
Apart from obvious differences in skin colour between various
races, the complexion of each human being reflects any number
of hues, according to whether you are looking at that particular
individual in the cold light of winter in the north or beneath a
brilliant summer sun, closer to the equator. Then again, there is
another range of tints caused by the effect of electric light. And
not only do you have the colour of the skin to consider, but also
the colour of your model’s clothes and of the background setting,
which will affect the appearance of the skin against them. 
With people, it is always a case of getting them to co-operate
with you in order to draw them effectively.  It may not be a
question of drawing the whole figure, but sometimes just an arm,
or a foot, or the head and neck. And don’t just draw the head
from the front, but from every possible angle: it all increases your
ability to do ‘life’ well. 
Your models will need patience, as it takes time to produce a
good representation of the human body. A life class at a local art
institute is one of the best ways of learning to draw the human
figure and the experience will never be wasted. But even without
tuition, you can still prevail upon friends and relations to sit for
you. Change the poses frequently – standing up, lying down and
positions where the body is extended and curled up in turn all
help to increase your range. And remember to look carefully at
limbs and torso when they appear foreshortened, in order to 
see how much the shapes of the body alter when seen from
different angles. 
Finally, clothing obviously makes a big difference to the
appearance of your model. Start by asking them to dress simply,
so that you can see the shape of their body clearly. As you
improve, you can ask them to wear something thick or heavily
draped, and you can test yourself to see if you can work out what
is happening beneath the fabric.
The human figure
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

115
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
116
Building the colour scheme
The first thing to consider is how to build up the colour values on
a nude human figure. The following stage-by stage pictures will
give you some idea as to how the process works.  I did this study
in inks and started with the lightest pink colour I could find,
which, as you can see, was actually rather strong.
With your model in 
front of you, or a
photograph, or even another
artist’s picture to copy, first
make a very simple outline 
of the figure in a colour 
that lends itself to the 
subject-matter. 
1
Having set the scene, I
then built up a texture
with pink strokes going in
different directions, following
the contours of the figure. Don’t
put these marks very close
together or the figure will look
too pink. Leave any areas of
light where the spotlamp
catches the far side of the figure.
Looking hard at it, I noticed
some areas of light blue which
I put in with my palest blue.
Once again, the blue ink is
fairly strong, so I keep the
marks far enough apart to be
‘diluted’ by the off-white 
paper ground. 
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

117
BUILDING THE COLOUR SCHEME
It is a time-honoured exercise to copy a master
painter’s work and you should not be shy of
trying out this method. If you look closely, for
example, at the way the artist has handled his
colour and how he or she has contrasted the
stronger colours with the softer ones, you will
learn quite a lot that will help you when you
come to work from your own sources.
MASTERSTROKES
After this, the whole range of coloured inks comes into
play as I build up the darker colours with myriad marks in
order to make my earlier lighter tones look less strong in
contrast. There is a limit to how far you can take this. Black is the
darkest colour and you cannot use it extensively or the picture will
become too sombre. The very lightest areas of this figure carry
some yellow marks to give an effect of the artificial light.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
118
Proportions in the human figure
Before you leap into your first
figure drawing, pause to study
the proportions of the human
figure so that you have some
idea as to how it can be drawn
more easily. This diagram gives
a very simple view of that
complex object, the human
body. Viewed from the front,
the height of the average adult
– male or female – is
approximately seven-and-a-half
to eight times the length of
their own head, measured
from top to bottom. Women
are generally smaller boned
than men but the ratio of 
head to overall height remains
the same.
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 1
Unit 6
Unit 7
Unit 8
Unit 4
Unit 5
Notice how the halfway mark
of the human figure is the
lower end of the torso and the
top of the legs. The navel is
three units down, as are the
elbows with the arms lowered.   
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PROPORTIONS IN THE HUMAN FIGURE
119
Unit 2
Unit 5
Unit 8
Unit 7
Unit 6
Unit 4
Unit 3
Unit 1
Notice that the second unit
down is the level of the nipples
of the chest, and the knees
come about halfway down 
Unit 6. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
120
Light and dark tones
Here are a couple of figures, one on a white background and one on black,
which demonstrate how to balance out your tonal range. The problem with
drawing a figure in colour is the risk that you run of making the final result
look too melodramatic. The range of tones on the human body is quite
subtle, but they do go from cool or cold colours to warm, rich tones. The
sort of light that is used makes a difference – sunlight being so strong that
it often washes out contrasts of colour, and artificial light  being restricted
and therefore changing the natural colour of the body.
When drawing the human form, the simple
understanding of the geometric shapes and the
overall tones are far more important than the
details. Without this care in the main shapes
and colours, the details won’t work to your
advantage. So, take immense care with the
large, main shapes and colours of the body, and
then the details will really take off.
MASTERSTROKES
The man is seated, facing the source of light
and since he is drawn in coloured pencil, there
is no great contrast between the very darkest
tone and the very lightest. Note how the
shadowed area is mostly in cool blue tones and a
warm yellow has been used in the areas where
the light is falling on the figure. The numbered
patches show the colours used.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LIGHT AND DARK TONES
121
For maximum contrast on the
black background, I have used
pastels. Note the use of warm
and cool colours for the light
and dark areas; and to add a
touch more warmth to the
picture I’ve put in a rich
reddy-purple to prevent the
blue from becoming too
dominant. When working like
this you should do the initial
drawing in a single colour first,
to establish the overall shape
of the figure.
This dark, densely sketched
background in deep blues has
the effect of throwing the
lighter, yellow-toned body
forward into relief.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
122
Colour harmony
Another way of working out your colours is to keep within the
same range, not too diverse from one another. In these pictures
we look at colours where there is no great contrast of colour,
which produces a rather more subdued effect – one that helps the
different colours to harmonize with each other. This effect can
give you a rather attractive, low-key picture. 
In this example, based on a
portrait by James McNeill
Whistler, I first flicked in the
whole of the figure with a
small brush and then, with a
large brush, I washed in the
entire background in the same
colour. When all that had
dried, I put in the other colour
areas, being careful to avoid
too much contrast. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOUR HARMONY
123
These two figures are done in
coloured pencil and, although
I’ve used slightly different
techniques in executing them,
they are both quite
unemphatic in terms of colour
tones. The first is drawn in
more carefully, using the
outlined areas and just filling
them with a single tone of
colour. The second figure is
rather more loosely drawn,
and I’ve thrown on the colour
as strongly as I could.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
124
Limited colour
These two drawings do not try to produce any strong colour at all.
Quite often you will find that what you draw is subdued in colour
naturally, so that in order to make the most of your picture you
need to consider the values of tone for creating the same sort of
effect as colour.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

LIMITED COLOUR
125
These two nudes are drawn in different styles
but both in the medium of pen and ink. The
first is a copy of a Picasso ink drawing and I’ve
tried to follow the method he used, giving a
similar emphasis to the line. The second is
drawn more heavily and I’ve added some colour
washes to give a more spatial effect to the figure.
The contrast between a simple line drawing and
the addition of washes of colour shows how
much even limited colour can achieve.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
126
Colour strength and depth
Our first picture is by John Keane, entitled Fairy Tales of London
(1992) and is a sort of allegory of metropolitan life for a young
mother and her family. In my version of the picture, the strong pastel
colours are punchy and contrast with each other, making the scene
look very hard, sharp and rather unsympathetic. The colours seem
somehow to isolate the figures in the urban landscape.
These two drawings show how colour can either jump out of the
picture for you or tone into a depth of implied space. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOUR STRENGTH AND DEPTH
127
All the colours work gently together because
they build a deep sense of space without
isolating the man. The white patch of the shirt is
like a small flag calling attention to the elegant
figure. This is a painting by the artist Eugene
Palmer called The Brother (1993), and I have
transcribed it fairly freely in watercolour.
The second drawing shows a young black man
wearing a sharp suit and, in a way, he is every bit
as urban as the previous figures. However, by
placing this dark-suited young man against a
dark huddle of trees and a dark ground surface,
the contrast is reduced to the sharp patch of his
white shirt seen above the high-buttoned jacket.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
128
Movement in figures
When it comes to reproducing moving figures, there is always the same
problem. How much do you show clearly and how much should the
drawing be blurred in some way to make it convey movement? The
question may be approached in two ways. You can either hope that your
drawing is dynamic enough to hold up as a moving image, even if
everything in it is crystal sharp and clear, or you can bring in some
distortions and fuzzy edges to give an impression of movement, as if you
have taken a photograph with a slow shutter speed.
The first picture shows a dancer suspended in mid-
air, in the middle of a great leap, and it is obvious
enough that this pose could only have been
captured by a camera. Clearly the figure is not
supported by anything except her own impetus.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

MOVEMENT IN FIGURES
129
The next picture is also a scene captured on
film. The movement through the space around
the figure can be marked by traces of his hands
and feet – blurred by their rapid movements –
to show that this is all happening in real time. 
So, both solutions work in
different ways. Try each of
them and decide which one
you prefer for use on any
particular occasion. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
130
Foreshortening and perspective
with figures
The second figure – of the girl lying on her front
– is similar in proportion but, with her arm
stretched out towards the viewer, her hand looks
unusually large in comparison with the rest of
her body. You will no doubt have noticed that I
have used the patterns on their clothes to
emphasize the disproportion: the striped pattern
on the man’s chest and the horizontal stripes on
the girl’s back are the kind of trick that can help
your attempt at this sort of foreshortening.
The next two pictures demonstrate what you have to look for
when using foreshortening and perspective on the human body.
Below are two figures lying down on a surface with their heads
towards us and their feet away from us. 
The man is lying on his back and his head
appears very large in comparison with the rest
of his body. Notice how the shoulders, arms and
chest are the next biggest part of the body and
how the legs appear quite tiny, with the feet
sticking up and looking almost too big for 
the legs. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

FORESHORTENING AND PERSPECTIVE WITH FIGURES
131
These next two images
demonstrate the same kind of
foreshortening, but from the
opposite end of the body.
Here you see a girl lying on
her back with her feet towards
you, and subsequently the feet
and lower legs appear large,
the upper legs and hips less
large, and the upper torso and
head quite small. The arm
extended towards the viewer
has a large hand and a much
smaller arm in comparison. 
The man lying with one knee
bent, again seems to have
enormous feet, large legs and
a reduced upper body and
head. Notice how the
underside of the chin is
prominent in both cases.
These drawings were done in
ink and wash.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
132
Details of the body – hands
When drawing the figure, it is always necessary at some stage to
look at each portion of the body in order to get it really accurate. 
Hands are quite complex, and it can take some time before
you get proficient enough to be able to draw them easily, but it
will come if you persevere.
These two open hands, showing the
palm, will be very familiar to us, since
they are seen from the viewpoint of the
owner. Notice how the movement of
the thumb changes the character of
the gesture. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DETAILS OF THE BODY – HANDS
133
1. The open hand with its fingers straightened
out looks flat and fin-like.
5. A gesticulating hand suggests fluidity of
movement.
3. Here is a hand in a fist, which has quite a
rugged quality about it. 
4. This hand is partly closed and partly open,
demonstrating the versatility of hands.
2. Another fist, obviously masculine, but with
the thumb closed around the fingers. When the
hand is in a fist, draw the whole shape first,
picking out the detail afterwards. 
6. A hand extended towards the viewer, relaxed
but not totally open. Notice how the outside of
the fingers are in shadow and contrast with the
palm, which is lit.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
134
Details of the body – arms
2. With the arm raised and the
elbow closer to the viewer, the
forearm looks bigger than the
upper arm, which is
foreshortened.
1. This arm with the hand resting
on the hip, shows clearly the
main shape, including the large
muscles in the upper arm and
the delicacy of the wrist. 
To draw arms effectively, you need to look at them from every angle. Remember,
the arm is larger in section nearer the body and thinner further away, towards the
extremities. The only time this appears not to be so is through foreshortening,
when a thinner section, such as the wrist, can seem as thick as the bicep, due to the
effect of perspective.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DETAILS OF THE BODY – ARMS
135
3. One thing is clear, the arm
is larger in section nearer the
body and thinner further away,
towards the extremities. The
only time this appears not to
be so is through
foreshortening, when a
thinner section, such as the
wrist, can seem as thick as the
bicep, due to the effect of
perspective.
4. Study of the joints will help you to create a
convincingly lifelike arm. Draw it with a simple
outline to start with, then gradually increase the
subtle curves to produce the shape of the
muscles more accurately.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
136
Details of the body – legs
These examples of legs in close-up show both
the full length view and the legs folded up 
and bent. 
The back view of a pair of female legs (1),
drawn in coloured inks, shows the full stretch of
the thigh and calf muscles and gives a good idea
of ideal proportions. The other two sets of legs
show very clearly the appearance of bent knees
– in one case, a large bulky shape (2), and in
the other example, the way the two legs curve
softly around each other when they are lying
across each other (3). Notice how the calf
muscle of the upper leg forms itself around the
thigh muscle of the one beneath.
1
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

Drawing the parts of the human body is never a
waste of your artistic time. It will teach you
more about drawing than any other kind of
drawing that you can think of. It is at one and
the same time the most difficult and the most
satisfying exercise and will help you to become
an efficient draughtsman quicker than any
other kind of work.
MASTERSTROKES
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
138
Details of the body – feet
These examples of feet, seen from the front, side,
underneath and from three-quarter view, provide a lot of
information as to their structure. They have been drawn
in pen and ink, in pastel, in coloured pencils and in brush
and watercolour. Feet are probably the most simple of all
the details of the body and it doesn’t take long to
familiarize yourself with them. Try drawing your own
hands, feet and legs in a mirror or directly; the practice is
always valuable. 
1. The most difficult view is from the front
where everything is foreshortened.
2. A straight side-on view shows the typical foot
shape that we all recognize.
3. The foot seen from below is
unusual and needs a bit of
study to get it right. But it is
not too complex.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DETAILS OF THE BODY – FEET
139
4. Feet arched and up on their
toes are not too difficult except
when seen from the front. 
5. A foot coming down as if walking, shows how
the toes lift up to help the action.
6. The typical shape of the foot of someone
standing in front of you is seen here from the
three-quarter view. Note how the flatter part of
the foot connects with the ankle joint.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
140
Step by step figure drawing
I chose as an easy 
option the perennial
holiday beach scene, which
most of us have had some
experience of, and which
shows off the human figure to
some advantage. So I drew a
young woman sitting as if on
the beach, then a male
companion lounging with his
hand up as if calling to someone.
1
When you come to produce a picture with a number of figures in
it, you will need to have some sort of theme or idea about how
they are all going to fit together into the scene. It could be totally
abstract in that it would only be a group of figures arranged in a
format with no particular reason for being there. But usually
there is more fun in choosing a theme to put your figures
together in a more natural and narrative way.
Then I added the classic 
bathing beauty, kneeling
up and applying  sun-tan lotion.
2
I next added a young 
man with a beach ball,
which he appears about to throw.
4
Another character was 
an older man with a bath
towel, looking somewhat
uncertain.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP FIGURE DRAWING
141
And finally a 
middle-aged
woman with dark
glasses, just standing.
All these figures are in
their swimming
costumes so we have a
classic scene of bodies
almost in their natural
state in a familiar
situation.
7
Now you have to set the scene. First the 
sea, making a nice broad horizon across
the middle of the picture. A bit of rocky cliff to
one side and then an island and some yachts on
the horizon. The beach is divided into a lower
part near the sea and a higher part closer to the
observer. On the lower part is a deck chair and a
large bag. On the higher level are placed two
beach towels, one of which has a large umbrella
or sunshade planted near it. By the towel without
the sunshade are a sunhat and an open book.
8
Another 
girl next,
looking as though
she is being
splashed. 
6
A youth with a small bucket, from which
he is throwing water. 
5
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

THE HUMAN FIGURE
142
Step by step figure drawing
continued
Next you have to place the 
figures into the scene. The
first thing was to put the couple
together on the towel with the
sunshade on the left side of the
picture. On the other beach towel,
which is strongly coloured, I
placed the young woman. She has
no need for the shade as she is
building up her tan, and she has a
sunhat to keep off the hottest sun.
Behind her I set the young man
with the beach ball so that the
lounging man appears to be
calling to him. Behind him is the
uncertain man wondering what is
going on, and the middle-aged
woman who is probably waiting for
him to move the deckchair closer
towards her. In the space between
the three in the foreground I put
the youth throwing the water and
the young woman reacting to that.
And so you now have a beach
scene with a logical enough story
to give it credence that it actually
happened. Needless to say, all
these figures have been observed
by me at some time or another,
and it was only a matter of
remembering what they had
looked like in order to draw them.
But if you are contemplating a
scene like this it would not go
amiss for you to draw some people
in that situation first or even take
some photographs of such poses.
9
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP FIGURE DRAWING
143
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

144
Portrait drawing is frequently the type of drawing that people
would most like to be able to do, so that they can make
reasonable likenesses of their friends and relatives. The first
important thing is to understand the structure of the head.
Without attention to its general shape, you will not be able to
make a very convincing portrait, or even a caricature. When
people start drawing the human head there is a tendency to
concentrate on the face of the sitter, and it is often drawn larger
in scale than the overall size of the head. This is natural enough,
but something you will have to correct for the future.
Start practising either from life, which is the most effective
way, or from clear photographs. Gradually you will become
accustomed to the relative shape of any head and then, even if
you still don’t quite capture the likeness, at least you will have a
head that looks as though it belongs to a real person.
When it comes to tonal values in the portrait, you may well
find that the colour of the human face is not always uniform. If a
person has quite dramatic changes of colour in their facial
features, you could be tempted to put them in very strongly.
However, this could reduce the structural composition, turning it
into a caricature of the real person. In order to avoid this, grade
your colour gradually from one part of the face to the next and
the result will look more natural.
Then, of course, you will need to look at the various features
of the face, until you know how to draw them from any angle.
What identifies a face as belonging to a specific person is the
particular arrangement of the features and their relationship to
each other. So, carefully consider the arrangement of your sitter’s
features, even if you have to measure them to make sure that you
have the right proportions. Interestingly, the features of most
faces are very similar to each other in terms of measurements.
However, there are lots of small distinctions of shape and form
that will make all the difference when you come to draw. Our eyes
are so accustomed to scanning faces that they discern even the
tiniest differences between one face and another.
Don’t neglect to study every face that you see. It always stands
a portrait artist in good stead.
Portraits
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

145
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
146
Proportions of the head
These two diagrams of the average adult human head are to help
you become familiar with the general proportions. In the first, I
have drawn the female head full on from the front with the head
upright and directly facing me. The male head, usually larger-
boned, has exactly the same proportions.
Vertical readings of the profile
face:
1. The length of the eye from
corner to corner is exactly one
fifth of the overall width of the
face, viewed full on. 
2. The space between the eyes
is one unit, or the same as the
length of the eye from corner 
to corner.
3. The widest part of the head
is about two units from the top
of the head. 
4. The nose extends over two
vertical units, three units from
the top of the head and two
units from the bottom. 
5. The eyes are situated
halfway down the head.
Nobody believes this at first
but it is so – we only see the
face and usually ignore the
top of the head, which is
usually covered in hair. 
6. The hairline at the front is
one unit down from the top. 
7. The nose is one and a half
units from eye level to the
base of the nostrils. 
8. The bottom of the lower lip
is one unit up from the base
of the chin. This should help you get
the position of the mouth right,
because it is not halfway between the
base of the nose and the chin. 
9. The length of the ears is two units,
the tops are level with the eyebrows
and the lobes align with the base of
the nose. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PROPORTIONS OF THE HEAD
147
The basic proportion is five units across the width
and seven units down the length of the head. Note
the central line running the length of the face,
passing between the eyes, straight down the nose,
bisecting the mouth and the finally, the chin.
Horizontal readings of the
profile face:
1. In profile, the head is seven
units wide and seven units
long, including the nose. 
2. The front of the eye is 
one unit in from the point of
the nose. 
3. The ear is one unit wide and
two units in length. Its front
edge is four units from the
point of the nose or three units
from the back of the head.
4. The nose projects half a unit
out from the front of the skull.
5. Remember, even if there is a
difference in the size of adult 
heads, there is no significant
difference in proportion. 
6. Having said that, the
proportions of children’s heads
are different from those of
adults and they vary from age 
to age. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
148
Heads from all angles
We generally use the frontal view of the face as the easiest way to
get a good likeness and it is probably the best view for your first
attempt at drawing the head. It shows you the eyes and mouth at
their most recognizable, however, it is not the easiest way to draw
the nose. Nor is it necessarily the most interesting method for
portrait purposes. 
The profile is straightforward
enough to draw in most parts,
although some people have
difficulty with the eyes at this angle. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

HEADS FROM ALL ANGLES
149
The most favoured viewpoint is from the three-
quarter view, where you can draw the shape of
the nose more clearly and still see the main area
of the full face. However, you do need to look
very carefully at the shape of the far eye and
also the shape of the far side of the mouth. 
There are two other ways that you can portray
the face without losing the recognition. The first
is from slightly below, as if the head is tilted
backwards. This gives a rather cool look to the
face and even a rather haughty expression.
With the head tilted forward,
the look tends towards
quizzical or even defensive.
But both of these viewpoints
can work if you are confident
in getting the likeness.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
150
Stages of a portrait
The basic shape of the head is the thing you have to start with in
your portrait. Make sure that the skull structure is correct and
that it sits on the neck in the right way.  Take great care at this
stage because it makes your task so much easier later on. 
Next, look at the outline of 
the hair in relation to the
head and sketch this in very simply
as one shape. This is more
important when the hair is long.
1
Now mark out the 
positions of the eyes, the
nose and the mouth so that
they are in the correct
relationship to each other,
then draw in the shapes of
each of the features, getting
their shapes right and their
size correct in relation to the
rest of the head.
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STAGES OF A PORTRAIT
151
Then block in the rest 
of the colours, lightest
first, followed by the darker
ones, until you have gone as
dark in tone as you need.
Don’t use black until right at
the end and then only the
least you can get away with. It
is so strong that you have to be
very careful how much you use.
4
After all this, you will 
need to start blocking in
the colour, beginning with all
the areas of shade on the
head. Use a neutral colour and
maybe a different colour for
the hair.
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
152
An alternative approach to
drawing the head
This alternative approach to drawing the head is one used by
many portrait painters, and it works just as well. 
First, you draw a vertical
line to represent the length of the
head from the top to the chin and then
carefully mark on it the positions of the
eyes, which should be halfway down. 
1
The next part is very important.
First draw in the shapes of the eyes
and the mouth and the nose very
carefully. Notice how, in the three-quarter
view, the far eye and the far side of the
mouth are slightly shorter in shape than
the near side. 
Next draw in the eyebrows. Again the far
eyebrow is shorter than the nearer one. 
When you do the nose, the shadow side
can be put in, too, because that helps to
define the character of the nose more
clearly. It is worth taking the trouble to get
all these shapes right.
The next thing is to put in the ear that
you can see from this point of view.
Lengthwise, it is situated between the
eyebrow at the top and the end of the nose
at the bottom. Check the distance between
the outside edge of the nearest eye and the
front edge of the ear, relating its distance to
that of the length of the nose. Then draw in 
the shape.
3
Draw in – very simply – the shapes of the eyes in
their relative positions.
A mark halfway between where the eyes are and the
bottom mark, which is the chin, will give you the
position of the nose. Draw it in as near as possible to
the shape you can see.
The position of the mouth is to be marked in next,
and here you will have to be more careful. Do you
remember that the lower lip is one seventh of the way
from the bottom of the chin? Don’t put it halfway
between the nose and the chin as it will be too far away
from the nose, if you do.
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH TO DRAWING THE HEAD
153
Finally, treat all the areas of shading
fairly lightly at first and then block
in the other colours, starting with the
lightest first and ending with the darkest. If
you want the face to look brighter, give it a
darker background colour.
5
Now shape the mouth.
The half of the mouth on the far
side of the face will be shorter than the
half on the near side. The centre of the
mouth should be immediately below the
centre of the nose.
Then draw in the point of the chin.
Now complete the whole shape of the
head, carefully observing the shapes. 
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
154
Expressions
When you begin to draw portraits, you may find after a few
minutes of posing that people’s faces tend to adopt a fixed stare
and often a rather bored expression. This is why, in previous
times, professional portrait painters used to employ musicians to
keep their sitters amused, so that they would not find the business
too tedious. Some painters rely on their talent for interesting
conversation to keep their sitters lively, but you can see how that
might be difficult.  So, one thing you can do is to get your sitters
to try out various expressions, in order to keep them awake and
enjoying the experience of sitting for their portrait.
Facial expressions may be a bit difficult to keep for any length
of time, but it is worth trying to get a few down on paper for your
own enjoyment, and in order to learn from them.
Here I show a range of basic
expressions:
The first is laughter or
happiness – some people seem
to find it quite easy to keep a
big smile on their face long
enough for you to draw it.
The next is a smile or a look of
serenity which might be what
Leonardo da Vinci was trying
to capture in the portrait of
the Mona Lisa.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

EXPRESSIONS
155
The next is either angry or
grumpy, depending a bit on
the intensity.
This one is surprise, although
it could become that far-away
expression you sometimes fall
into when contemplating your
next holiday, for instance.
And the last one is a seductive
sort of look that works best of
course if you look like a
filmstar of the more 
beautiful kind.
This one should be easy
enough – just bore your sitter
by telling him feeble jokes or
relating in detail how hard it
was to park your car.
Do try out some more,
depending on your sitter’s
acting ability.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
156
Facial features
Here are things to look for when you are making a preliminary
study of the sitter’s face before you start to draw it. It is these
little details that are going to make the difference between the
portrait looking like the sitter or not.
1. First the eyes, because they
are the most dominant part of
the human physiognomy.
Check whether they are level
from corner to corner. 
2. Then look at the eyebrows.
Are they straight or arched? It
makes quite a difference to the
look of the face.
3. Now look at the mouth.
Mouths can be straight along
the line of the join of the lips.
Or they can be curved up at
the corners.
Are they angled so that the
outside corners are tilted
upwards? 
Or are they the opposite, and
tilting downwards at the
outside corners?
Or they can turn downwards at
the corners.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

FACIAL FEATURES
157
4. Not only that, the lips can
be thick or thin and, again,
this will affect the look of 
the face.
5. Ears are less noticeable
unless they stick out very
obviously but, as you can see
here with our very small
collection, ears do vary quite 
a bit.
6. Then there is the hairline.
This can vary too, but the most
obvious feature is whether it
forms an even line or a wavy
one; and a  widow’s peak is the
most distinctive form of all.
7. When it comes to noses, you
can see an amazing variety of
shapes and sizes. Look
carefully and draw well.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
158
Features in more detail
Now we will look at these features in closer detail and note some
of the things you are sure to come across, if you learn to look
carefully enough.
You will have noticed the
formation of the average eye is
not quite as you may have
imagined before you began
drawing the human face. The
iris, that is the coloured part,
features quite large in the
centre of the eye and yet is
hardly ever seen completely.
Normally, what you see is a
part of the iris hidden under
the top eyelid, and the bottom
edge of the iris just touching
the bottom lid. 
2. Seen from the side, the shape
of the eye changes dramatically,
and is more obviously a ball
held behind the lids. You can
actually see the bulge of the
lens on the front of the eyeball.
3. Then there are eyes with
very heavy or drooping eyelids.
In an older person, as here,
the iris retreats further under
the upper eyelid and does not
quite touch the lower one.
4. In Oriental eyes the top lid
is obscured altogether, which
has the effect of simplifying
the shape of the eye and,
incidentally, making it
smoother to draw.
5. Noses are much easier to draw
in profile, as these examples
show. When drawing from the
front, ascertain the shape by
observing the shadows cast by the
projection. From these three
examples, you will see that
because it casts a larger shadow,
the beaky or aquiline shape
shows more clearly than either
the retroussé or the straight nose.
1. The lower eyelid shows its
thickness, whereas the
thickness of the upper lid is
usually hidden by the
eyelashes.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

FEATURES IN MORE DETAIL
159
6. With mouths, the difference between
the front and the profile view of them is
radical. Seen from the front, all these lips
are easy enough to draw, but from the side
you begin to see that the most important
part of the mouth is where it opens. It
does mean that when you draw the mouth,
that part where the two lips meet is all
important for giving the right effect to
convince your viewer. With the smiling
mouth the real problem is whether you
should, or should not, emphasize the
teeth. If you overdo it they can look quite
grotesque, so go carefully.
Ears, foreheads and chins can show just as much variation as noses,
mouths and eyes. Study them carefully and work on building up a
good bank of them in your reference sketchbooks.
7. Here are some examples of
ears from the front and side.
8. And there are examples of
foreheads, too, which as you
can see are just as varied,
although it’s a feature that
doesn’t immediately grasp
your attention.
9. Finally, we have some
examples of chins, seen from
the side. Most chins are either
in line with the forehead or
slightly behind it. However,
some project further forward
than the forehead.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
160
Poses, or how to place your sitter
There’s an infinite variety of poses that can be adopted for
portraits, but eventually you have to rely on your sitter being able
to adopt the position that you feel would be the best. What I am
suggesting are a few poses that might be used, but you will no
doubt find many others.
1. The first is the most straightforward,
someone sitting upright in a chair
directly facing you. It’s not very
imaginative but may be used to show
an uncompromising attitude, which
might suit certain sitters.
2. The second  is the relaxed
pose of someone lying across a
settee or sofa. A good
horizontal shape that can look
both elegant and casual.
3. The third position is
difficult to obtain, because you
have to be above the sitter and
it relies on you having a higher
level to work from. However, it
is quite distinctive and so
could create a lot of interest.
2.
1.
3.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

POSES, OR HOW TO PLACE YOUR SITTER
161
4. Next I show the sort of
natural pose that anyone
might take up, and these kind
of positions do give a natural
quality to the portrait.
5. The fifth one is much the
easiest pose for the sitter to
adopt, as long as you don’t
expect him or her to keep
their arms above their head
for too long.
7. This example shows one of
the most natural positions for
a portrait, where the sitter is
dressed in their best clothes
and enthroned in a chair. A
sort of party piece. 
8 a, b and c. You might consider whether you
want a rich decorative element to your portrait
or, conversely, a very plain, unadorned image.
This will depend on your sitter, and you have to
try to match the character of their personality
with the way you portray them (a). You might
decide that you need a little drama in the pose
of the sitter, and here I show one in which the
subject of the portrait is reflected in a mirror,
standing by a mantelpiece, as in James McNeill
Whistler’s Symphony in White, No. 2: The Little
White Girl (b). Or you might want to refer to the
particular abilities of your sitter, as in this
example, based on the portrait of Charles
Dickens at his desk (c). 
6. This pose is rather stylised,
reminiscent of those
eighteenth- or nineteenth-
century aristocratic figures.
4.
7.
6.
8 a.
8 b.
8 c.
5.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
162
Step by step portrait
Before you start the portrait, you will need certain information
about, and familiarity with, your sitter. When you first contact
them, take a camera and your sketchbook with you, in order to
make a record of their face. 
You should do at least
two preliminary
drawings from different angles.
If you can do more than two
that is all to the good.
2
First, take several 
photographs of them
from as many different angles
as you think fit. I usually take a
full face shot, a three-quarter
left side, a three-quarter right
side and then at least one
profile. You will also need
pictures of them smiling and
unsmiling. This should give
you quite a lot of information.
1
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP PORTRAIT
163
Now you have to make a
decision about how you
want your model to pose. Your
sitter, of course, may have
strong ideas themselves but
don’t hesitate to tell them
what you think will work best.
In these examples, I’ve placed
the same girl in quite different
poses (here, in a formal pose,
and in a more relaxed pose
over the page). 
3
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

PORTRAITS
164
Step by step portrait
continued
People often don’t know
how they want to appear
until you suggest something.
Have confidence in your own
vision, but naturally the client
has the last word, particularly
if they have commissioned you
and are paying for the portrait.
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP PORTRAIT 
165
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

166
Drapery in the artistic sense means cloth, clothing or textiles. We
will be looking at fabric used in still-life arrangements; the clothes
that people wear in our drawings; and anything else connected
with the activity of drawing.
Initially, we have to examine the actual materiality of a piece
of cloth. That includes the way it folds, how it hangs and how it
drapes around an object. It also includes the sheen or surface
texture and whether it reflects the light or absorbs it. When you
come to look at the way a piece of cloth drapes or folds around a
shape, the fibre from which the cloth is made should be obvious
to anyone with very little experience of looking at clothes. If you
are lucky enough to wear a well-made piece of clothing made out
of the best fabric that money can buy, then it neither feels nor
looks like a similar article of clothing made from a cheaper
material. Nor does something like pure, natural wool ‘handle’ the
same way as a synthetic textile.
By the same token, a modern version of formal dress will not
be the same as an historical piece of formal wear. So we have to
do a little research if ever we want to portray anyone from a
historical period. And when we look at the old master paintings,
we see that they used different ways of representing the same
kind of materials, so there is some choice of methods.
One problem with coloured textiles is that the patterns on the
cloth can be quite complex. This often means that you have to
find a short cut in the way that you draw it, or else you may find
yourself engaged in a drawn-out piece of work. So, try suggesting
the pattern with marks that are not exact but rather more
impressionistic. Emulate the general shapes and don’t try to put
in every detail. And be sure to note the difference between the
colour of the shadows and the highlights on the cloth.
There is a significant difference between the way tailored
clothes hug or hide the figure and how less structured clothing
hangs on the human body. If you see a man’s jacket hanging on
the back of a chair, compared with a dressing gown or bathrobe
casually discarded, it is immediately obvious that these clothes
have very different functions, and their form tells you so. Finally,
there is an exercise in which you can use all the knowledge you
have gathered to construct a scene in which the clothing of some
kind plays a significant role. 
Drapery
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

167
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY
168
Materiality
With cotton, the look is
smoother, with neither the
surface reflection of silk nor
the heavier texture of wool. It
can also be starched and 
folded to a sharpness that
neither wool nor silk can
emulate. When cotton fabric is
worn and crumpled, it shows
much more than the other two.
First, here are three pieces of cloth made from natural fibres. 
It is not always easy to tell the substance of a material from a
drawing. These three pieces are silk, wool and cotton, in 
that order, but would you have known that just by looking at 
the drawings? 
The quality of wool is similar in some
ways but it is a much more dense
material. The folds tend to be more
generous and thicker, and the texture is
often chunkier.
A major clue is that silk is so
soft that it never forms harsh
or ugly folds. In fact, it always
folds so nicely that even if it
does not have the
characteristic silky sheen, it is
usually unmistakable.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

MATERIALITY
169
Now, let us take a look at examples of costumes from the past, as
well as some more familiar modern dress.
Here is someone in one of
those draped forms of clothing
that people wore when
garments resembled – to our
eyes – nothing more complex
than a sheet. This is like a
Roman toga, which winds
around the body and fits
where it touches.
The second figure is from a
later date, although the artist
who drew her intended to
represent a person from the
classical era. Nevertheless, we
notice immediately that the
top of the costume is shaped,
and it has a voluminous skirt
that doesn’t appear to be
made from the same fabric.
So, we would be correct in
dating it well after the pure,
draped forms of the classical
period and, if our costume
history is good enough, we
might guess at the
Renaissance, which would 
be right.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY
170
Shapes under cloth
Modern and historic
Because of the sophisticated tailoring and the
figure-hugging styles, the next two examples 
could not really be from any time before the
twentieth century. 
The female’s dress is designed
to show off a fashionably
slender figure, carefully cut
and quite comfortable to wear.
I suggest that men’s dress in previous
centuries has been closer fitting but,
more recently, the male figure has
worn a suit of jacket and trousers,
which is the least compromizing set of
garments invented for the human
form. It both describes the basic shape
and yet hides its curves and bulges. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SHAPES UNDER CLOTH
171
However, the more
modern girl is wearing a
loose, relaxed style of
clothing and, although it
is obviously party or
formal wear, she is
dressed to suit the
activity that she is
engaged in. This dress
actually accompanies an
active lifestyle.
The next pair of
pictures is also nicely
juxtaposed, with two
different types of dress
that hint at the
philosophy behind the
tailoring. The lady
sitting demurely at the
lunch table is wearing
a long dress of the
nineteenth century,
with a large flower-
bedecked hat, both of
which make it unlikely
that in the near future
she will get up and
start jumping around.
She is far more likely
to take a gentle stroll
in the garden. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY
172
Drapery in art
The next set of clothes suggests the change in lifestyle and
fashion ideas brought about by the passage of centuries. This not
only shows in the cut of the clothes, but also in the symbolic
meaning behind their colours. 
The short, closely fitting tunic
in this composition (after
Tamara de Lempicka) seems
to be a device to draw
attention to the young woman
herself, and the strong colour
is part of that message.
The illustration of the Virgin Mary shows her
wearing the typical medieval costume of a long
dress with a heavy flowing cloak, in the
powerful combination of red and blue. The
red – representing Christ’s Passion – is tonally
particularly vibrant and the blue – associated
with the Mother of God as the ‘Stella Maris’ 
or Star of the Sea – is a deep azure. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY IN ART
173
This large red drape, hanging over the edge of
the support of St John’s figure, is emblemmatic
of the martyrdom he will later endure, and hints
at his passion and death. 
The dress of Mary Magdalene (after Piero della
Francesca) signifies in both colour and style the
penitence of the reformed courtesan who gave up
her worldly life to follow one of sacrifice. The green
signifies the rebirth of her soul and the red cloak
(now worn as a badge of repentance) tells of her
recent worldly career.
The colour chosen for
the dominant figure in
Delacroix’s Liberty
Leading the People
(1830) – the female
icon of the French
revolutionary principle
– suggests that she is a
beacon for the people
to follow through the
smoke and fire of battle.
The use of drapery here, in a
drawing after David Hockney,
hints at a sort of protective
instinct on the part of the artist,
with the bathrobe cosily
wrapping round the drowsy
young man.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY
174
Step by step to clothed figures
For a composition in which clothing is central to the artist’s
statement, choose a scene with which you are familiar. I have
decided on a jazz version of the dance hall or night club which, as
a young man, I found endlessly fascinating, chiefly for the way
people revealed themselves in terms of what they wore. This is
where people go to dance, show off, have fun and dress up to be
seen, all at the same time.
First, you need to decide on the
number of figures, and how you want
to portray them. I wanted to show three
pairs dancing and three other individuals
on the sidelines, so to speak. I decided to
leave the actual venue rather vague, just a
dark space with some strobe lights to
suggest the activity.
1
My main couple, 
designed to occupy
the centre of the picture,
are a young man and
woman dancing in a jazz
club; partly because my own
experience was based in
clubs like these and partly
because my research
suggests that jazz is making
a comeback in the
nightclub world.
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP TO CLOTHED FIGURES
175
My second dancing 
couple would be
dancing closer, and more
slowly. Then the third pair
would be likewise dancing to
jazz, but at some distance and
less obtrusively. 
3
Along with these 
dancers, I decided to
include two girls having a drink
and chatting to each other
and, finally, a young man
standing nearby, watching 
the dancers.
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

DRAPERY
176
Step by step to clothed figures
continued
Having drawn these up, so that I had some
idea of what they should look like, I then
arranged them across the page, as though they were
all in the scene together. I put the two girls in close
and at one end. Behind them, I placed the solitary
young man. Immediately next to them were the first
pair of dancers and they took up most of the centre
space. Visible behind them, slightly smaller, were
the other two jazz dancers. Finally, I put the slow-
dancing couple on the end.
5
Behind these main figures, I showed 
silhouettes of people in the far reaches of the
club. Of course, if the club was any good it would
be very crowded, but the silhouette technique is a
form of artistic licence, as my task would be all the
harder if I had to put in many more bodies.
6
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP TO CLOTHED FIGURES
177
I made the whole background dark with
a few streaks of white, yellow and red
breaking up the tone. On the dancers’ figures, I
made sure that there were yellow and light blue
flicks of light around the edges, to indicate the
reflection of the strobe flashes. The foreground
figures were significantly lighter than the
background. I also indicated some reflection on
the floor under their feet, to give the impression
of a smooth surface. The floor was a cool blue
and the upper background was deep purple.
None of the figures were drawn in any great
detail because a looser mode of drawing
suggests movement better. 
8
My next step was deciding both the 
medium and the colour to use. I chose
pastel as the medium and decided to go for an
atmospheric use of colour. So although I
sketched in the local colour lightly to begin with, I
allowed the tones of light and shade to dictate
the colour values to me. In such a venue, anyway,
the light would be very low, except for the
strobe effects, which would dominate the scene.
7
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

178
Composition is always the hardest and yet the most interesting
part of picture-making, once you have mastered the basics of
drawing everything else. When you are only concerned with form
and tone the problem is difficult enough but, when you come to
add colour, it introduces a new element that will make a huge
difference to your final design. Here some of the things that you
will have to take into consideration.
Some artists use colour as a medium in its own right and
subject all their composition and drawing to the dictates of colour
values. This can work very well in the hands of a master, but does
require considerable practice before you achieve the success that
you aim for. The abstract qualities of colour can be used to great
advantage and can bring new heights of emotion to quite
traditional compositions. An artist may even subsume the whole
picture into one colour (monochrome), which will then set the
emotional drive of the piece. On the other hand, a picture may be
so delicately coloured that you can almost see it as a tonal
drawing. Or perhaps an artist will dramatize the contrast between
light and dark, or the colours themselves, and so strongly that the
tone or colour carries the whole message of the picture.
When you contemplate your composition, it is a good idea to
produce a small sketch first, to see how the areas of colour
balance themselves out across the whole picture. You may find
that you have introduced a colour that swamps all the others, 
then you can either reduce its intensity or strengthen the other
colours to balance it out. On the other hand, if you like strong
contrasts in your work, the effect of a powerful hue can be very
dramatic. But whatever your intention, that preliminary sketch
shows what effect your colour scheme might have and is always a
sensible start.
Even colourists use geometry to compose their pictures, so I
will touch on this as well. The idea of colour as form will also be
discussed, and you will soon discover that it not only gives
emotional impact to the work but also substance to the forms in
the picture. Finally, the drama and meaning behind a composition
can also be conveyed by the use of colour. 
Composition 
and colour
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

179
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
180
Various artists and their use 
of colour
Here are my versions of some paintings by master artists who knew the
value of colour and how to use it to their advantage. Different ideas
demand different colour values and you will see several approaches here.
This is a conventionally composed eighteenth-
century portrait by Thomas Gainsborough, of
himself, his wife and daughter. It may well have
been a sample of his work, designed to be
shown to prospective clients, demonstrating his
expertise in making  portraits of people of
different sexes and ages – not to mention the
dog – and setting them in an attractive
landscape. It also shows his remarkable ability to
interpret fabrics of all kinds, and the one thing
that jumps out of the picture is the
extraordinary brilliance of the artist’s waistcoat
and his wife’s beautiful blue dress. He sets off
the red of the waistcoat by surrounding it with
dark blue and sombre black. His white stockings
also contrast with the black breeches. His wife,
in comparison, is all lightness and brightness in
her sky- blue dress with white silk and lace
trimmings. We can imagine his wealthy clients
thinking that Gainsborough must be able to
make them appear even more splendid.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

VARIOUS ARTISTS AND THEIR USE OF COLOUR
181
The Allegory of Love: Unfaithfulness (1570), a picture by Paolo
Veronese of three figures engaged in a kind of dance shows how,
with the restrained and yet playful use of colour, the sting can be
taken out of the most painful love story. This is a portrait of
unfaithfulness, but disguised in such a way that at first you are
amazed by the brilliance of the draughtsmanship then lulled by
the gentle, charming colour scheme. Only gradually do you begin
to wonder what this trio is actually doing. Then you notice that
the younger man is receiving a love letter from the unfaithful
lover or wife, while she reassures the other man with a firm grasp.
It is a very adroit use of both design and colour.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
182
Use of colour for harmony 
and drama
The next picture is Danae (1636) by Rembrandt van Rijn, master
of master painters, and he has bathed his story in a golden glow
of light. To achieve this effect he has created a setting of great
richness and splendour. The story is of one of Jupiter’s amorous
adventures, when he appears to Aegina in the form of fire. The
bedroom into which he arrives has a vast golden bed with rich
hangings and gilded carvings. The main colour of this scene is
gold, as though lit by a brilliant fire that we cannot see. The only
other notable colour  is a rich red covered table. The cool colour
of the pale sheets and pillows on the bed only makes the fiery
glow look stronger. A masterful use of colour.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

USE OF COLOUR FOR HARMONY AND DRAMA
183
Caravaggio’s Beheading of St John the Baptist
(1607) is the largest painting he ever did, and I
was lucky enough to see it soon after its
restoration, when it was in the Santa Maria della
Carmine, in Florence. It is very dramatic.The
picture is divided into one very black half, with
the other just a little lighter. The figures appear
quite small, with the central characters of St
John and the executioner spotlit, in effect. The
predominant colours are variations on brown
with a touch of dark blue, except for the flesh
tones of the figures. There is one brilliant touch
of colour, however, in the red cloak that has
fallen to the floor from St John’s body and looks
like a great pool of blood. It is the only strong
colour in the picture – a shocking red accent by
the great dramatist of art.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
184
Geometry of composition
Colour can add greatly to the enhancement of
many artistic effects – particularly that of
geometry. Correct and careful handling of
colour and tone shapes can help dramatically in
presenting convincing images. 
In Piero’s geometric plan, the picture is divided
horizontally into three equal parts. The angel
and the tent roof make up the top third. The lit
opening of the tent makes the central part; and
the Emperor and his attendants dominate the
lower third. The tent top forms a large triangle,
repeated below in the central section by that of
the tent opening. Because of the strong vertical,
running from the point of the tent, down the tent
pole towards the foot of the seated attendant, we
can infer an inverted triangle in the lower section,
although it is not quite so obvious.
For mastery of the geometry of composition,
Piero della Francesca proved himself the great
mathematician. He invariably divided up his
works in a well-regulated geometric fashion, and
he was just as much a master of colour.
In this fresco, Constantine’s Dream (c. 1457–58),
all the light is on the sleeping emperor and his
attendant, surrounded by the warm colours of
the tent and the royal bedclothes. The guards in
semi-shadow in the foreground seem unaware
that the beautiful glow signifies angelic intrusion
into the dream of Constantine the Great.  
The picture conforms to a strong geometric
design overall. There are two subsidiary thrusts
of energy through the picture: a line going from
the angel’s arm to the chest of the sleeping
Emperor; and another line from the vertical
spear of the left-hand guard to the centre of the
angel above.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

GEOMETRY OF COMPOSITION
185
Now, we look at a picture, after
Alma-Tadema’s The Kiss (1891),
that is less obviously
geometrically arranged, but
whose spatial qualities are such
that I detect a strong sense of
geometric design about it.
First it seems that the
horizontal divisions of the space
are sevenths of the whole depth:
the edge of the lake at one
seventh; the top of the beacon
ledge at two sevenths; and the
top of the steps at five sevenths.
Then all the lines of the
architecture recede towards a
vanishing point at the left end
of the edge of the lake. These
lines to the vanishing point cut
across a very strong vertical
through the beacon and down
along the edge of the carved
support. There also seems to be
a tight triangle between the
three main figures.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
186
Abstract colour in composition
Paintings can provide a strong effect by their colour and many
modern painters have used colour with some power. In all the
examples here you can see how the colour really forms the basis of
the pictures’ impact and has obviously been designed to do so.
Colour used in an abstract way to give a picture a strong presence
is shown on this page by two painters of the Impressionist era. 
First Vuillard who, with his amazing eye,
produced this extraordinary piece of graphic
painting The Goose in the 1890s. The white goose
in the centre frustrates his hunters – two baffled
gentlemen in top hats and cloaks – and two
other helpers over on the horizon. The flat
expanse of orange-yellow grass or gravel sets off
the white shape of the bird, making it look very
poised and confident. The deep-blue sky with its
white clouds looks very close. The two black-clad
figures in the foreground seem isolated by the
strong colour of the ground. There is no
attempt to portray depth, although the warm
colour of the ground does advance strongly in
front of the blue.
In this scene, after Manet’s
Boating (1874), the water
forms the entire background.
We can see only the stern
section of the sailing boat. In it
are a young man steering by
the tiller and, lying back, a
young woman in a blue
summer dress with a hat and 
a veil. The man, all in white, 
is set against the blue of 
water almost like a cut-out.
The use of white and blue to
set the scene of a sunny day is
very evocative.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ABSTRACT COLOUR IN COMPOSITION
187
Matisse was a supreme
colourist, one who made colour
work for him. In The Pink Studio
(1911) he floods the scene with
one dominant colour, against
which all the other colours have
to take their place. The strong
pink of the floor space sets the
scene. Somewhat surprisingly,
the yellow rug reinforces the
power of the floor space. The
rest of the scene seems muted
in comparison, even though
some of the objects are quite
strong in colour. Oddly
enough, the device works very
well and you do actually
perceive the floor as flat.
Here too, in David Hockney’s swimming pool scene Portrait of an Artist (Pool with
Two Figures) (1971), there is no attempt to create depth in the picture with tonal
harmonies or perspective. The colour of the pink jacket brings the young man
forward from the green background, the flat colour alone creating the form in
space; the modelling is not strong enough to have much effect. The blue patterns
of the pool create a sense of volume against the bright creamy white of the
poolside with, once again, the colour giving the major clue to the depth. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
188
Action and drama
Drama and colour often go hand-in-hand, as the power of colour
to produce an active, dominant ingredient into the composition
of the picture is shown well in these examples. When you want to
convey drama through a picture, as you have already seen, it is
not too difficult if you use colour cleverly. 
In St George and the Dragon
(1555–1558) by Tintoretto, the
use of colour is very traditional
but extremely successful in
getting across the drama of the
situation. The foreground is
dominated by the frightened
princess fleeing from St
George’s violent conflict with
the dragon as she rushes
towards the viewer with arms
outstretched and cloak flying.
To ‘advance’ her, she is shown
in a shimmering deep blue
dress, cloaked in a beautiful
pinkish red. Her pale face and
shoulders emerge from the rich
colours of her clothes, hinting
at a certain desirability through
her apparent defencelessness.
In turn, she is surrounded by
the rich green swathe of a
narrow piece of land. 
The scene behind her is also
full of action as St George  on a
white horse, with a white cloak
and a red saddle-cloth, lances
the scaly dragon who flaps his
wings, coils his tail and gapes
his jaws. Beyond that again is an
inlet, and then another shore
with dim grey walls. Above that
there is a brilliant, almost white
light in which God, looking
down from heaven, seems to be
urging St George on. The
whole colour scheme enhances
the drama of the situation well.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ACTION AND DRAMA
189
Felix Vallotton’s The Lie (1897) seems to be set
in a scene full of deep red danger. The whole
room is furnished in strong reds, with pink and
yellow striped wallpaper and black and pink
flowers in the vase. The embracing man and
woman are wearing evening dress, him in
deepest black and her in bright, hot red. Who is
telling whom the lie? We don’t know for sure,
but no doubt we each have our own idea of the
culprit. The quality of the dominant, obsessive
red conveys both a sign of danger and the
suggestion of liaisons less than innocent. The
colour really does set the scene and we know
that no good will come of it. But isn’t it
attractive, isn’t it seductive? What deep waters
we are getting into, and all because of a title and
a suggestive colour scheme. Strong drama, of
the psychological kind.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
190
Step by step to a dramatic scene 
in colour
This exercise is not quite as difficult as it might seem because,
discounting high noon, which can be quite sleepy, we have two
times of day – sunrise and sunset – during which we are treated to
some of the most dramatic scenes to be found; the moments at
which the sun actually rises over the horizon and then later,
descends out of sight, plunging us into darkness once more.
I am going to choose sunset as
my dramatic event, and
assume that it is an evening in
summer with clear skies. The
sea is close at hand as we look
westward at the sinking sun.
Let’s introduce two people, a woman and 
a man, and a rocky coastline with the sun
sinking slowly into the sea. 
First I draw two figures; a girl standing
shading her eyes against the sun as she looks
westward, and a young man sitting gazing into
the sky. 
1
I need a
specific setting, 
so I devise narrow,
rocky steps down a
sloping cliff, leading
to a jetty with a ship
moored alongside,
and a house or two. 
I include the sea, 
and the setting orb of
the sun. 
2
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP TO A DRAMATIC SCENE IN COLOUR
191
I need to do a couple of drawings of 
sunset colours, showing the reflection of
the sun in the water, and the pink clouds and
tinted sky with the bright orange glow of the
sun, centre stage. I then decide that a yellow sun
and a pink sky will give the required effect.
3
Next I have to compose 
the picture and
gradually I arrive at a scene in
which the cleft in the rock is
central, cliffs stand at each side
and the steps are cut straight
out of the rock, as you
sometimes find in Cornwall. I
place the young woman right
in the foreground, as though
she has been coming up the
steps and has just turned to
look at the lowering sun. The
man is further back, sitting at
the top of one of the cliffs that
borders the steps.
4
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COMPOSITION AND COLOUR
192
Step by step to a dramatic scene 
in colour 
continued
Now for the final picture. I use pastel
because the colour is good and strong
and I should  be able to reproduce the effect of
sunset. I work from the top left downwards, as I
am right-handed and do not want to smudge
the pastel. I start by getting the sky as true as I
can. I decide to make the sun orange, which is
not exactly accurate, as it must be the brightest
thing in the picture. However, I like the effect of
the orange ball and so I carry on. 
5
When it comes to the local colour, I know
that I will have to let it be reduced by a
certain amount, by the blast of light from the
sun. The shadows around the rocks need to be
quite dark in contrast, and rather purple in
colour. Where the sun hits the cliffs and glances
off the edges of things, I put in yellow and gold
streaks. Finally I redefine any other element that
needs strengthening. 
Now it’s your turn. Remember the drama and
let your colour shout.
6
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

STEP BY STEP TO A DRAMATIC SCENE IN COLOUR
193
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

194
Sometimes colour in a picture turns out totally different from the
way that you meant it to be. But many great artists work very 
hard on their colour schemes and don’t just arrive at them by
accident. It is worth taking a closer look at some of their work
before we close, although you have seen quite a number of
examples already. 
This approach differs from the previous sections, where we
have looked at the construction of a particular scene. Here, I will
present you with a picture by an artist known for his or her genius
with colour or experimentation. I will show how you could adapt
the same type of theme for your own benefit, and then produce a
new work based on the other artist’s ideas. This is an established
tradition – art feeds on its own history and produces new versions
that illuminate the old.
Be open to experiment. It is good practice for you, for
example, to adapt another’s work, even if you are only copying.
You can learn a huge amount by making as careful a study as
possible, but equally you learn quite a lot when you adapt and
simplify another’s piece. It also helps you to develop your
appreciation by examining other artists to see how they have
gained their success. Become familiar with the whole range of
artistic endeavour and you educate your own sensibilities and
begin to refine your taste and understanding. This can only be to
your advantage – it sharpens your critical faculties and increases
your enjoyment. Instead of idly walking around an art gallery
without much idea of what you are seeing there, you will find
yourself looking for all the things that you have been engaged in
with your own work, and the result is a much more rewarding
experience. So enjoy a new look at art.
The following works are interesting because of the particular
way that the artist has manipulated colour, and you will find that
there is a lot more to it than merely applying green to make grass
and blue to represent sky. Local colour is always interesting when
you draw from life, but when it comes to an original creative
work, you have to decide precisely how you are going to make
colour produce the required effects. In this final section, you are
going to use all your colour mediums, all your drawing skills and
also discover things about your own capabilities that will give you
food for thought.
Significant colours
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

195
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
196
Radical colour change
What would you do if presented with a work of art that you had
previously accepted as important, and were told to reduce it both
in your own eyes and that of other people? Marcel Duchamp did
this famously with Leonardo’s Mona Lisa. I have given my own
versions of this exercise in the two examples below.
Colouring up Picasso’s black
and white anti-war protest
Guernica with the pinks, soft
greens, baby blues and sunny
yellows that the artist
sometimes used in his portraits
of children would surely alter
viewers’ perceptions.
This extraordinary version of Ingres’ Grande
Odalisque (1814) is by Martial Raysse, produced
in 1964. The beautiful, languid harem queen
has been suffused in a jade green hue. The
original was hardly realistic, but the tastes of the
time saw it as an iconic sexual adventure. The
simple act of turning her green eclipses her
eroticism and suggests that it is a piece of
preposterous kitsch. Raysse’s version is
produced entirely by mechanical means; and
the addition of real feathers only goes to make
the final statement look artificial.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

RADICAL COLOUR CHANGE
197
So how can we learn
from this? Well, first take
a really strong colour,
like the colour of
oranges, and decide how
you might increase its
power, not by contrast
with another but by
reinforcing it with
variations on its own
hue. It could lead to a
tasteful harmony of
similar tones or it could
look bland. Your choice
is crucial.
Through reproductions,
Van Gogh’s Still Life:
Vase with fifteen sunflowers
(1888) is hard to regard
objectively. But the way
the artist flooded his
canvas with vibrant
colour, which has no
contrast in the picture
with any other range of
tones, is quite masterly.
The whole picture
consists of variations on
yellow and green – it
makes you wonder why
we so often stress the
value of a colour by
contrast with its
opposite. The whole
space is subsumed with
yellow. Blues and greens
are only minimally
represented. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
198
Colour simplicity
These pictures show how colour can be used to simplify your
message very effectively. The pop-art view (below) flattens out
the depth of the picture to concentrate on its coloured shapes to 
spell out the significance of the subject matter. And size, too, can 
make a difference, as the O’Keefe picture (opposite) shows.
The American pop artist Tom Wesselmann,
produced a series of Great American Nudes in
the 1960s. He took a pin-up-type girl and
produced anonymous nudes in pure kitsch
settings. The lips and breasts were emphasized;
the eyes, or in fact any detail that might have
made the figure look real, were done away with,
and the being was reduced to a grotesque. No
one could take a picture like this seriously. And
yet it is overtly sensual. So how do you emulate
this artist’s theme? Not by looking at more pin-
up girls. You need to take an ‘attractive’ idea
that you do not agree with, or would not want to
be connected with, and rethink it until you get a 
new theme. 
Here I’ve taken a picture of a US soldier, but
refused to make use of the more sombre colours
normally associated with soldiers. It is also
making a good point about the facelessness 
of armies, just as Tom Wesselmann did about
pin-up girls.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOUR SIMPLICITY
199
Georgia O’Keefe was quite an original artist and she produced
some very strong images of plants and flowers, drawing them up
to a grand scale which made you look much harder at them. In
this example she has chosen two blossoms of petunia in a strong
purple colour, which floods the area of her picture very
effectively. She has painted the fleshiness of the petals so that you
can almost touch and smell them. 
Using flat areas of colour is a good way to start
getting a good feeling for how colour works.
One way that you might try is to cut out pieces
of coloured paper and make a collage picture to
see how you can balance the colours. First try
this with coloured paper, and then try painting
pieces of paper in colours that you like. It will
help your understanding of colour.
MASTERSTROKES
One thing that you could do here is not
necessarily choose flowers to draw up
large, but any small object like a coin, a
key or a piece of fruit such as a
strawberry, for instance. Taking a small
thing and producing a very large image
of it both tests you as an artist and is
extremely enjoyable to do. So have a go
and see what you can manage.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
200
Colour as emphasis
When a painter wants to make a strong emphasis in his
composition, it is often the colour that brings out the point being
made. Both these examples use colour to great effect and you can
try out your own versions.
Monet is one of the great
colourists of all time and he
wasn’t afraid to lay on the
colour with abandon,
producing work such as this
sunset over the church of San
Giorgio Maggiore in Venice.
This is a pretty dramatic sight
at any time but when it is
blazing with the colours of the
setting sun it really becomes
almost overstated. How can
you do your own version of
this sort of sight? Well, to start
with you don’t need to rush off
to Venice;  you can look
around your own area for a
building that is reflected in a
river or lake, or the sea if you
live near it. You will need a
view that is towards the west to
get the benefit of the next good
sunset, so you will need to do a
little bit of research of the
locality. As an artist this is
always valuable, so it is not 
time wasted.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

COLOUR AS EMPHASIS
201
Now what would be the
equivalent situation now, in
your circle of friends? Maybe 
a party dress, but it might 
be something like an
interesting pair of shoes,  or
a new football strip.
The next artist, Tissot,  was an
Edwardian society painter who was
in great demand for his ability to
portray beautiful women and
handsome men. At any rate, if you
were painted by him, you usually
came out looking much better
than you had ever thought you
could. When someone had a
marvellous, fashionable dress to
show off, it was reasonable to get
Tissot to do a painting in which
this elegant article was being given
an airing. In this picture the
brilliant yellow dress obscures
everyone else at the ball and what
the dress doesn’t hide of the
competition, the large fan does. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
202
Expressive colour
The use of colour always has a reason behind it, which dictates the
kind of colour values used. Sometimes the attempt is to produce a
new realism or naturalism; sometimes the symbolism of nature is
more to the point. This is why, from generation to generation of
artists, the colour values keep changing.
Gustave Caillebotte was a friend and artistic
companion to several of the Impressionists but,
although he was attracted to the same subject
matter, he produced it in a very different
manner. Most of his works seem to be in a very
muted range of colours, with a very deliberate
tonal harmony in his colour. This one, of the
bridge over the railway in Paris, was painted
several times by him and other artists of the
time. This rather abstract arrangement of the
girders of the bridge and the men looking on, is
typical of the way he saw his subject matter.
Everything is in an industrial grey, including the
men’s coats, which look like a part of the same
urban landscape.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

EXPRESSIVE COLOUR
203
Another good artist to look at
for this topic is Paul Klee.
When you look at a Klee
picture it is not always certain
whether you are looking at an
abstract painting or something
more naturalistic. Here is one
of his images called Moonrise,
Sunset which is one of several
that he made with these large
dominant celestial shapes
surrounded by rather flimsy
looking man-made artefacts.
In a modern version of this
image you would have to 
find something very powerful
to dominate the picture in 
colour and then show 
other surrounding life as 
being much less imposing 
or necessary. 
What would be the
modern equivalent of
this approach now?
Perhaps an airport is
the most likely area
for a view of people
in transit, or an
underground station,
with its escalators and
travellators. It would
be a good thing to 
try out.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
204
Extreme colour
In the first half of the 19th century the colours in most professional
works became more and more conventional, until colour almost lost
its power in painting. The Impressionists brought back a brilliance of
colour into the art world and, from then on, painters began to take
colour to its greatest extremes.
When it comes to a portrait of someone in the
mode of this Fauve; or the Expressionist,
Jawlensky, you could pick anyone whom you
think might respond well to being drawn very
simplistically and in strong powerful colours. So
don’t pick someone who is worried about what
you will make them look like. The main thing is
to choose a range of colours that will work in
terms of form and solidity as in the example
here which uses the light green colour as the
shadow on the left side of the face while
reserving the strong reds or oranges for parts of
the face which are more prominent.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

EXTREME COLOUR
205
Vasily Kandinsky was not only a confirmed
colourist but he also wanted to try and produce
paintings that, like music, stood alone without a
story. This example of a landscape with boats he
painted in the autumn of 1908, and he made
the most of the colourful show put on by the
trees. Not only that, but the light shining on the
water and the boats is given its most lurid range
of colour possible. 
To get this sort of picture you would have to
be prepared to throw out any ideas that you
might have about tastefulness or restraint in
visual terms. You will be able to find these
colours in a scene but rarely with this intensity.
So you will need to look hard at the possible
picture you can get from a scene, picking 
one that allows you to go to town a bit in terms
of colour.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

SIGNIFICANT COLOURS
206
Abstract and artificial colour
In the 20th century the move away from figurative art led to many
experiments with colour. Some abstract artists evolved a symbolic,
semi-naturalistic style of painting in which colour and shape 
fitted around a flat plane. On the other hand the use of artificial
light in the cities gave a new boost to the realistic painters of
urban life.
Exactly how you would work
out this sort of idea now is not
easy to say, but obviously the
ability to produce some
animated characters would be
a great asset.
Another semi-abstract painter
was the Spanish artist, Joan
Miró. He evolved a sort of
language, rather like Paul Klee
did, that allowed him to show
all sorts of activities and
objects without being forced to
give a realistic treatment of
things. This picture, Hope, was
painted in 1946, and his
figures are like wild cartoons
which look very animated. 
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

ABSTRACT AND ARTIFICIAL COLOUR
207
Remember colour always helps to give an
emotional punch to your picture, so you need to
consider carefully how you use it in any form.
The power of colour to brighten, enliven or
intensify your drawing is amazing, so the more
you understand its possibilities, the more
impact your drawings will have on viewers of
your work.
MASTERSTROKES
Finally, I show an example of the American
painter Edward Hopper, whose work I find very
interesting. Called in the original Night Windows
(1928), here we see a scene that must be very
normal for city living, where the lights in the
windows across the road from you or out of the
back of your house, are showing you the life of
the people who live there. It may appear to be a
bit voyeuristic, but it certainly makes for some
interesting, abstract scenes. The frame of the
window acts rather like the camera and cuts off
bits of the scene, which seems to give it a greater
detached quality. So, it is  not such a difficult
picture to emulate, although you might think
that an image from a mobile phone camera
might be closer to the latest equivalent.
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

208
Index
animals
basics  54-5, 98-9
bird cage  108
birds  100-1, 105
butterflies  100
cat  102
colour  100-1
crab  55
dog  109
dolphin  107
fish  98, 109
fox  107
frog  104
horse  103
large  98, 102-3
leopard  105
lizard  104
movement  98, 102-5
rabbit  54
setting  108-9
shape  100-1
surface texture  103
tiger  110-13
Auerbach, Frank  25
bicycle  72
Brooker, William  69
Caillebotte, Gustave  202
car  73
Caravaggio, Michelangelo  183
Cassatt, Mary  20, 21
Cézanne, Paul  66
chalk  26-7
colour
abstract qualities  178, 186-7, 
206-7
artificial  206-7
contrast  6
depth  126-7
dramatic use  182-3, 188-9
emphatic use  200-1
experimentation  194
extreme  204-5
harmony  6, 122-3, 182-3
limited  124-5
manipulation  194
power of  207
preliminary sketch  178
schemes  178, 194
significant  194-5
simplicity  198-9
step-by-step to a dramatic
scene  190-3
strength  126-7
symbolism  56
theory  6
understanding  198
use by famous artists  180-9
values  178
values changing by
generation 
202-3
colour and composition  178-9
colour wheel, the  16-17
coloured chalk  26-7
coloured ink  22-5
coloured pastels  26-9
coloured pencils  18-21
composition
colour  178-9
geometrical  184-5
landscape  78-9
still life  56, 66-9
conté crayon  10, 26
copying masterworks  117
Delacroix, Eugene  173
drapery
basics  166-7
formal dress  166
hang of tailored clothes  166
high quality fabric  166
materiality  166, 168-9
natural fibres  168
shapes under cloth  170-3
step-by-step  174-7
textiles, complex patterns
166
drawing positions  14-5
Fjaestad, Gustav  88
Foster, Myles Birkett  87
Fuseli, Heinrich  91
Gainsborough, Thomas  180
Garden, A F  87
geometrical composition  184-5
glass  63
glass jar  60
Hiroshige  82
Hockney, David  30, 173, 187
holding the tools  12-3
Hopper, Edward  207
human figure
arms  134-5
basics  52-3, 114-15
body colouration  114
colour harmony  122-3
colour strength and depth
126-7
colour values  116-17
complexion  114
feet  138-9
foreshortening  130-1
hands  132-3
legs  136-7
limited colour  124-5
movement  128-9
perspective  130-1
proportion  118-19
sitter’s co-operation  114
step-by-step  140-3
tones, light and dark  120-1
Ingres paper  11, 26, 28, 46
Ingres, Jean-Auguste-Dominique
196
ink 11, 15, 92, 102
basics  22-5
dip pen, holding  12
landscape  92
still life  64
Jawlensky, Alexei  204
jug  59
Kandinsky, Vasily  205
Keane, John  126
Klee, Paul  203
Kokoschka, Oskar  25
K’un Ts’an  92
landscape
basics  50-1
composition  78-9
depth  78
different mediums  92-3
distance  78
familiar places  80-1
flowers  86
frame  50
holiday scene  85
larger spaces  82-3
leaves  86
plants  86
pleasure of painting  93
seaside scene  85
step-by-step  94-7
townscape  25, 84, 203
trees  87, 88
viewpoints  90-1
water  88-9
Lempicka, Tamara de  172
light and distance  41
lighting  42-3
Manet, Edouard  186
materials  10-11
Matisse, Henri  187
mediums  10-11
metal kettle  62
methodical approach  66-7
Miro, Joan  206
Monet, Claude  88, 90, 93, 200
Nolde, Emil  86
O’Keefe, Georgia  199
Palmer, Eugene  127
paper  11
pastels
animals  103
basics  26-9
coloured  26-7
hard  10, 26-7
landscape  93
soft  10, 26-7
still life  65, 68-9
stumps  10-11
pencil work
basics 18-21
coloured pencils  10
human figure  122-3
still life  64
texture  20-1
pens  10, 11, 22, 24-5, 32
perspective
aerial  40-1
human figure  130-1
one point  36-7
two point  38-9
Picasso, Pablo  21, 53, 124-5,
196
Piero della Francesca  173, 184
portraits
basics  144-5
chin  159
ears  157, 159
eyebrows  156
eyes  156, 158
faces, basics  52
facial expressions  154-5
facial features  144, 156-9
forehead  159
hairline  157
head from different angles
146-9
head proportions  146-7
head shape and structure
144
lips  157, 159
mouth  156, 159
noses  157, 158
poses  160-1
stages  150-3
step-by-step  162-5
tonal values  144
Ravilious, Eric  81
Raysse, Martial  196
Rembrandt van Rijn  182
Renoir, Pierre-Auguste  29
Rousseau, Henri  108, 110-13
spectacles, pair of  58
still life
complex groups  66-9
composition  56, 66-9
different mediums  64-5
fruit  44-7, 63
groups of objects  44-9, 61
large objects  72-3
materiality  62-3
pastel  68-9
settings  70-1
simple objects  58-60
single objects  58-60
step-by-step  74-7
Stubbs, George  103
sunrise  190
sunset  190, 200
Tintoretto, Jacopo  188
Tissot, James  201
Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri de  21
townscape 25, 84
underground station  203
Vallotton, Felix  189
Van Gogh, Vincent  197
Veronese, Paolo  181
Vuillard, Edouard  186
watercolour
basics  30-33
bird  106
fox  107
garden scene  32-3
sharp-edged approach  34-5
soft-edged approach  32-3
still life  65
Venetian scene  34-5
wetting the paper  45
Wesselmann, Tom  198
Whistler, James McNeil  122,
161
Wright, Joseph  89
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

In this practical guide, Barrington Barber
reveals the skills required to meet the
demands of drawing in colour using a
range of media, from coloured pencil
and pastel to ink and watercolour.
With the author’s customary blend
of 
expertise 
and 
encouragement,
providing examples and exercises at
every stage, The Fundamentals of Drawing
in Colour takes aspiring artists step-by-
step, teaching them to observe, compose
and record a variety of subjects. After a
straightforward introduction to colour
theory, still-life studies are presented as
the bedrock of drawing practice and,
from this basis, the book goes on to deal
in detail with landscape, animals and
finally, the human figure and portraiture.
The pace of modern life and the
countless images we see every
day
discourage us from looking with true
perception. The Fundamentals of Drawing
in Colour shows how we can adjust
our focus to take an absorbing, creative
approach to the world around us.
£9.99
      21BD1AF1-BA62-4ACF-868F-588A423B525B

