The Tools of 
Mathematical 
Reasoning
Tamara J. Lakins
UNDERGRADUATE      TEXTS
       
The Sally
     SERIES
Pure and Applied
26
American Mathematical Society
www.ebook3000.com

The Tools of 
Mathematical 
Reasoning

www.ebook3000.com

American Mathematical Society
Providence, Rhode Island
       
The Sally
     SERIES
UNDERGRADUATE      TEXTS • 26
Pure and Applied
The Tools of 
Mathematical 
Reasoning
Tamara J. Lakins

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
Gerald B. Folland (Chair)
Jamie Pommersheim
Steven J. Miller
Serge Tabachnikov
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 00-01.
For additional information and updates on this book, visit
www.ams.org/bookpages/amstext-26
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Lakins, Tamara J., 1963-
Title: The tools of mathematical reasoning / Tamara J. Lakins.
Description: Providence, Rhode Island : American Mathematical Society, [2016] | Series: Pure
and applied undergraduate texts ; volume 26 | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016021930 | ISBN 9781470428990 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Mathematical analysis–Foundations–Textbooks. | Logic, Symbolic and math-
ematical–Textbooks. | AMS: General – Instructional exposition (textbooks, tutorial papers, etc.).
msc
Classiﬁcation: LCC QA300 .L26 2016 | DDC 511.3–dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.
loc.gov/2016021930
Copying and reprinting. Individual readers of this publication, and nonproﬁt libraries acting
for them, are permitted to make fair use of the material, such as to copy select pages for use
in teaching or research. Permission is granted to quote brief passages from this publication in
reviews, provided the customary acknowledgment of the source is given.
Republication, systematic copying, or multiple reproduction of any material in this publication
is permitted only under license from the American Mathematical Society. Permissions to reuse
portions of AMS publication content are handled by Copyright Clearance Center’s RightsLink®
service. For more information, please visit: http://www.ams.org/rightslink.
Send requests for translation rights and licensed reprints to reprint-permission@ams.org.
Excluded from these provisions is material for which the author holds copyright. In such cases,
requests for permission to reuse or reprint material should be addressed directly to the author(s).
Copyright ownership is indicated on the copyright page, or on the lower right-hand corner of the
ﬁrst page of each article within proceedings volumes.
c⃝2016 by the author. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
⃝
∞The paper used in this book is acid-free and falls within the guidelines
established to ensure permanence and durability.
Visit the AMS home page at http://www.ams.org/
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
21 20 19 18 17 16
www.ebook3000.com

For my husband Harald Ellers, my son Michael Ellers,
and my parents Billy and Lois Lakins,
with love

www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Preface
ix
To Students
xii
Acknowledgements
xiii
Chapter 1.
Language, Logic, and Proof
1
1.1.
Language and logic
1
1.2.
Proof
16
Chapter 2.
Techniques of Proof
25
2.1.
More direct proofs
25
2.2.
Indirect proofs: Proofs by contradiction and contrapositive
38
2.3.
Two important theorems
44
2.4.
Proofs of statements involving mixed quantiﬁers
47
Chapter 3.
Induction
53
3.1.
Principle of Mathematical Induction
53
3.2.
Strong induction
61
Chapter 4.
Sets
67
4.1.
The language of sets
67
4.2.
Operations on sets
74
4.3.
Arbitrary unions and intersections
83
4.4.
Axiomatic set theory
89
Chapter 5.
Functions
93
5.1.
Deﬁnitions
93
5.2.
Function composition
104
5.3.
One-to-one and onto functions
107
vii

viii
Contents
5.4.
Invertible functions
114
5.5.
Functions and sets
121
Chapter 6.
An Introduction to Number Theory
131
6.1.
The Division Algorithm and the Well-Ordering Principle
131
6.2.
Greatest common divisors and the Euclidean Algorithm
135
6.3.
Relatively prime integers and the Fundamental Theorem
of Arithmetic
141
6.4.
Congruences
145
6.5.
Congruence classes
149
Chapter 7.
Equivalence Relations and Partitions
155
7.1.
Introduction
155
7.2.
Equivalence relations
157
7.3.
Partitions
162
Chapter 8.
Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
167
8.1.
Introduction
167
8.2.
Finite sets
170
8.3.
Inﬁnite sets
179
8.4.
What next?
188
Chapter 9.
Foundations of Analysis
191
9.1.
Introduction
191
9.2.
The Completeness Axiom
193
9.3.
The Archimedean Property and its consequences
202
9.4.
What next?
207
Appendix.
Writing Mathematics
209
Bibliography
211
Index
213
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
The idea for this textbook was conceived as a direct result of my experience teaching
the “introduction to proofs” course at Allegheny College.
When I ﬁrst started
teaching this course, there were only a handful of appropriate textbooks on the
market. My experience teaching from various textbooks clariﬁed in my mind what
I wanted to accomplish in such a course and how to accomplish it.
One possible title (and the one used at Allegheny College) for an “introduction
to proofs” course is “Foundations of Mathematics”, which can conjure up at least
two possibilities for the focus of the course.
The word “foundations” could be
interpreted in the sense of the logician: working axiomatically and in the language
of set theory, or working within a formal proof system. On the other hand, the
course can be viewed as a student’s ﬁrst exposure to proofs, sets, functions, etc., as
mathematicians use them, giving students a practical collection of tools that will
enable them to be successful in later mathematics courses, such as abstract algebra
and real analysis. As interesting as the ﬁrst interpretation is, in my opinion the
second interpretation is the right one for a ﬁrst exposure to these ideas and for the
average mathematics major.
It is important that students begin writing proofs as early as possible in the
course, hopefully by the end of the second week of classes. To achieve this, I present
only enough logic for students to be able to work with the propositional connectives
and the quantiﬁers. Although the initial treatment of this material is streamlined,
the importance of this material is emphasized throughout the book. Students are
frequently reminded, especially in the early chapters, of the importance of the logical
structure of a mathematical statement as a framework for ﬁnding a proof of that
statement. In particular, the importance of the logical structure of a mathematical
deﬁnition as a framework for proving that an object has (or does not have) that
property is a constant theme throughout the textbook.
Focusing on logical structure is an important ﬁrst step in addressing the ques-
tion, “How do I start?” that students who are learning to write proofs often ask.
ix

x
Preface
To help students learn that searching for a proof is a process, I have adopted Velle-
man’s approach [15] of using a “Given-Goal diagram” to organize what is known
versus what is to be proved. Together, these methods teach students that the log-
ical structure of the goal dictates the structure of a proof. Given-Goal diagrams
can be modiﬁed by unravelling the logical structure of the statement to be proved,
thereby organizing the search for a proof.
For many theorems and sample solutions to problems, this book presents several
paragraphs of “scratchwork” before presenting a correct formal proof. The goal is to
walk students through a complete analysis of a problem: understanding the logical
structure of the statement, creating one or more Given-Goal diagrams, deploying
various techniques to build a bridge from the given to the goal, and ﬁnally writing a
complete concise proof. I hope that this will help demystify the process of searching
for a proof.
After the introductory material on logic, my goal is to introduce students to
various proof techniques. The focus is on proving simple statements about integers,
rational numbers, and real numbers. It is important that students know what the
“ground rules” are at the beginning: what may they assume and what requires
proof? To achieve this, I provide students with the “basic properties” of integers
and real numbers; all other statements require proof. My goal here is not to develop
the entire theory of the integers (or the real numbers) from the axioms. Rather,
my goal is to be clear about the assumptions we make. Occasionally, I feel that
assuming additional axioms (such as assuming the existence part of the Funda-
mental Theorem of Arithmetic when proving the existence of inﬁnitely many prime
numbers) will expedite discussion and illustrate concepts. In such cases, I clearly
point out when we’re assuming more than we ought and emphasize that we will
pay our debts later.
Quantiﬁers and the proper use of variables are given very careful treatment.
The focus, as before, is that the logical structure of the statement determines the
shape of the proof, as well as guides the search for the proof. My approach to
quantiﬁers and variables is informed by the rigorous framework provided by ﬁrst-
order logic (see, for example, [10]). I pay particular attention to the concept of
existential instantiation1 as a means to stress the proper use of variables, as well
as the diﬀerence between a quantiﬁed statement and a nonquantiﬁed statement;
namely, if we know (∃x)P(x), then we may ﬁx a particular element d in the universe
such that P(d) is true, as long as we use a new variable that doesn’t already have a
particular meaning in the proof. In my experience, students need time to get used to
working with a single quantiﬁer before moving on to more complicated statements.
Consequently, I postpone proofs of statements beginning with mixed quantiﬁers,
such as the ε-δ proofs that give students so much trouble, until after the students
have more experience proving statements beginning with only one quantiﬁer. Given-
Goal diagrams are particularly eﬀective here as a means of teaching students to
unravel the logical complexity of a statement as a means of organizing and searching
for the proof of that statement.
1I mention this terminology exactly once in the text!
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xi
One of the most diﬃcult decisions one has to make when writing a textbook
of this sort is the order in which to present the concepts of relation and function.
In particular, one has to decide whether to deﬁne a function as an abstract set of
ordered pairs with a particular property or as a triple consisting of two sets and
a “correspondence”. If a function is a triple, then one must further decide how
function equality is deﬁned. (Must the codomains agree, or not? Both deﬁnitions
occur in the literature.) The cost of deﬁning a function as a particular kind of
set of ordered pairs is that other concepts, such as function composition, become
more abstract and harder to work with. In my experience, this formal approach is
confusing and unnecessarily abstract for students who are just beginning to learn
about mathematical proofs. Functions are rarely treated as sets of ordered pairs
in other undergraduate mathematics courses (unless a student takes a course in
formal set theory), so doing so in this course would present an abstract view of
the concept that won’t be useful to students later when they need to use functions
in other courses. I have chosen to deﬁne the concept of function ﬁrst, as a triple
consisting of two sets and a “correspondence”. I include agreement of the codomains
when deﬁning function equality, to avoid the situation that can otherwise occur, in
which two functions can be equal with one being onto its codomain and the other
not.
In the early part of the textbook, the focus is on giving students practice with
sets and the various proof techniques. Chapter 1 provides the necessary background
on the logic of the propositional connectives and the quantiﬁers, as well as an
introduction to the concept of proof. In Chapter 2, I present a variety of direct and
indirect proof techniques. Chapter 3 is devoted to induction.
The goal of the later chapters is to provide students with the foundational
material on sets, functions, equivalence relations, number theory, ﬁnite and inﬁnite
sets, and introductory analysis they will need in order to succeed in their later
proof-based courses, particularly linear algebra, number theory, abstract algebra,
and real analysis.
Chapters 4 and 5 deal with sets and functions, respectively.
The focus of Chapter 6 is introductory number theory: the Division and Euclidean
Algorithms and elementary facts about congruences, which are also important in
abstract algebra. The material in Section 6.4 and Section 6.5 on congruences and
congruence classes can be delayed until the more general discussion of relations,
equivalence relations, and equivalence classes in Chapter 7, which provides a further
introduction to ideas important in abstract algebra. In Chapter 8, I discuss ﬁnite
and inﬁnite sets, with a focus on the material needed in real analysis, namely, the
diﬀerence between countability and uncountability. Finally, Chapter 9 presents the
axiomatic foundations of analysis, including the Completeness Axiom, the existence
of
√
2, and the Archimedean Property.
One of the more diﬃcult aspects of learning to write a proof is learning to
eﬀectively communicate that proof to others (the instructor or other students).
Particularly at the beginning, I emphasize the diﬀerence between the search for
a proof (including any scratchwork) and the ﬁnal written proof. I have included
some guidelines for writing mathematics in the appendix. These guidelines were
originally inspired by the “Writing checklist” that Dr. Annalisa Crannell (Franklin
& Marshall College) so generously shared with me many years ago.

xii
Preface
I have deliberately not included “answers to selected problems” at the back of
the textbook. The process of learning to ﬁnd a proof, and learning to recognize
when what one has written is a correct proof, is an active one, which the passive
reading of solutions circumvents. The text provides plenty of examples and a great
deal of commentary.
Students will learn more by grappling with the problems,
perhaps in consultation with the instructor or other students, without a solution
easily accessible. When appropriate, I include hints for some of the more diﬃcult
problems. There are many exercises at the end of sections. Text cross-references
to exercises are in the form, for example, Exercise 1.1.2a. This is a reference to
exercise 2, part (a), in the section Exercises 1.1, which is at the end of Section 1.1.
Proofs are ended with the usual end-of-proof character □.
I have used the
symbol ♦to mark the end of examples.
To Students
Chances are you are studying the material in this book because you are enrolled
in an “introduction to proofs” course at your college or university. You will be
learning how to use mathematical language and notation and how to communicate
mathematical ideas clearly and precisely. And you will be learning the foundations
of mathematical reasoning, the mathematician’s standard of truth. Logical reason-
ing skills and the ability to use mathematical language and notation properly are
also essential for other scientiﬁc disciplines, such as physics and computer science.
In my experience, this type of course is usually a completely new experience for
students. It is normal to feel a bit disoriented at ﬁrst. It is important to persevere.
It is especially important to study actively, by reading the textbook equipped with
pencil and paper, by writing lots of proofs, and by discussing the mathematics with
your instructor and fellow students. You should never expect to simply write down
a proof immediately after reading the statement to be proved. As illustrated in this
textbook, ﬁnding a proof is a process that must take you from an analysis of the
statement to be proved, through the scratchwork of Given-Goal diagrams and false
starts, to a ﬁnal polished and correct proof.
It is important that you learn any new mathematical deﬁnition or notation
right away; you cannot hope to succeed if you don’t know what the words and
notation mean! This may be a new experience for you, particularly since there is
not a lot of “leeway” in mathematical deﬁnitions. One needs to know the precise
meaning of the words, rather than the “general idea”. Finally, you may ﬁnd it
strange to be writing so much in a math course. Keep in mind that our job is to
communicate what we know, and how we know it, to others. Learning to write
mathematics well requires a lot of practice and can be diﬃcult at the beginning.
One way to improve your writing is to read your mathematical statements out
loud. Since notation simply abbreviates a mathematical statement and since our
statements have a grammar, speaking out loud exactly what you’ve written (no
more and no less) can help you improve your mathematical writing.
www.ebook3000.com

Acknowledgements
xiii
Acknowledgements
I have coded the graphics in this book using pstricks and TikZ. In particular, the
code for the Venn diagrams on page 75 can be found in “Example: Set opera-
tions illustrated with Venn diagrams”, authored by Uwe Ziegenhagen, published
on TEXample.net on 3/18/2010. I have replaced the use of color in that example
with grayscale, moved the labels, and added the rectangular box for the universe
U. The use and adaptation of this code is permitted by the Creative Commons
License Deed found at creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5/.
I am grateful to the staﬀat the AMS, including Eriko Hironaka, whose sup-
port for my textbook and willingness to answer questions was gratifying, and Chris
Thivierge, who provided me with all the information I needed to prepare my man-
uscript for the AMSTEXT series.
I thank Barbara Beeton and the rest of the
technical support team at the AMS for invaluable help in managing several TEX
issues. I am particularly grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their careful read-
ing of my manuscript and for their many valuable comments and suggestions for
improving the exposition and exercises. Of course, any errors in the text are my
own.
I am grateful to many colleagues. Michael Barry (Allegheny College), Matt
Clay (University of Arkansas), Jeﬀry Hirst (Appalachian State University), Iraj
Kalantari (Western Illinois University), and Daniel Velleman (Amherst College)
provided feedback on early versions of this textbook. Craig Dodge, Harald Ellers,
Rachel Weir, and Caryn Werner used early versions of this textbook in the class-
room at Allegheny College and also provided valuable feedback.
My desire to write this textbook was motivated by my desire to equip stu-
dents with the skills they need in order to be successful in upper-level mathematics
courses. Teaching Allegheny’s introduction to proofs course helped me better under-
stand why some students ﬁnd proof writing so diﬃcult, and it helped me improve
as a teacher. I am grateful to my own teachers, as well. In particular, I would
like to thank Iraj Kalantari at Western Illinois University for sharing with me his
enthusiasm and expertise as a mathematician, teacher, and expositor.
Finally, I am most grateful to my husband, Harald Ellers. He has given me his
unwavering support, both personally and professionally. This textbook has greatly
beneﬁtted from our numerous conversations regarding mathematics, teaching, and
writing.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 1
Language, Logic, and Proof
1.1. Language and logic
Like all scientiﬁc subjects, mathematics requires evidence in order to justify claims.
While the lab sciences often use experimental data to justify their claims, in math-
ematics, logical reasoning is the standard of truth.
Mathematics is concerned with formal statements about mathematical objects,
such as integers or functions, and whether these statements are true or false. The
language of mathematics must therefore be precise and unambiguous—it has a
vocabulary and a grammar. Logical arguments called proofs are used to deduce
statements from basic assumptions; i.e., given a mathematical statement, we want
to determine whether it is true or false and prove that our assertion is correct. For
example, you may have learned in a previous course that there exist inﬁnitely many
prime numbers. Just a few deﬁnitions and proof techniques will enable us to prove
this statement, which we do in Section 2.3.
The language and tools of mathematics are used by other scientists, particularly
physicists and computer scientists, as well. For example, a computer scientist may
wish to determine the “computational complexity” (or “hardness”) of an algorithm,
or even to prove that an algorithm “works” at all.
We will begin with mathematical language, the logical connectives and quanti-
ﬁers, and then we will study the fundamental techniques of proof. Once armed with
these tools, we are ready to study the concepts most often needed in mathematics
and computer science, such as sets, functions, and relations. We then consider a
variety of mathematical topics designed to prepare you for future proof-based math
courses.
Deﬁnition 1.1.1. A proposition is a sentence (i.e., it has both a subject and a
verb) which has exactly one truth value; i.e., it is either true or false, but not both.
Example 1.1.2. Consider the following examples of propositions.
(1) 2 + 3 = 6.
1

2
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
Here, the verb is equals, which is represented notationally. (Remember we
said that our mathematical language has a grammar!) Clearly this proposition
is false.
(2) The 1046th digit of π is 7.
At the time this book was written, the 1046th digit of π was unknown.
Consequently, this proposition is a bit unusual—it is certainly true or false,
but not both, but which truth value it has is unknown.
(3) Every prime number is odd.
Is this proposition true or false? To answer this, you ﬁrst need to know
what the words prime and odd mean. (If necessary, consult Deﬁnitions 2.1.7
and 1.2.1.)
♦
We will often represent propositions with capital letters, such as P, Q, or R.
Next we consider some nonexamples of propositions.
Example 1.1.3.
(1) 2 + 3.
What is the problem here? Refer to Example 1.1.2(1).
(2) n + 1 > 3.
What is the problem here? It is impossible to determine a truth value.
However, the situation is very diﬀerent from that of Example 1.1.2(2). Here
we cannot determine a truth value because the truth value depends on the
value assigned to n. For example, the statement is true if n = 4 and false if
n = 1. The statement “n + 1 > 3” is a sentence, though; such a statement is
called a predicate. We can denote the predicate “n + 1 > 3” by the notation
P(n) to emphasize that n is a free variable, i.e., a variable that we need to
“substitute for” in order to obtain a proposition.
There is another, more subtle issue, here as well. Given the predicate
P(n), we should really ask ourselves what we are allowed to substitute for n;
i.e., what is the universe, or possible range of values, for n? So, we can see
that we will either need to make the universe for a given predicate explicit or
be able to deduce it from the context (here, there was no context given).
♦
So, we have two types of mathematical statements, propositions and predicates.
We can build more complicated statements using logical connectives.
1.1.1. Basic connectives. Suppose that P and Q are statement letters (i.e.,
letters that represent propositions or predicates). We deﬁne the logical connectives
conjunction, disjunction, and negation as follows.
The conjunction of P and Q is the statement “P and Q”, which is denoted by
P ∧Q; the statements P and Q are called the conjuncts of the statement P ∧Q.
The intended meaning of the statement P ∧Q is clear; the statement P ∧Q will
be true when P is true and Q is true, and false otherwise. We can represent this
deﬁnition by the truth table in Table 1.1.
Note that when we build a truth table for a compound statement involving
two (or more) statement letters (say, P and Q), we must consider all the possible
truth values for each statement letter. Here there are two possible truth values for
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
3
Table 1.1. Truth table for ∧.
P
Q
P ∧Q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
P (true, false), and similarly for Q, so there are 2 · 2, or 4, possible truth values
for the statement P ∧Q. (This method of counting is called the multiplication
principle, which we discuss in Section 8.2.)
Next, we consider disjunction. The disjunction of P and Q is the statement
“P or Q”, which is denoted by P ∨Q; here, the statements P and Q are called the
disjuncts of the statement P ∨Q. We must decide on the intended meaning of this
connective, since it can be interpreted in one of two ways.
In the English language, the word “or” is often an exclusive “or”. For example,
at a restaurant you may be asked to choose to have soup or salad with your entree.
It is understood that you should choose one or the other, but not both (unless you
pay extra!).
In mathematics, however, the common usage of the word “or” is in the inclusive
sense. For example, consider the following well-known mathematical statement:
if a and b are integers with ab = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.
Here, we know that we should interpret this statement as “if a and b are integers
with ab = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0 or possibly both a = 0 and b = 0”.
To repeat, in mathematics, the usage of the word “or” is always inclusive, un-
less explicitly stated otherwise. The truth table for disjunction is given in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2. Truth table for ∨.
P
Q
P ∨Q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
Finally, we consider negation. The negation of P is the statement “not P”,
which is denoted by ¬P and interpreted just as you suspect, in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3. Truth table for ¬.
P
¬P
T
F
F
T
Before introducing our last two basic connectives, let’s consider some examples.
Just as we can make more complicated statements by forming the negation of a
statement, or the conjunction or disjunction of two statements, we can form other
compound statements by combining connectives.

4
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
Example 1.1.4. Determine whether the following statements are true or false.
(1) 2 + 3 = 5 and ¬(1 + 1 = 2).
Since ¬(1 + 1 = 2) is false, this conjunction is false.
(2) 2 + 3 = 5 or ¬(1 + 1 = 2).
This disjunction is true since 2 + 3 = 5 is true.
♦
Example 1.1.5. Find the truth tables for the statements
¬(P ∧Q),
¬P ∧¬Q,
¬P ∨¬Q.
Before we begin, notice that we have already made an assumption about the
connective ¬, namely, that it always modiﬁes as little as possible, unless we ex-
plicitly indicate otherwise. Thus, we should interpret the statement ¬P ∧¬Q as
(¬P) ∧(¬Q). In addition, the parentheses in ¬(P ∧Q) are necessary, since ¬P ∧Q
would be interpreted as (¬P) ∧Q, by our previous rule. In general, therefore, just
as parentheses are used in arithmetical expressions to indicate the order in which
the arithmetical operations should be evaluated, parentheses are used in compound
logical statements to indicate the order in which the logical connectives should be
evaluated. The requested truth tables are in Table 1.4.
Table 1.4. Truth table for ¬(P ∧Q), ¬P ∧¬Q, ¬P ∨¬Q.
P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P ∧Q
¬(P ∧Q)
¬P ∧¬Q
¬P ∨¬Q
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
♦
We see from this example that not only does the order of connectives matter,
but also the sixth and eighth columns in Table 1.4 show that the statements ¬(P∧Q)
and ¬P ∨¬Q have the same logical meaning.
Deﬁnition 1.1.6. Two statements involving the same statement letters are logi-
cally equivalent if they have the same truth table.
In Example 1.1.5, we see that the statements ¬(P ∧Q) and ¬P ∨¬Q are
logically equivalent. On the other hand, the statements ¬(P ∧Q) and ¬P ∧¬Q are
not logically equivalent because when P is true and Q is false, ¬(P ∧Q) is true,
while ¬P ∧¬Q is false. The statement that ¬(P ∧Q) is logically equivalent to
¬P ∨¬Q is one of DeMorgan’s Laws.
Proposition 1.1.7 (DeMorgan’s Laws). Let P and Q be statements.
(1) ¬(P ∧Q) is logically equivalent to ¬P ∨¬Q.
(2) ¬(P ∨Q) is logically equivalent to ¬P ∧¬Q.
Proof. We proved (1) using the truth table in Table 1.4.
The proof of (2) is
Exercise 1.1.2d.
□
We consider two more examples before introducing our ﬁnal two logical con-
nectives.
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
5
Example 1.1.8. Assume that x is a ﬁxed real number. What is the negation of
the statement 1 < x < 2?
We must ﬁrst recall that the statement 1 < x < 2 is an abbreviation of the
compound statement
1 < x and x < 2.
The negation of this statement is
it is not the case that 1 < x and x < 2,
or, in notation form, ¬[(1 < x) ∧(x < 2)].
While our answer is technically correct, sometimes we ﬁnd that expressing a
statement “negatively”, as a negation, is not useful. Often, a more useful way to
express the negated statement is to express it “positively”, using Proposition 1.1.7
to ﬁnd a logically equivalent statement. Using DeMorgan’s Laws, the negation of
the statement 1 < x < 2 is logically equivalent to the statement ¬(1 < x)∨¬(x < 2).
Simplifying further, we see that the negation of the statement 1 < x < 2 is logically
equivalent to the statement
x ≤1 or x ≥2.
Here we are using what is called the Trichotomy Axiom of real numbers: given ﬁxed
real numbers a and b, exactly one of the statements a < b, a = b, b < a is true.
♦
When we use DeMorgan’s Laws to express the negation of a conjunction or
disjunction “positively”, we shall say that we have found a useful denial of that
statement.
Example 1.1.9. Assume that n is a ﬁxed positive integer. Find a useful denial of
the statement
n = 2 or n is odd.
Using DeMorgan’s Laws, we see that
¬[(n = 2) ∨n is odd]
is logically equivalent to
n ̸= 2 ∧n is even,
where we are using the fact that every integer is either even or odd, but not both.
Thus, a useful denial of the given statement is, in natural English,
n is an even positive integer other than 2.
♦
We now present the ﬁnal two logical connectives. As before, we let P and Q
denote ﬁxed statements.
The implication or conditional statement P ⇒Q is the statement “if P, then
Q”, or “P implies Q”. The intended mathematical meaning of this connective,
however, may surprise you. When should the statement P ⇒Q be true? Certainly
the English usage of the phrase “if . . . , then” conjures up the mental phrase “if
P is true, then Q must also be true”. However, mathematicians also consider the
statement P ⇒Q to be true when P is false, regardless of the truth value of Q.
One way to think about this is to think about when P ⇒Q “should” be false,
namely, only when P is true and Q is false. As with the other connectives, we
summarize this information in a truth table (see Table 1.5).

6
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
Table 1.5. Truth table for ⇒.
P
Q
P ⇒Q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
In the statement P ⇒Q, P is called the hypothesis, or antecedent, and Q is
called the conclusion or consequent.
There are several other English phrases that are always interpreted to mean
P ⇒Q, or P implies Q, which are given in Table 1.6. It is important to note,
therefore, that the words if, only if, necessary, suﬃcient (as well as and and or) have
particular mathematical meanings, and so we must take care to use and interpret
these words correctly.
Table 1.6. Alternative expressions for P ⇒Q.
If P, then Q
Q when P
P only if Q
Q if P
P is suﬃcient for Q
Q is necessary for P
For our ﬁnal logical connective (here, again, P and Q are ﬁxed statements),
the biconditional statement P ⇔Q is an abbreviation for the compound statement
(P ⇒Q) ∧(Q ⇒P); the truth table is given in Table 1.7.
Table 1.7. Truth table for ⇔.
P
Q
P ⇒Q
Q ⇒P
P ⇔Q
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
As with the conditional, there are several English phrases which can denote the
biconditional (see Table 1.8). In particular, note that we interpret the ⇐of P ⇔Q
as if, while we interpret the ⇒as only if.
Table 1.8. Alternative expressions for P ⇔Q.
P if and only if Q
P iﬀQ
P is equivalent to Q
P exactly when Q
P is necessary and suﬃcient for Q
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
7
Example 1.1.10. Determine whether the following statements are true or false.
(1) If 7 + 6 = 14, then 5 + 5 = 10.
Since 7 + 6 = 14 is false, we see that this implication is true.
(2) p is odd is necessary for p to be prime. (Here, think of p as a ﬁxed positive
integer.)
In general, we will ﬁnd it easier to interpret this statement if we rephrase
it as an “if . . . , then” statement using Table 1.6. In this form, the statement
becomes
if p is prime, then p is odd.
Note again that we are relying on knowing the deﬁnitions of “prime” and
“odd” (see Deﬁnitions 2.1.7 and 1.2.1). Here we can see that the truth value
of the implication will depend on which positive integer p is.
If p = 2, then the hypothesis “p is prime” is true, but the conclusion “p
is odd” is false. In this case, the implication is false.
If p = 3, then the hypothesis “p is prime” is true and also the conclusion
“p is odd” is true. In this case, the implication is true. Here we can also see
that mathematical implication has nothing to do with “causality”. The fact
that 3 is odd is not “caused” by the fact that 3 is prime.
If p = 4 or p = 9, then the hypothesis “p is prime” is false. Thus, in these
cases, the implication is true.
We invite you to determine exactly for which positive integers p the given
statement is true.
(3) |x| = 1 iﬀx = 1 or x = −1. (Here, think of x as a ﬁxed real number.)
This biconditional is a true statement. When x is a ﬁxed real number,
regardless of its value, the two statements |x| = 1 and (x = 1)∨(x = −1) have
the same truth value (see Proposition 1.1.11(3) and Deﬁnition 2.1.11).
♦
We will ﬁnd it useful to have more than one way of thinking of certain state-
ments.
Proposition 1.1.11. Let P and Q be statements.
(1) P ⇒Q is logically equivalent to (¬P) ∨Q.
(2) ¬(P ⇒Q) is logically equivalent to P ∧(¬Q).
(3) P ⇔Q is true exactly when P and Q have the same truth value.
Proof. See Exercise 1.1.2e, Exercise 1.1.2f, and Table 1.7. Use truth tables.
□
Proposition 1.1.11(2) indicates how to ﬁnd a useful denial of an implication.
Example 1.1.12. Find a useful denial of the statement
n is prime only if n = 2 or n is odd.
(Assume that n is a ﬁxed positive integer.)
As before, we should ﬁrst rewrite the statement as an “if . . . , then” statement;
i.e.,
n is prime ⇒(n = 2 or n is odd).

8
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
By Proposition 1.1.11(2) and Example 1.1.9, a useful denial of the given statement
is, in natural English,
n is prime, and n is an even positive integer other than 2.
♦
1.1.2. Statements related to P ⇒Q. We consider now two statements related
to the implication P ⇒Q.
Deﬁnition 1.1.13. Let P and Q be statements.
(1) The converse of P ⇒Q is the statement Q ⇒P.
(2) The contrapositive of P ⇒Q is the statement (¬Q) ⇒(¬P).
We illustrate these ideas using a familiar implication from calculus.
Example 1.1.14. Let f be a ﬁxed real-valued function deﬁned on some collection
of real numbers (i.e., the type of function one considers in calculus), and let a be a
ﬁxed real number. Consider the conditional statement
(1.1)
if f is diﬀerentiable at a, then f is continuous at a.
The converse of this statement is
(1.2)
if f is continuous at a, then f is diﬀerentiable at a.
The contrapositive is
♦
(1.3)
if f is not continuous at a, then f is not diﬀerentiable at a.
It is important to know the diﬀerence between the converse and the contrapos-
itive of an implication, as the truth table in Table 1.9 shows.
Table 1.9. Truth table for P ⇒Q, Q ⇒P, (¬Q) ⇒(¬P).
P
Q
¬P
¬Q
P ⇒Q
Q ⇒P
(¬Q) ⇒(¬P)
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
Table 1.9 shows that the statement P ⇒Q and its contrapositive (¬Q) ⇒(¬P)
are logically equivalent. We also see that the implication P ⇒Q is not logically
equivalent to its converse Q ⇒P, since when P ⇒Q is true, Q ⇒P may be
true or false, depending on the truth values of P and Q. We have thus proved the
following proposition.
Proposition 1.1.15. Let P and Q be statements.
(1) P ⇒Q is logically equivalent to (¬Q) ⇒(¬P).
(2) P ⇒Q is not logically equivalent to Q ⇒P.
Consider Example 1.1.14 again. We learn in calculus that statement (1.1) is a
true statement, regardless of which ﬁxed function f and real number a we consider.
Hence, the contrapositive statement (1.3) is also true, regardless of which ﬁxed
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
9
function f and real number a we consider. We also learn in calculus that the truth
or falsity of the converse of (1.1), statement (1.2), depends on which ﬁxed function
f and real number a we consider. To prove that statement (1.2) does not hold
for all functions f and for all real numbers a, we must demonstrate a particular
function f and a particular real number a such that f is continuous at a but not
diﬀerentiable at a (see Exercise 1.1.6). We discuss the quantiﬁer “for all”, and how
it is negated, in Subsection 1.1.3.
1.1.3. Quantiﬁers. Recall that the statement “n + 1 > 3” on its own is not a
proposition because it doesn’t have a truth value. Instead, it is a predicate because
it becomes a proposition when the “free variable” n is replaced by a particular value
from the universe in question.
Let P(n) denote the predicate “n + 1 > 3” (the notation makes explicit the
fact that n is a free variable). As an example, we’ll also assume that the universe
over which n can range is N = {1, 2, 3, . . . }, the set of all natural numbers (also
called the set of positive integers). Then P(2) is the proposition “2+1 > 3”, which
is false, and P(7) is the proposition “7 + 1 > 3”, which is true.
Another way to turn a predicate into a statement with a truth value is to
modify it with a quantiﬁer.
Deﬁnition 1.1.16. Let U be the universe under consideration and P(x) be a
predicate whose only free variable is x. Then the statements
“for all x, P(x)”
notation: (∀x)P(x),
“there exists x such that P(x)”
notation: (∃x)P(x)
are statements that have truth values.
The symbol ∀is called the universal quantiﬁer. The statement (∀x)P(x) is
true exactly when each individual element a in the universe U has the property
that P(a) true.
The symbol ∃is called the existential quantiﬁer. The statement (∃x)P(x) is
true exactly when the universe U contains at least one element a with P(a) true.
We can make the universe U explicit by writing (∀x ∈U)P(x) instead of
(∀x)P(x), and similarly by writing (∃x ∈U)P(x) instead of (∃x)P(x). We read the
notation (∀x ∈U) as “for all x in U” and (∃x ∈U) as “there exists x in U”. The
symbol ∈is used in order to denote an element of a set; for example, the statement
3 ∈N says that 3 is a natural number, while the statement 1
2 /∈N says that 1
2 is
not a natural number. We discuss this concept in more depth in Chapter 4.
Example 1.1.17. Determine whether the following statements are true or false.
(1) There exists a natural number n such that n + 1 > 3.
The statement (∃n ∈N)(n + 1 > 3) is true because 7 ∈N and 7 + 1 > 3
is true.
(2) For all real numbers x, x2 ≥0.
We’ll use R to denote the set of all real numbers. You’ve probably learned
in a previous math course that the statement (∀x ∈R)(x2 ≥0) is true; i.e., the
square of a real number is never negative. (See Exercise 2.1.6, which requests
a proof of this statement.)

10
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
(3) For all natural numbers n, n + 1 > 3.
The statement (∀n ∈N)(n+1 > 3) is false because 2 is a natural number,
but 2 + 1 > 3 is false. Here, the natural number 2 is called a counterexample
to the statement (∀n ∈N)(n + 1 > 3); this means that it is an example that
shows that the universal statement (∀n ∈N)(n + 1 > 3) is false.
(4) (∀x ∈R)(x3 + 52x2 + 79x + 1000 ≥0)
Here we need to think a bit before proceeding.
We learn in calculus
that the power function x3 “grows faster” than the power function x2 when
x is large. Thus, when x is large negative, we expect that the polynomial
x3 + 52x2 + 79x + 1000 should be negative; i.e., we conjecture that we should
be able to ﬁnd a counterexample that shows the given statement is false. If
we try x = −2, then we compute
(−2)3 + 52 · (−2)2 + 79(−2) + 1000 = 1042,
which tells us nothing since 1042 ≥0. In other words, −2 is not the coun-
terexample we seek. However, it is important to note that this computation
does not show that the given statement is true. We try another value of x,
such as x = −100. We compute
(−100)3 + 52 · (−100)2 + 79(−100) + 1000 = −486900 < 0.
Thus we have successfully found a counterexample that shows that the state-
ment (∀x ∈R)(x3 + 52x2 + 79x + 1000 ≥0) is false.
♦
Note that Deﬁnition 1.1.16 states that in order to determine the truth value of
a statement (∀x)P(x) or (∃x)P(x), the universe over which x can range must be
known. A quick example illustrates why. The statement (∃x ∈N)(2x = 3) is false
because the equation 2x = 3 has no solution in the natural numbers. However, the
statement (∃x ∈R)(2x = 3) is true because 3
2 is a real number and 2 · 3
2 = 3.
For convenience, we collect in Table 1.10 the deﬁnitions and notation for the
various number universes U we will consider in this text, namely, the natural num-
bers, the integers, the rational numbers, and the real numbers. Note that in some
texts, 0 is considered to be a natural number, so it is important to check the def-
inition in whatever source you are using. Note also that because every rational
number has inﬁnitely many representations (for example, 1
2 = 3
6 = −2
−4 = · · · ), our
deﬁnition of Q is informal. Deﬁning Q more carefully, including checking that the
arithmetic operations are “well-deﬁned”, is often addressed in an abstract algebra
course (see also Exercise 7.2.9). Similarly, our deﬁnition of what it means to be
a real number is informal only. Formally deﬁning the concept of a real number is
often addressed in courses such as real analysis or set theory; see Chapter 9.
Table 1.10. Number universes.
natural numbers N:
N = {1, 2, 3, . . . }
integers Z:
Z = {. . . , −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }
rational numbers Q:
x ∈Q if there exist a, b ∈Z, b ̸= 0, such that x = a
b
real numbers R:
informally, x ∈R if x has a decimal expansion
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
11
Sometimes we will denote the set of positive integers by Z+. Similarly, Q+
denotes the set of positive rational numbers, etc.
Next, we need to determine how the quantiﬁers interact with negation. Here,
the usual English usage of these phrases gives us exactly the right idea. The nega-
tion of the statement “all members of this class have brown hair” is “at least one
member of this class doesn’t have brown hair”. Here we see that the universal
quantifer (all members of this class) became an existential quantiﬁer (at least one
member of this class), and the statement “has brown hair” was negated to be-
come “doesn’t have brown hair”. Similarly, the negation of the statement “there
is a member of this class who is left-handed” is “every member of this class is
right-handed”.
Proposition 1.1.18. Let P(x) be a predicate and let U be the intended universe.
Then:
(1) ¬(∀x)P(x) is logically equivalent to (∃x)(¬P(x)); i.e., ¬(∀x ∈U)P(x) is log-
ically equivalent to (∃x ∈U)(¬P(x)).
(2) ¬(∃x)P(x) is logically equivalent to (∀x)(¬P(x)); i.e., ¬(∃x ∈U)P(x) is log-
ically equivalent to (∀x ∈U)(¬P(x)).
Proof. See Exercise 1.1.8. Use Deﬁnition 1.1.16.
□
Proposition 1.1.18 tells us how to ﬁnd a useful denial of a quantiﬁed statement.
Example 1.1.19. Find a useful denial of the statement
for all real numbers x, if x > 2, then x2 > 4.
Remember that ﬁnding a useful denial of a statement means to express the
negation of the statement positively. At ﬁrst, you may ﬁnd this type of exercise
easier if you ﬁrst express the statement using a mixture of English and mathematical
notation, and then proceed one step at a time. The statement
¬(∀x ∈R)[x > 2 ⇒x2 > 4]
is equivalent to
(∃x ∈R)[¬(x > 2 ⇒x2 > 4)],
by Proposition 1.1.18(1),
which is equivalent to
(∃x ∈R)[x > 2 ∧x2 ≤4]
by Proposition 1.1.11(2).
Thus, a useful denial of the statement
for all real numbers x, if x > 2, then x2 > 4
is
there exists a real number x such that x > 2 and x2 ≤4.
♦
Notice in the example above that we did not allow ourselves to be distracted
by the truth or falsity of the statements.
We conclude this subsection with a ﬁnal comment about statements such as
(∀x ∈U)P(x), which explicitly indicate the universe U under consideration. The

12
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
notation (∀x ∈U) is called a modiﬁed quantiﬁer, since we have modiﬁed the uni-
versal quantiﬁer (∀x). The notation
(∀x ∈U)P(x)
is actually an abbreviation for the statement
(∀x)(x ∈U ⇒P(x)).
Similarly, the notation
(∃x ∈U)P(x)
is an abbreviation for
(∃x)(x ∈U ∧P(x)).
See Exercise 1.1.8b.
Quantiﬁers that are modiﬁed in other ways, such as the modiﬁcation seen in
the statement (∀x > 2)(x2 > 4), follow the same rules. For example,
(∀x > 2)(x2 > 4)
is an abbreviation for
(∀x)(x > 2 ⇒x2 > 4),
and
(∃x < 2)(x2 > 4)
is an abbreviation for
(∃x)(x < 2 ∧x2 > 4).
1.1.4. A warning:
hidden and implied quantiﬁers. From the beginning of
this chapter, we have emphasized the language of mathematics. In order for us to
understand and be understood, we must use that language (including its notation)
precisely to say exactly what we mean, no more and no less. However, there are
several situations in mathematical practice where the mathematical language may
imply more than it says explicitly.
One important example of this is illustrated by the following statement. The
universe here is the set Z = {. . . , −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, . . . } of integers.
(1.4)
If n is odd, then n + 1 is even.
We have emphasized already that this statement is not a proposition (i.e., it doesn’t
have a truth value) but rather a predicate. However, the custom in mathematics
is to treat an isolated implication such as this one as a universal statement, even
though the universal quantiﬁer ∀is not explicitly mentioned. This is because n is
to be treated as a ﬁxed, but arbitrary, integer. Thus, the statement “if n is odd,
then n + 1 is even” is often interpreted as
(1.5)
(∀n ∈Z)[if n is odd, then n + 1 is even].
Recognizing the hidden quantiﬁers is also important when one needs to negate
a statement. If an author had intended for statement (1.4) to be interpreted as
statement (1.5) (and one should be able to tell this from the context), then one
needs to make the quantiﬁers explicit ﬁrst in order to ﬁnd the correct negation:
(∃n ∈Z)[n and n + 1 are both odd].
Again, do not be distracted by the truth or falsity of these statements.
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
13
So, to repeat, an implication involving one or more free variables is often treated
as a universally quantiﬁed statement.
In addition, quantiﬁers may “hide” in other ways, such as in the deﬁnition of
mathematical terms like “even”. For example, the statement that “12 is an even
integer” means that 12 is divisible by 2, which itself means that there is an integer
k such that 2k = 12 (here, k = 6). The phrase “12 is even” hides an existential
quantiﬁer, which is important to recognize.
Another example of hidden quantiﬁers occurs in the statement that “
√
2 is
irrational”, i.e., that “
√
2 is not a rational number”. The statement “
√
2 is rational”
means that there exist positive integers p and q such that
√
2 = p
q . We can therefore
express “
√
2 is irrational” using notation as
¬(∃p ∈Z+)(∃q ∈Z+)
√
2 = p
q

or
(∀p ∈Z+)(∀q ∈Z+)
√
2 ̸= p
q

.
Exercises 1.1
1. Let P, Q, and R be statements. Determine whether or not the two expressions
in each pair are logically equivalent. In each case, demonstrate that your answer
is correct.
(a) (P ∧Q) ∧R,
P ∧(Q ∧R).
(b) (P ∨Q) ∨R,
P ∨(Q ∨R).
(c) (P ∧Q) ∨R,
P ∧(Q ∨R).
(d) (P ∨Q) ∧R,
P ∨(Q ∧R).
2. Let P, Q, and R be statements. Show that the following statements are logically
equivalent.
(a) ¬(¬P) and P.
(b) (P ∨Q) ∧R and (P ∧R) ∨(Q ∧R).
(c) (P ∧Q) ∨R and (P ∨R) ∧(Q ∨R).
(d) ¬(P ∨Q) and (¬P) ∧(¬Q).
(e) P ⇒Q and (¬P) ∨Q.
(f) ¬(P ⇒Q) and P ∧(¬Q).
3. Let P, Q, and R be statements. Determine whether or not the two expressions
in each pair are logically equivalent. In each case, demonstrate that your answer
is correct.
(a) (P ⇒Q) ⇒R,
P ⇒(Q ⇒R).
(b) (P ∨Q) ⇒R,
(P ⇒R) ∨(Q ⇒R).
(c) (P ∧Q) ⇒R,
(P ⇒R) ∧(Q ⇒R).
(d) P ⇒(Q ∨R),
(P ⇒Q) ∨(P ⇒R).
(e) P ⇒(Q ∧R),
(P ⇒Q) ∧(P ⇒R).
4. Propositions which are “always true” (respectively, “always false”) are called
tautologies (respectively, contradictions). More precisely:

14
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
Deﬁnition 1.1.20. A tautology is a proposition that is true for every possible
assignment of truth values to the statement letters that occur in it. A con-
tradiction is a proposition that is false for every possible assignment of truth
values to the statement letters that occur in it.
Let P and Q be statements.
Determine whether each of the following
statements is a tautology, a contradiction, or neither.
(a) P ⇔¬(¬P).
(b) P ∧¬P.
(c) P ∨¬P.
(d) (P ∧Q) ∨(¬P ∧¬Q).
(e) P ⇒(Q ⇒P).
5. Let n be a ﬁxed positive integer. Which of the following statements are true,
regardless of which positive integer n you consider? Explain brieﬂy. (While
you are not being asked to provide a proof, try to explain clearly.)
(a) If n is divisible by 6, then n is divisible by 3.
(b) If n is divisible by 3, then n is divisible by 6.
(c) If n is divisible by 6, then n is divisible by 9.
(d) If n is divisible by 9, then n is divisible by 6.
(e) If n is divisible by 6, then n2 is divisible by 6.
(f) If n2 is divisible by 6, then n is divisible by 6.
(g) If n2 is divisible by 9, then n is divisible by 9.
(h) If n is divisible by 2 and n is divisible by 3, then n is divisible by 6.
(i) If n is divisible by 2 and n is divisible by 6, then n is divisible by 12.
6. Give an example which shows that statement (1.2) does not hold for all func-
tions f and for all real numbers a; i.e., give a speciﬁc example of a function
f deﬁned on the real numbers, and a speciﬁc real number a, such that f is
continuous at a but not diﬀerentiable at a.
7. For each of the following statements, give an example of a mathematical uni-
verse in which the statement is true and an example of a universe in which the
statement is false. Explain why your answers are correct.
(a) (∀x)[0 < x2 < 2 ⇒x = 1].
(b) (∀x)[0 < x2 < 2 ⇒(x = 1 ∨x = −1)].
8. Let P(x) be a predicate whose only free variable is x and let U be the intended
universe.
(a) Use Deﬁnition 1.1.16 to explain why the following statements are logically
equivalent (i.e., have the same truth value).
(i) ¬(∀x)P(x) and (∃x)(¬P(x)).
(ii) ¬(∃x)P(x) and (∀x)(¬P(x)).
(b) Use Proposition 1.1.11, Proposition 1.1.18, and the deﬁnitions of the mod-
iﬁed quantiﬁers on page 12 to show that the following statements are
logically equivalent.
(i) ¬(∀x ∈U)P(x) and (∃x ∈U)(¬P(x)).
(ii) ¬(∃x ∈U)P(x) and (∀x ∈U)(¬P(x)).
9. Let U be the universe under consideration, and let P(x) and Q(x) be predicates
with free variable x. Find a useful denial (i.e., a statement equivalent to the
negation) of each statement.
www.ebook3000.com

1.1. Language and logic
15
(a) (∀x ∈U)(P(x) ⇒Q(x)).
(b) (∀x ∈U)(Q(x) ∨P(x)).
(c) (∃x ∈U)(Q(x) ∧P(x)).
(d) (∃x ∈U)(Q(x) ∧P(x)). (Use an implication in your answer.)
10. Express each statement symbolically, including a quantiﬁcation of all variables
which makes the universe explicit. Negate the symbolic statement, and express
the negation in natural language as a useful denial.
(a) The inequality x2 −4x + 3 < 0 has a real solution.
(b) The curves y = 1 −x2 and y = 3x −2 intersect.
(c) Every positive real number has a real square root. (Do not use the symbol
√in your solution.)
11. Which of the following statements are true? Explain brieﬂy. (While you are
not being asked to provide a proof, try to explain clearly.)
(a) There exists an integer n such that 4n + 5 = 7n + 3.
(b) There exists a real number x such that x2 + 8x + 12 ≥0.
(c) For all real numbers x, x2 + 8x + 12 ≥0.
(d) For all real numbers x, x2 + 8x + 17 ≥0.
12. Which of the following statements are true? Explain brieﬂy. (While you are
not being asked to provide a proof, try to explain clearly.)
(a) For all real numbers x, x2 −2x −3 = 0 only if x = 3.
(b) For all real numbers x, x2 −2x −3 = 0 if x = 3.
13. Find the converse and contrapositive of each statement. Here, v1, v2, 0 are
ﬁxed vectors in a real vector space (you don’t need to know what this means!),
x1, x2 are ﬁxed real numbers, and f is a ﬁxed function.
(a) (x1v1 + x2v2 = 0) ⇒(x1 = 0 ∧x2 = 0).
(b) f(x1) = f(x2) ⇒x1 = x2.
14. Find a useful denial (i.e., a statement logically equivalent to the negation) of
each statement. Here, v1, v2, 0 are ﬁxed vectors in a real vector space (you
don’t need to know what this means!) and f is a ﬁxed function.
(a) (∀x1)(∀x2)[(x1v1 + x2v2 = 0) ⇒(x1 = 0 ∧x2 = 0)].
(b) (∀x1)(∀x2)[f(x1) = f(x2) ⇒x1 = x2].
(c) (∀y)(∃x)[y = f(x)].
15. Find a useful denial (i.e., a statement logically equivalent to the negation)
of each statement, and express it in mathematically precise, natural English.
Express all conditional statements in the form “if . . . , then . . . ”. Do not add
implied quantiﬁers. (Here, a, b, c, n are ﬁxed integers, f is a ﬁxed function,
and x0, L are ﬁxed real numbers.)
(a) n is not a multiple of 4 if n is even.
(b) If f has a relative maximum at x0 and f is diﬀerentiable at x0, then
f ′(x0) = 0.
(c) For every integer m, m2 is odd and m3 −1 is divisible by 4.
(d) For all integers j and k, if n = jk, then j = 1 or k = 1.
(e) If n is a perfect square, then there exists an integer k such that n = 3k or
n = 3k + 1.
(f) bc is divisible by a only if b is divisible by a or c is divisible by a.

16
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
(g) For all ε > 0 there exists δ > 0 such that for all x, |f(x) −L| < ε if
0 < |x −x0| < δ.
(h) For every real number M there exists a real number x such that f(x) > M.
(i) If n is an odd integer, then there exists an integer k such that n = 4k + 1
or n = 4k + 3.
16. Write the converse and contrapositive of each conditional statement. Do not
add implied quantiﬁers. Express all conditional statements in the form “if . . . ,
then . . . ”. (Here, n is a ﬁxed integer, x is a ﬁxed real number, S is a ﬁxed set
of real numbers, {an} is a ﬁxed sequence of real numbers, and G is a group.
In this exercise, it is not necessary to know the meanings of any mathematical
concepts we have not yet deﬁned.)
(a) If x > 1 or x < −1, then x2 > 1.
(b) n2 is a multiple of 3 is suﬃcient for n to be a multiple of 3.
(c) S is closed and bounded is necessary for S to be compact.
(d) {an} converges if {an} is bounded and monotone.
(e) {an} is Cauchy only if {an} converges.
(f) If n is an odd integer, then there exists an integer k such that n = 4k + 1
or n = 4k + 3.
(g) If G is abelian, then every subgroup of G is normal.
(h) If n is a perfect square, then there exists an integer k such that n = 3k or
n = 3k + 1.
1.2. Proof
1.2.1. Logical arguments. So far we have concentrated on the language, no-
tation, and grammar of mathematical statements. Now we move on to our goal of
learning to construct clear and correct mathematical proofs.
What is a proof? Informally, we will deﬁne a mathematical proof to be a logical
argument that establishes the truth of a mathematical statement.
What is a logical argument? We’ll ﬁrst consider the following familiar example
from calculus.
Suppose that f is a ﬁxed function deﬁned on a subset of the real numbers and
that a is a ﬁxed real number. Suppose you also know:
• If f is diﬀerentiable at a, then f is continuous at a.
• f is diﬀerentiable at a.
What logical conclusion can you draw? That f is continuous at a. While you
probably came to this conclusion without thinking too much about it, technically
you constructed a valid logical argument using the “rule of deduction” called modus
ponens. If we represent the statement “f is diﬀerentiable at a” by the statement
letter P and the statement “f is continuous at a” by Q, then modus ponens says
“from P and P ⇒Q, deduce Q”. We can see that it is reasonable to adopt modus
ponens as a rule of deduction by looking again at the truth table for P ⇒Q in
Table 1.11.
www.ebook3000.com

1.2. Proof
17
Table 1.11. Truth table for ⇒.
P
Q
P ⇒Q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Modus ponens says that we begin by knowing that P ⇒Q is true and P is true.
Only the ﬁrst line in the truth table corresponds to this situation; in this line, Q is
also true. It follows that “Q is true” is a valid conclusion, based on the hypotheses
that P is true and P ⇒Q is true. Thus, the form of a logical argument is based
on the logic of our connectives and on the logic of our quantiﬁers.
If we wish to prove a mathematical statement, then we must ﬁrst
determine the logical form of that statement.
1.2.2. Direct proofs, an introduction. We begin by considering statements of
the form P ⇒Q. To determine how we might prove that a statement with this
logical form is true, we again look at the truth table for implication in Table 1.11.
We see that the statement P ⇒Q is automatically true when P is false, so there
is no need to consider this situation. In other words, we should begin by assuming
that P is true. The ﬁrst line in the truth table Table 1.11 then shows us how to
proceed: we should demonstrate that Q is true. This type of logical argument is
called a direct proof of the statement P ⇒Q. It is so fundamental in mathematics
that we emphasize it again in Table 1.12.
Table 1.12. Direct proof of P ⇒Q.
To prove a statement of the form P ⇒Q is true (directly).
•
We begin with “Assume P is true.”
•
We must then demonstrate that Q is true.
Next, we ask how to prove a statement of the form (∀x)P(x) is true. Recall
that there is an underlying universe U corresponding to the universal quantiﬁer.
Deﬁnition 1.1.16 tells us that the statement (∀x)P(x) is true exactly when every
element a in the universe U has the property that P(a) is true. In general, it’s
not possible to show P(a) is true for each element a in the universe individually.
Indeed, when the universe is inﬁnite, there is no way to do this, since a proof must
be ﬁnite. In a direct proof of (∀x)P(x), therefore, we demonstrate that if x is an
arbitrary, ﬁxed element of the universe, then P(x) is true. See Table 1.13.
Deﬁnition 1.1.16 also tells us how to prove (directly) that a statement of the
form (∃x)P(x) is true. See Table 1.14.
Let’s begin by proving the following:
The sum of an even integer and an odd integer is odd.

18
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
Table 1.13. Direct proof of (∀x)P(x).
To prove a statement of the form (∀x)P(x) is true (directly).
•
We begin with “Let x be an arbitrary (but now ﬁxed),
element of the universe.”
•
We must then demonstrate that P(x) is true.
Table 1.14. Direct proof of (∃x)P(x).
To prove a statement of the form (∃x)P(x) is true (directly).
•
We must ﬁnd an element a in the universe such that P(a) is true.
•
In other words, we must explicitly say what a is and
demonstrate that P(a) is true.
We cannot proceed until we are sure that we know what the words mean. While you
certainly know intuitively what the words “even” and “odd” mean, a mathemati-
cal proof that a particular undetermined integer is even or odd relies on knowing
the precise mathematical deﬁnition of these words. Without knowing the logical
structure of these deﬁnitions, we will not know what must be proved.
Deﬁnition 1.2.1. Let n ∈Z.
(1) n is even if there exists an integer k such that n = 2k; i.e.,
n is even if (∃k ∈Z)[n = 2k].
(2) n is odd if there exists an integer k such that n = 2k + 1; i.e.,
n is odd if (∃k ∈Z)[n = 2k + 1].
We should make two observations about this formal deﬁnition right away. First,
it is almost universal in mathematics to use the word “if” in a deﬁnition when what
is actually meant is “if and only if”. For example, technically Deﬁnition 1.2.1 says
only that, for a given integer n, if we know that there exists k ∈Z such that
n = 2k, then we can conclude that n is even. Although not explicitly stated in
Deﬁnition 1.2.1, it is further understood that if we know that n is even, then there
exists k ∈Z such that n = 2k. While this completely contradicts our policy of
always saying exactly what we mean, it is standard practice in mathematics that
deﬁnitions have this special status, and so we may as well get used to it now.
Special status of deﬁnitions. Mathematical deﬁnitions are always if and only
if statements.
Next, we should note that we will assume that every integer is either even or
odd, but never both. You certainly believe this, but it actually requires a proof.
We will make use of this assumption for now and justify it in Exercise 2.2.2 and
Chapter 6.
Most importantly, we need to be sure that we recognize the logical structure of
the statement to be proved, which we purposely stated ﬁrst in colloquial English.
www.ebook3000.com

1.2. Proof
19
As a mathematical statement, “the sum of an even integer and an odd integer is
odd” should be interpreted as follows:
if m is an even integer and n is an odd integer, then m + n is an odd
integer.
Remember that we must be careful. There are assumed universal quantiﬁers here:
(∀m ∈Z)(∀n ∈Z)[(m is even and n is odd) ⇒(m + n is odd)].
We should never expect to simply “write down” a proof of a statement; we
will need to search for it. To organize our thoughts for this “scratchwork”, we will
use a “Given-Goal” diagram1 to identify what is given and what is our goal. The
universal quantiﬁers tell us to assume that m and n are arbitrary (and now ﬁxed)
integers.
Given
Goal
m, n arbitrary integers
if m is even and n is odd,
then m + n is odd
Right away, the logical structure of the goal, an implication, tells us what to
do next.
The Goal dictates the form of the proof.
Table 1.12 tells us that we should assume the hypotheses that m is even and n is
odd and then rewrite our goal:
Given
Goal
m, n arbitrary integers
m is even
n is odd
m + n is odd
We must search for a logical way of getting to our goal from our givens. One
useful way to search is with a “backward-forward” method. You should ask yourself
the following questions:
What’s my goal? What does it mean?
What’s given? What does it mean?
Our job is to work back and forth between these ideas until we ﬁnd the logical
connections.
Our Goal is to show:
m + n is odd.
Since the deﬁnition of odd is existential, Table 1.14 tells us that our goal is to
ﬁnd a particular integer a such that m + n = 2a + 1.
1The notion of a “Given-Goal” diagram as a way of organizing one’s thoughts regarding what is
known, versus what is to be proved, was ﬁrst used in Daniel J. Velleman’s book How to Prove It: A
Structured Approach [15]. It is also used in Peter J. Eccles’s book An Introduction to Mathematical
Reasoning: Numbers, Sets and Functions [8], where Velleman is credited with the terminology.

20
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
We are Given that
m is even.
This means that
there exists an integer k such that m = 2k.
Since such an integer exists, we’ll ﬁx one so that we can work with it; i.e., we can
ﬁx i ∈Z such that m = 2i.
Similarly, since we know
n is odd,
we can
ﬁx j ∈Z such that n = 2j + 1.
Since we both have and want information about the integer m + n, it makes
sense to investigate this quantity. Note that
m + n = 2i + (2j + 1) = (2i + 2j) + 1 = 2(i + j) + 1.
Since i + j is an integer, we’ve found the integer a we are seeking.
We’ve convinced ourselves that the statement is true, but part of our job is
to formally and eﬀectively communicate a mathematical proof of this statement to
others.
Proposition 1.2.2. For all integers m and n, if m is even and n is odd, then
m + n is odd.
Proof. Let m, n ∈Z be arbitrary, and assume that m is even and n is odd. We
show that m + n is odd; i.e., we must ﬁnd an integer a such that m + n = 2a + 1.
Since m is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx i ∈Z such that m = 2i. Similarly,
since n is odd, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx j ∈Z such that n = 2j + 1. Then
m + n = 2i + (2j + 1)
= (2i + 2j) + 1
= 2(i + j) + 1,
by the associative and distributive properties. Since i + j is an integer, m + n is
odd, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1.
Hence, the sum of an even integer and an odd integer is odd.
□
1.2.3. Some important observations. Despite the apparent simplicity of the
statement and proof of Proposition 1.2.2, there are several important lessons that
must be emphasized. First, in our scratchwork, we progressed from the statement
m is even
to
(∃k ∈Z)(m = 2k)
to
ﬁx an integer i such that m = 2i.
Going from the existential statement (∃k ∈Z)(m = 2k) (which simply asserts that
something exists) to ﬁxing a particular integer i ∈Z with m = 2i (which ﬁxes
www.ebook3000.com

1.2. Proof
21
a particular example of such an object and gives it a name) is called existential
instantiation.
It’s important here to use a new name (variable) that doesn’t already have
a particular meaning in your proof.
To avoid wordiness in the ﬁnal proof, we
instantiated the existential quantiﬁers right away, taking care to use a new variable
each time.
In fact, at the beginning of the ﬁnal proof, the name (variable) k did not yet
have a meaning. Consequently, we could have replaced the line
since m is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx i ∈Z such that m = 2i
by
since m is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx k ∈Z such that m = 2k.
Or, we could have replaced it by
since m is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx ℓ∈Z such that m = 2ℓ.
However, once we choose a name to use to instantiate the ﬁrst quantiﬁer:
since m is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx i ∈Z such that m = 2i,
the meaning of the variable i becomes ﬁxed for the rest of the proof, and it would
then be a mistake to say,
since n is odd, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1 we can ﬁx i ∈Z such that n = 2i + 1.
Summarizing:
If we know (∃x)P(x), where P(x) is some predicate involving the
free variable x, then we should ﬁx a particular x such that P(x)
holds, as long as we take care not to use a variable whose meaning
in the current proof is already ﬁxed.
Next, note how essential the mathematical deﬁnitions of “even” and “odd” were
in the proof. As we mentioned earlier, you almost certainly “knew” the deﬁnitions
of these words already, at least in an intuitive sense. In mathematics, however,
language must be used precisely and arguments must be rigorous. To prove that
an integer is odd (or that something is a widget), we must have a precise mathe-
matical deﬁnition of this concept, and the logical form of that deﬁnition indicates
the structure of that proof.
Summarizing:
If we wish to prove that something is a widget and all we know
about widgets is the deﬁnition, then we must use the deﬁnition to
prove it’s a widget.
The logical form of the deﬁnition of widget determines the structure
of a proof that something is a widget.
It is also important to note the diﬀerence between the search for the proof (i.e.,
the scratchwork) and the mathematical proof we produced at the end. In this case,
the scratchwork and the proof look pretty similar, but often it can take several
approaches before you come up with the right idea for a proof. In fact, this is

22
1. Language, Logic, and Proof
why reading mathematical proofs can seem diﬃcult; you are reading the polished,
ﬁnished product, and not the process by which the proof was discovered. Typically,
mathematical proofs do not describe the process by which the proof was discovered
(i.e., the scratchwork), although there are exceptions to this.
Furthermore, as we’ve emphasized from the beginning, we want to be sure to
use mathematical language and notation correctly in mathematical writing. See the
appendix for some suggested guidelines to help you write mathematics eﬀectively.
These guidelines review the general comments mentioned here, as well as address
other issues.
Finally, it is important to note that we used some basic properties of integers
in the proof of Proposition 1.2.2 (such as the associative property of addition and
the distributive property). At the beginning of this section on proof, we noted
that a proof is a logical argument and illustrated the role that modus ponens plays.
Students who ﬁrst learn about proof in mathematics often wonder what mathe-
matical statements need proof, particularly when a statement “seems obvious” to
them. Indeed, while our point of view in this course will be that “all” mathemati-
cal statements require proof, one cannot prove anything at all without some basic
assumptions, which are often called axioms.
To give us a starting point, we will consider the statements found in Basic
Properties of Integers 1.2.3 on page 23 (and also the Principle of Mathematical
Induction, to be discussed in Chapter 3) to be our basic assumptions about the
integers. We will accept these statements without proof, and you might take a
moment to ask yourself whether you think it is reasonable for us to do so. (In
fact, we could have taken a smaller list of statements as our basic assumptions
about the integers and proved the rest from that smaller list.) All other statements
we mention about integers, however, will require proof, unless we explicitly state
otherwise. In this way, it should be very clear to you when a statement requires a
proof. In general, we will never consider a mathematical statement, no matter how
“simple” it may seem, as “obvious”.
www.ebook3000.com

1.2. Proof
23
Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3.
For all integers a, b, c:
(Closure under + and ·)
a + b and ab are also integers.
(Associative properties)
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and
(ab)c = a(bc).
(Commutative properties)
a + b = b + a and ab = ba.
(Distributive property)
a(b + c) = ab + ac.
(Identities)
0 ̸= 1, a + 0 = a, a · 1 = a, and a · 0 = 0.
(Additive inverses)
There is a unique integer
−a = −1 · a such that
a + (−a) = 0.
(Subtraction)
b −a is deﬁned to equal b + (−a).
(No divisors of 0)
If ab = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.
(Cancellation)
If ab = ac and a ̸= 0, then b = c.
(Transitive property of <)
If a < b and b < c, then a < c.
(Trichotomy)
Exactly one of
a < b or a = b or a > b holds.
(Order property 1)
If a < b, then a + c < b + c.
(Order property 2)
If c > 0, then a < b iﬀac < bc.
(Order property 3)
If c < 0, then a < b iﬀac > bc.
Note in particular the cancellation property of integers; there is no division
operation in the integers. In order to use the cancellation property to conclude
b = c from ab = ac, where a, b, c ∈Z, we must ﬁrst explain why a ̸= 0.
Exercises 1.2
1. Let n be an integer.
(a) Prove that if n is even, then n2 is even.
(b) Prove that if n is odd, then n2 is odd.
2. Let m and n be integers.
(a) Prove that if m and n are even, then m + n is even.
(b) Prove that if m and n are odd, then m + n is even.
3.
(a) Prove that for all m ∈Z, if m is even, then mn is even.
(b) Prove that for all m, n ∈Z, if m and n are odd, then mn is odd.
4. Use the deﬁnition to prove that for all n ∈N, 4n + 7 is odd.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 2
Techniques of Proof
2.1. More direct proofs
In this chapter, we consider several examples that demonstrate various basic proof
techniques. We begin by emphasizing again the importance of the logical structure
of mathematical statements and deﬁnitions. The logical structure of a mathematical
statement and, in particular, the logical structure of the Goal will dictate the form
of its proof. The logical structure of a mathematical deﬁnition gives us a clear
strategy for trying to establish that an object has (or doesn’t have) that particular
property.
In this section, we exhibit additional examples of direct proofs. For our ﬁrst
example, we introduce a new mathematical concept. The statement that an integer
n is even is a statement about divisibility; an integer n is even if n is divisible by
2, or 2 divides n. We now deﬁne this concept more generally.
Deﬁnition 2.1.1. Let a, b ∈Z.
a divides b if there exists n ∈Z such that b = an.
We write a | b for “a divides b”1 and say that a is a divisor of b.
Remember the “special status” of deﬁnitions; the “if” in a deﬁnition (but not
in other mathematical statements) is always read as “iﬀ”. We illustrate this new
concept with some examples.
Example 2.1.2. Note that 3 | 12 since there exists n ∈Z such that 12 = 3n;
namely, 12 = 3 · 4.
On the other hand, 5 ∤12 (i.e., 5 does not divide 12) since there does not exist
an integer n such that 12 = 5n.2
1Beware: Do not confuse this notation a | b with the fraction notation
a
b or a/b used to denote
division, which is not a legal operation in the integers. In particular, “a | b” is a complete sentence
whose verb is “|”, while “ a
b ” (and “a/b”) is a noun; it is a name of a particular rational number.
2The fact that 5 ∤12 may seem clear, but technically it requires proof. For now, let’s simply note
that 5 ∤12 because 12 = 5 · 2 + 2; i.e., 5 “goes into” 12 twice with a “remainder” of 2. See page 40.
25

26
2. Techniques of Proof
As another example, note that 12 | 72 since 72 = 12 · 6.
♦
Note that in Example 2.1.2, we have 3 | 12 and 12 | 72. Also note that 3 | 72,
since 72 = 3 · 24. This is an example of the “transitive” property of the divisibility
relation: for all integers a, b, c,
if a | b and b | c, then a | c.
Our example is not a proof, however, so let’s ﬁnd a proof of this fact. As we did in
Section 1.2, we organize our thoughts using a Given-Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
a, b, c arbitrary integers
a | b
b | c
a | c
Our Goal is to show
a | c.
Since the deﬁnition of divides is existential, our goal is to
ﬁnd an integer k such that c = ak.
(Note in particular our use of a new letter k here.) We can now replace the Given-
Goal diagram above with the following.
Given
Goal
a, b, c arbitrary integers
a | b
ﬁnd k ∈Z
b | c
with c = ak
Now we consider our Givens. We know
a | b,
so we can
ﬁx n ∈Z such that b = an.
(Note our use of a new letter n here.)
Similarly, since
b | c,
we can
ﬁx m ∈Z such that c = bm
(and a new letter here).
We’ll attempt to combine our given information into a single statement about
c:
c = bm = (an)m = a(nm).
So nm is the integer k we seek. We have found a proof.
Proposition 2.1.3. For all integers a, b, c, if a | b and b | c, then a | c.
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
27
Proof. Let a, b, c ∈Z be arbitrary and assume that a | b and b | c. We must show
that a | c; i.e., we must ﬁnd an integer k such that c = ak.
Since a | b, by Deﬁnition 2.1.1 we may ﬁx n ∈Z such that b = an. Similarly,
since b | c, we may ﬁx m ∈Z such that c = bm, again by Deﬁnition 2.1.1. Then
c = bm
= (an)m
= a(nm),
since multiplication of integers is associative (Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3).
Since nm ∈Z, we have proved that a | c, by Deﬁnition 2.1.1, as desired.
□
It is important to note that Proposition 2.1.3 describes a property of integers.
The divisibility relation in Deﬁnition 2.1.1 is phrased in terms of integers. Despite
the terminology “divides” in Deﬁnition 2.1.1, there is no division operation in Z,
as we noted in Section 1.2. Consequently, the proof of Proposition 2.1.3, or any
statement about integer divisibility, mentions only integers, and never fractions.
So far we’ve been proving statements about integers. We next consider a state-
ment about the real numbers; recall that we denote the set of all real numbers by R.
The list of axioms you may assume about the real numbers is given below. As with
the Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3, we could take a smaller list of statements
from those given below as our basic assumptions about the real numbers and prove
the rest from that smaller list.
Basic Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4.
For all real numbers a, b, c:
(Closure under +, ·)
a + b and ab are also real numbers.
(Associative properties)
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and
(ab)c = a(bc).
(Commutative properties)
a + b = b + a and ab = ba.
(Distributive property)
a(b + c) = ab + ac.
(Identities)
0 ̸= 1, a + 0 = a, a · 1 = a, and a · 0 = 0.
(Additive inverses)
There is a unique real number
−a = −1 · a such that
a + (−a) = 0.
(Subtraction)
b −a is deﬁned to equal b + (−a).
(Multiplicative inverses)
If a ̸= 0, then there is a unique real number
a−1 = 1
a such that a · a−1 = a · 1
a = 1.
(Division)
When a ̸= 0, b
a is deﬁned to equal b · 1
a.
(Transitive property of <)
If a < b and b < c, then a < c.
(Trichotomy)
Exactly one of
a < b or a = b or a > b holds.
(Order property 1)
If a < b, then a + c < b + c.
(Order property 2)
If c > 0, then a < b iﬀac < bc.
(Order property 3)
If c < 0, then a < b iﬀac > bc.
There is one additional axiom for R, called the Completeness Axiom. Except
for the following theorem about the existence of nth roots, which we will accept and

28
2. Techniques of Proof
use for now without proof, the Completeness Axiom will not be needed or discussed
until Chapter 9.
Theorem 2.1.5. Let n ∈Z+.
(1) Assume n is even. Then every x ∈R with x ≥0 has a real “nth root”; i.e.,
when x ≥0, there is a unique nonnegative real number denoted by x1/n =
n√x
which satisﬁes (x1/n)n = x. Furthermore, for any x ∈R, (xn)1/n = |x|.
(2) Assume n is odd.
Then every x ∈R has a real “nth root”; i.e., for any
x ∈R, there is a unique real number denoted by x1/n =
n√x which satisﬁes
(x1/n)n = x. Furthermore, for any x ∈R, (xn)1/n = x.
As examples,
3√
7 is the unique real number z such that z3 = 7, and, for all
x ∈R,
√
x2 = |x|. Theorem 2.1.5 will be an important tool in Chapter 5.
We also take a moment to recall that a real number z is rational if there exist
integers a, b with b ̸= 0 such that z = a
b . The sum and product of two rational
numbers are also rational; the familiar formulas
a
b + c
d = ad + cb
bd
and
a
b · c
d = ac
bd,
where a, b, c, d ∈Z and b, d ̸= 0, establish this (note that we need the “No divisors
of 0” axiom in Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3 to conclude that bd ̸= 0).
For our ﬁrst proof about real numbers, we’ll prove that
for all a, b ∈R with a < b < 0, a2 > b2.
Our Given-Goal diagram contains the usual information.
Given
Goal
a, b ∈R
a < 0
b < 0
a < b
a2 > b2
We know a < b. Since we want an inequality involving a2 and b2, we could
try to multiply both sides of the inequality a < b by a (respectively b) to obtain
a statement about a2 (respectively b2). We’ll need to be careful to use the order
axioms in Basic Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4 correctly.
Proposition 2.1.6. For all a, b ∈R with a < b < 0, a2 > b2.
Proof. Let a, b ∈R with a < b < 0. We prove that a2 > b2.
Multiplying both sides of the inequality a < b by a gives a2 > ab by an order
axiom (see Basic Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4), since a < 0. Similarly, mul-
tiplying both sides of the inequality a < b by b gives ab > b2, since b < 0. Since
a2 > ab and ab > b2, we have a2 > b2 by the transitive property of the order
relation, as desired.
□
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
29
2.1.1. Counterexamples. The statement of Proposition 2.1.3 was motivated
by a single example (Example 2.1.2), which wasn’t much evidence! Typically, when
faced with a mathematical statement, one wishes to determine whether the state-
ment is true or false. How can one approach such a situation? One usually tries a
variety of approaches. Does the statement involve familiar concepts, and do previ-
ously proved theorems about these concepts apply? Can one ﬁnd examples of the
statement, which can provide intuition about whether the statement is true and
how one might go about ﬁnding a proof of it? If one really isn’t sure whether the
statement is true or false, one can alternately try to prove it and to disprove it
(which means to show that its negation is true).
Our next example deals with prime integers, so we begin with the deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.1.7. A positive integer p is prime if p > 1 and the only positive
integer factors of p are 1 and p; i.e., p is prime if p > 1 and
(2.1)
(∀a, b ∈Z+)[p = ab ⇒(a = 1 or b = 1)].
Example 2.1.8. Is the following statement true or false? If it is true, then prove
it. If it is false, then disprove it.
For all positive integers n, n2 + n + 41 is prime.
We begin by computing n2 + n + 41 for several values of n:
12 + 1 + 41 = 43 is prime,
22 + 2 + 41 = 47 is prime,
32 + 3 + 41 = 53 is prime,
42 + 4 + 41 = 61 is prime.
So far it looks like we are building evidence that the statement is true. On the
other hand, having many examples does not constitute a proof, and these examples
give no indication for why the statement might be true (if it is). In fact, it seems
unlikely that there is a formula (such as n2 + n + 41) that always generates primes.
Consequently, while all our examples seem to be in favor of the statement being
true, we will try to disprove it.
The negation of
(∀n ∈Z+)(n2 + n + 41 is prime)
(2.2)
is
(∃n ∈Z+)(n2 + n + 41 is not prime),
(2.3)
and this is what we wish to prove. Statement (2.3) is an existential statement, so
we know that we must ﬁnd an example of a particular positive integer n such that
n2 + n + 41 is not prime. So far, all the values of n we have tried have resulted
in a prime integer. If we seek a value of n so that n2 + n + 41 is not prime, then
we need to remember that a positive integer is not prime if we can factor it as a
product of two positive integers, neither of which is 1, since this is the negation of
statement (2.1). Since n2 + n + 41 has 41 as a term, we will generate a common
factor if we let n = 41. This example, which will demonstrate that statement (2.2)
is a false statement, is called a counterexample to that statement.

30
2. Techniques of Proof
Proof. We show that the statement
for all positive integers n, n2 + n + 41 is prime
is false by providing a counterexample. Note that when n = 41,
n2 + n + 41 = (41)2 + 41 + 41 = (41)(41 + 1 + 1) = (41)(43).
Hence (41)2 + 41 + 41 is not prime, by Deﬁnition 2.1.7.
□♦
2.1.2. Proof by cases. Sometimes one is unable to ﬁnd a single argument that
works in general to prove a statement. Consider the statement
for all integers a, a(a + 1) is even.
Is this statement true or false? If it is true, then we wish to prove it. If it is false,
then we’ll disprove it.
Again, we’ll try to get a sense for the statement by computing a(a + 1) for
various values of a.
a = 4 :
a(a + 1) = 4(5) = 2(2)(5) is even,
a = 17 :
a(a + 1) = 17(18) = 2(17)(9) is even,
a = −5 :
a(a + 1) = −5(−4) = 2(−5)(−2) is even.
Here, not only do our examples seem to indicate that the statement is true, but
they also appear to show us why: if a is even, then a(a + 1) is automatically even,
and if a is odd, then a+1 is even, again ensuring that a(a+1) is even. (Note that we
are continuing to assume that every integer is either even or odd, but never both.)
So, we will try to prove the statement, and our scratchwork (we have no need for a
Given-Goal diagram here) indicates that we should use a technique called proof by
cases, since the argument depends on whether or not a is even.
Proposition 2.1.9. For all integers a, a(a + 1) is even.
Proof. Let a ∈Z. We show that a(a + 1) is even by considering two cases.
Case I: a is even.
Then 2 | a, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1. Since a | a(a + 1) by Deﬁnition 2.1.1,
we have that 2 | a(a + 1) since the divisibility relation is transitive (Proposi-
tion 2.1.3). Hence a(a + 1) is even.
Case II: a is not even.
Since a is not even, we know that a is odd. Then a + 1 is even by Exer-
cise 1.2.2b. Then, using an argument similar to that of Case I, we have that
2 | (a + 1) and (a + 1) | a(a + 1), and hence 2 | a(a + 1) by Proposition 2.1.3.
Thus a(a + 1) is even.
Hence, since we have considered all possible cases for the integer a, we have proved
that for all integers a, a(a + 1) is even.
□
The most important thing about a proof by cases is that the cases need to
consider all possibilities for the object in question (here, for the arbitrary integer
a, that a is either even or not). Note that a proof by cases may have more than
two cases.
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
31
Also note that our proof of Proposition 2.1.9 made reference to two previously
proved results, namely Exercise 1.2.2b and Proposition 2.1.3.
This is standard
practice in mathematics, since it allows one to focus on the issues at hand and thus
shortens the proof in question. While we could have included a proof of the two
relevant statements (that when a is odd, then a+1 is even, and that the divisibility
relation is transitive) within our proof of Proposition 2.1.9 (and we would have
needed to, had we not previously proved those two statements), the proof we gave
is more eﬃcient. Thus, we can amend our earlier statement in Section 1.2 about
how to prove that something is a widget (here, the property “even integer” is the
widget in question).
If we wish to prove that something is a widget, then we must either
use the deﬁnition of widget or we must use a previously proved
result that implies that something is a widget.
If we use the deﬁnition, then its logical form determines the struc-
ture of a proof that something is a widget.
If we use a previously proved result that implies that something is
a widget, then we must verify the hypotheses of that result.
2.1.3. Working backwards. In this example, given a positive real number x,
we wish to determine whether one of the expressions
x
x+1 and x+1
x+2 is always larger
than the other. We can try some simple examples, with x a positive integer, to see
what we think.
x
x
x+1
x+1
x+2
1
1
2
2
3
2
2
3
3
4
3
3
4
4
5
4
4
5
5
6
It appears that, at least for positive integers x,
x
x + 1 < x + 1
x + 2.
We’ll try to prove this for all positive real numbers x.
Given
Goal
x ∈R
x > 0
x
x+1 < x+1
x+2
It’s not clear how we should proceed, since we have hardly any information
in our “Given” column. In situations such as this, it sometimes helps to “work
backwards” from the Goal; i.e., we’ll try to simplify or rewrite the goal to help us
see how to proceed.

32
2. Techniques of Proof
Warning: Working backwards is a strategy for ﬁnding a proof, not a proof in
itself. The reason for this is that when we work backwards, we will assume what
we are trying to prove, which is never allowed. When we work backwards, we are
hoping to eventually ﬁnd a statement that we “already” know is true, such as an
instance of an axiom or a statement we have already proved. We do not know ahead
of time what that statement will be. More importantly, we are also hoping that
our reasoning is reversible, which we must also check. We’ve already seen that the
converse of a true implication need not also be true, so that working backwards may
not work. Thus, when working backwards, we must verify that we can construct a
valid proof.
To begin, let’s assume that we know we have x > 0 and
x
x+1 < x+1
x+2. We’d
like to multiply both sides of the inequality by (x + 1)(x + 2), in order to clear
the fractions, but we also know that we must be careful about the sign of this
expression. Since x > 0, we know that x + 1 > 1 > 0 and, similarly, x + 2 > 0.
Hence (x + 1)(x + 2) > 0 by an order property. Multiplying both sides of
x
x + 1 < x + 1
x + 2
by (x + 1)(x + 2) gives, after cancelling,
x(x + 2) < (x + 1)2,
since (x + 1)(x + 2) > 0. If we rewrite this inequality as
x2 + 2x < (x2 + 2x) + 1,
here we see a statement that we know, from our basic properties, to be true; i.e.,
x2 + 2x < x2 + 2x + 1 is always true, regardless of x. If all our steps are reversible,
then we’ve found a proof. We give the ﬁnal proof of the desired statement below;
take special note of how the proof diﬀers from the scratchwork, where we worked
backwards.
Proposition 2.1.10. For all positive real numbers x,
x
x+1 < x+1
x+2.
Proof. Let x ∈R be arbitrary with x > 0. We must show that
x
x + 1 < x + 1
x + 2.
First note that by an order property,
x2 + 2x < (x2 + 2x) + 1
(2.4)
and hence, by factoring,
x(x + 2) < (x + 1)2.
(2.5)
Since x > 0, we know that (x + 1)(x + 2) > 0, and hence we may divide both sides
of statement (2.5) by (x + 1)(x + 2) to obtain
x(x + 2)
(x + 1)(x + 2) <
(x + 1)2
(x + 1)(x + 2),
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
33
by another order property. Thus we may remove a factor of 1 on each side of the
inequality to obtain
x
x + 1 < x + 1
x + 2,
as desired.
□
The statement we just proved in Proposition 2.1.10 isn’t particularly profound;
the point here is to demonstrate the method of working backwards. Two things are
important to note, however. First, as we mentioned above, it is important when
using this method not to confuse the scratchwork with the proof. Phrased even
more strongly, the scratchwork is not the proof!
Second, note that the proof makes no mention of how we got our inspiration
to start with statement (2.4). This makes the proof seem fairly mysterious.
It
is important to remember this anytime you are reading a proof that makes you
wonder “How did the author know to do this?” In such instances, you might try
to do the scratchwork yourself.
2.1.4. Proving biconditional statements. So far we have not proved any bi-
conditional, or “iﬀ”, statements. Let’s try to prove the familiar statement that for
all real numbers a, b with b ≥0,
|a| ≤b iﬀ−b ≤a ≤b.
First, we must remember that there are two statements to be proved, the
forward (⇒) direction
if |a| ≤b, then −b ≤a ≤b,
and the backward (⇐) direction
if −b ≤a ≤b, then |a| ≤b.
Also recall that the compound inequality −b ≤a ≤b is an abbreviation for
the statement “−b ≤a and a ≤b”. Finally, we need to recall the deﬁnition of the
absolute value function.
Deﬁnition 2.1.11. Given x ∈R, the absolute value of x, denoted by |x|, is deﬁned
by
|x| =

x
if x ≥0,
−x
if x < 0.
As we begin our scratchwork, we note that it is likely (although not auto-
matic) that this proof will involve cases, since the deﬁnition of |x| is a deﬁnition by
cases involving x. We provide the Given-Goal diagrams but leave any additional
scratchwork up to you.
For (⇒):
Given
Goal
a, b ∈R
−b ≤a ≤b
b ≥0
(i.e.,
|a| ≤b
−b ≤a and a ≤b)

34
2. Techniques of Proof
For (⇐):
Given
Goal
a, b ∈R
b ≥0
−b ≤a ≤b
(i.e.,
−b ≤a and a ≤b)
|a| ≤b
Proposition 2.1.12. For all real numbers a, b ∈R with b ≥0, |a| ≤b if and only
if −b ≤a ≤b.
Proof. Let a, b ∈R be arbitrary with b ≥0. We prove that |a| ≤b iﬀ−b ≤a ≤b.
(⇒) Assume that |a| ≤b. We show that −b ≤a ≤b. We consider two cases.
Case I: a ≥0.
Then |a| = a by Deﬁnition 2.1.11, and so a ≤b by our assumption that
|a| ≤b. Also, since b ≥0, we have −b ≤0 ≤a; i.e., −b ≤a by the
transitive property. Since −b ≤a and a ≤b, we have −b ≤a ≤b, as
desired.
Case II: ¬(a ≥0).
Then a < 0 and hence |a| = −a, by Deﬁnition 2.1.11. So −a ≤b by our
assumption that |a| ≤b. But then a ≥−b by an order property, and so
−b ≤a < 0 ≤b;
i.e., −b ≤a ≤b, as desired.
(⇐) Assume that −b ≤a ≤b. We show that |a| ≤b by again considering two
cases.
Case I: a ≥0.
Then |a| = a by Deﬁnition 2.1.11, and hence |a| ≤b by our assumption
that a ≤b.
Case II: a < 0.
Then |a| = −a by Deﬁnition 2.1.11. Since −b ≤a by our assumption, we
have b ≥−a by an order property. Thus |a| ≤b, as desired.
□
2.1.5. Uniqueness proofs. Sometimes we ﬁnd that not only do we wish to
prove that an object exists, but also we wish to prove that the object that exists
is unique, i.e., that there is exactly one such object. We can express this in our
mathematical language in one of two ways. Suppose that P(x) is a predicate with
free variable x, and think of P(x) as expressing “x satisﬁes property P”.
The
statement
there exists a unique x such that P(x)
denotes
(2.6)
(∃x)[P(x) ∧(∀y)[P(y) ⇒x = y]]
or
(2.7)
(∃x)P(x) ∧(∀y)(∀z)[(P(y) ∧P(z)) ⇒y = z].
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
35
Remember here that ∧denotes the logical connective “and”.
Statement (2.6) states that
(1) an object x satisfying property P exists and, furthermore,
(2) if y is an arbitrary object satisfying property P, then y must be the same
object as this x.
Statement (2.7) states that
(1) an object x satisfying property P exists, and
(2) if y and z are arbitrary objects both satisfying property P, then y and z are
equal.
Both statement (2.6) and statement (2.7) can be represented by the notation
(∃!x)P(x).
Regardless of whether one thinks of (∃!x)P(x) in terms of statement (2.6) or state-
ment (2.7), note that a proof of (∃!x)P(x) always has two parts: a proof of existence
and a proof of uniqueness.
Example 2.1.13. In Basic Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4 and Basic Properties
of Integers 1.2.3, we have assumed (both implicitly and explicitly) a bit more than
we needed in order to not belabor these assumptions too much. For example, Basic
Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4 states that for all a ∈R, a + 0 = a = 0 + a
and, implicitly, that 0 is the only element of R with this property. Let’s keep this
assumption and the assumption that addition of real numbers is commutative.
Basic Properties of Real Numbers 2.1.4 also states that for all a ∈R, there
exists a unique real number −a such that a + (−a) = 0 = (−a) + a.
It’s possible to replace this axiom by the weaker assumption
(2.8)
(∀a ∈R)(∃b ∈R)[a + b = 0 = b + a]
and then prove
(2.9)
(∀a ∈R)(∃!b ∈R)[a + b = 0 = b + a].
Then, given a ∈R, we can deﬁne −a to be the unique b ∈R with a + b = 0.
Scratchwork: Let a ∈R. By statement (2.7), a Given-Goal diagram for the
uniqueness part of statement (2.9) is
Given
Goal
all axioms in Basic Properties of Real Numbers,
with (Additive inverses) replaced by statement (2.8)
a ∈R arbitrary
b1, b2 ∈R arbitrary
a + b1 = 0 = b1 + a
a + b2 = 0 = b2 + a
b1 = b2

36
2. Techniques of Proof
Proof of statement (2.9). Let a ∈R.
(Existence): Assumption (2.8) establishes the fact that there exists b ∈R such
that a + b = 0.
(Uniqueness): Let b1, b2 ∈R and assume that a + b1 = 0 = b1 + a and a + b2 =
0 = b2 + a. We prove that b1 = b2. We have
a + b1 = 0,
so
b2 + (a + b1) = b2 + 0.
By associativity of addition and the fact that 0 is the additive identity, we have
(b2 + a) + b1 = b2.
Since b2 + a = 0, this gives
0 + b1 = b2,
or
b1 = b2,
as desired.
Hence, there is a unique b ∈R such that a + b = 0.
□
The point of this example was to illustrate a standard uniqueness proof, and
it is necessary to prove statements of this sort in an abstract algebra course. We’ll
see more uniqueness statements later in this textbook.
♦
Exercises 2.1
1. Let a, b, and c be integers. Prove that for all integers m and n, if a | b and
a | c, then a | (bm + cn).
2. Prove that for all real numbers a and b, if 0 < a < b, then 0 < a2 < b2.
3. Prove that for all integers m, if m is odd, then there exists k ∈Z such that
m2 = 8k + 1.
4. Using deﬁnitions, prove by cases that for every integer n, n2 + n + 5 is odd.
5. Determine whether each statement is true or false. If true, then prove it. If
false, then provide a counterexample.
(a) For all positive integers n, n is divisible by 3 is necessary for n to be
divisible by 6.
(b) For all positive integers n, n is divisible by 3 is suﬃcient for n to be
divisible by 6.
(c) For all real numbers x, x2 −2x −3 = 0 only if x = 3.
(d) For all real numbers x, x2 −2x −3 = 0 if x = 3.
(e) For all integers a, b, c, if a | bc, then a | b or a | c.
(f) For all integers a, b, c, if a | (b + c), then a | b or a | c.
(g) For all even integers m and n, 4 | mn.
(h) For all integers n, if n2 is a multiple of 4, then n is a multiple of 4.
(i) There exist integers m and n such that 15m + 12n = −6.
www.ebook3000.com

2.1. More direct proofs
37
6. Prove that for all real numbers x, x2 ≥0.
7. Prove that for all real numbers x and y, if xy = 0, then x = 0 or y = 0.
8. Prove that for all real numbers x and y, x2 + xy + y2 ≥0. (HINT: Complete
the square in x.)
9. Prove that for all real numbers x and y, if x2 = y2, then x = y or x = −y; i.e.,
x = ±y. (Your proof should not mention anything called a “square root”.)
10. Prove that for all a, b ∈R+,
√
ab =

a

b and  a
b =
√a
√
b .
11. Prove that for all real numbers x and y, if x < y, then x < x+y
2
< y.
12. Let a ∈R. Prove that:
(a) |a| = | −a|. (HINT: Consider three cases.)
(b) −|a| ≤a ≤|a|.
(c) |a| = 0 if and only if a = 0.
13. Let a, b ∈R. Prove that:
(a) If |a| = |b|, then a = b or a = −b.
(b) |ab| = |a||b|.
(c) |a −b| = |b −a|.
14. Let a, b ∈R. Prove that:
(a) (Triangle Inequality) |a + b| ≤|a| + |b|. (HINT: Use Exercise 2.1.12b and
Proposition 2.1.12, or a proof by cases.)
(b) |a + b| = |a| + |b| if and only if a and b have the same sign.
(c) ||a| −|b|| ≤|a −b|.
(d) |a −b| ≤|a| + |b|.
15. Prove that for all positive real numbers x, the sum of x and its reciprocal is
greater than or equal to 2.
16. Prove that for all negative real numbers x, the sum of x and its reciprocal is
less than or equal to −2.
17. Prove that for all x, y ∈R+, √xy ≤x+y
2 , with equality occurring if and only
if x = y.
(This result is a special case of the Arithmetic-Geometric Mean
Inequality.)
18. Prove that for all nonnegative real numbers x, 2|x −3|
x + 1
≤7. (HINT: Consider
two cases, based on the deﬁnition of absolute value.)
19. Prove that for all real numbers a, b, c with a ̸= 0, the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0
has a solution u ∈R if and only if b2 −4ac ≥0 and u = −b±
√
b2−4ac
2a
. (Recall
that a real number u is a solution of the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0 if and only
if au2 + bu + c = 0.)
20. A 2 × 2 (real) matrix is a table of the form
a
b
c
d

, where a, b, c, d ∈R. Given
two 2 × 2 matrices (the plural of “matrix” is “matrices”) A =

a
b
c
d

and

38
2. Techniques of Proof
B =

x
y
z
w

, the matrix product AB is deﬁned by
AB =

a
b
c
d
 
x
y
z
w

=

ax + bz
ay + bw
cx + dz
cy + dw

.
(a) Compute the matrix product

2
−3
−1
4
 
5
−1
2
−2

.
(b) Prove that for all 2 × 2 matrices A, B, and C, A(BC) = (AB)C (i.e.,
matrix multiplication is associative).
(c) Prove that there exist 2 × 2 matrices A and B with AB ̸= BA (i.e., in
general, matrix multiplication is not commutative).
21. Let a, b, c ∈R with a ̸= 0. Prove that the equation ax + b = c has a unique
solution in R; i.e., prove that (∃!x ∈R)[ax + b = c].
2.2. Indirect proofs: Proofs by contradiction and contrapositive
2.2.1. Proof by contradiction. In Subsection 1.2.2 and Section 2.1, we have
been concentrating on direct proofs of statements such as P ⇒Q, (∀x)P(x), and
(∃x)P(x). Sometimes, however, it can be diﬃcult to determine how to proceed
using these methods. For example, suppose that we want to prove that
there do not exist integers m, n ∈Z such that 12m + 9n = 100.
Our initial Given-Goal diagram is the following:
Given
Goal
Nothing
¬(∃m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n = 100]
How can we proceed? We’re given nothing, and we are trying to show that
something does not exist. Even rewriting
¬(∃m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n = 100]
as
(∀m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n ̸= 100]
does not seem to help:
Given
Goal
m, n ∈Z arbitrary
12m + 9n ̸= 100
It seems diﬃcult to show that arbitrary integers m and n, about which we know
nothing, have the desired property.
www.ebook3000.com

2.2. Indirect proofs
39
So we’re in a situation where we’re trying to prove that a statement P is true,
but we don’t know how to begin. One thing to try in such a situation is to assume
that ¬P is true, and then try to deduce a statement R such as
(2.10)
0 = 1
or
(2.11)
Q ∧¬Q,
where Q is some (possibly diﬀerent) statement.
A statement such as (2.10) or (2.11) is called a contradiction. More precisely, a
statement R involving statement variables, such as Q ∧¬Q, is a contradiction if
every assignment of truth values to the statement variables in R makes R false; see
Exercise 1.1.4.
If we can ﬁnd such a contradiction R, then we will have a valid proof that the
implication (¬P) ⇒R is true. The truth table in Table 1.5 then tells us that (¬P)
must be false, since (¬P) ⇒R is true and R is false. Hence, we will have proved
that P is true, which is what we wanted all along. This proof technique is called
proof by contradiction, and it is an example of an indirect method of proof.
Table 2.1. Proof by contradiction.
To prove a statement P is true by contradiction.
•
We begin with “Assume ¬P is true.”
•
We deduce a contradiction.
•
We then conclude that P is true.
Let’s use this technique to prove that there are no integers m and n such that
12m + 9n = 100; i.e., ¬(∃m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n = 100]. Since this will be a proof by
contradiction, we will assume
¬¬(∃m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n = 100].
By Exercise 1.1.2a, this is logically equivalent to
(∃m, n ∈Z)[12m + 9n = 100].
We search for a contradiction. Our Given-Goal diagram now takes the following
form:
Given
Goal
m, n ∈Z
12m + 9n = 100
Contradiction
The tricky part to a proof by contradiction is that, while we know that we are
looking for a contradiction, we usually do not know ahead of time what form that
contradiction will take. So we just follow where our Given column takes us logically
and stay on the lookout for a contradiction.
We know 12m + 9n = 100; a logical thing to do is to factor the left-hand side
to obtain
3(4m + 3n) = 100.

40
2. Techniques of Proof
Recalling Deﬁnition 2.1.1, we see that this says that 100 is divisible by 3. But
3 ∤100 by the order properties of the integers, since 3 · 33 = 99 and 3 · 34 = 102.
We’ve found a contradiction; namely, we’ve proved that 3 | 100 and 3 ∤100, i.e., a
statement of the form Q ∧¬Q.
Proposition 2.2.1. There do not exist integers m and n such that 12m+9n = 100.
Proof. Assume for the sake of a contradiction that we have integers m and n such
that 12m + 9n = 100. Then 3(4m + 3n) = 100; i.e., 3 | 100, by deﬁnition. But 100
is not divisible by 3 because every integer k either satisﬁes k ≤33 or k ≥34, and
hence every multiple 3k of 3 satisﬁes 3k ≤99 or 3k ≥102, by the order properties
of the integers. Thus, we have a contradiction. Hence there do not exist integers
m and n such that 12m + 9n = 100.
□
Note that our proof by cases, above, i.e., that every multiple of 3 is either less
than or equal to 99 or greater than or equal to 102, is exactly the type of proof
needed in Example 2.1.2 to show that 5 ∤12.
The next statement we’ll consider deals with rational and irrational numbers.
Recall that a real number z is rational if there exist integers a, b with b ̸= 0 such
that z = a
b . A real number is irrational if it is not rational; thus, to prove (directly)
that a real number z is irrational, one must show that integers with a particular
property do not exist. We’ll now prove that
the sum of a rational number and an irrational number is irrational.
We begin with our initial Given-Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
x, y ∈R arbitrary
x ∈Q
y is irrational
x + y is irrational
Since trying (directly) to show that x + y is irrational amounts to showing
that something does not exist, it again seems reasonable to try an indirect proof by
contradiction. We rewrite our Given-Goal diagram for this approach.
Given
Goal
x, y ∈R arbitrary
x is rational
y is irrational
x + y is rational
Contradiction
Since we know that the sum and product of two rational numbers is rational
(see page 28), we should try to exploit these facts using x and x + y in some way.
Since we are looking for a contradiction, it makes sense to work with y, which is
easy to express in terms of x and x + y:
y = (x + y) −x.
www.ebook3000.com

2.2. Indirect proofs
41
We have the idea of the proof; now we need to express the details carefully.
Proposition 2.2.2. For all real numbers x and y, if x is rational and y is irrational,
then x + y is irrational.
Proof. Let x, y ∈R be arbitrary, and assume that x is rational and y is irrational.
For the sake of a contradiction, also assume that x + y is rational. Note that (−1)x
is rational, since the product of rational numbers is another rational number. Also,
(x + y) + (−1)x is rational, since the sum of rational numbers is another rational
number. Since y = (x + y) + (−1)x, this implies that y is rational, a contradiction,
since we are given that y is irrational. Thus x + y is irrational, as desired.
□
2.2.2. Proving the contrapositive. To motivate our second method of indirect
proof, we will show that
for all n ∈Z, if n2 is odd, then n is odd.
It’s easy to see why we should try to use an indirect proof.
Given
Goal
n ∈Z arbitrary
n2 is odd
n is odd
If we assume that n ∈Z with n2 odd, then by Deﬁnition 1.2.1, we know that
we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that n2 = 2k + 1. However, this does not give us any
information about n. We could use a proof by contradiction here (try it yourself),
but we will instead take advantage of what we know about implications.
Recall from Proposition 1.1.15 that an implication P ⇒Q is logically equivalent
to its contrapositive ¬Q ⇒¬P.
Thus, to prove P ⇒Q, we may choose instead to prove ¬Q ⇒¬P.
The contrapositive of
n2 is odd ⇒n is odd
is
n is even ⇒n2 is even.
We certainly know how to prove this (see Exercise 1.2.1a), and proving this state-
ment serves as a proof of our original statement, since the two statements are logi-
cally equivalent. For practice, however, rather than simply quoting Exercise 1.2.1a,
we’ll provide all details in this proof.
Given
Goal
n ∈Z arbitrary
n is even
n2 is even
Proposition 2.2.3. For all n ∈Z, if n2 is odd, then n is odd.

42
2. Techniques of Proof
Proof. Let n ∈Z be arbitrary. We prove the contrapositive. Assume that n is
even; we show that n2 is also even.
Since n is even, by deﬁnition we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that n = 2k. Then
n2 = (2k)2 = 4k2 = 2(2k2),
and hence n2 is even, also by deﬁnition.
Hence, if n2 is odd, then n is odd.
□
A similar result is also true.
Proposition 2.2.4. For all n ∈Z, if n2 is even, then n is even.
Proof. This is Exercise 2.2.1.
□
2.2.3. Proving or statements. In this section we consider one useful method
of proving a statement which is a disjunction. Consider the following proposition.
Proposition 2.2.5. For all real numbers a and b with b ≥0, if a2 ≥b, then a ≥
√
b
or a ≤−
√
b.
As usual, we begin with a Given-Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
a, b ∈R arbitrary
b ≥0
a2 ≥b
a ≥
√
b or a ≤−
√
b
We could try a proof by contradiction here. Instead, we will once again take
advantage of logic. Recall from Proposition 1.1.11 and Exercise 1.1.2a that a state-
ment of the form P ∨Q is logically equivalent to the statement ¬P ⇒Q. Also
note that P ∨Q is logically equivalent to Q∨P, which is logically equivalent to the
statement ¬Q ⇒P.
Thus, to prove P ∨Q, we may assume ¬P and prove Q, or we may
assume ¬Q and prove P.
Since we are not proving the statement in its original form, we view this method
of proving P ∨Q as an indirect proof. We can also think of this as a proof by cases,
where one of the cases is automatic; for example, if P is true, then P ∨Q is
automatically true; thus, we need only consider the case when P is false, i.e., when
¬P is true. The analogous approach with the roles of P and Q interchanged is also
permitted.
Note that in this case either of the statements a ≥
√
b or a ≤−
√
b can be P. In
general, however, your choice of P and Q will depend on the statements themselves
and whatever is easier to work with. The new Given-Goal diagram follows.
www.ebook3000.com

2.2. Indirect proofs
43
Given
Goal
a, b ∈R arbitrary
b ≥0
a2 ≥b
a ̸≥
√
b (i.e., a <
√
b)
a ≤−
√
b
To deal with these inequalities, it often helps to express them by moving all
terms to one side. Thus we have a2 −b ≥0, so we can manipulate by factoring
(remember that b ∈R with b ≥0):
(a −
√
b)(a +
√
b) ≥0.
We are also given that a−
√
b < 0, so it’s now easy to see how this proof should go.
Proof of Proposition 2.2.5. Let a, b ∈R be arbitrary with b ≥0, and assume
that a2 ≥b. We prove that a ≥
√
b or a ≤−
√
b (note that
√
b makes sense since
b ≥0). If a ≥
√
b, then we’re done, so assume that a ̸≥
√
b; i.e., a <
√
b.
Since a2 ≥b, we know that a2 −b ≥0, and hence (a −
√
b)(a +
√
b) ≥0. Since
a <
√
b, we know a−
√
b < 0. Since (a−
√
b)(a+
√
b) ≥0 and a−
√
b < 0, it follows
that a +
√
b ≤0. To see this, note that if a +
√
b > 0, then (a −
√
b)(a +
√
b) < 0
by an order property, a contradiction. Hence a ≤−
√
b, as desired.
□
Exercises 2.2
1. Prove Proposition 2.2.4, that for all integers n, if n2 is even, then n is even,
using deﬁnitions.
2. Prove that there are no integers n such that n is both even and odd.
3. Prove there are no integers m and n such that 8m + 26n = 1.
4. Prove there are no integers m and n such that m2 = 4n + 2. (HINT: Use
Proposition 2.2.4.)
5. Prove there are no integers m and n such that m2 = 4n + 3.
6. In this problem, you may use the fact (which we will prove in Chapter 6) that
an integer n is not divisible by 3 if and only if there exists an integer k such
that n = 3k + 1 or n = 3k + 2.
(a) Prove that for all integers n, if 3 | n2, then 3 | n.
(b) Prove that for all integers i and j, if 3 | (i2 + j2), then 3 | i and 3 | j.
7. Prove that for all a, b ∈Z+, if a | b, then a ≤b.
8. Let a and b be positive integers. Prove that if a | b and b | a, then a = b.
9. Determine whether each statement is true or false. If true, then prove it. If
false, then provide a counterexample.
(a) The sum of two irrational numbers is irrational.
(b) The product of two irrational numbers is irrational.

44
2. Techniques of Proof
(c) The product of a nonzero rational number and an irrational number is
irrational.
10. Using deﬁnitions and the method of Subsection 2.2.3, prove that for all integers
m and n, if mn is even, then m is even or n is even.
11. Prove that for all real numbers x, x2 + 3x −4 > 0 if and only if x < −4 or
x > 1.
12. Prove that for all real numbers x and y, if x3 = y3, then x = y. (Your proof
should not mention anything called a “cube root”. Use Exercise 2.1.8.)
13. Let x ∈R and assume that for all ε > 0, |x| < ε. Prove that x = 0. (HINT: Use
a proof by contradiction, and ﬁnd a speciﬁc ε > 0 contradicting the hypothesis.)
2.3. Two important theorems
So far we have considered examples of direct and indirect proofs, taking advantage
of the logical equivalence of statements, when necessary. The examples we have
considered have been of fairly straightforward mathematical statements, since our
primary goal has been to illustrate diﬀerent techniques of proof.
In this section, we prove two very important facts, that
√
2 is irrational and
that there are inﬁnitely many prime numbers. These proofs are more sophisticated
than the others we have considered up to now, but the basic setup of these indirect
proofs follows the same patterns as the techniques we have discussed.
For the ﬁrst result, note that the statement
√
2 is irrational
is a negative one:
(2.12)
¬(∃p, q ∈Z+)
p
q =
√
2

.
(Note that since
√
2 > 0, we may take the universe for p and q to be Z+, rather
than Z.) Because the statement we wish to prove is negative, it makes sense to
try a proof by contradiction. Assuming the negation of statement (2.12) yields the
following Given-Goal diagram:
Given
Goal
p, q ∈Z+
p
q =
√
2
Contradiction
Theorem 2.3.1.
√
2 is irrational.
Proof. Assume for the sake of a contradiction that
√
2 is rational. By deﬁnition,
we may ﬁx p, q ∈Z+ such that
p
q =
√
2, and by removing common factors if
necessary, we may also assume that p and q do not have any common positive
www.ebook3000.com

2.3. Two important theorems
45
integer factors other than 1. (Here we are assuming that every fraction can be put
in “least terms”.) Then p2
q2 = 2, and hence
(2.13)
p2 = 2q2.
Hence the integer p2 is even, by Deﬁnition 1.2.1. It follows by Proposition 2.2.4
that p is also even. Thus, again by Deﬁnition 1.2.1, we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that
p = 2k. Substituting into (2.13), we have (2k)2 = 2q2, or 4k2 = 2q2. By cancellation
in Z (see Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3), we have 2k2 = q2.
Hence q2 is even, by deﬁnition, and again by Proposition 2.2.4, q is also even.
But then p and q are both even, and so p and q have 2 as a common factor. This
is a contradiction, since we assumed that p and q had no common positive integer
factors other than 1.
Hence
√
2 is irrational.
□
The argument that, for example,
√
3 is irrational is similar. See Exercise 2.3.1.
Our next example of an indirect proof, that there are inﬁnitely many prime
numbers, is due to Euclid. In order to prove this result, we will need three pieces of
information: the deﬁnition of “prime number”, the deﬁnition of “inﬁnitely many”,
and the existence part of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, a result with
which you may already be familiar about factoring positive integers as products of
primes. We review these statements below.
Deﬁnition 2.3.2. The positive integer p is prime if
p > 1 and (∀m, n ∈Z+)[p = mn ⇒(m = 1 ∨n = 1)].
Theorem 2.3.3 (Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic). Every positive integer
greater than 1 can be written as a product of primes. Furthermore, this product of
primes is unique, except for the order in which the factors appear.
Note that we consider a prime number to itself be a “product of primes” with
a single factor. As another example, note that the unique prime factorization of
1119250 is
1119250 = 2 · 5 · 5 · 5 · 11 · 11 · 37.
The only prime factors of 1119250 are 2, 5, 11, and 37, and the only factorization of
1119250 in terms of these primes, written in nondecreasing order, is the one given
above.
Recall from our discussion in Subsection 2.1.5 that a proof of the Fundamental
Theorem of Arithmetic will have two parts: a proof of existence and a proof of
uniqueness. We will prove the existence part of Theorem 2.3.3 (i.e., the fact that
every positive integer greater than 1 can be written as a product of primes) in
Section 3.2. We prove uniqueness (which is not needed here) in Section 6.3.
We should note why we may postpone this proof. We are in essence making a
promise that the proof of Theorem 2.3.3 does not depend on the statement we are
currently proving, in this case, Theorem 2.3.4. If it did, then we would have what
is known as a “circular argument”, which is not logically valid and hence is not a
proof at all. In fact, the proof of the existence part of Theorem 2.3.3 requires a
proof technique called strong induction, and we could stop and present this proof

46
2. Techniques of Proof
technique now. By choosing to wait until Section 3.2 to prove the existence part
of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, we are focusing on the result we are
currently interested in, namely, Euclid’s theorem that there are inﬁnitely many
primes.
Our proof will be an indirect proof by contradiction and will emphasize the
relationship between primality and factorization.
Theorem 2.3.4 (Euclid). There are inﬁnitely many prime numbers.
Proof. Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that there do not exist inﬁnitely
many prime numbers, i.e., that there exist ﬁnitely many prime numbers.
This
means that we can form a complete list of the prime numbers:
p1, p2, . . . , pk,
where k ∈Z+ is the number of primes and 1 < p1 < p2 < · · · < pk. (Note that, for
example, p1 = 2, p2 = 3, p3 = 5, etc.).
Consider the positive integer
n = p1 · p2 · · · · · pk + 1.
Note that n > pk > 1 by the order axioms.
Thus n is not prime, by our
assumption that p1 < p2 < · · · < pk yields a complete list of all prime numbers. By
the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 2.3.3), some prime must divide
n, since n is a product of primes. Hence we can ﬁx an integer j, 1 ≤j ≤k, such
that pj divides n, and it then follows by deﬁnition that we may ﬁx m ∈N such
that n = pjm.
Thus we have pjm = p1 · p2 · · · · · pk + 1. Rewriting this gives
pjm −p1 · p2 · · · · · pk = 1,
or
pjm −pjℓ= 1,
where ℓis the product of all the primes in the list p1, p2, . . . , pk except for pj (note
that if k = 1, then ℓ= 1). Thus
pj(m −ℓ) = 1,
and hence pj | 1, which is a contradiction, since pj > 1.
Hence there must exist inﬁnitely many prime numbers.
□
Exercises 2.3
1. Prove that
√
3 is irrational. (HINT: You will need the result of Exercise 2.2.6a.)
2. Prove that for all x ∈R, at least one of
√
3 −x and
√
3 + x is irrational.
3. Prove that log2 3 is irrational. (NOTE: Recall that log2 3 is the real number
y such that 2y = 3. You may assume, without proof, the familiar “rules of
exponents”.)
4. In Theorem 2.3.1, what is the purpose of assuming that p and q do not have
any common positive integer factors other than 1? How does the proof change
if we do not make this assumption?
www.ebook3000.com

2.4. Proofs of statements involving mixed quantiﬁers
47
2.4. Proofs of statements involving mixed quantiﬁers
The statement of Euclid’s theorem, that there exist inﬁnitely many prime numbers,
is another example of “hidden quantiﬁers”. As we have stated it, the theorem may
sound existential to you, i.e., like it has the form (∃n)P(n). However, the logical
form of the statement is actually more complicated; it is a two-quantiﬁer statement,
where the type of quantiﬁer alternates (here, from ∀to ∃):
(∀n ∈Z+)(∃m ∈Z+)[m ≥n and m is prime].
We also say that this statement has mixed quantiﬁers.
Another example of a statement hiding a second quantiﬁer is “There is a small-
est positive integer.” If we unravel this statement, it says “there is a positive integer
x such that x is less than or equal to any positive integer”; i.e.,
(2.14)
(∃x ∈Z+)(∀y ∈Z+)[x ≤y].
Equation (2.14) is a true statement. To prove it, we begin by noting that the
outermost quantiﬁer is ∃; this tells us that we must give a particular example of a
positive integer x which satisﬁes
(∀y ∈Z+)[x ≤y].
This is easy: note that 1 ∈Z+ satisﬁes (∀y ∈Z+)[1 ≤y].
Note also that, as in our previous discussion of quantiﬁers, the universe matters.
If we change (2.14) to
(∃x ∈Z)(∀y ∈Z)[x ≤y],
then this statement is false. To prove this, we must prove that
¬(∃x ∈Z)(∀y ∈Z)[x ≤y]
is true, i.e., that
(∀x ∈Z)(∃y ∈Z)[x > y]
is true.
Again, the way we begin the proof is dictated by the outermost quantiﬁer.
Given
Goal
x ∈Z arbitrary
(∃y ∈Z)[x > y]
So, given x ∈Z arbitrary, we must demonstrate a particular integer y which is
strictly less than x. Note that y = x −1 is an integer and x > y since x > x −1.
We have proved that (∀x ∈Z)(∃y ∈Z)[x > y] is true, and hence the statement
(∃x ∈Z)(∀y ∈Z)[x ≤y] is false.
Regardless of the number of quantiﬁers in a quantiﬁed statement
(Q1x1)(Q2x2) · · · (Qkxk)[· · · ],

48
2. Techniques of Proof
where Q1, Q2, . . . , Qk are quantiﬁers, we always begin with the outermost quantiﬁer
and “work our way in”. When we see a string of identical quantiﬁers, such as in
the statements
(∀x)(∀y)P(x, y) or (∃x)(∃y)(∃z)Q(x, y, z),
then the order of these quantiﬁers doesn’t matter. For example,
(∀x)(∀y)P(x, y) and (∀y)(∀x)P(x, y)
have the same logical meaning, and both can be thought of as (∀x, y)P(x, y). Sim-
ilarly (considering one possible reordering),
(∃x)(∃y)(∃z)Q(x, y, z) and (∃z)(∃x)(∃y)Q(x, y, z)
have the same logical meaning, and both can be thought of as (∃x, y, z)Q(x, y, z).
However, we must be careful with mixed quantiﬁers: in general
order of mixed quantiﬁers matters!
We can easily see that this must be the case by comparing the following two “com-
mon sense” statements. Let S be the set of all students at your college or university.
The statement
(∀x ∈S)(∃y ∈S)[x and y are friends]
says that every student at your college or university is friends with some student
at your college or university. This is not the same statement as
(∃y ∈S)(∀x ∈S)[x and y are friends],
which says that some student at your college or university is friends with every
student at your college or university!
In addition, moving quantiﬁers within a statement can change the truth value
of that statement. For example, consider the statement
(2.15)
(∀x)[(∀y)(y > 0) ⇒x > 0],
where the quantiﬁers range over R. Statement (2.15) is true, since given an arbitrary
x ∈R, the statement (∀y)(y > 0) is false in R, so (∀y)(y > 0) ⇒x > 0 is true in R.
However, the statement
(∀x)(∀y)[y > 0 ⇒x > 0]
is false in R; i.e.,
(∃x)(∃y)[y > 0 ∧x ≤0]
is true in R, since x = −1 and y = 3 satisfy y > 0 ∧x ≤0.
While there do exist rules for moving quantiﬁers around (see [10]), we will not
be employing them.
Don’t move quantiﬁers around within mathematical statements!
Example 2.4.1. Prove that
(2.16)
(∀x ∈R)(∃y ∈R)[x + y = 0]
is a true statement and that
(2.17)
(∃y ∈R)(∀x ∈R)[x + y = 0]
is a false statement.
www.ebook3000.com

2.4. Proofs of statements involving mixed quantiﬁers
49
Proof. First note that statement (2.16) is one of our Basic Properties of Real
Numbers 2.1.4 and hence a true statement. More formally, when x ∈R is arbitrary,
y = −x = (−1)x satisﬁes x+y = x+(−x) = 0. Hence (∀x ∈R)(∃y ∈R)[x+y = 0]
is a true statement.
Next, we prove (2.17) is false; i.e., we prove (∀y ∈R)(∃x ∈R)[x + y ̸= 0] is
true. Let y ∈R be arbitrary. We must prove that (∃x ∈R)[x + y ̸= 0]. Note that
if we let x = −y + 1, which is a real number, then
x + y = (−y + 1) + y = 1 ̸= 0,
as desired. Hence (∃y ∈R)(∀x ∈R)[x + y = 0] is false.
□♦
Gven a formula (Q1x1)(Q2x2) · · · (Qkxk)P(x1, x2, . . . , xk), where the predicate
P(x1, x2, . . . , xk) is quantiﬁer-free, an alternation of quantiﬁers means a change
from ∀to ∃or vice versa within (Q1x1)(Q2x2) · · · (Qkxk). In a way that can be
made mathematically precise (see [16]), the more alternations of quantiﬁers such
a statement has, the more complicated the statement is. Mathematical concepts
whose deﬁnitions involve mixed quantiﬁers are very common in calculus and real
analysis. For example, the statement that there is a rational number between any
two distinct real numbers is expressed as follows:
(∀x, y ∈R)(∃z ∈Q)[x < y ⇒x < z < y].
An important concept involving mixed quantiﬁers that is studied in calculus
is the notion of limit. Working informally for the moment, beginning students in
calculus often think of the statement limx→a f(x) = L as meaning that the values
of the function f get “closer and closer” to the number L when the value x gets
“closer and closer” to the number a. Unfortunately, this way of thinking about a
limit is not only imprecise, it is incorrect. The precise deﬁnition of limit, which has
a daunting two alternations of quantiﬁers, is given below.
Deﬁnition 2.4.2. Let f be a function of a single variable deﬁned for all real
numbers in an open interval containing the real number a, except possibly at a
itself, and let L be a real number.
Then the limit of f at a is L, in notation,
lim
x→a f(x) = L if
(∀ε > 0)(∃δ > 0)(∀x)[0 < |x −a| < δ ⇒|f(x) −L| < ε].
(Here, all quantiﬁers range over the real numbers.)
To make sense of this deﬁnition, recall that the inequality |x −a| < δ says
that the distance between the numbers x and a is less than δ, i.e., that x is within
a distance of δ from a. Peeling oﬀthe quantiﬁers one at a time, Deﬁnition 2.4.2
says that for any (think: tiny) distance ε > 0, we can ﬁnd a (think: small enough)
distance δ > 0 such that if x ̸= a is any real number within a distance of δ from a,
then the value of the function f(x) is within a distance of ε of L. See Figure 2.1.
Example 2.4.3. Let
f(x) =

4x −3
if x ̸= 2,
1
if x = 2.
Prove that lim
x→2 f(x) = 5.

50
2. Techniques of Proof
L
L+ε
L−ε
a
y = f(x)
a+δ
a−δ
Figure 2.1. lim
x→a f(x) = L.
Deﬁnition 2.4.2 tells us what the Given-Goal diagram should look like.
Given
Goal
ε > 0 arbitrary
(∃δ > 0)(∀x)[0 < |x −2| < δ ⇒|f(x) −5| < ε]
So, given ε > 0, we must ﬁnd a real number δ > 0 such that
(∀x)[0 < |x −2| < δ ⇒|f(x) −5| < ε].
We’ll work backwards. Suppose x ∈R is arbitrary. We want |f(x) −5| < ε. We
may assume that x ̸= 2, since we will ultimately be assuming that 0 < |x −2|.
Hence, we may assume that f(x) = 4x −3. This means that we want
|(4x −3) −5| < ε;
i.e.,
(2.18)
|4x −8| < ε.
We want the δ we are looking for to satisfy |x −2| < δ ⇒|f(x) −5| < ε. This
tells us to look for an expression involving |x −2|. Equation (2.18) is equivalent to
|4(x −2)| < ε, or 4|x −2| < ε, by Exercise 2.1.13b. Thus, we need |x −2| < ε
4, and
we should try δ = ε
4.
Proof. We prove that lim
x→2 f(x) = 5. Let ε > 0 be arbitrary. We show
(∃δ > 0)(∀x)[0 < |x −2| < δ ⇒|f(x) −5| < ε].
Consider δ = ε
4, which is positive, since ε is. We must show
(∀x)[0 < |x −2| < δ ⇒|f(x) −5| < ε].
www.ebook3000.com

2.4. Proofs of statements involving mixed quantiﬁers
51
Let x ∈R be arbitrary, and assume that 0 < |x −2| < δ; i.e., 0 < |x −2| < ε
4. We
must show |f(x) −5| < ε. To see this, note that since x ̸= 2,
|f(x) −5| = |(4x −3) −5|
= |4x −8|
= |4(x −2)|
= 4|x −2|,
by properties of absolute value. Thus, since |x −2| < ε
4,
|f(x) −5| = 4|x −2|
< 4
ε
4

,
by an order property. Hence |f(x)−5| < ε, as desired. It follows that lim
x→2 f(x) = 5,
by Deﬁnition 2.4.2.
□♦
The formal study of limits is part of a course in real analysis.
Exercises 2.4
1. Determine whether each statement is true or false, and prove or disprove, as
appropriate.
(a) (∀x ∈R)(∃y ∈R)[xy = 1].
(b) (∃x ∈R)(∀y ∈R)[xy = 1].
(c) (∃x ∈R)(∀y ∈R)[xy > 0].
(d) (∀x ∈R)(∃y ∈R)[xy > 0].
(e) (∀x ∈R)(∃y ∈R)(∀z ∈R)[xy = xz].
(f) (∃y ∈R)(∀x ∈R)(∃z ∈R)[xy = xz].
(g) (∀x ∈Q)(∃y ∈Z)[xy ∈Z].
(h) (∃x ∈Z+)(∀y ∈Z+)[y ≤x].
(i) (∀y ∈Z+)(∃x ∈Z+)[y ≤x].
(j) (∀x, y ∈Z)[x < y =⇒(∃z ∈Z)[x < z < y]].
(k) (∀x, y ∈Q)[x < y =⇒(∃z ∈Q)[x < z < y]].
2. Prove that
lim
x→−1
2
(4x −1) = −3.
3. Let
f(x) =

5 −2x
if x ̸= 4,
23
if x = 4.
Prove that lim
x→4 f(x) = −3.
4. Prove that there exists a real number M such that for all x ∈R with 1 < x < 3,

5x2 −2x −4
5(x2 + 1)
 ≤M.

52
2. Techniques of Proof
5. Assume that for every real number x, there is an integer N such that N > x.3
Prove that for every positive real number ε, there exists a positive integer N
such that for all n ≥N, 1
n < ε.
3This statement follows from a fact about real numbers called the Archimedean Property, which
we prove in Chapter 9.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 3
Induction
3.1. Principle of Mathematical Induction
Thus far we have been proving results about the integers using only the assumptions
in the Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3. Up to now, any direct proof of a statement
of the form (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) has begun with the assumption “Let n ∈Z+ be
arbitrary.”
We consider now a new proof technique, called proof by induction,
for proving a statement about all positive integers. The statement of the Principle
of Mathematical Induction is logically complicated, so we have typeset in bold the
words showing the logical structure of this statement.
Theorem 3.1.1 (Principle of Mathematical Induction (PMI)).
Let P(n) be a statement about the positive integer n, so that n is a free variable
in P(n).
Suppose the following:
(PMI 1) The statement P(1) is true.
(PMI 2) For all positive integers m,
if P(m) is true, then P(m + 1) is true.
Then, for all positive integers n, P(n) is true.
Notice that, given the statement P(n), a proof of (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) consists of
ﬁrst proving the two statements (PMI 1) and (PMI 2) and then concluding (by
induction) the statement (∀n ∈Z+)P(n). Why should this conclusion be logically
valid?
Well, (PMI 1) establishes that P(1) is true, and (PMI 2) establishes that
P(1) ⇒P(2).
Thus by modus ponens, P(2) is true. But (PMI 2) also establishes that
P(2) ⇒P(3).
53

54
3. Induction
Thus, from P(2) and P(2) ⇒P(3), we conclude P(3) is true, etc.
PMI says that the “etc.” is valid; i.e., it says that we can reach any positive
integer n by starting at 1 and successively adding 1. This is quite a reasonable
statement about the positive integers. However, one can show that it is impossible
to prove PMI from the Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3. Thus, we will accept
PMI as an additional axiom for Z+ (in fact, we are adding inﬁnitely many axioms,
one for each statement P(n)). It is possible to prove PMI from other statements
about the positive integers, such as the Well-Ordering Principle, which we discuss
in Section 6.1, but then we would need to assume those statements as axioms.
Several of the mathematical statements we will prove by induction are familiar
summation formulas, which we will want to express using “sigma notation”.
Notation 3.1.2. Suppose that i ≤n are integers and ai, ai+1, . . . , an are real
numbers. Then
n
	
k=i
ak = ai + ai+1 + · · · + an.
For our ﬁrst example of a proof using PMI, we will prove a summation formula
you may have seen before, perhaps when discussing Riemann sums in calculus. We
will prove by induction that for all n ∈Z+,
n
	
k=1
k = n(n + 1)
2
;
i.e., 1 + 2 + · · · + n = n(n + 1)
2
.
For example, when n = 4, note that
4
	
k=1
k = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10
and
n(n + 1)
2
= 4(5)
2
= 10,
so the statement is true when n = 4. To prove the statement is true for all posi-
tive integers n, however, we will use PMI. In this ﬁrst example, we will show our
scratchwork in great detail.
Scratchwork. Given n ∈Z+, we’ll let P(n) be the statement
n
	
k=1
k = n(n + 1)
2
.
Note that P(n) is a statement about n; it asserts that n has a particular property.
The Principle of Mathematical Induction says that if we can prove that the Base
Case (PMI 1) is true and that the Inductive Step (PMI 2) is true, then we may
conclude that (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) is true, which is what we want.
Base Case: Show P(1) is true.
P(1) is the statement
1
	
k=1
k = 1(1 + 1)
2
,
www.ebook3000.com

3.1. Principle of Mathematical Induction
55
and our task is to prove that P(1) is true.
Thus, we must compute both
quantities
1
	
k=1
k
and
1(1 + 1)
2
,
individually, and then we must verify that these quantities are equal. Note
that
1
	
k=1
k = 1
by deﬁnition. Also note that
1(1 + 1)
2
= 2
2 = 1.
So we see that
1
	
k=1
k = 1(1 + 1)
2
;
i.e., P(1) is true.
Inductive Step: Prove statement (PMI 2). Let’s begin with a Given-Goal di-
agram
Given
Goal
m ∈Z+ arbitrary
P(m) is true
P(m + 1) is true
which we rewrite as
Given
Goal
m ∈Z+ arbitrary
m
	
k=1
k = m(m + 1)
2
m+1
	
k=1
k = (m + 1)((m + 1) + 1)
2
We will use the Given (called the Inductive Hypothesis), which says that
(3.1)
m
	
k=1
k = m(m + 1)
2
,
to help us prove our Goal, which says that
m+1
	
k=1
k = (m + 1)((m + 1) + 1)
2
.
We may rewrite our Goal as
m+1
	
k=1
k = (m + 1)(m + 2)
2
.

56
3. Induction
To prove an equality, we must pick one side and attempt to manipulate
legally until we reach the other side.
We’ll start with
m+1
	
k=1
k. The key point in the proof is that, since m ∈Z+,
m+1
	
k=1
k = 1 + 2 + · · · + (m + 1)
= (1 + 2 + · · · + m) + (m + 1);
i.e.,
(3.2)
m+1
	
k=1
k =

 m
	
k=1
k

+ (m + 1),
by the associative property of addition. Equation (3.2) shows us clearly where
the Inductive Hypothesis (3.1) will be useful; namely, we may replace m
k=1 k
by m(m+1)
2
. From here, the computation should be routine.
In our formal writeup of this proof by induction, pay close attention to the
format of the proof, which we’ll use in all proofs by induction.
Proposition 3.1.3. For all n ∈Z+,
n
	
k=1
k = n(n + 1)
2
.
Proof. Given n ∈Z+, let P(n) denote the statement
n
	
k=1
k = n(n + 1)
2
.
We prove (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) by induction on n.
Base Case: We must show that P(1) is true.
Note that P(1) is the statement
1
	
k=1
k = 1(1 + 1)
2
.
Since 1
k=1 k = 1 by deﬁnition and since
1(1+1)
2
=
2
2 = 1, we see that
1
k=1 k = 1(1+1)
2
. Hence, P(1) is true.
Inductive Step: Let m ∈Z+ and assume that P(m) is true; i.e., assume the
Inductive Hypothesis
m
	
k=1
k = m(m + 1)
2
.
We must show that P(m + 1) is true; i.e., we must show that
m+1
	
k=1
k = (m + 1)((m + 1) + 1)
2
= (m + 1)(m + 2)
2
.
www.ebook3000.com

3.1. Principle of Mathematical Induction
57
Note that
m+1
	
k=1
k = (1 + 2 + · · · + m) + (m + 1)
=

 m
	
k=1
k

+ (m + 1)
= m(m + 1)
2
+ (m + 1)
by the Inductive Hypothesis.
Thus, by adding fractions,
m+1
	
k=1
k = m(m + 1) + 2(m + 1)
2
= (m + 1)(m + 2)
2
(factoring (m + 1) in the numerator),
as desired. Hence P(m + 1) is true.
Thus, by the Principle of Mathematical Induction, we have proved that for all
n ∈Z+,
n
	
k=1
k = n(n + 1)
2
.
□
Note that the idea of proof by induction is the same idea used when making an
“inductive” or “recursive” deﬁnition. For example, the familiar function 2n, where
n ≥0 is an integer, is deﬁned by recursion as follows:
20 = 1
and
for all m ≥0,
2m+1 = 2 · 2m.
Note that, just as with a proof by induction, a recursive deﬁnition has a base case
(sometimes more than one) and an inductive step, which in a recursive deﬁnition is
often called the recursion step. Not surprisingly, one often uses proof by induction
to prove statements about concepts that are deﬁned recursively.
The factorial function n! is also deﬁned by recursion on n ≥0:
0! = 1
and
for all m ≥0, (m + 1)! = (m + 1)m!.

58
3. Induction
For example (showing all steps in the recursion),
5! = 5 · 4!
= 5 · 4 · 3!
= 5 · 4 · 3 · 2!
= 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1!
= 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1 · 0!
= 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1,
since 0! = 1; i.e.,
5! = 120.
Notice also that in a recursive deﬁnition or proof by induction, the base case
need not correspond to n = 1, as it did in Proposition 3.1.3, nor to n = 0, as it did
in the recursive deﬁnitions above. Thus, we can state a more general version of the
Principle of Mathematical Induction.
Theorem 3.1.4 (Principle of Mathematical Induction (modiﬁed)).
Let P(n) be
a statement about the integer n, where n is free in P(n).
Suppose that there is an integer n0 such that:
(PMI 1) The statement P(n0) is true.
(PMI 2) For all integers m ≥n0,
if P(m) is true, then P(m + 1) is true.
Then, for all integers n ≥n0, P(n) is true.
For our next example, we will prove that
for all integers n ≥10, n3 ≤2n.
The fact that 2n, n ≥0, is deﬁned by recursion on n tells us that it is reasonable to
try induction on n ≥10. We do the scratchwork for the inductive step; you should
verify for yourself why we chose n = 10 as the base case.
Scratchwork: The Given-Goal diagram for the Inductive Step is below; we have
identiﬁed the Inductive Hypothesis by (IH).
Given
Goal
m ∈Z+
m ≥10
m3 ≤2m (IH)
(m + 1)3 ≤2m+1
We begin by examining (m + 1)3 and 2m+1.
2m+1 = 2 · 2m ≥2m3
by the Inductive Hypothesis, and
(m + 1)3 = m3 + 3m2 + 3m + 1.
Working backwards, we want to argue that
2m3 ≥m3 + 3m2 + 3m + 1,
(3.3)
www.ebook3000.com

3.1. Principle of Mathematical Induction
59
so it will suﬃce to argue that
m3 ≥3m2 + 3m + 1.
(3.4)
Throughout we’ll make use of the order properties in Basic Properties of Inte-
gers 1.2.3. Note that since 1 ≤m, we have 1 ≤m ≤m2, and hence
3m2 + 3m + 1 ≤3m2 + 3m2 + m2 = 7m2.
Also, 7 ≤m and m2 ≥0, so 7m2 ≤m3. Thus we have
3m2 + 3m + 1 ≤3m2 + 3m2 + m2 = 7m2 ≤m3,
establishing (3.4).
We are ready to write down the formal proof.
Proposition 3.1.5. For all integers n ≥10, n3 ≤2n.
Proof. Let n ∈Z with n ≥10, and let P(n) denote the statement
n3 ≤2n.
We prove by induction on n that for all integers n ≥10, P(n) is true.
Base Case: We must show that 103 ≤210.
Note that 103 = 1000 and 210 = 1024, so the Base Case holds; i.e.,
103 ≤210.
Inductive Step: Let m ∈Z with m ≥10 and assume that m3 ≤2m. We must
prove that (m + 1)3 ≤2m+1.
To see this, ﬁrst note that since 1 ≤m, 1 ≤m ≤m2.
In addition,
7m2 ≤m3, since 7 ≤m and m2 ≥0. Thus,
(m + 1)3 = m3 + 3m2 + 3m + 1
≤m3 + 3m2 + 3m2 + m2
= m3 + 7m2
≤m3 + m3
= 2m3
≤2 · 2m,
by the Inductive Hypothesis.
Hence, (m + 1)3 ≤2m+1, as desired.
Thus, by PMI, we have that for all integers n ≥10, n3 ≤2n.
□
Exercises 3.1
All exercises should be proved using induction.
1. Prove that for all positive integers n,
n
	
k=1
k2 = 12 + 22 + 32 + · · · + n2 = n(n + 1)(2n + 1)
6
.

60
3. Induction
2. Prove that for all integers n ≥0,
n
	
k=0
2k = 1 + 2 + 22 + · · · + 2n = 2n+1 −1.
3. Prove that for all positive integers n,
n
	
k=1
(2k −1) = 1 + 3 + 5 + · · · + (2n −1) = n2.
4. Prove that for all positive integers n,
n
	
k=1
1
k(k + 1) =
1
1(2) +
1
2(3) +
1
3(4) + · · · +
1
n(n + 1) =
n
n + 1.
5. Prove that for all positive integers n,
n
	
k=1
(2k −1)2 = (1)2 + (3)2 + (5)2 + · · · + (2n −1)2 = 4n3 −n
3
.
6. Conjecture a formula for n
k=1(−1)kk2, and then prove the formula is correct
using induction.
7. Prove that for all positive integers n, n < 10n.
8. Prove that for all positive integers n ≥5, n2 < 2n.
9. Prove that for all positive integers n ≥7, ( 4
3)n > n.
10. Prove that for all positive integers n ≥4, 2n < n!.
11. Prove that for all positive integers n, n3 + 8n + 9 is divisible by 3.
12. Prove that for all positive integers n, 4n −1 is divisible by 3.
13. Prove that for all positive integers n, 32n −1 is divisible by 8.
14. Let a1 = 2, and let an+1 = 1
2(an + 3) for all n ≥1. (We are essentially deﬁning
a function a(n) = an for n ∈Z+ by recursion.)
(a) Prove that for all positive integers n, an < an+1.
(b) Without using part (c) below, prove that for all positive integers n, an < 3.
(c) Prove that for all positive integers n, an = 3 −
1
2n−1 .
15. Let r ∈R with r ̸= 1. Prove that
n−1
	
k=0
rk = 1 + r + · · · + rn−1 = 1 −rn
1 −r .
(For this notation to make sense, we “bend the rules” and declare 00 = 1.)
16. Prove Bernoulli’s Inequalty: Let x > −1. Then for all n ∈Z+, (1+x)n ≥1+nx.
17. The Fibonacci numbers fn, n ∈Z+, are deﬁned recursively by the formulas
f1 = 1, f2 = 1, and fn = fn−1 + fn−2 for all n ≥3.
(a) Find the ﬁrst ten Fibonacci numbers f1, . . . , f10.
(b) Compute f1 + f2, f1 + f2 + f3, f1 + f2 + f3 + f4, f1 + f2 + f3 + f4 + f5.
(c) Conjecture a formula for the sum f1 + · · · + fn of the ﬁrst n Fibonacci
numbers, where n ≥1, and then prove the formula is correct using induc-
tion.
(d) Use induction to prove that for all integers k ≥1, 5 | f5k.
www.ebook3000.com

3.2. Strong induction
61
18. Given integers k, n ≥0 with k ≤n, we deﬁne the binomial coeﬃcient
n
k

by
n
k

=
n!
k!(n −k)!.
(a) Prove that for all integers n, k with 1 ≤k ≤n,
n+1
k

=
n
k

+
 n
k−1

. (This
part does not require induction.)
(b) Use part (a) to prove by induction on n that for all integers n ≥0, for all
integers k with 0 ≤k ≤n,
n
k

is an integer.
19. Let x, y ∈R. Prove the binomial theorem: for all integers n ≥1,
(x + y)n =
n
	
k=0
n
k

xn−kyk
=
n
0

xn +
n
1

xn−1y +
n
2

xn−2y2
+ · · · +

n
n −2

x2yn−2 +

n
n −1

xyn−1 +
n
n

yn.
20. The following is a well-known example of a “proof” that all horses are the same
color.
Let P(n) denote the statement “For every set of n horses, all the horses
in the set are the same color.” We “prove” (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) by induction on n.
Note that P(1) is true, since for any set containing a single horse, all the horses
in that set have the same color, namely the color of that single horse. Next, let
m ≥1 and assume that P(m) is true, i.e., that for any set of m horses, all the
horses in the set are the same color. We prove that P(m+1) is true. Let S be a
set of m + 1 horses named x1, x2, . . . , xm+1. Now the horses x1, x2, . . . , xm are
a set of m horses, so by the Inductive Hypothesis, all the horses x1, x2, . . . , xm
in this set have the same color. Furthermore, the horses x1, x3, . . . , xm+1 (i.e.,
all the horses except for horse x2) are a set of m horses, so by the Inductive
Hypothesis, all the horses x1, x3, . . . , xm+1 in this set have the same color. It
follows that all of the m + 1 horses x1, x2, . . . , xm+1 are the same color, since
they are all the same color as horse x1. Thus, P(m + 1) is true. It follows by
PMI that P(n) is true for all n ∈Z+; i.e., all horses have the same color.
What’s wrong with this proof?
3.2. Strong induction
Recall that, informally, a sequence is a list of real numbers.
More precisely, a
sequence is given by a function deﬁned on the positive integers. For example, the
function a(n) = 1
n, for n ≥1, deﬁnes the sequence
1, 1
2, 1
3, . . . .
In general we write an, rather than a(n), and a sequence
a1, a2, a3, . . .
is denoted by {an}∞
n=1.

62
3. Induction
Consider the following recursively deﬁned sequence {an}∞
n=1.
a1 = 1,
a2 = 5,
for all n ≥2, an+1 = an + 2an−1.
Let’s try to guess a formula for an. Computing the ﬁrst few integers in the sequence
shows that
a3 = a2 + 2a1 = 5 + 2(1) = 7,
a4 = a3 + 2a2 = 7 + 2(5) = 17,
a5 = a4 + 2a3 = 17 + 2(7) = 31,
a6 = a5 + 2a4 = 31 + 2(17) = 65.
Note that these numbers are almost, but not quite, powers of 2:
a1 = 1 = 21 −1,
a2 = 5 = 22 + 1,
a3 = 7 = 23 −1,
a4 = 17 = 24 + 1,
a5 = 31 = 25 −1,
a6 = 65 = 26 + 1.
Thus, a reasonable guess is that
an = 2n + (−1)n
for n ≥1.
This formula is called a closed formula for the recursively deﬁned sequence; i.e., it
describes an as a function of n.
How can we prove that our closed formula is correct?
It seems clear that
induction is needed; the recursive deﬁnition has a base case (in fact, two of them)
and an inductive step. However, the inductive step seems problematic. If we set
up the inductive step according to PMI, then we have the following Given-Goal
diagram.
Given
Goal
m ∈Z+ (m ≥2)
am+1 = am + 2am−1
am = 2m + (−1)m (IH)
am+1 = 2m+1 + (−1)m+1
However, the inductive step in the recursive deﬁnition deﬁnes am+1 in terms of
two predecessors (am and am−1), rather than the usual one predecessor am. Our
usual inductive hypothesis will give us information about am, but no information
about am−1. Thus, we appear to need a new form of induction.
www.ebook3000.com

3.2. Strong induction
63
Theorem 3.2.1 (Principle of Strong Mathematical Induction (PSMI)). Let P(n)
be a statement about the positive integer n.
Suppose the following:
(PSMI 1) The statement P(1) is true.
(PSMI 2) For all positive integers m,
(3.5)
if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤m, P(k) is true, then P(m + 1) is true.
Then, for all positive integers n, P(n) is true.
Statement (3.5) is complicated, so let’s see what it says for various values of
m. When m = 1, statement (3.5) says that
if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤1, P(k) is true, then P(2) is true;
i.e.,
if P(1) is true, then P(2) is true.
Given the base case, it follows that
(3.6)
P(2) is true.
When m = 2, statement (3.5) says that
if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤2, P(k) is true, then P(3) is true;
i.e.,
if P(1) and P(2) are true, then P(3) is true.
Given the base case and statement (3.6), it follows that
(3.7)
P(3) is true.
When m = 3, statement (3.5) says that
if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤3, P(k) is true, then P(4) is true;
i.e.,
if P(1), P(2), and P(3) are true, then P(4) is true.
Given the base case and statements (3.6) and (3.7), it follows that
P(4) is true.
We can see from these examples that it is reasonable to accept PSMI as an
axiom. If we can prove statements (PSMI 1) and (PSMI 2), then it is reasonable
to conclude that for all positive integers n, P(n) is true. Furthermore, just as with
PMI, the “starting integer” can be any integer n0, rather than 1.
Example 3.2.2. Let us now go back to the sequence that motivated our discussion:
a1 = 1,
a2 = 5,
for all n ≥2, an+1 = an + 2an−1.
We will prove by strong induction on n that for all n ∈Z+, an = 2n + (−1)n. We
will not provide any scratchwork, since we already know how to set up induction
proofs, but rather we’ll simply indicate how the framework will change. As before,
we will have a base case and an inductive step. However, because this particular

64
3. Induction
recursive deﬁnition has two base cases, our induction proof will also have two base
cases. For the inductive step, (PSMI 2) tells us to begin with an arbitrary integer
m ≥2 (2 rather than 1 because of the two base cases), and assume the strong
induction hypothesis that is indicated in statement (3.5).
Proof. For n ∈Z+, let P(n) denote the statement
an = 2n + (−1)n.
We prove (∀n ∈Z+)P(n) by strong induction on n.
Base Case: We show P(1) and P(2).
Since 21 + (−1)1 = 2 −1 = 1 and a1 = 1 by deﬁnition of the sequence,
P(1) is true.
Since 22 + (−1)2 = 4 + 1 = 5 and a2 = 5 by deﬁnition of the sequence,
P(2) is true.
Inductive Step: Let m ∈Z with m ≥2, and assume that for all integers k
with 1 ≤k ≤m, P(k) is true; i.e., we assume that for all integers k with
1 ≤k ≤m, ak = 2k + (−1)k. We must prove that P(m + 1) is true, i.e., that
am+1 = 2m+1 + (−1)m+1.
Note that am+1 = am + 2am−1 by deﬁnition, since m ≥2. Thus,
am+1 = am + 2am−1
= 2m + (−1)m + 2(2m−1 + (−1)m−1)
by the inductive hypothesis for k = m −1, m. Hence,
am+1 = 2m + (−1)m + 2(2m−1 + (−1)m−1)
= 2m + (−1)m + 2m + 2(−1)m−1
= 2 · 2m + (−1)m−1(−1 + 2)
= 2m+1 + (−1)m−1
= 2m+1 + (−1)m−1(−1)2
= 2m+1 + (−1)m+1,
as desired.
Hence, by PSMI, we have that for all integers n ≥1,
an = 2n + (−1)n.
□♦
We now use strong induction to pay a debt from Section 2.3 and prove the
existence part of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 2.3.3). Recall
ﬁrst from Deﬁnition 2.1.7 that a positive integer p is prime if p > 1 and
(∀a, b ∈Z+)(p = ab ⇒(a = 1 or b = 1)).
Theorem 3.2.3 (Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Existence)). Every positive
integer n > 1 can be written as a product of primes; i.e., for every positive integer
n > 1, there exist s ∈Z+ and primes p1, p2, . . . , ps such that n = p1p2 · · · ps.
Proof. We prove the result by strong induction on n, where n ≥2.
Base Case: Note that 2 is prime, and hence 2 = p1, where p1 is prime.
www.ebook3000.com

3.2. Strong induction
65
Inductive Step: Let m ∈Z with m ≥2 and assume that for all integers k with
2 ≤k ≤m, k is a product of primes. We must prove that m + 1 is a product
of primes.
Case I: m + 1 is prime.
Then m + 1 is a product of primes, as in the Base Case.
Case II: m + 1 is not prime.
Then, by Deﬁnition 2.1.7, we may ﬁx a, b ∈Z+ such that
m + 1 = ab, where neither a nor b is 1.
Note then that 1 < a < m + 1, so 2 ≤a ≤m, and also 2 ≤b ≤m. Thus,
by the Inductive Hypothesis applied to each of a and b, a is a product of
primes
a = p1p2 · · · pi
and b is a product of primes
b = q1q2 · · · qj,
where i, j ≥1 and p1, . . . , pi, q1, . . . , qj are all primes. Hence
ab = p1p2 · · · piq1q2 · · · qj,
and so ab is a product of primes.
Hence by PSMI, every positive integer n > 1 is a product of primes.
□
We end this section by commenting that one might wonder whether the Prin-
ciple of Strong Mathematical Induction is in fact a “stronger” statement than the
Principle of Mathematical Induction. In fact these statements are logically equiva-
lent. In other words, if we accept PSMI as an axiom, then we can prove PMI (this
should be easy to prove), and conversely, if we accept PMI as an axiom, then we
can prove PSMI. (See Exercise 3.2.5.)
Exercises 3.2
1. Let a1 = 2, a2 = 4, and an+1 = 7an −10an−1 for all n ≥2. Conjecture a closed
formula for an and then prove your result.
2. Let a1 = 3, a2 = 4, and an+1 = 1
3(2an + an−1) for all n ≥2. Prove that for all
positive integers n, 3 ≤an ≤4.
3. Without using the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, use strong induction
to prove that for all positive integers n with n ≥2, n has a prime factor.
4. For i ∈Z+, let pi denote the ith prime number, so that
p1 = 2,
p2 = 3,
p3 = 5, . . . .
Prove that for all n ∈Z+, pn ≤22n−1. (HINT: For the induction step, given
m ∈Z+, show that pm+1 ≤p1p2 · · · pm + 1.)
5. In this exercise, you will prove that PMI is logically equivalent to PSMI; in
other words, given PMI, show that you can deduce the statement PSMI, and
vice versa.

66
3. Induction
(a) Assume that PSMI is true.
To prove that PMI is true, let P(n) be a
statement about the positive integer n. Assume that
(i) P(1) is true and
(ii) for all m ∈Z+, if P(m) is true, then P(m + 1) is true.
Your goal is to prove that for all n ∈Z+, P(n) is true. You should do this
using PSMI. This means that you should prove
(iii) P(1) is true and
(iv) for all m ∈Z+, if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤m, P(k) is true,
then P(m + 1) is true.
You can then conclude from PSMI that for all n ∈Z+, P(n) is true.
(b) Assume that PMI is true.
To prove that PSMI is true, let P(n) be a
statement about the positive integer n. Assume that
(i) P(1) is true and
(ii) for all m ∈Z+, if for all integers k with 1 ≤k ≤m, P(k) is true,
then P(m + 1) is true.
Your goal is to prove that for all n ∈Z+, P(n) is true. You should do
this using PMI applied to a slightly diﬀerent statement. Let Q(n) be the
statement (∀k ≤n)P(k). Use PMI to prove that for all n ∈Z+, Q(n) is
true. This means that you should prove
(iii) Q(1) is true and
(iv) for all m ∈Z+, if Q(m) is true, then Q(m + 1) is true.
You can then conclude from PMI that for all n ∈Z+, Q(n) is true. Finally,
explain why for all n ∈Z+, P(n) is true.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 4
Sets
4.1. The language of sets
Sets occur everywhere in mathematics and other subjects whose foundations are
mathematical. We have been using the word “set” since Chapter 1, but we have
never deﬁned what this word means.
In many ways, this situation cannot be
avoided. Take a moment now to try to deﬁne what you mean by a “set” . . . . Do you
ﬁnd yourself saying something like “a collection of objects”? Can you deﬁne math-
ematically what this means? Of course not; “collection” is just as mathematically
vague as “set”!
Just as Euclid took concepts such as “point” and “line” in geometry as basic
or undeﬁned, we will (for now) take the concept of “set” to be undeﬁned. We will
insist that for any particular set A, membership in A (i.e., whether an object is in
the set A or not) must be well-deﬁned (i.e., for any ﬁxed object x in the underlying
universe under discussion, the answer to the question, “Is x in A?” must be either
always “yes” or always “no”, regardless of when the question is asked). As we have
done since Chapter 1, we will use the notation ∈to denote membership in a set.
Notation 4.1.1. Given a set A, we write x ∈A for “x is an element of the set A”,
and we write x ̸∈A for “x is not an element of the set A”.
There are several ways that one can specify or describe a set. One way is to
explicitly list its elements inside a pair of curly braces, such as
A = {1, 2, 3},
B = {1, 2, 3, . . . , 10},
C = {2, 4, 6, . . . }.
Here, B appears to be the set of positive integers between 1 and 10, inclusive, and
C appears to be the set of even positive integers. The notation “. . . ”, however,
is imprecise.
We are inferring from the information given that the underlying
universal set is the set Z+ of positive integers (recall our discussion of universal
67

68
4. Sets
sets in Subsection 1.1.3) and that the patterns we see exhibited in the sets B and
C continue.
A more precise way of describing a set is to use “set-builder” notation to specify
the precise property that the elements of the set should satisfy. This description is
sometimes called a conditional deﬁnition of the set.
Notation 4.1.2. Let P(x) be a statement with a single free variable x. Then the
notation
{x | P(x)}
or
{x : P(x)}
denotes the set of all objects x in the underlying universal set such that P(x) is
true.
When X is a set, the notation {x ∈X | P(x)} is an abbreviation for the set
{x | x ∈X and P(x)}.
Example 4.1.3.
(1) A conditional deﬁnition of the set A = {1, 2, 3, . . . , 10} above is
A = {n ∈Z+ | 1 ≤n ≤10}.
Note here that we have made the underlying universal set explicit.
(2) As with our discussion of quantiﬁers, the underlying universal set matters.
The set
D = {x ∈R | 1 ≤x ≤10}
is certainly diﬀerent from the set A above, because π ∈D, while π ̸∈A.
Recall that the set D is also denoted in interval notation by [1, 10]. (With
interval notation, the underlying universal set is always assumed to be R,
unless explicitly indicated otherwise. See Notation 4.1.10.)
(3) The set C = {2, 4, 6, . . . } of even positive integers can be deﬁned conditionally
by
{n ∈Z+ | n is even}
(4.1)
or, making the quantiﬁer complexity explicit,
{n ∈Z+ | (∃k ∈Z+)[n = 2k]}.
(4.2)
We can also denote this set using what is sometimes called a constructive
deﬁnition:
(4.3)
{2k | k ∈Z+}.
Here, the notation indicates that the elements of the set are all integers of the
form 2k, where k ranges through the set of positive integers.
It is important to remember that
the notation in (4.3) is an abbreviation for the set given in (4.2).
While the notation in (4.3) is more concise, it is dangerous in the sense that it
hides the existential quantiﬁer explicitly given in (4.2). Since we have already
seen that knowing the logical form of a statement is essential when writing
proofs, we must be sure to be aware of such hidden quantiﬁers. Students who
are learning about sets for the ﬁrst time may wish, if given a constructive
www.ebook3000.com

4.1. The language of sets
69
deﬁnition of a set, to convert the deﬁnition into a conditional deﬁnition of
that set.
♦
We have already made a very reasonable assumption about sets, namely, that
a set is uniquely determined by its elements.1 The unique set with no elements is
denoted by ∅and is called the empty set or null set.
It is important to note right
away that ∅is diﬀerent from {∅}. (Be sure you can explain why!)
The assumption that a set is uniquely determined by its elements provides the
deﬁnition of what it means for two sets to be equal (Deﬁnition 4.1.6); namely, two
sets are equal if they have the same elements. Before working more with this idea,
we ﬁrst deﬁne what it means for one set to be “contained” in another set.
Deﬁnition 4.1.4. Let A and B be sets. Then A is a subset of B (in notation,
A ⊆B) if every element of A is also an element of B. Symbolically, A ⊆B if
(4.4)
(∀x)[x ∈A ⇒x ∈B].
We’ll write A ̸⊆B if A is not a subset of B.
We can denote an arbitrary set as the interior of a circle, so that the following
diagram illustrates that A ⊆B.
B
A
Take a moment to write the deﬁnition of A ̸⊆B symbolically, by forming a
useful denial of (4.4). You’ll ﬁnd this symbolic representation useful when writing
proofs.
Example 4.1.5.
(1) N ⊆Z, Z ⊆Q, Q ⊆R.
(2) {{1}, 2} ⊆{{1}, 2, 3}, since every element (how many are there?) of the left-
hand set is also an element of the right-hand set.
(3) {1} ̸⊆{{1}, 2, 3}, since 1 ∈{1}, but 1 /∈{{1}, 2, 3}.
(4) Let
A = {n ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[n = 4k + 1]},
B = {n ∈Z | n is odd}.
Prove that A ⊆B and B ̸⊆A.
1This assumption is actually the Axiom of Extensionality in formal, axiomatic set theory.

70
4. Sets
Scratchwork. First, we’ll give several examples of elements of A, to illus-
trate the conditional deﬁnition of this set.
−3 ∈A, since −3 = 4 · −1 + 1,
1 ∈A, since
1 = 4 · 0 + 1,
5 ∈A, since
5 = 4 · 1 + 1,
9 ∈A, since
9 = 4 · 2 + 1.
Remember that these computations are not a proof.
These computations
simply help build our intuition by giving us a better sense for which integers
live in the set and which integers may not.
We must use Deﬁnition 4.1.4 to prove that A ⊆B; the Given-Goal dia-
gram is below.
Given
Goal
n ∈Z arbitrary
n ∈A
n ∈B
Since we’ll be given n ∈A, the deﬁnition of A tells us we may ﬁx k ∈Z
such that n = 4k + 1. The deﬁnition of B tells us that our goal is to show
that n is odd, which we certainly know how to do.
To show that B ̸⊆A, we must again use Deﬁnition 4.1.4. Negating the
statement (∀x)[x ∈B ⇒x ∈A], we see that we must show
(∃x)[x ∈B and x /∈A].
Our computations above seem to imply that the odd integer 3 is not an element
of A, although we will prove this carefully using a proof by contradiction.
We’re ready to write down the formal proofs.
Proof. Let
A = {n ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[n = 4k + 1]},
B = {n ∈Z | n is odd}.
We ﬁrst show that A ⊆B. Let n ∈A be arbitrary. We must show that
n ∈B.
Since n ∈A, we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that n = 4k + 1. Then
n = 4k + 1 = 2(2k) + 1,
and hence n is odd, by deﬁnition. Since n is odd, n ∈B by deﬁnition of B.
Thus, A ⊆B.
Next we show that B ̸⊆A. To see this, note that 3 is odd, so 3 ∈B, by
deﬁnition of B. We claim 3 /∈A. Assume for the sake of a contradiction that
3 ∈A. Then we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that 3 = 4k + 1, by deﬁnition of A. But
then 2 = 4k, where k ∈Z; i.e., 4 | 2, which is a contradiction. Hence 3 /∈A,
and so B ̸⊆A, as desired.
□♦
www.ebook3000.com

4.1. The language of sets
71
We’ve already noted that the deﬁnition of set equality states that a set is
uniquely determined by its elements; by Deﬁnition 4.1.4, we can also phrase this in
terms of the subset relation ⊆.
Deﬁnition 4.1.6. Let A and B be sets. Then A = B if
(∀x)[x ∈A ⇔x ∈B].
Equivalently, A = B iﬀA ⊆B and B ⊆A.
For the particular sets A and B in Example 4.1.5(4), we had A ⊆B but A ̸= B
(since B ̸⊆A). In this case, we say that A is a proper subset of B and write A ⊊B.
Example 4.1.7. Let
A = {n ∈Z | n + 5 is odd},
B = {n ∈Z | n is even}.
Prove that A = B.
Scratchwork.
Deﬁnition 4.1.6 tells us that we must prove that A ⊆B and
B ⊆A. Deﬁnition 4.1.4 tells us that to prove A ⊆B, we use the following Given-
Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
n ∈Z arbitrary
n ∈A
n ∈B
The situation for B ⊆A is analogous.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that A ⊆B. Let n ∈A; we must show that n ∈B.
Since n ∈A, we know that n + 5 is odd; hence, we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that
n + 5 = 2k + 1. To show that n ∈B, we must show that n is even. Note that
n = 2k + 1 −5 = 2k −4 = 2(k −2),
and hence n is even, as desired. Thus n ∈B, and we may conclude that A ⊆B.
Next we show that B ⊆A. Let n ∈B; we must show that n ∈A.
Since n ∈B, we know that n is even. Hence, we may ﬁx k ∈Z such that
n = 2k. Then
n + 5 = 2k + 5 = 2(k + 2) + 1,
and hence n + 5 is odd. Thus n ∈A, and we may conclude that B ⊆A.
Since A ⊆B and B ⊆A, we have that A = B, by Deﬁnition 4.1.6.
□♦
So far we have seen some examples of how to show that one speciﬁed set is a
subset of, or is equal to, another set. We now establish two general results regarding
subsets.
Theorem 4.1.8. Let A, B, and C be sets. If A ⊆B and B ⊆C, then A ⊆C.

72
4. Sets
Scratchwork. We begin with an important reminder.
In order to start this proof correctly, we must focus on the Goal.
The beginning Given-Goal diagram is given below.
Given
Goal
A, B, C arbitrary sets
A ⊆B
B ⊆C
A ⊆C
Note that Deﬁnition 4.1.4 tells us how to prove that A ⊆C.
Given
Goal
A, B, C arbitrary sets
A ⊆B
B ⊆C
n ∈A arbitrary
n ∈C
Proof. Let A, B, and C be sets, and assume that A ⊆B and B ⊆C. We show
that A ⊆C.
Let n ∈A be arbitrary; we must show that n ∈C. Since n ∈A and A ⊆B, we
have that n ∈B, by Deﬁnition 4.1.4. Similarly, since n ∈B and B ⊆C, we have
that n ∈C, by Deﬁnition 4.1.4, as desired.
Hence, by Deﬁnition 4.1.4, A ⊆C.
□
Recall that the unique set with no elements is ∅, the empty set.
Proposition 4.1.9. For all sets A, ∅⊆A and A ⊆A.
Scratchwork.
The only possible delicate issue here is that the deﬁnition of
⊆is given in terms of ∈, and ∅has no elements!
Thus, we take a moment to
examine more closely the symbolic form of the statement ∅⊆A, according to
Deﬁnition 4.1.4:
∅⊆A ⇔(∀x)[x ∈∅⇒x ∈A].
Since ∅has no elements, any statement of the form x ∈∅is false. If we recall the
truth table for ⇒in Table 1.5, then it is clear how the proof of ∅⊆A should go.
Proof. Let A be an arbitrary set. The proof of A ⊆A is Exercise 4.1.2. We prove
that ∅⊆A. We must show
(∀x)[x ∈∅⇒x ∈A].
Given any arbitrary x, x ∈∅is false, and hence the implication
x ∈∅⇒x ∈A
is true. Thus by deﬁnition ∅⊆A, as desired.
□
www.ebook3000.com

4.1. The language of sets
73
We say that a statement such as
(∀x)[x ∈∅⇒x ∈A]
is vacuously true, since there are no x such that x ∈∅.
We conclude this section by recalling interval notation.
Notation 4.1.10. If a < b are real numbers, then
(a, b) = {x ∈R | a < x < b},
[a, b] = {x ∈R | a ≤x ≤b},
(a, b] = {x ∈R | a < x ≤b},
[a, b) = {x ∈R | a ≤x < b},
(a, ∞) = {x ∈R | a < x},
[a, ∞) = {x ∈R | a ≤x},
(−∞, b) = {x ∈R | x < b},
(−∞, b] = {x ∈R | x ≤b}.
Exercises 4.1
1. State whether the following are true or false. Brieﬂy explain your answers.
(a) {1, 2, 3} ∈{{1, 2, 3}, {1, 3}, 1, 2, 3}.
(b) {1, 3} ∈{{1, 2, 3}, {1, 2}, 1, 3}.
(c) {1, 2} ⊆{{1, 2, 3}, {1, 2}, 1, 3}.
(d) [5, 6) ⊆(4, 6].
(e) (7, 9] ⊆[6, 9).
(f) (5, 9] ⊆[6, 10].
(g) {0} ∈{0, {0}}.
(h) {0} ⊆{0, {0}}.
(i) {{0}} ∈{0, {0}}.
(j) {{0}} ⊆{0, {0}}.
(k) For every set A, {∅} ⊆A.
2. Let A be a set. Prove that A ⊆A.
3. Let A and B be sets. Prove that if x /∈B and A ⊆B, then x /∈A.
4. Consider the sets
A = {n ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)(n = 12k + 11)},
B = {n ∈Z | (∃j ∈Z)(n = 4j + 3)}.
(a) Is A ⊆B? Prove or disprove.
(b) Is B ⊆A? Prove or disprove.
5. Consider the sets
A = {n ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)(n = 4k + 1)},
B = {n ∈Z | (∃j ∈Z)(n = 4j −7)}.
Prove that A = B.

74
4. Sets
6. Consider the sets
A = {n ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[n = 3k]},
B = {n ∈Z | (∃i, j ∈Z)[n = 15i + 12j]}.
Prove that A = B.
7. Let A = {x + y
√
2 | x, y ∈Q} ⊆R.
(a) Prove that for all x, y ∈Q, x + y
√
2 = 0 if and only if x = y = 0.
(b) Prove that for all z1, z2 ∈A, z1 + z2, z1z2 ∈A and, for z2 ̸= 0, z1
z2
∈A.
8. Let M =

a
b
c
d
  a, b, c, d ∈R

.
Let X =

a
b
c
d

∈M
 ad −bc ̸= 0

.
Prove that for all A, B ∈X, AB ∈X (see Exercise 2.1.20).
4.2. Operations on sets
This section deals with operations we may perform on sets to build “new” sets from
“old” ones. We begin with several commonly used set operations.
Deﬁnition 4.2.1. Let A and B be sets.
(1) The union of A and B is the set
A ∪B = {x | x ∈A or x ∈B}.
(2) The intersection of A and B is the set
A ∩B = {x | x ∈A and x ∈B}.
(3) The complement of A in B, also called the diﬀerence of B and A, is the set
B −A = {x ∈B | x /∈A}
= {x | x ∈B and x /∈A}.
The set diﬀerence B −A is sometimes denoted by B\A.
(4) If U is the universal set under discussion (so that A ⊆U), then U −A is
denoted by A and is called the complement of A; i.e.,
A = {x ∈U | x /∈A}.
Below we give diagrams, called Venn diagrams, that illustrate the various set
operations. In a Venn diagram, the universal set U is denoted by a rectangle. As
before, we denote an arbitrary set as the interior of a circle.
In each case, the
shaded region represents the set operation being illustrated.
www.ebook3000.com

4.2. Operations on sets
75
A
B
A ∪B
U
A
B
A ∩B
U
A
A
U
B
A
B −A
U
Example 4.2.2. Let
A = {1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9},
B = {3, 6, 7, 10},
C = {2, 6},
and let the universal set be U = Z+. Then
A ∪B = {x | x ∈A or x ∈B} = {1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10},
A ∩B = {x | x ∈A and x ∈B} = {3, 7},
A −B = {x ∈A | x /∈B} = {1, 4, 5, 9},
B −A = {x ∈B | x /∈A} = {6, 10},
A ∩C = {x | x ∈A and x ∈C} = ∅,
C = {n ∈Z+ | n /∈C} = {n ∈Z+ | n ̸= 2 and n ̸= 6}.
♦
Deﬁnition 4.2.3. Two sets A and B are disjoint if A ∩B = ∅.
In Example 4.2.2, sets A and C are disjoint. In the next example, the sets
(which are subsets of R) are given in interval notation.
Example 4.2.4. This example shows that the union or intersection of two intervals
need not be another interval.
(2, 4] ∩(3, 5) = (3, 4],
[2, 4] ∩(4, 5) = ∅,
(2, 4) ∪(3, 5) = (2, 5),
(2, 4] = (−∞, 2] ∪(4, ∞).
♦
Before stating some useful properties that the set operations ∪, ∩, and set
complement possess, we ﬁrst include a proof illustrating some of these operations.
Proposition 4.2.5. Let A, B, and C be sets. If A ∩B ⊆C and x ∈A −C, then
x /∈B.
Proof. Let A, B, and C be arbitrary sets and assume that A ∩B ⊆C. Assume
also that x ∈A −C; we show that x /∈B.
For the sake of a contradiction, assume that x ∈B. Since x ∈A −C, x ∈A
and x /∈C, by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(3). Since x ∈A and x ∈B, by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2)

76
4. Sets
we know that x ∈A ∩B. Since A ∩B ⊆C, we may conclude that x ∈C, a
contradiction, since x /∈C.
Hence, x /∈B, as desired.
□
The next theorem enumerates some properties of our new set operations.
Theorem 4.2.6. Let A, B, and C be subsets of some universal set U. Then:
(1) A ∪A = A.
(2) A ∩A = A.
(3) A ∪∅= A.
(4) A ∩∅= ∅.
(5) A ∩B ⊆A.
(6) A ⊆A ∪B.
(7) A ∪(B ∪C) = (A ∪B) ∪C.
(8) A ∩(B ∩C) = (A ∩B) ∩C.
(9) A ∪B = B ∪A.
(10) A ∩B = B ∩A.
(11) A ∪(B ∩C) = (A ∪B) ∩(A ∪C).
(12) A ∩(B ∪C) = (A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C).
(13) (A ∪B) = A ∩B.
(14) (A ∩B) = A ∪B.
(15) A ∪A = U.
(16) A ∩A = ∅.
(17) A = A.
Proof. Let A, B, and C be subsets of some universal set U. We will prove prop-
erties (12) and (14), showing all details, and leave the rest for the exercises at the
end of the section.
Proof of (12): We show that A ∩(B ∪C) = (A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C).
First we show that A ∩(B ∪C) ⊆(A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C). Let x ∈A ∩(B ∪C);
we must show that x ∈(A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C).
Since x ∈A ∩(B ∪C), by
Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2) we know that x ∈A and x ∈B ∪C. Since x ∈B ∪C, by
Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1) we know that x ∈B or x ∈C.
Case I: x ∈B.
Then we have that x ∈A and x ∈B, and hence x ∈A ∩B by Deﬁni-
tion 4.2.1(2). It follows that x ∈(A∩B)∪(A∩C) by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1).
Case II: x /∈B.
Then we have that x ∈C, and since x ∈A also, we know that x ∈A ∩C
by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2). Hence x ∈(A∩B)∪(A∩C) by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1).
Thus, in any case, we have that A ∩(B ∪C) ⊆(A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C).
Next, we must show that (A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C) ⊆A ∩(B ∪C). We begin
by letting x ∈(A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C); we must show that x ∈A ∩(B ∪C).
www.ebook3000.com

4.2. Operations on sets
77
Since x ∈(A ∩B) ∪(A ∩C), we know that x ∈A ∩B or x ∈A ∩C by
Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1). As before, we consider two cases.
Case I: x ∈A ∩B.
Then we have that x ∈A and x ∈B by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2). Since x ∈B,
we know that x ∈B ∪C by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1). Hence x ∈A ∩(B ∪C)
by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2).
Case II: x /∈A ∩B.
Then we have that x ∈A ∩C.
Hence x ∈A and x ∈C by Deﬁ-
nition 4.2.1(2), and it follows that x ∈A and x ∈B ∪C by Deﬁni-
tion 4.2.1(1). Thus we have x ∈A ∩(B ∪C) by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2).
Hence (A∩B)∪(A∩C) ⊆A∩(B∪C), and so A∩(B∪C) = (A∩B)∪(A∩C).
Proof of (14): We show that (A ∩B) = A ∪B.
First we show that (A ∩B) ⊆A ∪B. Let x ∈(A ∩B); we must show
that x ∈A ∪B. Since x ∈(A ∩B), we know that x ∈U and x /∈A ∩B
by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4). It follows by the negation of Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2) that
x /∈A or x /∈B. Hence by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4), x ∈A or x ∈B; i.e., x ∈A∪B,
by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1), as desired. Thus (A ∩B) ⊆A ∪B.
Next we show that A ∪B ⊆(A ∩B). Let x ∈A ∪B; we must show that
x ∈(A ∩B). Since x ∈A ∪B, we know by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(1) that x ∈A or
x ∈B. If x ∈A, then x ∈U and x /∈A by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4). Since x /∈A,
x /∈A ∩B by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2). Hence x ∈A ∩B by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4).
Similarly, if x /∈A, then x ∈B. It follows by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4) that x ∈U
and x /∈B. Since x /∈B, x /∈A∩B by Deﬁnition 4.2.1(2). Hence x ∈A ∩B by
Deﬁnition 4.2.1(4). Thus, in any case, x ∈(A ∩B) and hence A∪B ⊆(A ∩B).
It follows that (A ∩B) = A ∪B.
□
Just as in Proposition 1.1.7, properties (13) and (14) from Theorem 4.2.6 are
often called DeMorgan’s Laws.
You are probably familiar with the next set operation.
Deﬁnition 4.2.7. Let A and B be sets. The Cartesian product of A and B is the
set
A × B = {(x, y) | x ∈A and y ∈B},
where (x, y) denotes the ordered pair 2 containing x and y in that order.
More
generally, if n ∈Z+ and A1, A2, . . . , An, A are sets, then
A1 × A2 × · · · × An = {(x1, x2, . . . , xn) | for all i, 1 ≤i ≤n, xi ∈Ai}
is a set of ordered n-tuples and
An = {(x1, x2, . . . , xn) | for all i, 1 ≤i ≤n, xi ∈A}.
Example 4.2.8.
(1) Let A = {1, 2} and B = {π, e, {0}}.
A × B = {(1, π), (1, e), (1, {0}), (2, π), (2, e), (2, {0})},
B × A = {(π, 1), (π, 2), (e, 1), (e, 2), ({0}, 1), ({0}, 2)}.
2Technically, an ordered pair is a set. See Exercise 4.2.25.

78
4. Sets
(2) R2 is the familiar Cartesian, or Euclidean, plane, R3 is Euclidean space, and
Rn is n-dimensional Euclidean space.
R × R = R2 = {(x, y) | x, y ∈R},
R × R × R = R3 = {(x, y, z) | x, y, z ∈R},
Rn = {(x1, x2, . . . , xn) | x1, x2, . . . , xn ∈R}.
♦
We deﬁne two ordered pairs (x, y) and (a, b) to be equal if and only if x = a
and y = b.
Thus we see from Example 4.2.8(1) that, in general, A × B ̸= B × A.
More generally,
(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = (y1, y2, . . . , yn) iﬀfor all i, 1 ≤i ≤n, xi = yi.
Note also in Example 4.2.8(1) that the set A has 2 elements, B has 3 elements,
and A × B (and B × A) has 6 elements. In general it can be proved (see Theo-
rem 8.2.7) that when A has m elements and B has n elements, where m, n ∈Z
with m, n ≥0, then A × B has mn elements.
The following proposition indicates some of the relationships between the Carte-
sian product and the other set operations.
Proposition 4.2.9. Let A, B, C, and D be sets. Then:
(1) A × ∅= ∅= ∅× A.
(2) A × (B ∪C) = (A × B) ∪(A × C).
(3) A × (B ∩C) = (A × B) ∩(A × C).
(4) (A × B) ∩(C × D) = (A ∩C) × (B ∩D).
(5) (A × B) ∪(C × D) ⊆(A ∪C) × (B ∪D). In general, equality need not hold.
Proof. Let A, B, C, and D be sets. We prove parts (2) and (5); the rest of the
proofs are left for the exercises.
Proof of (2): We show A × (B ∪C) = (A × B) ∪(A × C).
Let (x, y) ∈A × (B ∪C); we must show that (x, y) ∈(A × B) ∪(A × C).
Since (x, y) ∈A × (B ∪C), we know that x ∈A and y ∈B ∪C; i.e., y ∈B or
y ∈C. If y ∈B, then (x, y) ∈A × B, and hence (x, y) ∈(A × B) ∪(A × C).
If y /∈B, then y ∈C. Thus (x, y) ∈(A × B) ∪(A × C), since (x, y) ∈A × C.
Hence A × (B ∪C) ⊆(A × B) ∪(A × C).
Next, let (x, y) ∈(A×B)∪(A×C); we show that (x, y) ∈A×(B∪C). Since
(x, y) ∈(A × B) ∪(A × C), we know that (x, y) ∈A × B or (x, y) ∈A × C. If
(x, y) ∈A×B, then x ∈A and y ∈B, so y ∈B∪C. Otherwise, (x, y) ∈A×C,
so x ∈A and y ∈C, so y ∈B ∪C. Thus, in any case, (x, y) ∈A × (B ∪C).
Hence (A × B) ∪(A × C) ⊆A × (B ∪C).
It follows that A × (B ∪C) = (A × B) ∪(A × C).
Proof of (5): We show that (A × B) ∪(C × D) ⊆(A ∪C) × (B ∪D).
Let (x, y) ∈(A × B) ∪(C × D); we show that (x, y) ∈(A ∪C) × (B ∪D).
Since (x, y) ∈(A×B)∪(C×D), we know that (x, y) ∈A×B or (x, y) ∈C×D.
If (x, y) ∈A × B, then x ∈A and y ∈B, so x ∈A ∪C and y ∈B ∪D. If
(x, y) /∈A × B, then (x, y) ∈C × D. So, x ∈C and y ∈D, and hence again
www.ebook3000.com

4.2. Operations on sets
79
x ∈A ∪C and y ∈B ∪D. Hence in any case, (x, y) ∈(A ∪C) × (B ∪D).
Thus (A × B) ∪(C × D) ⊆(A ∪C) × (B ∪D).
We next show that equality need not hold in general, i.e., that, in general,
(A ∪C) × (B ∪D) ⊆(A × B) ∪(C × D) is false. We must provide a coun-
terexample. Let A = Z = D and B = ∅= C. Then A × B = ∅= C × D, by
part (1) of this proposition. Thus (A × B) ∪(C × D) = ∅and
(A ∪C) × (B ∪D) = Z × Z ̸= ∅= (A × B) ∪(C × D).
□
Our last operation deﬁnes the collection of all subsets of a set.
Deﬁnition 4.2.10. Let X be a set. The power set of X is the set
P(X) = {A | A ⊆X},
the set of all subsets of X.
Example 4.2.11. Let X = {1, 2, 3}. Note that
{1, 2} ⊆X, so {1, 2} ∈P(X).
Also,
1 /∈P(X),
since
1 ⊈X,
{1} ∈P(X),
since
{1} ⊆X,
∅∈P(X),
since
∅⊆X.
We can list all the elements of P(X):
P(X) = {∅, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}}.
♦
Note that in Example 4.2.11, the set X has 3 elements and P(X) has 23 = 8
elements. In general, if a set X has n elements, where n ∈Z, n ≥0, then P(X)
has 2n elements (see Exercise 4.2.26). This fact can help you check that you have
the right number of subsets when you are computing the power set of a ﬁnite set.
The next proposition shows how the power set operation interacts with subset-
hood.
Proposition 4.2.12. Let A and B be sets. Then
A ⊆B ⇔P(A) ⊆P(B).
Scratchwork. We will prove only the backward direction and leave the forward
direction for Exercise 4.2.19. Our Given-Goal diagram is below.
Given
Goal
A, B arbitrary sets
P(A) ⊆P(B)
A ⊆B
As always,
the structure of the proof is determined by the Goal,
so we rewrite the Given-Goal diagram.

80
4. Sets
Given
Goal
A, B arbitrary sets
P(A) ⊆P(B)
x ∈A arbitrary
x ∈B
In order to make use of the hypothesis that P(A) ⊆P(B), we need to turn
information about x ∈A into information about P(A). The important thing to
remember is that elements of P(A) correspond to subsets of A, by Deﬁnition 4.2.10.
We have an element x in A; in order to use the hypothesis that P(A) ⊆P(B), we
must use x to ﬁnd a subset of A.
Proof. Let A and B be sets. The proof that
A ⊆B ⇒P(A) ⊆P(B)
is Exercise 4.2.19.
We prove
P(A) ⊆P(B) ⇒A ⊆B.
Assume that P(A) ⊆P(B); we must show that A ⊆B. Let x ∈A be arbitrary.
Since x ∈A, by deﬁnition, {x} ⊆A.
Thus by Deﬁnition 4.2.10, {x} ∈P(A).
Since P(A) ⊆P(B), we know that {x} ∈P(B). Then, again by Deﬁnition 4.2.10,
{x} ⊆B. Hence, x ∈B, as desired.
Thus, A ⊆B.
□
In Exercise 4.2.20, you are asked to use the fact that A ⊆A to provide a
diﬀerent proof of
P(A) ⊆P(B) ⇒A ⊆B.
Exercises 4.2
1. Let A, B, and C be subsets of some universal set U.
Prove the following
statements from Theorem 4.2.6.
(a) A ∪A = A and A ∩A = A.
(b) A ∪∅= A and A ∩∅= ∅.
(c) A ∩B ⊆A and A ⊆A ∪B.
(d) A ∪(B ∪C) = (A ∪B) ∪C and A ∩(B ∩C) = (A ∩B) ∩C.
(e) A ∪B = B ∪A and A ∩B = B ∩A.
(f) A ∪(B ∩C) = (A ∪B) ∩(A ∪C).
(g) (A ∪B) = A ∩B.
(h) A ∪A = U and A ∩A = ∅.
(i) A = A.
2. Let A and B be sets, where U is the underlying universal set.
Prove that
A ⊆B ⇔B ⊆A.
www.ebook3000.com

4.2. Operations on sets
81
3. Let A and B be sets.
(a) Prove that A ⊆B ⇔A ∩B = A.
(b) Prove that A ⊆B ⇔A ∪B = B.
4. Let A, B, and C be sets. Prove that if A ⊆B ∪C and A ∩B = ∅, then A ⊆C.
5. Let A and B be sets.
(a) Prove that A = (A ∩B) ∪(A −B).
(b) Prove that A ∪B = A ∪(B −A).
(c) Prove that A −B = A ∩B.
(d) Prove that (A ∪B) ∩A = B −A.
(e) Prove that (A −B) ∪(B −A) = (A ∪B) −(A ∩B).
6. Let A, B, C, and D be sets with C ⊆A and D ⊆B. Prove that D−A ⊆B−C.
7. Let A, B, and C be sets. Prove:
(a) (A ∪B) −C ⊆(A −C) ∪B.
(b) (A ∪B) −C = (A −C) ∪B iﬀB ∩C = ∅.
8. Let A, B, and C be sets.
(a) Prove or disprove: if A ⊆B ∪C, then A ⊆B or A ⊆C.
(b) State the converse of part (a) and prove or disprove.
9. Let A, B, and C be sets.
(a) Prove or disprove: if A ⊆B ∩C, then A ⊆B and A ⊆C.
(b) State the converse of part (a) and prove or disprove.
10. Let A, B, and C be sets.
(a) Prove or disprove: if A −C ⊆B −C, then A ⊆B.
(b) State the converse of part (a) and prove or disprove.
11. Let A = {a, b}, B = {1, 2}, and C = {c, d, e}. Find A × B and C × A. Explain
why A × (B × C) ̸= (A × B) × C.
12. Let A, B, C, and D be sets. Prove the following statements from Proposi-
tion 4.2.9.
(a) A × ∅= ∅= ∅× A.
(b) A × (B ∩C) = (A × B) ∩(A × C).
(c) (A × B) ∩(C × D) = (A ∩C) × (B ∩D).
13. Let A, B, C be sets with A ̸= ∅. Prove that if A × B = A × C, then B = C.
Is the statement still true if A = ∅? Prove your answer.
14. Let A and B be nonempty sets. Prove that A × B = B × A iﬀA = B. Is this
statement true if one of A or B is empty? Prove your answer.
15. Which of the following statements are true for every set A? Explain.
∅⊆P(A),
∅∈P(A),
A ⊆P(A),
A ∈P(A).
16. Find the power set P(X) for the following sets.
(a) X = {1, 2}.
(b) X = {0, △, □}.
(c) X = {1, {2, {3}}}.
(d) X = {a, b, {a, b}}.
17. Let A = {1, 2}. Find P(P(A)).

82
4. Sets
18. Let U = {1, 2, 3} be the universal set for A = {1, 2} and B = {2, 3}. Find
(a) P(A) ∩P(B),
(b) P(A) ∪P(B),
(c) P(A) −P(B).
19. Let A and B be sets such that A ⊆B. Prove that P(A) ⊆P(B).
20. Let A and B be sets such that P(A) ⊆P(B). Use the fact that A ⊆A to show
that A ⊆B.
21. Let A and B be sets.
(a) Prove or disprove: P(A ∪B) = P(A) ∪P(B).
(b) Prove or disprove: P(A ∩B) = P(A) ∩P(B).
(c) Prove or disprove: P(A −B) = P(A) −P(B).
22. Prove that for all a, b ∈R with a ̸= b there exist ε, δ ∈R+ such that
{x ∈R | |x −a| < ε} ∩{x ∈R | |x −b| < δ} = ∅.
23. Let X be a set. For sets A, B ∈P(X), deﬁne the symmetric diﬀerence A △B
of A and B by
A △B = (A −B) ∪(B −A) = (A ∪B) −(A ∩B)
(see Exercise 4.2.5e).
(a) Let X = Z and
A = {n ∈Z | n ≥5},
B = {n ∈Z | n ≤7},
C = {−7, −2, 1, 5, 9, 11},
D = {−2, 0, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12}.
Find A △B and C △D.
(b) Let
X = R,
A = [−3, 1] ∪(6, 9),
B = [−2, 10).
Find A △B.
(c) Prove that for all sets A, B, C ∈P(X),
(i) A △B = B △A
(△is commutative),
(ii) A △(B △C) = (A △B) △C
(△is associative).
(d) Prove that there exists a unique set I ∈P(X) such that for all sets A ∈
P(X), A △I = A.
(e) Prove that for the set I in part (d) above, for all sets A ∈P(X), there
exists a unique set B ∈P(X) such that A △B = I.
(f) Prove that for all sets A, B ∈P(X), there exists a unique set C ∈P(X)
such that A △C = B.
24. We say that a set S ⊆R of real numbers is open if for all x ∈S, there exists a
real number r > 0 such that (x −r, x + r) ⊆S. The set S is closed if R −S is
open.
(a) Let a, b ∈R with a < b. Prove that the intervals (a, b), (a, ∞), (−∞, b),
and (−∞, ∞) are open.
(b) Prove that R and ∅are both open and closed.
(c) Let U, V ⊆R be open sets. Prove that U ∪V and U ∩V are open.
(d) Let a, b ∈R with a < b. Prove that the intervals [a, b], [a, ∞), (−∞, b] are
closed.
www.ebook3000.com

4.3. Arbitrary unions and intersections
83
25. In a course in formal set theory, the ordered pair (x, y) is deﬁned to be the set
{{x}, {x, y}}. Use this deﬁnition to prove that
(x, y) = (z, w) iﬀx = z and y = w.
26. Use induction on n ≥0 to prove that if the set A has n elements, then P(A)
has 2n elements. (This exercise is also Exercise 8.2.9a, where a hint is given.)
4.3. Arbitrary unions and intersections
4.3.1. Arbitrary ﬁnite union and intersection. In the previous sections, we
have examined several types of operations on sets, including the union A ∪B and
intersection A ∩B of two sets A and B.
If we are given three sets, say A =
{1, 3, 5}, B = {2, 5, 7}, and C = {3, 5}, then only a moment’s thought tells you
that A ∪B ∪C = {1, 2, 3, 5, 7} and A ∩B ∩C = {5}. However, since union and
intersection are operations deﬁned on two sets, not three, one must be more careful
to deﬁne what one means by, say, A ∪B ∪C. There are two obvious ways to deﬁne
it:
A ∪B ∪C = (A ∪B) ∪C
or
A ∪B ∪C = A ∪(B ∪C),
and by Exercise 4.2.1d, both lead to the same set. This means that the notation
A ∪B ∪C is unambiguous, and we can therefore generalize this notion to n sets,
where n ∈Z+, using induction.
For the remainder of this section, we ﬁx a universal set U.
Deﬁnition 4.3.1. Let n ∈Z+ and A1, A2, . . . , An be sets. Then
n

i=1
Ai = A1 ∪A2 ∪· · · ∪An
= {x ∈U | there exists i ∈Z+ with 1 ≤i ≤n such that x ∈Ai},
n

i=1
Ai = A1 ∩A2 ∩· · · ∩An
= {x ∈U | for all i ∈Z+ with 1 ≤i ≤n, x ∈Ai}.
Not surprisingly, parts (11)–(14) of Theorem 4.2.6 generalize to this setting.
Theorem 4.3.2. Let n ∈Z+. Then for all sets A, B1, B2, . . . , Bn,
(1) A ∪(B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn) = (A ∪B1) ∩(A ∪B2) ∩· · · ∩(A ∪Bn).
(2) A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn) = (A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bn).
(3) B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn = B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn.
(4) B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn = B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn.
Proof. We prove only part (2) by induction on n ≥1, leaving the other parts for
Exercise 4.3.6.

84
4. Sets
Base Case: Let A, B1 be sets.
The statement of the Base Case is that
A ∩B1 = A ∩B1,
which is certainly true.
Inductive Step: Let m ≥1 and assume that for all sets C, D1, . . . , Dm,
C ∩(D1 ∪D2 ∪· · · ∪Dm) = (C ∩D1) ∪(C ∩D2) ∪· · · ∪(C ∩Dm).
Next, let A, B1, . . . , Bm+1 be arbitrary sets. We must prove that
A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bm+1) = (A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bm+1).
First note that
A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bm+1) = A ∩((B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bm) ∪Bm+1)
= (A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bm)) ∪(A ∩Bm+1)
by Theorem 4.2.6(12). Then
(A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bm)) ∪(A ∩Bm+1)
= ((A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bm)) ∪(A ∩Bm+1)
by the Induction Hypothesis for C = A and Di = Bi, 1 ≤i ≤m. Hence
((A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bm)) ∪(A ∩Bm+1)
= (A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bm) ∪(A ∩Bm+1)
as desired.
Hence, by mathematical induction we have that for all n ∈Z+ and for all sets
A, B1, B2, . . . , Bn,
A ∩(B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn) = (A ∩B1) ∪(A ∩B2) ∪· · · ∪(A ∩Bn).
□
Notice in particular the universal quantiﬁers on the sets in Theorem 4.3.2 and
how these universal quantiﬁers aﬀected the Inductive Step of the preceding proof.
4.3.2. Index sets. Another way to visualize the ﬁnite union n
i=1 Ai (where
i ∈Z+ and for all 1 ≤i ≤n, Ai is a set) is to note that the subscripts 1, 2, . . . , n
on the sets A1, A2, . . . , An form an index set I = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Each element i ∈I
corresponds to a set Ai, and {Ai | i ∈I} is called an indexed family of sets. Then
n

i=1
Ai = {x ∈U | (∃i ∈I)[x ∈Ai]}
and, analogously,
n

i=1
Ai = {x ∈U | (∀i ∈I)[x ∈Ai]}.
If we have an inﬁnite list A1, A2, A3, . . . of sets, then the index set is Z+.
www.ebook3000.com

4.3. Arbitrary unions and intersections
85
Deﬁnition 4.3.3. Given sets Ai, i ∈Z+, with underlying universal set U, the
union ∞
i=1 Ai and intersection ∞
i=1 Ai are deﬁned by
∞

i=1
Ai = {x ∈U | (∃i ∈Z+)[x ∈Ai]},
∞

i=1
Ai = {x ∈U | (∀i ∈Z+)[x ∈Ai]}.
We may also denote ∞
i=1 Ai by 
i∈Z+ Ai and ∞
i=1 Ai by 
i∈Z+ Ai.
We begin with an easy example to illustrate these concepts.
Example 4.3.4. Given i ∈Z+, let Ai = {i, i + 1}; i.e.,
A1 = {1, 2},
A2 = {2, 3},
A3 = {3, 4},
. . . .
We’ll ﬁnd ∞
i=1 Ai and ∞
i=1 Ai. A picture is useful for visualizing these sets.
We draw the sets A1, A2, . . . above a number line:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
i = 1
i = 2
i = 3
i = 4
...
...
For ∞
i=1 Ai, we want the collection of all numbers that show up in at least one
Ai, so it appears that ∞
i=1 Ai = Z+. For ∞
i=1 Ai, we want the collection of all
numbers that show up in all the Ai’s, so it appears that ∞
i=1 Ai = ∅.
Proving that our claims are true is not diﬃcult, but it does require that we
completely understand Deﬁnition 4.3.3. Students who are encountering these ideas
for the ﬁrst time may wish to omit the proofs on their ﬁrst reading. For this ﬁrst
example, we’ll show all details in order to fully illustrate the concepts.
First, to show that ∞
i=1 Ai = Z+, we must show that ∞
i=1 Ai ⊆Z+ and
Z+ ⊆∞
i=1 Ai. The containment ∞
i=1 Ai ⊆Z+ is automatic, since the elements of
Ai are positive integers by deﬁnition.
Next, the Given-Goal diagram for Z+ ⊆∞
i=1 Ai is
Given
Goal
n ∈Z+
(∃i ∈Z+)[n ∈Ai]
Here we will use the deﬁnition of the Ai’s.
Similarly, to show that ∞
i=1 Ai = ∅, we must show that ∅⊆∞
i=1 Ai and
∞
i=1 Ai ⊆∅. We know the ﬁrst statement is true by Proposition 4.1.9. For the
second statement, Exercise 4.2.2 tells us we can prove Z+ ⊆∞
i=1 Ai instead, since
∅= Z+ in this context. Our Given-Goal diagram is

86
4. Sets
Given
Goal
n ∈Z+ arbitrary
n /∈
∞

i=1
Ai
i.e., (∃i ∈Z+)[n /∈Ai]
So, our goal is to demonstrate a particular i ∈Z+ with n /∈Ai.
We are now ready to prove that ∞
i=1 Ai = Z+ and ∞
i=1 Ai = ∅.
Proof. First we show that ∞
i=1 Ai = Z+. Let n ∈∞
i=1 Ai. We must show that
n ∈Z+.
Since n ∈∞
i=1 Ai, by Deﬁnition 4.3.3 we know we may ﬁx i ∈Z+
such that n ∈Ai. Since Ai ⊆Z+, we immediately have that n ∈Z+. Hence
∞
i=1 Ai ⊆Z+.
Next let n ∈Z+. We must show that n ∈∞
i=1 Ai. Note that An = {n, n + 1},
so that n ∈An, and hence n ∈∞
i=1 Ai, as desired. Thus Z+ ⊆∞
i=1 Ai and hence
Z+ = ∞
i=1 Ai.
Next we show that ∞
i=1 Ai = ∅.
Note ﬁrst that ∅⊆∞
i=1 Ai by Proposi-
tion 4.1.9.
To show that ∞
i=1 Ai ⊆∅, we let n ∈Z+ be arbitrary.
We must
show that n /∈∞
i=1 Ai.
Note that n /∈An+1 = {n + 1, n + 2}, and hence by
Deﬁnition 4.3.3, n /∈∞
i=1 Ai. Thus ∞
i=1 Ai = ∅, as desired.
□♦
A typical example in an analysis course is the following.
Example 4.3.5. Given i ∈Z+, deﬁne Ai = [0, 1
i ). Find 
i∈Z+ Ai and 
i∈Z+ Ai.
As before, we ﬁrst make a picture to illustrate the family of sets.
0
1
i = 1
i = 2
i = 3
i = 4
...
...
We claim that 
i∈Z+ Ai = [0, 1) and 
i∈Z+ Ai = {0}.
Once again, students who are encountering these ideas for the ﬁrst time may
wish to omit the proof on their ﬁrst reading.
The proof relies on the result of
Exercise 2.4.5, which follows from the Completeness Axiom for R and is proved in
Corollary 9.3.2(3).
Proof. First we show that 
i∈Z+ Ai = [0, 1). Let x ∈
i∈Z+ Ai, and by Deﬁni-
tion 4.3.3, ﬁx i ∈Z+ such that x ∈Ai. We must show that x ∈[0, 1). Since x ∈Ai,
we know that x ∈[0, 1
i ). Thus 0 ≤x < 1
i ≤1, since i ≥1. Hence x ∈[0, 1) as
desired and 
i∈Z+ Ai ⊆[0, 1).
Next let x ∈[0, 1). Then x ∈A1 by deﬁnition, and hence x ∈
i∈Z+ Ai by
deﬁnition. Thus [0, 1) ⊆
i∈Z+ Ai, and hence 
i∈Z+ Ai = [0, 1).
www.ebook3000.com

4.3. Arbitrary unions and intersections
87
Next we show that 
i∈Z+ Ai = {0}. Let x ∈
i∈Z+ Ai. We must show that
x = 0. Assume for a contradiction that x ̸= 0; then x > 0, since all elements of

i∈Z+ Ai are nonnegative. By the result of Exercise 2.4.5, we may ﬁx n ∈Z+ such
that 1
n < x. Thus x /∈An = [0, 1
n), and hence x /∈
i∈Z+ Ai, by Deﬁnition 4.3.3.
This is a contradiction, and hence x = 0. Thus 
i∈Z+ Ai ⊆{0}.
Next let x ∈{0}; i.e., let x = 0. We must show that x ∈
i∈Z+ Ai. Let i ∈Z+
be arbitrary. Since Ai = [0, 1
i ), 0 ∈Ai. Thus x ∈
i∈Z+ Ai by Deﬁnition 4.3.3, and
hence {0} ⊆
i∈Z+ Ai. It follows that 
i∈Z+ Ai = {0}.
□♦
In the previous examples, our index sets have been subsets of the integers. Note
that we may take any nonempty set I to be an index set.
Deﬁnition 4.3.6. Let I be a nonempty set and let {Ai | i ∈I} be a family of sets
indexed by I, with underlying universal set U. Then

i∈I
Ai = {x ∈U | (∃i ∈I)[x ∈Ai]},

i∈I
Ai = {x ∈U | (∀i ∈I)[x ∈Ai]}.
We use this deﬁnition to prove that the generalization of Theorem 4.2.6 holds
in this context.
Theorem 4.3.7. Let I be a nonempty set and let {Ai | i ∈I} be an indexed family
of sets, relative to some universal set U. Let B be a set. Then:
(1) For each j ∈I,

i∈I
Ai ⊆Aj.
(2) For each j ∈I, Aj ⊆

i∈I
Ai.
(3) B ∪

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
(B ∪Ai).
(4) B ∩

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
(B ∩Ai).
(5)

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
Ai.
(6)

i∈I
Ai =

i∈I
Ai.
Proof. Let I be a nonempty set and let {Ai | i ∈I} be an indexed family of sets,
relative to some universal set U. Let B be a set. We prove parts (3) and (5), leaving
the rest of the results for Exercise 4.3.7.
Proof of (3): We ﬁrst show that B ∪
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I(B ∪Ai).
Let x ∈B ∪
i∈I Ai. Then x ∈B or x ∈
i∈I Ai.
Case I: x ∈B.
Then for all i ∈I, x ∈B ∪Ai, and hence x ∈
i∈I(B ∪Ai).

88
4. Sets
Case II: x /∈B.
Then x ∈
i∈I Ai. Hence, for all i ∈I, x ∈Ai. This implies that for all
i ∈I, x ∈B ∪Ai. Thus x ∈
i∈I(B ∪Ai).
Hence, in any case, B ∪
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I(B ∪Ai).
Next we show that 
i∈I(B ∪Ai) ⊆B ∪
i∈I Ai.
Let x ∈
i∈I(B ∪Ai). Then for all i ∈I, x ∈B ∪Ai.
Case I: x ∈B.
Then x ∈B ∪
i∈I Ai.
Case II: x /∈B.
Then, since for all i ∈I, x ∈B ∪Ai, it follows that for all i ∈I, x ∈Ai.
Hence x ∈
i∈I Ai, and so x ∈B ∪
i∈I Ai.
Thus B ∪
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I(B ∪Ai), and hence the two sets are equal.
Proof of (5): We ﬁrst show that 
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I Ai.
Let x ∈
i∈I Ai. Then x ∈U and x /∈
i∈I Ai. By Deﬁnition 4.3.6, it
follows that for all i ∈I, x /∈Ai, and hence for all i ∈I, x ∈Ai. Thus
x ∈
i∈I Ai and so 
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I Ai.
Next, we show that 
i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I Ai.
Let x ∈
i∈I Ai. Then for all i ∈I, x ∈Ai; i.e., x ∈U and for all i ∈I,
x /∈Ai. Hence, by Deﬁnition 4.3.6, x /∈
i∈I Ai, and so x ∈
i∈I Ai. Thus

i∈I Ai ⊆
i∈I Ai, and so the two sets are equal.
□
Exercises 4.3
1. For i ∈Z+, let Ai = (−i, i).
(a) Find
∞

i=1
Ai and
∞

i=1
Ai.
(b) Prove your answers to part (a) are correct.
2. For i ∈Z+ with i ≥2, let Ai =
 1
i , i

.
(a) Find
∞

i=2
Ai and
∞

i=2
Ai.
(b) Prove your answers to part (a) are correct.
3. For i ∈Z+ with i ≥2, let Ai =
 1
i , i

.
(a) Find
∞

i=2
Ai and
∞

i=2
Ai.
(b) Prove your answers to part (a) are correct.
4. For i ∈Z+ with i ≥1, let Ai =

0, 1 −1
i

.
(a) Find

i∈Z+
Ai and

i∈Z+
Ai.
(b) Prove your answers to part (a) are correct.
5. For i ∈Z+ let Ai =

1 −1
i , 3 −1
i

.
(a) Find

i∈Z+
Ai and

i∈Z+
Ai.
www.ebook3000.com

4.4. Axiomatic set theory
89
(b) Prove your answers to part (a) are correct.
6. Finish the proof of Theorem 4.3.2. Let n ∈Z+. Prove by induction on n that
for all sets A, B1, B2, . . . , Bn,
(a) A ∪(B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn) = (A ∪B1) ∩(A ∪B2) ∩· · · ∩(A ∪Bn).
(b) B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn = B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn.
(c) B1 ∩B2 ∩· · · ∩Bn = B1 ∪B2 ∪· · · ∪Bn.
7. Complete the proof of Theorem 4.3.7.
8. Let I be a nonempty set and let {Ai | i ∈I} be an indexed family of sets.
Prove that

i∈I
Ai ⊆

i∈I
Ai.
9. Let I be a nonempty set and let {Ai | i ∈I} be an indexed family of sets. Let
X and Y be sets.
(a) Suppose that for all i ∈I, X ⊆Ai. Prove that X ⊆

i∈I
Ai.
(b) Suppose that for all i ∈I, Ai ⊆X. Prove that

i∈I
Ai ⊆X.
10. Let {Ai | i ∈Z+} be an indexed family of sets.
(a) Assume that for all i ∈Z+, Ai ⊆Ai+1. Prove that

i∈Z+
Ai = A1.
(b) Assume that for all i ∈Z+, Ai+1 ⊆Ai. Prove that

i∈Z+
Ai = A1.
11. (See Exercise 4.2.24.)
(a) Prove that for all n ∈Z+, for all sets A1, A2, . . . , An, if Ai is open for all
i, 1 ≤i ≤n, then
n

i=1
Ai is open.
(b) Prove that for all n ∈Z+, for all sets A1, A2, . . . , An, if Ai is closed for all
i, 1 ≤i ≤n, then
n

i=1
Ai is closed.
12. (See Exercise 4.2.24.) Let I ̸= ∅and let {Ai | i ∈I} be an indexed family of
sets.
(a) Prove that if Ai is open for all i ∈I, then

i∈I
Ai is also open.
(b) Prove that if Ai is closed for all i ∈I, then

i∈I
Ai is also closed.
4.4. Axiomatic set theory
We have been dealing with sets on a very informal basis, as many mathematicians
do. We have been willing to write down any object of the form {x | P(x)}, for
any “reasonable” conditional deﬁnition P(x), and call it a “set”. Based on our
experience so far, deﬁning a set is a routine matter of writing down a reasonable
conditional deﬁnition P(x), and our approach has been consistent with the early
history of set theory.

90
4. Sets
We present now a very brief history of set theory, which is based on the engaging
longer account presented in Robert S. Wolf’s A Tour through Mathematical Logic
[16]. See also [9] and [12].
From about 1870 to 1900, German mathematicians Richard Dedekind and
Georg Cantor, and others, worked to develop a theory of sets. Their motivation
was their desire to convince mathematicians of the time to adopt the use of inﬁnite
sets as mathematical objects. Their theory, which is now called “naive set theory”,3
had only two basic assumptions.
Extensionality: Two sets are equal exactly when they have the same elements.
Comprehension: Any collection {x | P(x)} is a set as long as the deﬁning
condition P(x) is well-deﬁned: given x, it must be clear that either x has this
property or it does not.
This has been the approach we have taken, and while so far we’ve encountered no
problems, potential problems do exist.
Consider now the following collection of sets that are not elements of them-
selves:
A = {x | x /∈x}.
It’s reasonable to ask whether A is an element of A. Note that if A ∈A, then A
must satisfy its deﬁning condition, and hence A /∈A. But if A /∈A, then A satisﬁes
its deﬁning condition, and hence A ∈A.
Hence we’ve proved
(4.5)
A ∈A ⇔A /∈A.
However, it certainly must be the case that A ∈A or A /∈A, but not both,
so statement (4.5) is false. Thus we have the contradiction that statement (4.5)
is simultaneously true and false. This contradiction is called Russell’s paradox in
honor of English mathematician Bertrand Russell, who announced the contradiction
in 1902 (German mathematician Ernst Zermelo also discovered this contradiction
earlier and independently).
The ultimate eﬀect of Russell’s paradox was the development of axiomatic set
theory as a “formal system”. In a “ﬁrst-order” formal system for set theory, the
only mathematical statements that can be written down are equalities involving
the variables (such as x = y), statements that say that one object is an element
of another (such as x ∈y), and statements built up from these “atomic” formulas
using the logical connectives (¬, ∧, ∨, →, ↔) and quantiﬁers (∀, ∃) applied to
variables (only).
In the intended interpretation of the formal system, variables
denote sets (only). Finally, a list of axioms is given, which provides a set of rules
that indicate what types of sets exist. For example, the statement
(∀x)(∀y)(∃z)(∀w)[w ∈z ↔(w = x ∨w = y)],
called the Pairing Axiom, states (in the intended interpretation) that for any sets
x and y, the set {x, y} exists.
Our axioms for the integers give a list of properties that the integers (and pos-
sibly other sets of “numbers”?) possess. Any ﬁrst-order formal system of axioms
3“Naive set theory” just means a nonaxiomatic approach to set theory.
www.ebook3000.com

4.4. Axiomatic set theory
91
for set theory provides a list of rules that indicates what types of sets exist. In
fact, there are several ways that one can axiomatize set theory; the earliest axiom-
atization was given by Zermelo in 1908. A common ﬁrst-order axiomatization of
set theory is denoted ZF, for Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. It contains axioms that
assert, among other things, the existence of ∅, ﬁnite sets, an inﬁnite set, and any
set built up from other sets using ∩, ∪, ⊆, and the power set operation (handled
carefully). The “subset axioms” (informally) assert that “deﬁnable” subsets of any
given set exist; for example, when P(x) is a formula in the language of set theory
whose only free variable is x, then {x ∈z | P(x)} is a subset axiom that deﬁnes
the particular subset of the set z whose elements satisfy P(x). The subset axioms
prevent sets from getting “too big”, as is the problem with the Russell set A above.
In ZF set theory, Russell’s paradox becomes a proof that there is no “set of all sets”.
Proof. Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that there exists a set X such that
for all sets y, y ∈X. By a subset axiom, Y = {z ∈X | z /∈z} is also a set. Since
Y ∈X, by deﬁnition we have Y ∈Y if and only if Y /∈Y . This is a contradiction,
since Y ∈Y and Y /∈Y cannot be both simultaneously true or both simultaneously
false. Hence no such set X of all sets exists.
□
Although the language of ZF may seem limited to you (again, the only allowed
“atomic” formulas in ZF are formulas of the form x = y or x ∈y), it turns out that
a great deal of mathematics can be derived in ZF. Informally, what we mean by
this statement is that many mathematical concepts (such as the natural numbers,
integers, rational numbers, and real numbers) can be deﬁned in, and the properties
about these concepts can be proved in, ZF. Furthermore, while it is not possible to
formally prove that ZF is “free from contradictions” (this statement can be made
precise), so far no contradictory statement has been found to be provable from ZF,
and most mathematicians believe that ZF is free from contradictions.
Adding the Axiom of Choice (ﬁrst used by Zermelo in 1904) to ZF creates
the formal system ZFC. Informally, (one form of) the Axiom of Choice states that
for every family of nonempty sets, there exists a “choice function” f such that
f(X) ∈X for every set X in the family (i.e., f chooses an element of X for
all X in the family, “all at once”).
As described in [16], the Axiom of Choice
was controversial when it was ﬁrst introduced. First, it asserts the existence of
something (a choice function) without indicating how to deﬁne it. Furthermore, it
implies both “believable” mathematical statements (such as the statement that the
Cartesian product of any family of nonempty sets is nonempty4) and “unbelievable”
mathematical statements (such as the Banach-Tarski paradox, which states that
“a solid sphere can be decomposed into a ﬁnite number of pieces that can be
reassembled (using only ‘rigid motions’, translation and rotation) into two spheres
of the same radius as the original!”)
[16, p. 226].
At this point in time, the
Axiom of Choice (AC) is accepted by most mathematicians as just another tool of
mathematical reasoning. In fact, contemporary mathematicians rarely point out
when they use the Axiom of Choice.
Studying set theory from an axiomatic point of view, including the eﬀect of
including or not including the Axiom of Choice, and the fact that a great deal of
4Another “believeable” statement implied by the Axiom of Choice can be found in Exercise 5.4.10b.

92
4. Sets
mathematics can be derived in axiomatic set theory, is the topic of another course.
Interested readers should consult [9] or [12]. What’s important for us is that, with
care, issues like Russell’s paradox do not come up in day-to-day mathematics.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 5
Functions
5.1. Deﬁnitions
Just as with the notion of set, you have been working with functions in several
previous mathematics courses. You already have an intuitive feeling about functions
and how to work with them, most likely from a calculus course. In such a course,
a function (deﬁned on some subset of R) is deﬁned to be a correspondence which
sends each real number in its domain to a unique real number. However, using the
word “correspondence” to deﬁne “function” has the same problem as using the word
“collection” to deﬁne “set”; it is mathematically imprecise and essentially leaves the
term “function” undeﬁned. In addition, we will want to consider functions deﬁned
on sets X other than the real numbers, for which the outputs of the function reside
in some set Y .
Given arbitrary nonempty sets X and Y , one can formally deﬁne a function
from X to Y to be a subset F ⊆X × Y of ordered pairs (x, y) such that for each
x ∈X, there exists a unique y ∈Y with (x, y) ∈F. Given x ∈X, the unique y ∈Y
such that (x, y) ∈F is denoted notationally by F(x). Some authors choose to deﬁne
the phrase “function from X to Y ” in this way, which enables them to work with
a formal set-theoretical deﬁnition from which to prove theorems. However, while
it is easy to avoid adding another undeﬁned term by formalizing the deﬁnition of
function as a particular kind of set, doing so adds a layer of abstraction. In practice,
most mathematicians work with functions informally, as they do with sets, and an
informal deﬁnition of function suﬃces to prove the theorems of interest in many
areas of mathematics. When a more formal approach is needed, one can return to
the set-theoretical deﬁnition.
In this book, an informal deﬁnition of function is adequate for our purpose.
All further deﬁnitions regarding functions will be precise, as will be the theorems
we state and prove about functions. Thus, we begin with the deﬁnition you are
accustomed to, with the exception that we will deﬁne a function to be a triple
93

94
5. Functions
consisting of two sets, corresponding to the domain and “target set” of outputs of
the function, and a “correspondence” between these sets.1
Deﬁnition 5.1.1. Let X and Y be nonempty sets. A function f from the set X to
the set Y is a correspondence that assigns to each element x ∈X a unique element
y ∈Y , which is denoted by f(x).
The set X is called the domain of f. We often denote the domain of a function
f by dom f. The set Y is called the codomain of f.
If x ∈X and y ∈Y are such that y = f(x), then y is called the value of f at
x, or the image of x under f, and x is called a preimage of y under f. We may also
say that f maps x to y.
Note, then, that a function is speciﬁed by giving a domain, a codomain, and
a correspondence. However, it is important to emphasize that a correspondence
does not have to be speciﬁed by a “rule”, a formula, or an algorithm. Although
each x in the domain of a function f is assigned to a unique element f(x) of the
codomain, we may not have any information regarding “how” that correspondence
takes place.
Notation 5.1.2. We indicate that f is a function from domain X to codomain Y
by writing f : X →Y . (Note that this notation then implies that X and Y are
nonempty.)
We often use the following picture to denote a function f : X →Y .
X
Y
f
Example 5.1.3. Let X = {1, 2, 3, 4} and Y = {a, b, c, d, e}. Since X is ﬁnite, we
may deﬁne a function f : X →Y by simply stating what the correspondence is for
each x ∈X:
f(1) = c,
f(2) = e,
f(3) = e,
f(4) = a.
Note that
• f is deﬁned on each element of the set X; i.e., dom f = X;
• the image of 4 under f is a, since f(4) = a;
• both 2 and 3 are preimages of e under f since f(2) = f(3) = e;
• b ∈Y is not the image of any element of X under f.
♦
Right away we see that there is no requirement that every element of the
codomain of a function must be the image of some element of the domain. There is
sometimes a diﬀerence between the codomain of a function, which you can think of
1Note that not all authors deﬁne a function as a triple, so always check and adhere to the deﬁnition
for whatever source you are using.
www.ebook3000.com

5.1. Deﬁnitions
95
as the “target set” in which the values of the function live, and the range, or image
of a function, which is the set of actual values attained by the function.
Deﬁnition 5.1.4. Let X and Y be sets, and let f : X →Y . The range of f (also
called the image of f) is the set
{y ∈Y | (∃x ∈X)[y = f(x)]} = {f(x) | x ∈X}.
We denote the range (or image) of the function f by ran f (or im f).
In Example 5.1.3 above, we see from our computations that ran f = {a, c, e},
so that ran f is not equal to the codomain of f, which is the set Y = {a, b, c, d, e}.
Recall that we can deﬁne a function as a set of ordered pairs. We are used to
thinking of this set as the “graph” of the function.
Deﬁnition 5.1.5. Let X and Y be sets, and let f : X →Y . The graph of f is the
set
Gf = {(x, y) ∈X × Y | y = f(x)}
= {(x, f(x)) | x ∈X}.
Note that we can determine a function from its domain, codomain, and graph.
In Example 5.1.3 above, Gf = {(1, c), (2, e), (3, e), (4, a)}. In that example, we
gave the correspondence that deﬁnes the function f by explicitly indicating, for
each element of the domain, the corresponding element in the codomain. Often
functions are deﬁned by formulas.
Example 5.1.6. Let f : Z →R and g : Z →R by, for all n ∈Z,
f(n) = cos(nπ),
g(n) = (−1)n.
We’ll ﬁnd the graphs Gf and Gg of these two functions. Note that when n is an
even integer,
f(n) = cos(nπ) = 1 and
g(n) = (−1)n = 1,
and when n is odd,
f(n) = cos(nπ) = −1 and
g(n) = (−1)n = −1.
Thus, we see that ran f = {−1, 1} = ran g. Furthermore,
Gf = {(n, 1) | n ∈Z is even} ∪{(n, −1) | n ∈Z is odd}
= {(2m, 1) | m ∈Z} ∪{(2m + 1, −1) | m ∈Z}
= Gg.
Note that while the correspondences of the functions are given by diﬀerent formulas,
the graphs of the functions are the same, which means that the correspondences
between the domain Z and the codomain R are the same. In other words, while
f, g : Z →R were deﬁned by diﬀerent formulas, they are the same function.
♦

96
5. Functions
Deﬁnition 5.1.7 (Function equality). Let A, B, C, D be sets. Let f : A →B and
g : C →D. Then f = g if
(1) A = C and B = D and
(2) for all x ∈A, f(x) = g(x).
Deﬁnition 5.1.7 says that a function f : X →Y is determined by its graph, not
by its rule or formula. In Example 5.1.6, dom f = dom g = Z, the codomains of f
and g are both R, and for all n ∈Z, f(n) = g(n). Hence f = g, by Deﬁnition 5.1.7.
Example 5.1.8. Let f : R →R and g : R →R by, for all x ∈R,
f(x) =
√
x2,
g(x) = x.
Note that f ̸= g, since Deﬁnition 5.1.7(2) does not hold: we can ﬁnd x ∈R such
that f(x) ̸= g(x).
f(−5) =

(−5)2 =
√
25 = 5, and
g(−5) = −5.
Hence, by Deﬁnition 5.1.7, f ̸= g.
♦
The function g in Example 5.1.8 is called the identity function on R. We can
deﬁne this notion more generally.
Deﬁnition 5.1.9. Let X be a set. The identity function on X is the function
IX : X →X deﬁned by, for all x ∈X, IX(x) = x.
We consider several more examples below. Our next example considers a poly-
nomial function.
Deﬁnition 5.1.10. Let n ∈Z with n ≥0, and let a0, a1, . . . , an ∈R such that
an ̸= 0. The function p : R →R is a polynomial of degree n with real coeﬃcients
a0, a1, . . . , an if for all x ∈R,
p(x) = anxn + an−1xn−1 + · · · + a1x + a0.
The function q : R →R such that q(x) = 0 for all x ∈R is the zero polynomial,
whose degree is undeﬁned.
Example 5.1.11. Let f : R →R by, for all x ∈R, f(x) = x2 + 1.
It is important to again emphasize the deﬁnitions and proper use of notation
and terminology. First note that the graph of f is
Gf = {(x, y) ∈R2 | y = x2 + 1}
= {(x, x2 + 1) | x ∈R}.
Here the graph of f can be illustrated by the usual graph in R2. (See Figure 5.1.)
In addition,
• f is the function;
• f(x) is the image of x under f (note that f and f(x) are not the same!);
• 3 and −3 are preimages of 10 under f, since f(3) = 10 = f(−3);
www.ebook3000.com

5.1. Deﬁnitions
97
x
y
Figure 5.1. Graph of y = x2 + 1.
• 0 is not the image of any real number under f, since for no x ∈R can we
have x2 + 1 = 0, or x2 = −1. Phrased another way, note that for all x ∈R,
x2 + 1 ≥0 + 1 = 1. Hence ran f ⊆[1, ∞), 0 /∈ran f, and ran f ̸= R.
In fact, ran f = [1, ∞). To show that [1, ∞) ⊆ran f, we need Theorem 2.1.5
on the existence of nth roots.
Scratchwork: We know that we must begin with an arbitrary element of [1, ∞).
Deﬁnition 5.1.4 tells us exactly how to prove that a real number is an element of
ran f.
We know that
ran f = {y ∈R | (∃x ∈dom f)[y = f(x)]}
= {y ∈R | (∃x ∈R)[y = x2 + 1]}.
We thus have the following Given-Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
y ∈R with y ≥1 arbitrary
ﬁnd x ∈dom f with y = x2 + 1
We work backwards. We want y = x2 + 1, so we need x2 = y −1. Since y ≥1,
we know y −1 ≥0. Thus by Theorem 2.1.5, √y −1 exists (i.e., it is a real number)
and (√y −1)2 = y −1; i.e., √y −1 is the x we seek. We are ready to prove our
claim.
Claim. ran f = [1, ∞).
Proof. We ﬁrst show that ran f ⊆[1, ∞). Let y ∈ran f. We must show y ∈[1, ∞);
i.e., y ≥1. By Deﬁnition 5.1.4, we may ﬁx x ∈dom f = R such that y = x2 + 1.
Since x2 ≥0, y = x2 + 1 ≥1. Hence ran f ⊆[1, ∞).
Next, we show that [1, ∞) ⊆ran f. Let y ∈[1, ∞). We must ﬁnd x ∈dom f =
R such that y = f(x).

98
5. Functions
Consider x = √y −1, which exists by Theorem 2.1.5 since y −1 ≥0; i.e.,
x ∈dom f = R. Then
f(x) = f(

y −1)
= (

y −1)2 + 1
= y −1 + 1 = y,
as desired. Hence [1, ∞) ⊆ran f.
□♦
As we have previously emphasized, we note that you should be sure not to
confuse the scratchwork, where we worked backwards to ﬁnd the desired x ∈dom f
such that y = f(x), and the actual proof that [1, ∞) ⊆ran f. The deﬁnition of
ran f is existential, and hence we followed our usual procedure of explicitly stating
the object we sought (x = √y −1) and verifying that it worked (x ∈dom f and
y = f(x)). The proof looks very diﬀerent from the scratchwork, and in particular,
the proof generally does not show how the object we sought was obtained.
The next example emphasizes again that a function is speciﬁed by giving the
domain, the codomain, and the correspondence.
Example 5.1.12. Let g : R →[1, ∞) by, for all x ∈R, g(x) = x2 + 1. Note
that by Deﬁnition 5.1.7, g is not the same function as the function f deﬁned in
Example 5.1.11. This is because while f and g have the same domain and are
deﬁned by the same formula, f and g have diﬀerent codomains.
♦
In courses like calculus, functions are typically speciﬁed by a formula only, and
the domain and codomain are taken from context.
Example 5.1.13. Let f(x) = 2x+1
x−4 .
We will adopt the following convention.
Convention. When the domain and codomain of a function are not given, we take
the domain of the function to be the implicit, or natural, domain. The universe
under consideration is taken from context, and the implicit domain is the largest
subset of that universe on which the function is deﬁned. Similarly, the codomain is
taken from context.
This function is a typical function from calculus, and the codomain of any such
function is R (which says that f is a real-valued function), unless we explicitly
specify otherwise. The domain is a subset of R. Here, the implicit domain is
dom f = {x ∈R | x ̸= 4} = (−∞, 4) ∪(4, ∞).
Thus f : (−∞, 4) ∪(4, ∞) →R.
We next ﬁnd ran f and verify that our answer is correct.
Scratchwork for ran f: We must ﬁnd which numbers y are of the form f(x),
for some x ∈dom f. One way of doing this is to take advantage of the fact that f
is a rational function (i.e., a function of the form P (x)
Q(x), where P(x) and Q(x) are
polynomials) in which the degrees of the numerator and denominator are both 1.
We could use long division, but instead we’ll add 0 in a clever way to the numerator
www.ebook3000.com

5.1. Deﬁnitions
99
of f(x); our goal here is to achieve a term in the numerator which is a factor of
x −4:
2x + 1
x −4 = (2x + 1) −8 + 8
x −4
= 2x −8 + 9
x −4
= 2(x −4) + 9
x −4
= 2 +
9
x −4.
Since
9
x−4 is never 0, we see that 2x+1
x−4 = 2 +
9
x−4 can never equal 2. Thus we
conjecture that ran f = {y ∈R | y ̸= 2} = (−∞, 2) ∪(2, ∞).
The Given-Goal diagram for showing {y ∈R | y ̸= 2} ⊆ran f is similar to the
previous example.
Given
Goal
y ∈R with y ̸= 2 arbitrary
ﬁnd x ∈dom f with y = 2x+1
x−4
As before, we should work backwards to ﬁnd the desired x such that y = f(x),
and we must not forget to verify that x ∈dom f.
Claim. ran f = {y ∈R | y ̸= 2}.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that ran f ⊆{y ∈R | y ̸= 2}. Let y ∈ran f. Then we may
ﬁx x ∈dom f, i.e., x ∈R with x ̸= 4, such that y = f(x) = 2x+1
x−4 . Since
2x + 1
x −4 = 2(x −4) + 9
x −4
= 2 +
9
x −4
and
9
x−4 ̸= 0, y = 2 +
9
x−4 ̸= 2. Hence ran f ⊆{y ∈R | y ̸= 2}.
Next we show that {y ∈R | y ̸= 2} ⊆ran f. Let y ∈R with y ̸= 2. We must
ﬁnd x ∈dom f, i.e., x ∈R with x ̸= 4, such that y = f(x). Consider x = 4y+1
y−2
(found by working backwards), which is deﬁned since y ̸= 2. Note that x ∈dom f,
i.e., x ̸= 4, since
x = 4y + 1
y −2 = (4y + 1) −8 + 8
y −2
= 4(y −2) + 9
y −2
= 4 +
9
y −2
and
9
y−2 ̸= 0.
Next, note that y = f(x), since
f(x) = f
4y + 1
y −2

=
2

4y+1
y−2

+ 1

4y+1
y−2

−4
=
2

4y+1
y−2

+ 1

4y+1
y−2

−4
· y −2
y −2
= 2(4y + 1) + y −2
4y + 1 −4(y −2)
= 9y
9 = y,
as desired.

100
5. Functions
Hence, {y ∈R | y ̸= 2} ⊆ran f, and so
ran f = {y ∈R | y ̸= 2}.
□
Two additional remarks are in order. First, another way we could have conjec-
tured the fact that ran f = {y ∈R | y ̸= 2} is to begin with y = f(x) = 2x+1
x−4 and
note that solving for x requires that y ̸= 2. Second, we could have used a proof by
contradiction to show that when x = 4y+1
y−2 , x ̸= 4.
♦
It is important to note that in this last example, we have been able to verify
ran f algebraically. This is not always possible, and indeed, ﬁnding the range of
an arbitrary real-valued function can be very diﬃcult. Sometimes analytic (i.e.,
calculus) methods are necessary, such as the use of a theorem from calculus called
the Intermediate Value Theorem (see [11] or any calculus textbook).
Of course, not all functions map subsets of the real numbers to the real numbers.
We consider several further examples.
Example 5.1.14. Let f : Z →Z by, for all n ∈Z,
f(n) =

n −1
if n is even,
n + 5
if n is odd.
This piecewise-deﬁned function gives the value of f(n) according to whether
n ∈Z is even or odd. For example, f(−2) = −2−1 = −3, and f(11) = 11+5 = 16.
What about ran f? First, as an example, note that −54 ∈ran f. To see this,
note that n −1 is odd when n ∈Z is even, and n + 5 is even when n ∈Z is odd.
Working backwards, we therefore see that, since −54 is even, we need an odd integer
n such that f(n) = n+5 = −54. Thus, −54 ∈ran f since f(−59) = −59+5 = −54.
In Exercise 5.1.5, you will prove that ran f = Z.
♦
Example 5.1.15. Recall that P(Z) is the set of all subsets of Z. Consider the
function f : P(Z) →P(Z) by, for all A ∈P(Z), f(A) = A, where A is the
complement of A in Z. Note therefore that each element of the domain of f, i.e.,
each input of f, is a set of integers and that each element of the codomain of f,
and hence each output of f, is a set of integers. Note that
f({−3, 2, 17}) = {n ∈Z | n ̸= −3 and n ̸= 2 and n ̸= 17},
f({99, 100, 101, . . . }) = f({n ∈Z | n ≥99})
= {n ∈Z | n ≤98} = {. . . , 96, 97, 98},
f({n ∈Z | n ̸= 0}) = {0},
and
f(E) = O,
where E = {n ∈Z | n is even} and O = {n ∈Z | n is odd}.
Since A = A for all sets A ⊆Z by Theorem 4.2.6(17), we suspect that ran f =
P(Z). Note that ran f ⊆P(Z) by the deﬁnition of f. Each element of ran f must
be an element of the codomain of f, which is speciﬁed here to be P(Z). Phrased
another way, any output of f is a set of integers, by deﬁnition of f.
www.ebook3000.com

5.1. Deﬁnitions
101
To show that P(Z) ⊆ran f, we know we must begin with an arbitrary element
of P(Z); i.e., we must begin with an arbitrary set B of integers. As before, the
deﬁnition of ran f tells us exactly how to proceed.
Given
Goal
B ∈P(Z) arbitrary
ﬁnd X ∈P(Z) with B = f(X) = X
Claim. ran f = P(Z).
Proof. First note that since f : P(Z) →P(Z), we know that ran f ⊆P(Z) by
deﬁnition. Thus, we must show that P(Z) ⊆ran f.
Let B ∈P(Z); i.e., B ⊆Z.
We must ﬁnd X ⊆Z with B = f(X).
By
Theorem 4.2.6(17), f(B) = B = B. Thus B ∈ran f, and so P(Z) ⊆ran f, as
desired. Hence ran f = P(Z).
□♦
Example 5.1.16. Let f : Z × Z →Z by, for all m, n ∈Z, f((m, n)) = m + n.
Here, the function f maps each ordered pair (m, n) of integers to a single integer.
For example,
f((15, 7)) = 22
and
f((4, −9)) = −5.
To simplify the notation, the value f((m, n)) of f at (m, n) is often denoted
by f(m, n) instead.
In other words, we might write f(15, 7) = 22, rather than
f((15, 7)) = 22.
We know that ran f ⊆Z, since f : Z2 →Z (here, we are using the notation Z2
as usual for the set Z × Z). We show ran f = Z by showing that Z ⊆ran f. The
Given-Goal diagram emphasizes what we must show:
Given
Goal
k ∈Z arbitrary
ﬁnd (m, n) ∈Z2 with k = f(m, n)
i.e.,
Given
Goal
k ∈Z arbitrary
ﬁnd m, n ∈Z with k = m + n
Claim. ran f = Z.
Proof. First note that since f : Z × Z →Z, ran f ⊆Z, by deﬁnition. Thus, we
must show that Z ⊆ran f.
Let k ∈Z. We must ﬁnd m, n ∈Z with f(m, n) = k. Note that f(k, 0) =
k + 0 = k. Hence k ∈ran f, and so Z ⊆ran f, as desired.
□♦

102
5. Functions
A function f : X × X →X which maps each ordered pair of elements of
a set X to X is often called a binary operation on X. Thus, the function f in
Example 5.1.16 is a binary operation on Z. Phrased more naturally, addition (+)
is a binary operation on the integers.
Example 5.1.17. Let g : R2 →R2 by, for all x, y ∈R, g(x, y) = (−y, x). Here,
the function maps ordered pairs of real numbers to ordered pairs of real numbers.
For example,
g(
√
2, 3.97) = (−3.97,
√
2)
and
g

−π,
3√
4
7

=

−3√
4
7
, −π

.
Let’s show that ran g = R2. The Given-Goal diagram for R2 ⊆ran g is given
below; note our careful use of variables here, which follows our usual policy of taking
care not to use a variable whose meaning in the current proof is already ﬁxed.
Given
Goal
(z, w) ∈R2 arbitrary
ﬁnd (x, y) ∈R2 with g(x, y) = (z, w)
Before you read the proof below, work backwards to determine the candidates
for x and y.
Claim. ran g = R2.
Proof. First note that since g : R2 →R2, ran g ⊆R2 by deﬁnition. Thus, we must
show that R2 ⊆ran g.
Let (z, w) ∈R2. We must ﬁnd (x, y) ∈R2 such that g(x, y) = (z, w). Consider
(x, y) = (w, −z); i.e., x = w and y = −z. Then
g(x, y) = g(w, −z)
= (−(−z), w)
= (z, w),
as desired. Hence R2 ⊆ran g.
□♦
Exercises 5.1
1. For each of the following functions determine the domain and range of f. Prove
that your answer for ran f is correct.
(a) f(x) = 7 −2x.
(b) f(x) = 3x −2
2x + 1.
(c) f(x) = 4x −2
3x + 1.
(d) f(x) = x2 + 4x + 1. (HINT: Complete the square to help you ﬁnd a
conjecture for ran f.)
www.ebook3000.com

5.1. Deﬁnitions
103
(e) f(x) =
1
1 + x2 . (HINT: Note that f(x) > 0 for all x (why?), and work
backwards or analyze the form of f(x) to ﬁnd an additional restriction on
the values of f(x).)
(f) f(x) = 4 −√1 −x.
2. Let f : R2 →R by, for all x, y ∈R, f(x, y) = y. (Note that f is a projection
function; it projects all inputs (x, y) ∈R2 onto their second coordinate.) Prove
that ran f = R.
3. Let f(x, y) = (2y, 1
x). What is the implied domain of f; i.e., what is the largest
subset of R2 on which f is deﬁned? What is the most natural codomain of f?
Find ran f and prove that your answer is correct.
4. Let f : Rn →Rn by, for all (a1, . . . , an) ∈Rn, f(a1, . . . , an) = (−an, . . . , −a1).
Prove that ran f = Rn.
5. Let f : Z →Z be deﬁned by, for all n ∈Z,
f(n) =

n −1
if n is even,
n + 5
if n is odd.
Prove that ran f = Z.
6. This problem assumes the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic; see Theo-
rem 2.3.3.
Let f : Z+ →Z × Z by, for all n ∈Z+, f(n) = (a, b), where a and b are the
unique integers such that n = 2a · b, with b odd.
(a) Find f(1), f(32), f(100), and f(112).
(b) Find n, m ∈Z+ such that f(n) = (5, 3) and f(m) = (1, 1).
7. This problem requires calculus. Let
P = {anxn + an−1xn−1 + · · · + a1x + a0 | n ≥0, a0, . . . , an ∈R}
be the set of all polynomials with real coeﬃcients. Let F : P →P by, for all
p ∈P, F(p) = p′, where p′ is the derivative of p.
(a) Find F(3x5 −7
3x2 + x).
(b) Find p ∈P such that F(p) = 1
2x3 + 5x2 −4. Is p unique?
(c) Find ran F and prove your answer is correct.
8. Are the functions f(x) = 16 −x2
x + 4
and g(x) = 4 −x equal? Why or why not?
9. Let f : D →R, where D ⊆R. Say that f is increasing on D if for all x, y ∈D,
x < y =⇒f(x) < f(y).
Similarly, f is decreasing on D if for all x, y ∈D,
x < y =⇒f(x) > f(y).
(a) Show that f(x) = 5 −2x is decreasing on R.
(b) Show that f(x) = x2 is increasing on [0, ∞).
(c) Show that f(x) = x2 is decreasing on (−∞, 0].
(d) Show that f(x) = x3 is increasing on R. (HINT: See Exercise 2.1.8.)
10. A function F : R →R is a
(a) rigid motion if for all x, y ∈R with x ̸= y, |x −y| = |F(x) −F(y)|;

104
5. Functions
(b) translation if there exists b ∈R such that for all x ∈R, F(x) = x + b (in
this case, we say that F is the “translation by b” and denote F by the
notation Tb);
(c) reﬂection if there exists a ∈R such that for all x ∈R, F(x) = 2a −x (in
this case, we say that F is the “reﬂection through the point a” and denote
F by Ra).
Prove that F is a rigid motion if and only if F is a translation or a reﬂection.
11. The function d : R × R →R is a metric if for all x, y, z ∈R,
• d(x, y) ≥0;
• d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y;
• d(x, y) = d(y, x);
• d(x, y) ≤d(x, z) + d(z, y).
Prove that the following functions are metrics.
(a) d : R × R →R by, for all x, y ∈R, d(x, y) = |x −y|.
(b) d1 : R × R →R by, for all x, y ∈R, d1(x, y) = min{1, d(x, y)}, where d
is the metric in part (a) and min{a, b} denotes the least element in {a, b},
when a, b ∈R.
(c) d2 : R × R →R by, for all x, y ∈R, d2(x, y) =
d(x,y)
1+d(x,y), where d is the
metric in part (a). Also prove that d2 is a bounded metric; i.e., there exists
M ∈R such that for all x, y ∈R, d2(x, y) ≤M.
12. Let ∗be a binary operation on Z (i.e., ∗: Z×Z →Z) deﬁned by, for all a, b ∈Z,
∗(a, b) = a + b −31. For convenience, we write a ∗b = a + b −31 instead of
∗(a, b) = a + b −31.
(a) Prove that for all a, b, c ∈Z, a ∗(b ∗c) = (a ∗b) ∗c (i.e., ∗is associative).
(b) Prove that there exists a unique e ∈Z such that for all a ∈Z, e ∗a = a =
a ∗e.
(c) For the integer e in part (b), prove that for all a ∈Z, there exists b ∈Z
such that a ∗b = e = b ∗a.
This problem proves that Z, together with the binary operation ∗, forms a
group (see Table 6.2).
5.2. Function composition
Function composition is a way of constructing new functions from “old” ones.
Deﬁnition 5.2.1. Let A, B, C, and D be sets. Let f : A →B and g : C →D, with
ran f ⊆C. The composite (composition) of f and g is the function g ◦f : A →D
deﬁned by, for all x ∈A, (g ◦f)(x) = g(f(x)).
When f : A →B and g : B →C, then we have the following picture for the
function g ◦f : A →C.
www.ebook3000.com

5.2. Function composition
105
A
B
C
f
g ◦f
g
Example 5.2.2. Let f : R →R and g : R →R by, for all x ∈R,
f(x) = x2,
g(x) = x + 1.
Then f ◦g : R →R is deﬁned by, for all x ∈R,
(f ◦g)(x) = f(g(x)) = f(x + 1) = (x + 1)2,
and g ◦f : R →R is deﬁned by, for all x ∈R,
(g ◦f)(x) = g(f(x)) = g(x2) = x2 + 1.
We suspect that f ◦g ̸= g ◦f, but recall that functions deﬁned by diﬀerent
formulas might nevertheless be equal, i.e., the same function. Thus, we must use
Deﬁnition 5.1.7 to prove f ◦g ̸= g ◦f. Since f ◦g and g ◦f have the same domains
and codomains, we must show that
(∃x ∈R)[(f ◦g)(x) ̸= (g ◦f)(x)].
Thus, we see that f ◦g ̸= g ◦f since
(f ◦g)(1) = 4
and
(g ◦f)(1) = 2.
♦
Example 5.2.2 illustrates the following important fact.
Usually f ◦g ̸= g ◦f, even when both compositions are deﬁned.
Example 5.2.3. Consider the sets X = {1, 2, 3, 4}, Y = {a, b, c, d, e}, and Z =
{0, 5, 10, 15, 20}. Deﬁne functions f : X →Y and g : Y →Z by
f(1) = c,
f(2) = e,
f(3) = e,
f(4) = a,
g(a) = 10,
g(b) = 0,
g(c) = 5,
g(d) = 20,
g(e) = 15.
Then g ◦f : X →Z, and (g ◦f)(1) = g(f(1)) = g(c) = 5. Similarly,
(g ◦f)(2) = 15,
(g ◦f)(3) = 15,
(g ◦f)(4) = 10.
On the other hand, the composite function f ◦g is not deﬁned, since the range of
g is not a subset of the domain of f.
♦
Example 5.2.4. Let f : R →R and g : R →R by, for all x ∈R,
f(x) =

x2
if x ≥0,
x −2
if x < 0;
g(x) =

x + 3
if x ≥4,
2x
if x < 4.

106
5. Functions
We ﬁnd g ◦f and leave f ◦g for Exercise 5.2.2. Given x ∈R,
(g ◦f)(x) =

g(x2)
if x ≥0,
g(x −2)
if x < 0.
To compute g(x2) when x ≥0, the deﬁnition of g tells us that we must consider
whether x2 ≥4 or x2 < 4. Since x ≥0, x2 ≥4 when x ≥2, and x2 < 4 when
0 ≤x < 2. Thus, g(x2) = x2 + 3 when x ≥2, and g(x2) = 2x2 when 0 ≤x < 2.
Similarly, to compute g(x −2) when x < 0, we must consider whether x −2 ≥4 or
x −2 < 4. When x < 0, x −2 < −2 < 4, so g(x −1) = 2(x −2). Thus, we have
(g ◦f)(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
x2 + 3
if x ≥2,
2x2
if 0 ≤x < 2,
2x −4
if x < 0.
♦
We end this section by proving two important facts about function composition.
Recall that IX denotes the identity function on the set X.
Proposition 5.2.5. Let X, Y , Z, and W be sets. Let f : X →Y , g : Y →Z, and
h : Z →W. Then
(1) (h ◦g) ◦f = h ◦(g ◦f); i.e., function composition is associative, and
(2) f ◦IX = f = IY ◦f.
A picture illustrating the functions is given below.
X
Y
Z
W
f
g ◦f
g
h ◦g
h
Proof. Let f : X →Y , g : Y →Z, and h : Z →W.
(1) We use Deﬁnition 5.1.7 to show that (h ◦g) ◦f = h ◦(g ◦f). First note that
(h ◦g) ◦f, h ◦(g ◦f) : X →W. Next, we must show that for all x ∈X,
((h ◦g) ◦f)(x) = (h ◦(g ◦f))(x).
Let x ∈X. Then
((h ◦g) ◦f)(x) = (h ◦g)(f(x)) = h(g(f(x))),
and
(h ◦(g ◦f))(x) = h((g ◦f)(x)) = h(g(f(x))).
Hence (h ◦g) ◦f = h ◦(g ◦f) by Deﬁnition 5.1.7.
(2) We show that f ◦IX = f and leave the proof that IY ◦f = f as Exercise 5.2.3.
First note that IX : X →X and f : X →Y , so f ◦IX : X →Y . Next let
x ∈X. Then
(f ◦IX)(x) = f(IX(x)) = f(x),
by deﬁnition of the identity function IX. Hence f ◦IX = f, as desired, by
Deﬁnition 5.1.7.
□
www.ebook3000.com

5.3. One-to-one and onto functions
107
Exercises 5.2
1. Find f ◦g and g ◦f for each pair of functions f and g.
(a) f, g : R →R by f(x) = x2 −3x and g(x) = 5x −2.
(b) f, g : Z →Z by f(n) = 2n + 3 and
g(n) =

2n −1
if n is even,
n + 1
if n is odd.
2. Let f : R →R, g : R →R by, for all x ∈R,
f(x) =

x2
if x ≥0,
x −2
if x < 0,
g(x) =

x + 3
if x ≥4,
2x
if x < 4.
Find f ◦g.
3. Complete the proof of Proposition 5.2.5(2).
Let X and Y be sets, and let
f : X →Y . Prove that IY ◦f = f.
4. See Exercise 5.1.10.
(a) Prove that for all a, b ∈R, Ra ◦Rb is either the identity function IR or
a translation Tc for some c ∈R. When Ra ◦Rb ̸= IR, ﬁnd a formula for
c in terms of a and b, and indicate the relationship between Ra ◦Rb and
Rb ◦Ra.
(b) Prove that for all a, b ∈R, Ta ◦Tb is also a translation Tc for some c ∈R.
Find a formula for c in terms of a and b, and indicate the relationship
between Ta ◦Tb and Tb ◦Ta.
(c) Prove that for all a, b ∈R, Ra ◦Tb (respectively, Tb ◦Ra) is a reﬂection Rc
(respectively, Rd) for some c ∈R (respectively, d ∈R). Find formulas for
c and d in terms of a and b.
5.3. One-to-one and onto functions
Recall that the deﬁnition of f : X →Y states that each x ∈X is mapped via f
to a unique output f(x) in Y . Note that the deﬁnition of the word function does
not imply that every element of the codomain has a unique preimage, or indeed
any preimage at all.
We have already seen in Example 5.1.11 an example of a
function f : R →R, namely f(x) = x2 + 1, where it’s possible for an element of
the codomain to have more than one preimage (here, f(−2) = 5 = f(2)) and for an
element of the codomain to have no preimages at all (here, 0 /∈ran f). Functions
that do possess the properties that every element of the codomain has a unique
preimage are important in mathematics.

108
5. Functions
Deﬁnition 5.3.1. Let X, Y be sets, and let f : X →Y .
(1) The function f is one-to-one (1-1) if
(∀x1, x2 ∈X)[x1 ̸= x2 ⇒f(x1) ̸= f(x2)]
(5.1)
or, equivalently,
(∀x1, x2 ∈X)[f(x1) = f(x2) ⇒x1 = x2].
(5.2)
We may also say that f is injective, or is an injection, and write f : X
1-1
→Y .
(2) The function f is onto if
(5.3)
(∀y ∈Y )(∃x ∈X)[y = f(x)].
We may also say that f is surjective, or is a surjection, and write f : X →
onto Y .
(Note that a function f : X →Y is onto iﬀran f = Y .)
(3) The function f is bijective, or is a bijection (or a 1-1 correspondence), if f is
both an injection and a surjection, i.e., f is both 1-1 and onto, and we write
f : X
1-1
→
onto Y .
We rephrase the example at the beginning of this section in terms of this new
language. Before you read the example below, ﬁrst ﬁnd useful denials of statements
(5.1) and (5.3), in order to ﬁnd the deﬁnitions of the statements “f is not 1-1” and
“f is not onto”.
Example 5.3.2. Let f : R →R by f(x) = x2 + 1 for all x ∈R. Then f is not 1-1
because f(2) = 5 = f(−2). Since f(x) ≥1 for all x ∈R, we know that 0 /∈ran f,
and hence f is not onto.
♦
Note that statements (5.1) and (5.2) give us two ways to show that a function
is 1-1 (in fact, there are other ways, as well; see Exercise 5.3.8). Often (although
not always) it is the deﬁnition provided by (5.2) that is the most useful.
Example 5.3.3. Let a, b ∈R with a ̸= 0. Let f : R →R by, for all x ∈R,
f(x) = ax + b. We show that f is a bijection.
As remarked above, we use (5.2) to show that f is 1-1. It is worthwhile writing
down the general Given-Goal diagram. We will also need to keep track of and use
the additional hypothesis that a ̸= 0.
Given
Goal
a ̸= 0
x1, x2 ∈R arbitrary
f(x1) = f(x2)
x1 = x2
Proof that f is 1-1. Let x1, x2 ∈R and assume that f(x1) = f(x2). We must
show that x1 = x2.
Since f(x1) = f(x2), we know that ax1 + b = ax2 + b. Then ax1 = ax2, and
since a ̸= 0, we may divide both sides by a to obtain x1 = x2, as desired. Thus, f
is 1-1, by deﬁnition.
□
www.ebook3000.com

5.3. One-to-one and onto functions
109
To show that f is onto, we use (5.3). Again, we begin with the general Given-
Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
y ∈R arbitrary
(∃x ∈R)[y = f(x)]
Proof that f is onto. Let y ∈R be given. We must ﬁnd x ∈R such that y =
f(x). Consider x = y−b
a , which is a real number since a ̸= 0 (and which we found
in the usual way by working backwards). Then
f(x) = f
y −b
a

= a
y −b
a

+ b
= (y −b) + b
= y,
as desired. Hence f is onto, by deﬁnition.
□♦
The functions given in Example 5.2.3, which mapped ﬁnite sets to ﬁnite sets,
were given explicitly, so that one can determine whether the functions are 1-1 or
onto by observation.
Example 5.3.4. Consider the sets X = {1, 2, 3, 4}, Y = {a, b, c, d, e}, and Z =
{0, 5, 10, 15, 20}. Deﬁne functions f : X →Y and g : Y →Z by
f(1) = c,
f(2) = e,
f(3) = e,
f(4) = a,
g(a) = 10,
g(b) = 0,
g(c) = 5,
g(d) = 20,
g(e) = 15.
Then f is not 1-1, since f(2) = e = f(3). Similarly, f is not onto, since we can
see that, for example, b /∈ran f.
On the other hand, g is a bijection; we can see from its deﬁnition that distinct
elements of Y are mapped to distinct elements of Z, and ran g = Z.
We will see in Chapter 8 that, since X and Y are ﬁnite sets of diﬀerent sizes,
no function from one of these sets to the other can be a bijection. On the other
hand, since Y and Z are ﬁnite sets of the same size, any function from one of these
sets to the other is 1-1 if and only if it is onto. See Exercise 8.2.13.
♦
Example 5.3.5. We showed above that the function f : R →R by f(x) = x2+1 for
all x ∈R is not onto, since f(x) ≥1 for all x ∈R. We now show that g : R →[1, ∞)
by g(x) = x2 + 1 is an onto function.
Proof. Let y ∈[1, ∞) be arbitrary. We must ﬁnd x ∈R such that y = g(x); i.e.,
y = x2 + 1. Consider x = √y −1, which makes sense since y −1 ≥0 (and which

110
5. Functions
we found in the usual way by working backwards). Then
g(x) = g(

y −1)
= (

y −1)2 + 1
= (y −1) + 1
= y,
as desired. Hence g is onto.
□♦
Example 5.3.5 illustrates that the codomain of a function must be speciﬁed
in order to determine whether or not the function is “onto”. Recall also that we
showed in Example 5.1.11 that ran f = [1, ∞); the same steps that established
[1, ∞) ⊆ran f also show that the function g in Example 5.3.5 is onto. The function
g shows that (in an abuse of language) a function always maps its domain onto
its range. More precisely we have the following theorem, whose proof we leave for
Exercise 5.3.5.
Theorem 5.3.6. Let f : X →Y and let ran f be the range of f. Then the function
g : X →ran f by g(x) = f(x) for all x ∈X is onto.
Note also in Example 5.3.5 that the function g is not 1-1 for the same reason
that the function f isn’t (for example, g(2) = 5 = g(−2)). However, by “restricting
the domain” of g, we can obtain a 1-1 function.
Example 5.3.7. Let h : [0, ∞) →[1, ∞) by h(x) = x2 +1, for all x ∈[0, ∞). Then
h is a bijection.
Proof. To see that h is 1-1, we let x1, x2 ∈R with x1, x2 ≥0 and assume that
h(x1) = h(x2). We must show that x1 = x2.
Since h(x1) = h(x2), we have
(x1)2 + 1 = (x2)2 + 1,
so
(x1)2 = (x2)2,
and hence

(x1)2 =

(x2)2.
By Theorem 2.1.5, we obtain |x1| = |x2|, and since x1, x2 ≥0, we have x1 = x2, as
desired. Hence, h is 1-1.
The proof that h is onto is exactly the proof given above that g is onto, except
that we must verify that the candidate x = √y −1 from Example 5.3.5 is in the
domain of h. Since √y −1 ≥0, x ∈dom h = [0, ∞), and hence h is onto.
Since h is both 1-1 and onto, h is a bijection.
□♦
We leave for Exercise 5.3.6 the veriﬁcation that we can restrict the domain of
the function f above in a diﬀerent way to yield a diﬀerent 1-1 function with the
same formula. Namely, the function k : (−∞, 0] →[1, ∞) deﬁned by k(x) = x2 + 1
for all x ∈(−∞, 0] is also a bijection.
These examples demonstrate a kind of
analogue to Theorem 5.3.6 for the notion of 1-1-ness.
www.ebook3000.com

5.3. One-to-one and onto functions
111
Theorem 5.3.8. Let f : X →Y be onto. Then there exists a subset X0 ⊆X
such that restricting the domain of f to X0 yields a 1-1 and onto function; i.e., the
function g : X0 →Y deﬁned by g(x) = f(x) for all x ∈X0 is a bijection.
The proof of Theorem 5.3.8 involves the Axiom of Choice (see Section 4.4),
since for each element of the codomain Y we must choose an element x ∈X such
that f(x) = y. We therefore omit this proof.
As we noted in Section 5.1, it is not always easy, or even possible, to show that
a function f : X →Y is onto using algebraic methods. For example, consider the
function f : R →R deﬁned by f(x) = x3 −x for all x ∈R. Showing f is onto
algebraically amounts to solving the equation x3 −x = y for x, regardless of y ∈R,
which is not easy. The easiest way to show f is onto is by using the Intermediate
Value Theorem from calculus.
We consider one ﬁnal example.
Example 5.3.9. Let f : R2 →R2 by, for all x, y ∈R, f(x, y) = (−y, x). We show
that f is a bijection.
Scratchwork: As before, we will use statements (5.2) and (5.3) to prove that
the function f is 1-1 and onto. However, since an arbitrary element of R2 is an
ordered pair, our Given-Goal diagrams must reﬂect this.
For showing f is 1-1:
Given
Goal
(x1, y1), (x2, y2) ∈R2 arbitrary
(x1, y1) = (x2, y2)
f(x1, y1) = f(x2, y2)
i.e., x1 = x2 and y1 = y2
For showing f is onto:
Given
Goal
(z, w) ∈R2 arbitrary
(∃(x, y) ∈R2)[(z, w) = f(x, y)]
Note that this is the same Given-Goal diagram as the one we used in Exam-
ple 5.1.17 to show that the range of this function is all of R2; i.e., we’ve already
done the work that shows that f is onto.
Proof. We showed that f is onto in Example 5.1.17. We now show that f is 1-1.
Let (x1, y1), (x2, y2) ∈R2 and assume that f(x1, y1) = f(x2, y2). We must show
that (x1, y1) = (x2, y2); i.e., we must show that x1 = x2 and y1 = y2.
Since f(x1, y1) = f(x2, y2), we know that (−y1, x1) = (−y2, x2). By deﬁnition
of equality of ordered pairs (see page 78), we have that −y1 = −y2, and hence
y1 = y2, and also x1 = x2. Thus f is 1-1.
Since f is 1-1 and onto, f is a bijection.
□♦
We end this section by considering various important results about function
composition and 1-1 or onto functions.

112
5. Functions
Theorem 5.3.10. Let X, Y , Z be sets. Let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z.
(1) If f and g are both 1-1, then g ◦f is 1-1.
(2) If f and g are both onto, then g ◦f is onto.
(3) If f and g are both bijections, then g ◦f is a bijection.
(4) If g ◦f is 1-1, then f is 1-1, but g need not be.
(5) If g ◦f is onto, then g is onto, but f need not be.
Proof. Let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z. Recall that g ◦f : X →Z.
Note that (3) follows immediately from (1) and (2). We prove (1) and (5) and
leave (2) and (4) for Exercise 5.3.7. For each of these statements, remember that
it is the goal that determines how the proof should proceed.
Proof of (1): Assume that f and g are both 1-1. We show that g ◦f is 1-1.
Let x1, x2 ∈X and assume that (g ◦f)(x1) = (g ◦f)(x2). We must show
that x1 = x2. Since (g ◦f)(x1) = (g ◦f)(x2), we know that
g(f(x1)) = g(f(x2)).
Since g is 1-1, it follows that
f(x1) = f(x2).
Finally, since f is 1-1, it follows that x1 = x2 as desired. Hence g ◦f is 1-1.
Proof of (5): Assume that g ◦f is onto. We must show that g is onto.
Since g : Y →Z, statement (5.3) tells us to begin by letting z ∈Z be
arbitrary. We must ﬁnd y ∈Y such that z = g(y).
We know that g ◦f : X →Z is onto and z ∈Z, so we may ﬁx x ∈X such
that z = (g ◦f)(x). But then z = g(f(x)), and so y = f(x) has the property
that z = g(y). Note that y = f(x) ∈Y since f : X →Y . Hence g is onto, as
desired.
Next, we must provide a counterexample which shows that when g ◦f is
onto, f need not be onto. Since we are constructing a counterexample, we
must provide speciﬁc functions f : X →Y and g : Y →Z with this property.
Rather than try to work with formulas of familiar functions, the easiest thing
to do is to work with functions deﬁned on ﬁnite sets.
Let X = Y = {1, 2}, and let Z = {1}. Deﬁne f : X →Y by
f(1) = f(2) = 1,
and deﬁne g : Y →Z by
g(1) = g(2) = 1.
Then (g ◦f) : X →Z is onto, since ran(g ◦f) = Z = {1}. However, f is not
onto, since 2 ∈Y , but 2 /∈ran f.
□
www.ebook3000.com

5.3. One-to-one and onto functions
113
Exercises 5.3
1. For each function f,
(i) determine whether f is 1-1;
(ii) determine whether f is onto.
Prove your answers.
(a) f : R →R by f(x) = x + |x|.
(b) f : {x ∈R | x ̸= 3
5} →{y ∈R | y ̸= 2
5} by f(x) = 2x+1
5x−3.
(c) f : {x ∈R | x ̸= −d
c} →{y ∈R | y ̸=
a
c } by f(x) =
ax+b
cx+d, where
a, b, c, d ∈R have the property that ad −bc ̸= 0 and c ̸= 0.
(d) f : (−∞, 3] →[2, ∞) by f(x) = (x −3)2 + 2.
(e) f : (−∞, 1] →(−∞, 4] by f(x) = 4 −
√
1 −x3.
(f) f : R2 →R by f(x, y) = x + y.
(g) f : R2 →R by f(x, y) = (x −y)3.
(h) f : R →R2 by f(x) = (x, x).
(i) f : R2 →R2 by f(x, y) = (x + y, x −y).
(j) f : R2 →R3 by f(x, y) = (x + y, x −y, xy).
(k) f : R3 →R3 by f(x, y, z) = (x + y, y + z, x + z).
(l) f : R3 →R2 by f(x, y, z) = (x + y, y + z).
(m) f : Z+ × Z+ →Z+ by f(m, n) = 2m−1(2n −1). (HINT: You will need
the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 2.3.3).)
(n) F : P →P by F(p) = p′. (See Exercise 5.1.7.)
(o) f : C →Z, where C = {A ∈P(Z) | A is ﬁnite} and f(A) is the sum of all
elements of A.
2. Let f : Z →Z be deﬁned by
f(n) =

n −1
if n is even,
n + 3
if n is odd.
Prove that f is a bijection. (HINT: To prove that f is 1-1, let n1, n2 ∈Z and
assume that f(n1) = f(n2), as usual. Then consider cases for n1 and n2. How
many cases are there?)
3. For each of the piecewise-deﬁned functions f,
(i) determine whether f is 1-1;
(ii) determine whether f is onto.
Prove your answers.
(a) f : R →R by
f(x) =

x2
if x ≥0,
2x
if x < 0.
(b) f : Z →Z by
f(n) =

n + 1
if n is even,
2n
if n is odd.

114
5. Functions
(c) f : Z →Z by
f(n) =

2n + 1
if n is even,
n + 3
if n is odd.
4. Let X be a set. Prove that the identity function IX : X →X is a bijection.
5. Prove Theorem 5.3.6.
6. Let k : (−∞, 0] →[1, ∞) by k(x) = x2 + 1 for all x ∈(−∞, 0]. Prove that k is
a bijection.
7. Let X, Y, Z be sets, and let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z. Prove the following
statements from Theorem 5.3.10.
(a) If f and g are both onto, then g ◦f is onto.
(b) If g ◦f is 1-1, then f is 1-1.
(c) Give an example of particular functions f : X →Y and g : Y →Z with
the property that g ◦f is 1-1 but g is not 1-1.
8. Let X, Y ⊆R, and assume that f : X →Y is increasing on X (see Exer-
cise 5.1.9). Prove that f is 1-1. Similarly, prove that f : X →Y is 1-1 when f
is decreasing on X. (HINT: Use statement (5.1), rather than statement (5.2).)
9. Prove that every rigid motion F : R →R is 1-1, using the deﬁnition of rigid
motion. (See Exercise 5.1.10.)
10. Let C : N × N →N by, for all (x, y) ∈N × N,
C(x, y) =
x+y−1
	
i=1
(i −1) + y = (x + y)2 −3x −y + 2
2
.
Show that C is a bijection. (HINT: Use statement (5.1), rather than state-
ment (5.2). For (x1, y1), (x2, y2) ∈N2, consider the cases x1 + y1 = x2 + y2 and
x1 + y1 ̸= x2 + y2.)
5.4. Invertible functions
In this section, we answer the question of when it is possible to “reverse”, or “undo”,
the action of a function. As it turns out, the answer is connected to the property
of being a bijection.
Deﬁnition 5.4.1. Let X, Y be sets, and let f : X →Y . We say that f is invertible
if there exists a function g : Y →X such that for all x ∈X and for all y ∈Y ,
y = f(x)
⇔
x = g(y).
We say that such a function g is an inverse function of f.
The following picture illustrates Deﬁnition 5.4.1.
www.ebook3000.com

5.4. Invertible functions
115
X
Y
g(y) = x
y = f(x)
g
f
f
g
Note that if a function f : X →Y is invertible and g : Y →X is an inverse
function of f, then Deﬁnition 5.4.1 implies that g is also invertible and that f is an
inverse of g; see Exercise 5.4.3.
Example 5.4.2. Let f : R →R by f(x) = 3x−1. Then f is invertible because the
function g : R →R by g(x) = x+1
3
satisﬁes y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y) for all x, y ∈R.
To see this, note that given x, y ∈R,
y = f(x) ⇔y = 3x −1
⇔y + 1 = 3x
⇔x = y + 1
3
⇔x = g(y).
Thus, we see that g is an inverse of f.
♦
Our ﬁrst result characterizes inverse functions in terms of their composition.
Proposition 5.4.3. Let X and Y be sets, and let f : X →Y and g : Y →X.
Then f is invertible and g is an inverse function of f iﬀg ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY .
Proof. Let f : X →Y and g : Y →X.
(⇒) Assume that f is invertible and that g is an inverse function of f. Then by
Deﬁnition 5.4.1 we have that for all x ∈X and for all y ∈Y ,
(5.4)
y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y).
We must show that g ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY .
First note that g ◦f : X →X.
Let x ∈X be arbitrary, and deﬁne
y = f(x). Then
(g ◦f)(x) = g(f(x))
= g(y)
= x,
by (5.4),
= IX(x),
by deﬁnition.
Hence g ◦f = IX.

116
5. Functions
Similarly, f ◦g = IY , which we leave as an exercise (Exercise 5.4.4).
(⇐) Assume that f and g satisfy g ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY . To show that f is
invertible and g is an inverse function of f, we must let x ∈X and y ∈Y be
arbitrary and show that (5.4) is true.
First we assume that y = f(x) and show that x = g(y).
g(y) = g(f(x))
= (g ◦f)(x)
= IX(x),
by hypothesis,
= x,
as desired. Similarly, x = g(y) ⇒y = f(x), which we leave as an exercise
(Exercise 5.4.4).
□
Note that Proposition 5.4.3 gives an alternate way to prove that two functions
are inverse functions. The following corollary is immediate.
Corollary 5.4.4. Let X, Y be sets and let f : X →Y . Then f is invertible iﬀ
there exists a function g : Y →X such that g ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY .
Example 5.4.5. We show that the functions in Example 5.4.2 are inverse functions,
this time using Proposition 5.4.3 instead of Deﬁnition 5.4.1. Let f : R →R and
g : R →R by, for all x ∈R, f(x) = 3x −1 and g(x) = x+1
3 . Then g ◦f : R →R
satisﬁes g ◦f = IR. To see this, let x ∈R. Then
(g ◦f)(x) = g(f(x))
= g(3x −1)
= (3x −1) + 1
3
= 3x
3
= x = IR(x).
Similarly, f ◦g : R →R satisﬁes f ◦g = IR, which we leave for Exercise 5.4.5. Hence
f and g are inverse functions, by Proposition 5.4.3.
♦
Note that not all functions are invertible.
Example 5.4.6.
(1) The function f : R →[1, ∞) by, for all x ∈R, f(x) = x2 + 1 is not 1-1.
For example, f(1) = 2 = f(−1). It follows that f is not invertible; it is not
possible to ﬁnd a function g : [1, ∞) →R such that, for all x ∈R and for all
y ∈[1, ∞), y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y). If an inverse function g existed, then we
would need to have g(2) = 1 and g(2) = −1, which is not possible since g is a
function.
(2) The function f : Z →Z by, for all n ∈Z, f(n) = 2n + 1 is not invertible;
it is not possible to ﬁnd a function g : Z →Z such that, for all n, m ∈Z,
m = f(n) ⇔n = g(m). If an inverse function g for f existed, then the integer
n = g(2) would have to satisfy f(n) = 2. However, one can prove that ran f is
www.ebook3000.com

5.4. Invertible functions
117
the set of odd integers, so no such integer n exists. The problem here is that
f is not onto.
♦
The examples above motivate the next theorem, which characterizes invertible
functions as exactly those which are bijections.
Theorem 5.4.7. Let X, Y be sets and let f : X →Y .
(1) Then f is invertible iﬀf is a bijection.
(2) If f is invertible, then its inverse function is unique.
Notation 5.4.8. When f : X →Y is invertible, the unique inverse function is
denoted by f −1, and f −1 : Y →X.
So, in Example 5.4.6(1), the function f is not invertible because f is not a
bijection; f is not 1-1. In Example 5.4.6(2), the function f is not invertible because
f is not a bijection; f is not onto.
Proof. Let f : X →Y . We ﬁrst prove (1).
(⇒) Assume that f is invertible. We must show that f is a bijection.
Since f is invertible, by Proposition 5.4.3 we may ﬁx a function g : Y →X
such that g ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY . Note that by Exercise 5.3.4, the identity
functions IX and IY are bijections. Hence g ◦f is a bijection. Thus, g ◦f is
1-1, and so it follows by Theorem 5.3.10(4) that f is also 1-1. Similarly f ◦g
is a bijection. Thus, f ◦g is onto, and so it follows by Theorem 5.3.10(5) that
f is also onto. Thus f is 1-1 and onto; i.e., f is a bijection, as desired.
(⇐) Assume that f is a bijection. We must show that f is invertible. By Deﬁni-
tion 5.4.1, we must deﬁne a function g : Y →X such that for all x ∈X and
for all y ∈Y , y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y).
To deﬁne g, let y ∈Y be given. Since f is onto, we can ﬁx x ∈X such
that y = f(x). Since f is 1-1, this x is unique. Hence we deﬁne g(y) to be
this unique x ∈X such that f(x) = y. It follows by deﬁnition of g that for all
x ∈X and for all y ∈Y , y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y). Hence, by Deﬁnition 5.4.1, f
is invertible.
To prove (2), we must assume that f is invertible and prove that the inverse function
of f is unique. We use the standard method for proving that an object is unique,
given that it exists, found in statement (2.7) in Subsection 2.1.5. Assume that we
have functions g1 : Y →X and g2 : Y →X such that g1 and g2 are both inverses
of f. We must prove that g1 = g2. Using Deﬁnition 5.1.7, we let y ∈Y be arbitrary
and prove that g1(y) = g2(y).
Let x1, x2 ∈X be such that x1 = g1(y) and x2 = g2(y). Then f(x1) = y, since
g1 is an inverse of f, and similarly f(x2) = y, since g2 is an inverse of f. Since f is
invertible, we know that f is a bijection, as already proved above. Thus f is 1-1.
Since we have f(x1) = f(x2), it follows that x1 = x2; i.e., g1(y) = g2(y), as desired.
Thus g1 = g2.
□
Corollary 5.4.9. Let X, Y be sets and let f : X →Y . If f is a bijection, then
f −1 : Y →X is a bijection.

118
5. Functions
Proof. Let f : X →Y be a bijection. By Theorem 5.4.7, f is invertible, and
f −1 : Y →X is the inverse function of f. But then f is the inverse function of f −1
by Exercise 5.4.3, so f −1 is invertible by deﬁnition. Thus f −1 is a bijection, again
by Theorem 5.4.7.
□
Since every function maps its domain onto its range (see Theorem 5.3.6), we
have the following (more precisely stated) corollary.
Corollary 5.4.10. Let X, Y be sets, and assume f : X →Y is 1-1. Then the
function g : X →ran f deﬁned by, for all x ∈X, g(x) = f(x) is invertible.
Finally, the uniqueness statement in Theorem 5.4.7, together with Proposi-
tion 5.4.3, says that if you have a “candidate” function g : Y →X which you think
is the inverse of a given function f : X →Y , then it’s easy to verify this using
function composition.
Corollary 5.4.11. Let X and Y be sets, and let f : X →Y and g : Y →X. If
g ◦f = IX and f ◦g = IY , then g = f −1 and f = g−1.
We next present several examples illustrating these ideas.
Example 5.4.12. Consider the sets X = {1, 2, 3, 4}, Y = {a, b, c, d, e}, and Z =
{0, 5, 10, 15, 20}. Deﬁne functions f : X →Y and g : Y →Z by
f(1) = c,
f(2) = e,
f(3) = e,
f(4) = a,
g(a) = 10,
g(b) = 0,
g(c) = 5,
g(d) = 20,
g(e) = 15.
Then f is not invertible, since f isn’t 1-1. On the other hand, we noted in
Example 5.3.4 that g is a bijection, and hence g is invertible. The inverse function
g−1 : Z →Y is deﬁned by
g−1(0) = b,
g−1(5) = c,
g−1(10) = a,
g−1(15) = e,
g−1(20) = d.
♦
Example 5.4.13. Let f : R →R by f(x) = x3 + 1, for all x ∈R. Show that f is
a bijection and ﬁnd f −1.
First we show that f is 1-1. Let x1, x2 ∈R and assume that f(x1) = f(x2).
Then
(x1)3 + 1 = (x2)3 + 1,
so
(x1)3 = (x2)3,
and so
3
(x1)3 =
3
(x2)3.
Thus x1 = x2 by Theorem 2.1.5(2). (Note that it is important here that we are
dealing with an odd root, rather than an even root.) Hence, f is 1-1.
Next we show that f is onto. Let y ∈R be arbitrary. Consider x =
3√y −1,
which is a real number, and note that
f(x) = f(
3
y −1) = (
3
y −1)3 + 1 = (y −1) + 1 = y.
Hence f is onto.
Thus f is a bijection, and hence f is invertible, by Theorem 5.4.7.
www.ebook3000.com

5.4. Invertible functions
119
Note that what we have actually shown is that for all x ∈R,
y = x3 + 1 ⇔x =
3
y −1;
i.e.,
y = f(x) ⇔x = g(y),
where g : R →R by g(x) =
3√x −1.
Thus, since the inverse of f is unique,
f −1 : R →R by f −1(x) =
3√x −1 for all x ∈R.
♦
We can see from Example 5.4.13 that if we can show algebraically that a function
f : X →Y is a bijection, and in particular that it is onto, then we will automatically
ﬁnd a formula for the inverse function f −1 : Y →X.
Example 5.4.14. Let a, b ∈R with a ̸= 0 and let f : R →R by f(x) = ax + b
for all x ∈R. We showed in Example 5.3.3 that f is a bijection, and hence f
is invertible. The work done in that example also shows that f −1 : R →R by
f −1(x) = x−b
a
for all x ∈R.
♦
Example 5.4.15. Let f : R2 →R2 by, for all x, y ∈R, f(x, y) = (−y, x). We
showed in Example 5.3.9 that f is a bijection, and hence f is invertible. The work
done in that example also shows that f −1 : R2 →R2 by f −1(x, y) = (y, −x) for all
(x, y) ∈R2.
♦
It is not always possible to use algebraic methods to ﬁnd a formula for the
inverse function of a bijection.
Example 5.4.16. In an analysis or calculus course, the natural logarithm function
ln : (0, ∞) →R is deﬁned by ln x =
 x
1
1
t dt, for all x ∈(0, ∞). Using the derivative
of ln, one can prove that ln is increasing and hence 1-1, and using the Intermediate
Value Theorem, one can prove that ln is onto. Thus ln is a bijection, and so ln is
invertible. The inverse function ln−1 : R →(0, ∞) is deﬁned by, for all x ∈R and
for all y ∈R+,
ln−1(x) = y ⇔x = ln y.
The inverse function ln−1 is usually called exp, the natural exponential function,
since it satisﬁes the usual rules of exponents and its derivative is itself. Thus we
have that for all x ∈R and for all y ∈R+,
exp(x) = y ⇔x = ln y,
or, in more familiar notation,
ex = y ⇔x = ln y.
♦
Exercises 5.4
1. For each function f,
(i) determine whether f is 1-1;
(ii) determine whether f is onto;
(iii) use your answers to (i) and (ii) to determine whether f is invertible, and
if f is invertible, then ﬁnd the inverse function f −1.

120
5. Functions
Prove your answers.
(a) f : R →R by f(x) = x + |x|.
(b) f : {x ∈R | x ̸= 3
5} →{y ∈R | y ̸= 2
5} by f(x) = 2x+1
5x−3.
(c) f : {x ∈R | x ̸= −d
c} →{y ∈R | y ̸=
a
c } by f(x) =
ax+b
cx+d, where
a, b, c, d ∈R have the property that ad −bc ̸= 0 and c ̸= 0.
(d) f : (−∞, 3] →[2, ∞) by f(x) = (x −3)2 + 2.
(e) f : (−∞, 1] →(−∞, 4] by f(x) = 4 −
√
1 −x3.
(f) f : R2 →R by f(x, y) = x + y.
(g) f : R2 →R by f(x, y) = (x −y)3.
(h) f : R →R2 by f(x) = (x, x).
(i) f : R2 →R2 by f(x, y) = (x + y, x −y).
(j) f : R2 →R3 by f(x, y) = (x + y, x −y, xy).
(k) f : R3 →R3 by f(x, y, z) = (x + y, y + z, x + z).
(l) f : R3 →R2 by f(x, y, z) = (x + y, y + z).
(m) f : Z+ × Z+ →Z+ by f(m, n) = 2m−1(2n −1). (HINT: You will need
the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 2.3.3).)
(n) F : P →P by F(p) = p′. (See Exercise 5.1.7.)
(o) f : C →Z, where C = {A ∈P(Z) | A is ﬁnite} and f(A) is the sum of all
elements of A.
2. For each of the piecewise-deﬁned functions f,
(i) determine whether f is 1-1;
(ii) determine whether f is onto;
(iii) use your answers to (i) and (ii) to determine whether f is invertible, and
if f is invertible, then ﬁnd the inverse function f −1.
Prove your answers.
(a) f : Z →Z by
f(n) =

n −1
if n is even,
n + 3
if n is odd.
(b) f : R →R by
f(x) =

x2
if x ≥0,
2x
if x < 0.
(c) f : Z →Z by
f(n) =

n + 1
if n is even,
2n
if n is odd.
(d) f : Z →Z by
f(n) =

2n + 1
if n is even,
n + 3
if n is odd.
3. Let f : X →Y be invertible and let g : Y →X be an inverse function of f.
Use Deﬁnition 5.4.1 to prove that g is also invertible and that f is an inverse
function of g.
4. Provide the missing details in the proof of Proposition 5.4.3.
5. Provide the missing details in Example 5.4.5.
www.ebook3000.com

5.5. Functions and sets
121
6. Use Deﬁnition 5.4.1 to provide an alternate proof of the fact in Theorem 5.4.7
that if f : X →Y is invertible, then f is a bijection.
7. Give a direct proof (i.e., using deﬁnitions) of Corollary 5.4.9.
8. Let f : X →Y and g : Y →Z be invertible functions. Prove that g◦f : X →Z
is invertible and that (g ◦f)−1 = f −1 ◦g−1. (HINT: Use Corollary 5.4.11.)
9. Let X, Y ⊆R, and assume that f : X →Y is invertible and increasing on X
(see Exercise 5.1.9). Prove that f −1 : Y →X is increasing on Y .
10. Let X, Y be sets and let f : X →Y . Say that f is left-invertible if there exists
a function g : Y →X such that g ◦f = IX; in this case, g is called a left inverse
of f. Say that f is right-invertible if there exists a function h : Y →X such
that f ◦h = IY ; in this case, h is called a right inverse of f.
(a) Prove that f : X →Y is 1-1 if and only if f is left-invertible.
(b) Prove that f : X →Y is onto if and only if f is right-invertible. (NOTE:
The proof that f is right-invertible when f is onto requires the Axiom of
Choice (see Section 4.4). Do you see why?)
(c) Give an example of a function that has a left inverse but no right inverse
and an example of a function that has a right inverse but no left inverse.
11. Let X, Y be sets and let f : X →Y .
(a) Prove that f is 1-1 if and only if for all sets Z, for all functions h : Z →X
and k : Z →X, if f ◦h = f ◦k, then h = k.
(b) Prove that f is onto if and only if for all sets Z, for all functions h : Y →Z
and k : Y →Z, if h ◦f = k ◦f, then h = k.
5.5. Functions and sets
Given a function f : X →Y , f is deﬁned on elements of X. However, sometimes
we also want to consider the image of an entire subset of X under f.
Deﬁnition 5.5.1. Let f : X →Y and A ⊆X. The image of A under f is the set
{y ∈Y | (∃x ∈A)[y = f(x)]} = {f(x) | x ∈A},
which is denoted by the notation f[A].
By deﬁnition, f[A] is the set of all images of elements of A under f. A picture
can help us visualize this concept.
X
Y
A
f[A]
ran f
f

122
5. Functions
Warning: Note the potential for confusion with this notation. Given a func-
tion f : X →Y , an element x ∈X, and a subset A ⊆X,
f(x) is an element of Y,
f[A] is a subset of Y.
Our use of square brackets, rather than parentheses, is meant to help you remember
the diﬀerence between the image of an element of the domain under f and the image
of a subset of the domain under f.
See Subsection 5.5.1 for further discussion
regarding notation.
The next deﬁnition is of a related concept.
Deﬁnition 5.5.2. Let f : X →Y and B ⊆Y . The inverse image of B under f
(sometimes called the preimage of B under f) is the set
{x ∈X | f(x) ∈B},
which is denoted by the notation f −1[B].
By deﬁnition, f −1[B] is the set of all elements in X whose image under f is in
B, i.e., the set of all preimages of elements of B. Again, a picture can help clarify
this concept.
f −1[B]
ran f
B
X
Y
f
Warning: Once again, note the potential for confusion with this notation. In
particular, it is important to note in Deﬁnition 5.5.2 that the inverse image f −1[B]
under f has nothing to do with inverse functions.
We are not claiming in Deﬁnition 5.5.2 that f is invertible, and indeed f need
not be invertible. The “exponent” −1 in the notation f −1[B] is merely notation.
See Subsection 5.5.1 for further discussion regarding notation.
Example 5.5.3. Let X = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and Y = {5, 10, 15, 20, 25}.
We let
f : X →Y by
f(1) = 15,
f(2) = 10,
f(3) = 5,
f(4) = 10,
f(5) = 15,
f(6) = 10.
We ﬁnd f[{2, 3}], f[{2, 6}], f −1[{5, 10}], and f −1[{20, 25}].
www.ebook3000.com

5.5. Functions and sets
123
Note that
f[{2, 3}] = {f(x) | x ∈{2, 3}}
= {f(2), f(3)}
= {5, 10},
f[{2, 6}] = {f(2), f(6)}
= {10}
and
f −1[{5, 10}] = {x ∈X | f(x) ∈{5, 10}}
= {2, 3, 4, 6},
f −1[{20, 25}] = {x ∈X | f(x) ∈{20, 25}}
= ∅.
♦
Example 5.5.4. Let f : R →R by f(x) = 2x + 5 for all x ∈R. Let A = [1, 2],
B = (−∞, −2), and C = (4, ∞). We ﬁnd f[A], f[B], and f −1[C].
f[A] = {y ∈R | (∃x ∈A)[y = f(x)]}
= {y ∈R | (∃x ∈R)[1 ≤x ≤2 and y = 2x + 5]}
= {2x + 5 | 1 ≤x ≤2}.
Note that by properties of real numbers,
1 ≤x ≤2 ⇔2 ≤2x ≤4
⇔7 ≤2x + 5 ≤9.
Hence f[A] = [7, 9]. See Figure 5.2.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
f[A]
A
x
y
y = 2x + 5
Figure 5.2. f[A] = [7, 9].

124
5. Functions
Also, f[B] = {2x + 5 | x < −2}. Since x < −2 iﬀ2x + 5 < 1, f[B] = (−∞, 1).
See Figure 5.3.
f[B]
B
x
y
y = 2x + 5
Figure 5.3. f[B] = (−∞, 1).
Finally,
f −1[C] = {x ∈R | f(x) ∈C}
= {x ∈R | 2x + 5 > 4}
=

x ∈R | x > −1
2

=

−1
2, ∞

.
See Figure 5.4.
Note that in the previous example our task is much easier because the function
f(x) = 2x + 5 is increasing. When the function is not 1-1, we must be much more
careful.
Example 5.5.5. Let f : [0, 2π] →[−1, 1] by f(x) = cos x. Let A =
 π
2 , 3π
2

and
B = [0, 1]. We ﬁnd f[A] and f −1[B].
From the graph of y = cos x we see that
f[A] = {f(x) | x ∈A}
=

cos x

π
2 ≤x ≤3π
2

= [−1, 0].
www.ebook3000.com

5.5. Functions and sets
125
C
f −1[C]
x
y
y = 2x + 5
Figure 5.4. f −1[C] =

−1
2 , ∞

.
♦
It’s important to note here that f

[ π
2 , 3π
2 ]

is not simply equal to [f( π
2 ), f( 3π
2 )]; in
fact, [f( π
2 ), f( 3π
2 )] isn’t an interval. See Figure 5.5.
π
2
π
3π
2
2π
A
f[A]
x
y
y = cos x
Figure 5.5. f[A] = [−1, 0].
Again using the graph of the function and paying particular attention to the
fact that the function is not 1-1 (i.e., some elements of B may have more than one
preimage), we also see that
f −1[B] = {x ∈[0, 2π] | f(x) ∈B}
= {x ∈[0, 2π] | 0 ≤cos x ≤1}
=

0, π
2

∪
3π
2 , 2π

.
See Figure 5.6.
♦

126
5. Functions
π
2
π
3π
2
2π
B
f −1[B]
x
y
y = cos x
Figure 5.6. f −1[B] =

0, π
2

∪
 3π
2 , 2π

.
Now that we’ve seen several examples, we prove a theorem about how these
new concepts interact with the set operations ∪and ∩.
Theorem 5.5.6. Let f : X →Y , and let A, B ⊆X and C, D ⊆Y . Then:
(1) f[A ∪B] = f[A] ∪f[B].
(2) f[A ∩B] ⊆f[A] ∩f[B], but in general, equality need not hold.
(3) f −1[C ∪D] = f −1[C] ∪f −1[D].
(4) f −1[C ∩D] = f −1[C] ∩f −1[D].
Proof. We prove (1) and (3) and leave (2) and (4) for Exercises 5.5.3 and 5.5.4.
Let f : X →Y , A, B ⊆X, and C, D ⊆Y .
(1) We show f[A ∪B] = f[A] ∪f[B]. First let y ∈f[A ∪B]. Then by Deﬁni-
tion 5.5.1, we may ﬁx x ∈A ∪B such that y = f(x). Since x ∈A ∪B, x ∈A
or x ∈B. We argue by cases. If x ∈A, then y ∈f[A] by Deﬁnition 5.5.1
since y = f(x). It follows that y ∈f[A] ∪f[B]. Similarly, if x /∈A, then
x ∈B, so y ∈f[B] by Deﬁnition 5.5.1, and hence y ∈f[A] ∪f[B]. Thus
f[A ∪B] ⊆f[A] ∪f[B].
Next let y ∈f[A] ∪f[B].
Then y ∈f[A] or y ∈f[B].
Without loss
of generality2, assume that y ∈f[A], since the argument for y ∈f[B] is
analogous. Since y ∈f[A], by Deﬁnition 5.5.1 we may ﬁx x ∈A such that
y = f(x).
Then x ∈A ∪B and y = f(x), so again by Deﬁnition 5.5.1,
y ∈f[A ∪B]. Hence f[A] ∪f[B] ⊆f[A ∪B], and so f[A ∪B] = f[A] ∪f[B].
(3) We show f −1[C ∪D] = f −1[C] ∪f −1[D]. First let x ∈f −1[C ∪D]. Then by
Deﬁnition 5.5.2, f(x) ∈C ∪D, so f(x) ∈C or f(x) ∈D. We argue by cases.
If f(x) ∈C, then we know by Deﬁnition 5.5.2 that x ∈f −1[C], and hence
x ∈f −1[C] ∪f −1[D]. Similarly, if f(x) /∈C, then f(x) ∈D. Once again by
Deﬁnition 5.5.2 we have that x ∈f −1[D], and hence x ∈f −1[C] ∪f −1[D].
Thus f −1[C ∪D] ⊆f −1[C] ∪f −1[D].
Next, let x ∈f −1[C] ∪f −1[D]. Without loss of generality, we assume
that x ∈f −1[D], since the argument for x ∈f −1[C] is analogous.
By
2Or we could again argue by cases.
www.ebook3000.com

5.5. Functions and sets
127
Deﬁnition 5.5.2, f(x) ∈D, and hence f(x) ∈C ∪D.
Again by Deﬁni-
tion 5.5.2, x ∈f −1[C ∪D]. Thus f −1[C] ∪f −1[D] ⊆f −1[C ∪D], and so
f −1[C ∪D] = f −1[C] ∪f −1[D].
□
Note in our proof of Theorem 5.5.6(1) and (3), we have introduced the phrase
“without loss of generality” (sometimes abbreviated by “WLOG”) as a way of
handling a proof in which the argument for one case is completely analogous to the
argument for the other cases. Speciﬁcally, our use of the phrase “without loss of
generality, assume that y ∈f[A], since the argument for y ∈f[B] is analogous”
in the proof of part (1) means that the proof for the case when y ∈f[B] can be
obtained from the proof of the case when y ∈f[A] by simultaneously replacing
every occurrence of A with B and every occurrence of B with A. If it was not the
case that the proof of the second case was entirely analogous to the proof of the
ﬁrst case, then it would be incorrect to use “without loss of generality” to argue
only one case.
5.5.1. More on notation. We emphasize once again that, given a function
f : X →Y , f is deﬁned on elements of X, not on subsets of X. Given a subset
A ⊆X, we deﬁned the image of A under f to be the set
f[A] = {y ∈Y | (∃x ∈A)[y = f(x)]},
the set of all images of elements of A. What we are actually doing here is deﬁning
a new function from P(X) to P(Y ). As we noted at the beginning of this section,
we are using square brackets [ ], rather than parentheses ( ), around the input as a
signal to help us remember that f(x) is an element of Y and f[A] is a subset of Y .
The notation f[A] is one of the standard notations for this concept.
It’s important to note that many authors use the notation f(A) for the set
{y ∈Y | (∃x ∈A)[y = f(x)]}.
Here there is no signal from the notation, so the reader is responsible for determining
from the context whether f(A) denotes the image of an element of the domain or
the image of a subset of the domain.
The situation with the inverse image (preimage) of a set B ⊆Y under f,
f −1[B] = {x ∈X | f(x) ∈B},
is similar. As before, what we are actually doing is deﬁning a new function from
P(Y ) to P(X). The potential for confusion is even greater: the function f may
not be invertible, i.e., f −1 may not exist, and the “exponent” is nothing more than
notation.
Again, the notation f −1[B] is one of the standard notations for this
concept.
It’s important to note that many authors use the notation f −1(B) for the set
{x ∈X | f(x) ∈B}.
As before, one must determine the meaning of the notation f −1(B) from the context
in which it appears.
In the future, always check and adhere to the notation for these sets given by
whatever source you are using.

128
5. Functions
Exercises 5.5
1. Let f : R →R by f(x) = x2 + 1. Find each of the following. You do not need
to prove your answers, but you might want to draw a picture. Be careful!
f[{−3, 2, 7}],
f[[−1, 3]],
f[(−∞, −2)],
f −1[{−2, 5, 16}],
f −1[[−2, 4]],
f −1[[8, ∞)]
2. Let f : X →Y where X = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, Y = {p, q, r, s, t, z}, and f(1) = p,
f(2) = p, f(3) = s, f(4) = t, f(5) = z, and f(6) = t.
Find each of the
following:
f[{1, 3, 4, 6}],
f −1[{p, q, s}],
f −1[{r}],
f −1[f[{1, 4, 5}]].
3. Prove Theorem 5.5.6(2). Let X and Y be sets, A, B ⊆X, and f : X →Y .
(a) Prove that f[A ∩B] ⊆f[A] ∩f[B].
(b) Give an example of sets X and Y , subsets A, B ⊆X, and a function
f : X →Y such that f[A ∩B] ̸= f[A] ∩f[B].
4. Prove Theorem 5.5.6(4). Let X, Y be sets, C, D ⊆Y , and f : X →Y . Prove
that f −1[C ∩D] = f −1[C] ∩f −1[D].
5. Let X and Y be sets, A, B ⊆X, and f : X →Y .
(a) Prove that if A ⊆B, then f[A] ⊆f[B].
(b) Give an example of sets X and Y , subsets A, B ⊆X, and f : X →Y such
that f[A] ⊆f[B], but A ̸⊆B.
6. Let X and Y be sets, A ⊆X, and f : X →Y .
(a) Prove that A ⊆f −1[f[A]].
(b) Give an example of sets X and Y , a subset A ⊆X, and f : X →Y such
that A ̸= f −1[f[A]].
7. Let X and Y be sets, B ⊆Y , and f : X →Y .
(a) Prove that f[f −1[B]] ⊆B.
(b) Give an example of sets X and Y , a subset B ⊆Y , and f : X →Y such
that f[f −1[B]] ̸= B.
8. Let X and Y be sets, A, B ⊆X, and f : X →Y be 1-1. Prove that f[A∩B] =
f[A] ∩f[B].
Warning: If you do not use the hypothesis that f is 1-1 at some point,
then you do not have a proof.
9. Let X and Y be sets, A, B ⊆X, and f : X →Y be 1-1.
Prove that if
f[A] ⊆f[B], then A ⊆B.
Warning: If you do not use the hypothesis that f is 1-1, then you do not
have a proof.
10. Let X and Y be sets, A ⊆X, and f : X →Y be 1-1. Prove that f −1[f[A]] = A.
Warning: If you do not use the hypothesis that f is 1-1 at some point,
then you do not have a proof.
www.ebook3000.com

5.5. Functions and sets
129
11. Let X and Y be sets, B ⊆Y , and f : X →Y be onto. Prove that f[f −1[B]] =
B.
Warning: If you do not use the hypothesis that f is onto at some point,
then you do not have a proof.

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 6
An Introduction
to Number Theory
The goal of the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters of this book is to help you master the concepts
essential for success in most mathematics courses: logic, proof techniques, sets, and
functions. We turn now to material chosen to help prepare you for future math
courses, such as abstract algebra and analysis.
In this chapter, we return to studying properties of the integers. By now, you
should be feeling conﬁdent in your ability to write proofs, so we will be including
far fewer Given-Goal diagrams than we have seen previously. However, it is good
practice for you to construct them yourself.
6.1. The Division Algorithm and the Well-Ordering Principle
So far throughout this text, we have assumed the fact that every integer is either
even or odd, but not both, and we have used this fact several times to divide
our proofs into two cases. While this assumption seems quite harmless, it in fact
requires proof. In this section we will prove a theorem commonly known as the
“Division Algorithm”, which is one of the most important theorems about integers,
since it implies that proofs involving integers may be divided into ﬁnitely many
cases (such as two, for “even” and “odd”).
Theorem 6.1.1 (Division Algorithm). Let a, b ∈Z with b > 0. Then there exist
unique q, r ∈Z such that a = bq + r, where 0 ≤r < b.
Note that when b = 2, the Division Algorithm says that every integer a can be
uniquely expressed in one of two forms:
a = 2q + 0
or
a = 2q + 1,
where q ∈Z;
i.e., every integer a is either even or odd. Next, we consider some speciﬁc examples
that demonstrate the conclusion of the Division Algorithm.
131

132
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Example 6.1.2.
(1) a = 75 and b = 12.
Here, the conclusion of the Division Algorithm is essentially what you
remember about long division: “how many times does 12 go into 75, and
what’s the remainder?” In other words, q = 6, since 72 is the largest multiple
of 12 that is less than or equal to 75, and the remainder r is 3; i.e., 75 = 12·6+3.
(2) a = −4 and b = 3.
When a < 0, we must be more careful; the r we’re looking for must satisfy
0 ≤r < 3 = b. Again we look for the largest multiple of 3 that is less than or
equal to −4, which is −6, so q = −2 and r = 2; i.e., −4 = 3 · −2 + 2.
♦
These examples, while seemingly trivial, give us the idea behind how to prove
the “existence” part of the Division Algorithm. Given a, b ∈Z with a, b > 0, our
intuition tells us that we can ﬁnd q by adding b to itself consecutively until we reach
a multiple of b strictly greater than a; “backing up” one copy of b gives us a multiple
of b from which we can compute q. Once we have q, it is easy to compute r.
Another way of thinking about this is that we can keep subtracting b from a
until we ﬁrst reach a remainder strictly smaller than b. This gives us both q and
r.
Our job is to formalize this idea (in fact, you might be convinced already).
To write it down in general, we need to know that the process of subtracting will
stop, regardless of which numbers a and b we begin with. It turns out that we
have two options for formalizing this argument; we can use a proof by induction
or we can use another important fact about the nonnegative integers, called the
Well-Ordering Principle. In what follows, we denote the set of nonnegative integers
by Z≥0; i.e., Z≥0 = {n ∈Z | n ≥0}.
Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3. Every nonempty set of nonnegative integers has
a least element. In notation,
if S ⊆Z≥0 and S ̸= ∅, then (∃m ∈S)(∀x ∈S)[m ≤x].
Phrased another way, the Well-Ordering Principle states that there does not
exist an inﬁnite “descending chain” of positive integers
0 < · · · < n3 < n2 < n1.
Like the Principle of Mathematical Induction, the Well-Ordering Principle is
an axiom about the nonnegative integers; it is not possible for us to prove the Well-
Ordering Principle solely from the Basic Properties of Integers 1.2.3. In fact, the
Well-Ordering Principle (WOP) is equivalent to PMI; i.e., one can prove WOP by
assuming PMI, and conversely one can prove PMI by assuming WOP. See Exer-
cise 6.1.8.
We now use the Well-Ordering Principle to formalize our intuition about the
proof of the Division Algorithm; note that we no longer need the assumption that
a > 0. As we noted in Subsection 2.1.5, the proof of the Division Algorithm must
prove “existence” as well as “uniqueness”. We’ll be thinking about uniqueness in
terms of statement (2.6) in that subsection.
www.ebook3000.com

6.1. The Division Algorithm and the Well-Ordering Principle
133
Proof of Theorem 6.1.1. Let a, b ∈Z with b > 0.
Existence: We prove there exist q, r ∈Z such that a = bq + r and 0 ≤r < b.
Let
S = {n ∈Z | n ≥0 and (∃x ∈Z)[n = a −bx]}.
(Note that when a > 0, the elements of this set that are less than or equal to
a will be the numbers you get by successively subtracting copies of b.)
To use the Well-Ordering Principle, we must show that S ̸= ∅. We con-
sider cases. Note that if a ≥0, then a −b · 0 = a ≥0, so a ∈S since it has
the right form. If a < 0, then a −b · a = a(1 −b) ≥0 since a < 0 and b ≥1.
In this case a −b · a ∈S. Hence in any case, S ̸= ∅.
Thus, by the Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3, S has a least element r. Fix
q ∈Z such that r = a−bq, which is possible by deﬁnition of S. Then a = bq+r,
as desired.
We know that r ≥0 by deﬁnition of S, so we must show that r < b.
Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that r ≥b. Then
0 ≤r −b = a −bq −b
= a −(b + 1)q,
so r −b ∈S by deﬁnition. But r −b < r since b > 0, contradicting the fact
that r is the least element of S. Hence r < b, as desired.
Uniqueness: Suppose that we also have q1, r1 ∈Z with a = bq1 + r1, where
0 ≤r1 < b. We must show that q = q1 and r = r1.
So, we have
a = bq + r = bq1 + r1,
so
r −r1 = bq1 −bq = b(q1 −q).
In other words, b | (r −r1).
However, 0 ≤r < b and 0 ≤r1 < b, so
−b < r −r1 < b. Thus, since b | (r −r1), r −r1 = 0. Hence r = r1, as
desired. Since bq + r = bq1 + r1, this implies that bq = bq1. Hence q = q1 by
cancellation in Z, since b ̸= 0.
□
As mentioned earlier, the strength of the Division Algorithm is that it can be
used to reduce proofs about integers to ﬁnitely many cases. For example, when
b = 3, the Division Algorithm says that every integer a can be expressed in exactly
one of three forms:
a = 3q + 0,
a = 3q + 1,
or a = 3q + 2,
where q ∈Z.
This was the fact provided in Exercise 2.2.6a.
The Division Algorithm also says that every integer a can be expressed in
exactly one of four forms:
a = 4q + 0,
a = 4q + 1,
a = 4q + 2,
or a = 4q + 3,
where q ∈Z;
here, we are taking b = 4. Which version of the Division Algorithm we use (or try
to use) depends on the question being asked.

134
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Example 6.1.4. Prove that the square of any integer has one of the forms 3k or
3k + 1, where k ∈Z.
Given the form of this statement, it makes sense to apply the Division Algo-
rithm with b = 3.
Proof. Let n ∈Z. By the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1), n can be written
uniquely in exactly one of the forms 3q, 3q + 1, or 3q + 2, where q ∈Z.
Case I: n = 3q.
Then
n2 = (3q)2 = 9q2 = 3(3q2),
so n2 = 3k, where k = 3q2 ∈Z.
Case II: n = 3q + 1.
Then
n2 = (3q + 1)2 = 9q2 + 6q + 1 = 3(3q2 + 2q) + 1,
so n2 = 3k + 1, where k = 3q2 + 2q ∈Z.
Case III: n = 3q + 2.
Then
n2 = (3q + 2)2 = 9q2 + 12q + 4 = 3(3q2 + 4q + 1) + 1,
so n2 = 3k + 1, where k = 3q2 + 4q + 1 ∈Z.
Hence, the square of any integer has one of the forms 3k or 3k + 1, where k ∈Z.
□♦
Exercises 6.1
1. Prove that the fourth power of any integer has one of the forms 5k or 5k + 1,
where k is an integer.
2. Prove that the cube of any integer has one of the forms 9k, 9k + 1, or 9k + 8,
where k ∈Z.
3. Use the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1) to prove that for all n ∈Z+,
6 | n(n + 1)(2n + 1).
4. Assume that the set I ⊆Z satisﬁes the following properties:
(a) There exists n ∈I such that n ̸= 0.
(b) If m, n ∈I, then m + n ∈I.
(c) If m ∈I and a ∈Z, then am ∈I.
Prove that there exists n0 ∈Z such that I = {kn0 | k ∈Z}.
5. (Division Algorithm for polynomials with real coeﬃcients) Let n, m ∈Z≥0. Let
f and g be polynomials with real coeﬃcients of degrees n and m, respectively,
so that neither polynomial is the zero polynomial. Prove that there exist poly-
nomials q and r such that f(x) = q(x)g(x) + r(x) for all x ∈R, where either
r = 0, or r ̸= 0 and deg r < deg g. (HINT: Use strong induction on the degree
of f. Write f and g in polynomial form as in Deﬁnition 5.1.10 and consider the
www.ebook3000.com

6.2. Greatest common divisors and the Euclidean Algorithm
135
polynomial f(x) −an
bm xn−mg(x), where an is the coeﬃcient of xn in f and bm
is the coeﬃcient of xm in g. Note that the result also holds when f = 0.)
6. Let n ∈Z≥0. Let f be a polynomial with real coeﬃcients of degree n.
(a) Let a ∈R. Using Exercise 6.1.5, prove that f(a) = 0 if and only if there
exists a polynomial q with real coeﬃcients such that f(x) = q(x)(x −a)
for all x ∈R.
(b) Prove by induction on the degree n of f that there are at most n real
numbers a such that f(a) = 0.
7. Prove Theorem 6.1.1 using a proof by induction, rather than the Well-Ordering
Principle.
8. In this exercise, you will prove that PMI is logically equivalent to WOP; in
other words, given PMI, show that you can deduce the statement WOP, and
vice versa. We will be taking 0 as the base case in PMI.
(a) Assume that WOP is true.
To prove that PMI is true, let P(n) be a
statement about n ∈Z≥0. Assume that
(i) P(0) is true, and
(ii) for all m ∈Z≥0, if P(m) is true, then P(m + 1) is true.
Your goal is to prove that for all n ∈Z≥0, P(n) is true.
You should
do this using a proof by contradiction and by applying WOP to the set
S = {n ∈Z≥0 | P(n) is false}. This means that you should prove that S
is nonempty, so that you can apply WOP, to conclude that S has a least
element n0. What do statements (i) and (ii) imply about n0?
(b) Assume that PMI is true. To prove that WOP is true, let S ⊆Z≥0 be
nonempty. Your goal is to prove that S has a least element, which you
should do by contradiction. Given n ∈Z≥0, let P(n) be the statement
“for all k ∈Z≥0 with 1 ≤k ≤n, k /∈S”. Use PMI to prove that the
statement (∀n ∈Z≥0)P(n) is true. What conclusion can you then draw
about S?
6.2. Greatest common divisors and the Euclidean Algorithm
In this section, we discuss another concept you’re probably familiar with, that of
the greatest common divisor of two given nonzero integers. We’ll also discuss a
very useful algorithm not only for computing the greatest common divisor of two
positive integers, but also for expressing the greatest common divisor as a “linear
combination” of those integers, which is an important tool in number theory and
abstract algebra. We begin with an example that relies on your intuition.
Example 6.2.1. The greatest common divisor of the integers −24 and 30 is exactly
what it sounds like: the greatest positive integer that divides both −24 and 30.
Positive divisors of −24:
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 24.
Positive divisors of 30:
1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30.
Common positive divisors of −12 and 30:
1, 2, 3, 6.
So, the greatest common divisor of −24 and 30 is 6.
♦

136
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
We can see from this example why the greatest common divisor of two integers,
not both of which are 0, exists and is unique. The set of positive integer divisors of
a nonzero integer is ﬁnite, and the maximum element of a ﬁnite set is unique (see
Exercise 8.2.14). We are ready for the deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 6.2.2. Let a, b ∈Z with at least one of a and b nonzero. The greatest
common divisor (gcd) of a and b is the unique positive integer d such that
(1) d | a and d | b and
(2) for all c ∈Z+, if c | a and c | b, then c ≤d.
We denote the gcd of a and b by (a, b) or gcd(a, b).
Computing the greatest common divisor of two integers using the deﬁnition is
tedious when the numbers are large. In this section, we use the Division Algorithm
to derive an algorithm, called the Euclidean Algorithm, for computing gcd’s. The
algorithm relies on the following lemma.
Lemma 6.2.3. Let a, b ∈Z with a ̸= 0 and b ̸= 0. Assume we have q, r ∈Z such
that a = bq + r. Then (a, b) = (b, r).
Proof. Let a, b, q, r ∈Z with a ̸= 0, b ̸= 0, and a = bq + r. To show that (a, b) =
(b, r), we show that the pair a, b and the pair b, r have exactly the same common
divisors; it follows immediately that the pair a, b and the pair b, r have exactly the
same greatest common positive divisor.
Let D1 = {d ∈Z | d | a and d | b} and D2 = {d ∈Z | d | b and d | r}. We show
that D1 = D2. First let d ∈D1 and show that d ∈D2. Since d ∈D1, we know
d | a and d | b. Thus, we may ﬁx m, n ∈Z such that a = dn and b = dm. Then
r = a −bq = dn −dmq = d(n −mq), so d | r. Hence d ∈D2 and D1 ⊆D2. The
argument that D2 ⊆D1 is similar, and we leave it to you to ﬁnish.
□
Given a, b ∈Z+, the Division Algorithm produces a remainder r with 0 ≤r < b.
If we repeatedly apply the Division Algorithm, starting with a and b to produce
q and r, then Lemma 6.2.3 says that we can replace the question of computing
(a, b) with computing (b, r), an “easier” gcd to compute since it involves smaller
integers. We just need to argue that this process of repeatedly applying the Division
Algorithm stops. For this, we will again need the Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3.
Before giving a precise statement and proof of the Euclidean Algorithm, which
we do at the end of this section, we will state the algorithm informally. We’ll also
give an example of how it is used to ﬁnd the gcd of any two positive integers.
Euclidean Algorithm (Informal) 6.2.4.
(1) Given a, b ∈Z+.
(2) If b | a, then (a, b) = b, and STOP.
(3) If b ∤a, then use the Division Algorithm to ﬁnd q, r ∈Z such that a = bq + r,
where 0 ≤r < b . Note that (a, b) = (b, r).
(4) Repeat from step (2), replacing a by b and b by r.
www.ebook3000.com

6.2. Greatest common divisors and the Euclidean Algorithm
137
Intuitively we see that, given a, b ∈Z+, the algorithm must halt. Otherwise,
the sequence of remainders we obtain will form an inﬁnite descending chain in Z+,
contradicting the Well-Ordering Principle.
Example 6.2.5. Find (1962, 924).
We use the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1) with a = 1962 and b = 924 to
obtain 1962 = 924 · 2 + 114; i.e., q = q1 = 2 and r = r1 = 114.
We then repeat, this time taking b = 924 in place of a and r = 114 in place of b
to obtain 924 = 114·8+12; i.e., we now have q2 = 8 and r2 = 12. We continue until
we reach a remainder of 0; this is most easily followed as a sequence of Division
Algorithm computations:
1962 = 924 · 2 + 114,
(6.1)
924 = 114 · 8 + 12,
(6.2)
114 = 12 · 9 + 6,
(6.3)
12 = 6 · 2 + 0.
(6.4)
By repeated application of Lemma 6.2.3, note that
(1962, 924) = (924, 114) = (114, 12) = (12, 6) = (6, 0) = 6.
This process shows that the last nonzero remainder we obtain in the repeated com-
putations above is the gcd of the two numbers we began with; here (1962, 924) = 6.
We can also use this process to show that 6, the gcd of 1962 and 924, can be
expressed explicitly in terms of 1962 and 924 in a particularly useful way. We will
show that we can ﬁnd x, y ∈Z such that 6 = 1962x + 924y. This fact, that the
gcd 6 is an integer “linear combination” of 1962 and 924, is extremely important in
number theory. We obtain x and y by running the Euclidean Algorithm backwards.
First rewrite the sequence of computations (6.3), (6.2), and (6.1) as follows:
6 = 114 −12 · 9 = 114 + 12(−9),
12 = 924 −114 · 8 = 924 + 114(−8),
114 = 1962 −924 · 2 = 1962 + 924(−2).
Then substitute:
6 = 114 + 12(−9)
= 114 + (924 + 114(−8))(−9)
= 114 + 924(−9) + 114(72)
= 114(73) + 924(−9)
= (1962 + 924(−2))(73) + 924(−9)
= 1962(73) + 924(−146) + 924(−9)
= 1962(73) + 924(−155).
So, 6 = 1962x + 924y, where x = 73 and y = −155 (you should conﬁrm this
statement using your calculator).
♦
We next formally deﬁne the terminology used in Example 6.2.5.

138
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Deﬁnition 6.2.6. Let a, b, n ∈Z. The integer n is a linear combination of a and
b if there exist x, y ∈Z such that n = ax + by.
Although the Euclidean Algorithm can be used to ﬁnd the greatest common
divisors of positive integers only, it is easy to adapt when one or both of the integers
are negative, by the following fact.
Proposition 6.2.7. Let a, b ∈Z such that not both a and b equal 0. Then (a, b) =
(|a|, |b|).
Proof. Exercise 6.2.2.
□
Thus (−1962, 924) = (1962, 924) = 6 by our previous computation. We can
rewrite the linear combination found in Example 6.2.5 as
6 = 1962(73) + 924(−155)
= −1962(−73) + 924(−155)
to write (−1962, 924) as a linear combination of −1962 and 924.
Corollary 6.2.8. Let a, b ∈Z such that not both a and b equal 0, and let d = (a, b).
Then d is a linear combination of a and b.
Proof (Informal Sketch). Informally (for a ≥b > 0), repeated back substitution
using the computations that arise when the Euclidean Algorithm (Theorem 6.2.9)
is used to compute (a, b). Formally, one proves by strong induction on k that all
the remainders rk generated by the proof of the Euclidean Algorithm are linear
combinations of a and b. See Exercise 6.2.7.
□
6.2.1. The Euclidean Algorithm, more formally. The precise statement of the
Euclidean Algorithm is notationally complicated. Students who are encountering
these ideas for the ﬁrst time may wish to omit the statement and proof of the
Euclidean Algorithm.
To see how to formalize the Euclidean Algorithm, note that we can view the
computations (6.1)–(6.4) as follows:
a = bq1 + r1,
b = r1q2 + r2,
r1 = r2q3 + r3,
r2 = r3q4 + r4,
where a = 1962, b = 924, and
q1 = 2,
r1 = 114,
q2 = 8,
r2 = 12,
q3 = 9,
r3 = 6,
q4 = 2,
r4 = 0.
So, we are really asserting the existence of a “list of quotients” q1, q2, q3, q4 and a
“list of remainders” r1, r2, r3, r4 which strictly decrease to r4 = 0, where the desired
www.ebook3000.com

6.2. Greatest common divisors and the Euclidean Algorithm
139
gcd is the last nonzero remainder r3. In fact, the list of remainders starts earlier:
deﬁning r0 = b and r−1 = a is consistent with the pattern we see here since
r0 = b = r1q2 + r2,
r−1 = a = r0q1 + r1.
Theorem 6.2.9 (Euclidean Algorithm). Let a, b ∈Z+ with a ≥b and let d = (a, b).
Then there exist ﬁnite lists of integers q1, q2, . . . , qn+1 and r−1, r0, r1, r2, . . . , rn+1,
where n ≥0, such that a = r−1 ≥b = r0 > r1 > r2 > · · · > rn > rn+1 = 0,
a = bq1 + r1,
b = r1q2 + r2,
r1 = r2q3 + r3,
...
rn−2 = rn−1qn + rn,
rn−1 = rnqn+1 + rn+1,
and d = rn.
Proof. Informally, the Euclidean Algorithm follows from repeated applications of
the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1) and Lemma 6.2.3.
Formally, the proof
requires induction or the Well-Ordering Principle.
Let a, b ∈Z+ with a ≥b, and let r−1 = a and r0 = b. We deﬁne the two lists
of integers by recursion, using the Division Algorithm to obtain:
r1 and q1 with
a = r−1 = r0q1 + r1 = bq1 + r1,
where 0 ≤r1 < r0,
r2 and q2 with
b = r0 = r1q2 + r2,
where 0 ≤r2 < r1,
r3 and q3 with
r1 = r2q3 + r3,
where 0 ≤r3 < r2,
and in general, for k ≥1,
rk and qk with
rk−2 = rk−1qk + rk,
where 0 ≤rk < rk−1,
until a remainder of 0 is obtained, i.e., until n ≥0 is obtained with
rn−1 = rnqn+1 + rn+1,
where rn+1 = 0.
This n ≥0 exists, since if a remainder of 0 is never obtained, then {rn | n ≥0} is
a nonempty set of positive integers
· · · < r3 < r2 < r1 < r0
with no least element, contradicting the Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3.
Then by Lemma 6.2.3 we have
(a, b) = (b, r1) = (r1, r2) = · · · = (rn−1, rn) = (rn, rn+1) = (rn, 0) = rn.
To prove this rigorously, prove by induction on k that if 0 ≤k ≤n, then (rk−1, rk) =
(rk, rk+1). See Exercise 6.2.6. Hence (a, b) = rn, the last nonzero remainder, as
desired.
□

140
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Exercises 6.2
1.
(a) Use the Euclidean Algorithm to ﬁnd (14670, 4257) and write (14670, 4257)
as an integer linear combination of 14670 and 4257.
(b) Repeat part (a) for (1207, 569).
(c) Repeat part (a) for (7776, 16650).
2. Prove Proposition 6.2.7.
3. Let a, b ∈Z with a and b not both zero, and let d = (a, b). Let
S = {n ∈Z | (∃x, y ∈Z)[n = ax + by]}
(i.e., S is the set of all integer linear combinations of a and b), and let
T = {n ∈Z | (∃m ∈Z)[n = dm]}
(i.e., T is the set of all integer multiples of d). Prove that S = T.
4. Let a, b ∈Z with a and b not both zero, and let d = (a, b). Prove that d is the
least positive integer linear combination of a and b; i.e., for all c ∈Z+, if c is
an integer linear combination of a and b, then d ≤c.
5. One can deﬁne the gcd of two positive integers a and b strictly in terms of
the divisibility relation |, which is useful since it generalizes to other “algebraic
structures” without a linear order relation ≤.
Deﬁnition 6.2.10. Let a, b, d ∈Z+.
We say that d is a greatest common
divisor of a and b if
(a) d | a and d | b and
(b) for all c ∈Z+, if c | a and c | b, then c | d.
Let a, b, d ∈Z+.
(a) Let d = (a, b) be the gcd of a and b as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 6.2.2. Use
Corollary 6.2.8 to show that d is a gcd of a and b as deﬁned in Deﬁni-
tion 6.2.10. In other words, show that for all c ∈Z+, if c | a and c | b,
then c | d.
This proves that for all a, b ∈Z+, an integer d satisfying
Deﬁnition 6.2.10 exists.
(b) Using Deﬁnition 6.2.10, prove that the greatest common divisor of a and
b is unique. (Hint: Assume that for a, b ∈Z+, we have d1, d2 ∈Z+ both
satisfying Deﬁnition 6.2.10, and prove that d1 = d2.)
(c) Show that if the greatest common divisor (as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 6.2.10)
of a and b is d , then d = (a, b) (as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 6.2.2). In other
words, show that for all c ∈Z+, if c | a and c | b, then c ≤d.
6. Fill in the missing induction argument in the proof of the Euclidean Algorithm
(Theorem 6.2.9).
7. Prove Corollary 6.2.8.
www.ebook3000.com

6.3. Relatively prime integers and the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
141
6.3. Relatively prime integers and the Fundamental Theorem
of Arithmetic
The result of Corollary 6.2.8 is particularly useful when the greatest common divisor
of two integers is 1.
Deﬁnition 6.3.1. Let a, b ∈Z such that not both a and b equal 0. If (a, b) = 1,
then the integers a and b are called relatively prime (or coprime).
For example, 12 and 15 are not relatively prime, since (12, 15) = 3, while
24 and 35 are relatively prime, since (24, 35) = 1. By Corollary 6.2.8, we know
that we can write 1 as a linear combination of 24 and 35: you can check that
1 = 24(−16) + 35(11).
It turns out that this property characterizes when two
integers are relatively prime.
Theorem 6.3.2. Let a, b ∈Z such that not both of a and b equal 0. Then a and b
are relatively prime if and only if there exist x, y ∈Z such that ax + by = 1.
Proof. Let a, b ∈Z such that not both of a and b equal 0.
(⇒) Corollary 6.2.8.
(⇐) Assume that we are given x, y ∈Z such that ax + by = 1. We show that
(a, b) = 1. To do this, assume that we have d ∈Z+ such that d | a and d | b.
We must show that d = 1.
Since d | a and d | b, we may ﬁx m, n ∈Z such that a = dm and b = dn.
Then we have ax+by = 1, so dmx+dny = 1, or d(mx+ny) = 1. Hence d | 1.
Since d > 0, this implies that d = 1, as desired. Hence a and b are relatively
prime.
□
As already mentioned, Theorem 6.3.2 is a very useful tool when one knows that
two integers are relatively prime. We’ll use it to prove a result known as Euclid’s
Lemma, which implies an important fact about prime divisors of products. (See
Deﬁnition 2.1.7, if necessary, for the deﬁnition of prime integer.)
Theorem 6.3.3 (Euclid’s Lemma). Let a, b, c ∈Z. If (a, b) = 1 and a | bc, then
a | c.
Proof. Let a, b, c ∈Z. Assume that (a, b) = 1 and a | bc. We show that a | c.
Since (a, b) = 1, by Theorem 6.3.2 we may ﬁx x, y ∈Z with the property that
ax + by = 1. Since a | bc, we may ﬁx m ∈Z such that bc = am. Then
(ax + by)c = axc + byc = c.
Substituting for bc gives axc + amy = c, or a(xc + my) = c.
Thus a | c, as
desired.
□
Several important corollaries follow from Theorem 6.3.3, and they will lead us
back to the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic.
Corollary 6.3.4. Let a, b ∈Z and p ∈Z+ be prime. If p | ab, then p | a or p | b.
Proof. Exercise 6.3.1.
□

142
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Corollary 6.3.5. Let p ∈Z+ be prime, r ∈Z+, and b1, b2, . . . , br ∈Z be such that
p | b1b2 · · · br. Then there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, such that p | bi.
Proof. We prove for all primes p ∈Z+ and all b1, b2, . . . , br ∈Z,
(6.5)
p | b1b2 · · · br =⇒
there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, such that p | bi
by induction on r.
Base Case: Given p ∈Z+ prime and b1 ∈Z, statement (6.5) for r = 1 is
immediate.
Inductive Step: Let r ∈Z+. We assume the inductive hypothesis that for all
primes q ∈Z+ and all c1, c2, . . . , cr ∈Z,
(6.6)
q | c1c2 · · · cr =⇒
there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, such that q | ci.
Next, let p ∈Z+ be prime and b1, b2, . . . , br, br+1 ∈Z, and assume that
(6.7)
p | b1b2 · · · brbr+1.
We prove that there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r + 1, such that p | bi.
Note that p | abr+1, where a = b1b2 · · · br. By Corollary 6.3.4, p | br+1 or
b | a. If p | br+1, then we’re done, so assume p | a. Then p | b1b2 · · · br, so by
the inductive hypothesis for q = p and cj = bj, 1 ≤j ≤r, there exists i ∈Z+,
1 ≤i ≤r, such that p | bi, completing the Inductive Step.
Hence, by PMI, for all r ∈Z+, if p ∈Z+ is prime and b1, b2, . . . , br ∈Z are
such that p | b1b2 · · · br, then there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, such that p | bi.
□
Note our careful use of variables in the previous induction proof. The statement
to be proved by induction is a universal statement, and so the inductive hypothesis is
also universal. We use diﬀerent variables in the universal quantiﬁers in the inductive
hypothesis to remind ourselves that statement (6.6) holds for all q, c1, c2, . . . , cr
and not just for the speciﬁc p, b1, b2, . . . , br, br+1 in statement (6.7). In this case,
we didn’t need the full generality of the inductive hypothesis, but in other proofs
we might (see the discussion regarding the proof of Theorem 8.2.9).
Corollary 6.3.6. Let r ∈Z+ and p, q1, q2, . . . , qr ∈Z+ be prime with p | q1q2 · · · qr.
Then there exists i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, such that p = qi.
Proof. Exercise 6.3.2.
□
Corollary 6.3.6 is the missing tool that we need in order to prove the uniqueness
part of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 2.3.3). Note that this
proof is a much more sophisticated proof by induction than we have considered so
far. The proof of Corollary 6.3.5 is a warm-up induction proof.
Theorem 6.3.7 (Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Uniqueness)). Every posi-
tive integer greater than 1 can be written as a product of primes. Furthermore, this
product of primes is unique, except for the order in which the factors appear.
Proof (Uniqueness). We ﬁrst restate the uniqueness statement by taking advan-
tage of notation, which will conveniently set up the induction argument:
www.ebook3000.com

6.3. Relatively prime integers and the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
143
Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Uniqueness). For all r ∈Z+, for all
s ∈Z+ with r ≤s,
(6.8)
for all primes p1 ≤p2 ≤· · · ≤pr, q1 ≤q2 ≤· · · ≤qs,
if p1p2 · · · pr = q1q2 · · · qs, then r = s and for all i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, pi = qi.
Note that this phrasing of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic says that
the factorization of any ﬁxed integer n > 1 as a product of primes written in
nondecreasing order is unique.
We prove this by induction on r (i.e., by induction on the length of the factor-
ization).
Base Case: Assume we have s ∈Z+ and primes p1, q1, q2, . . . , qs ∈Z+ such
that q1 ≤q2 ≤· · · ≤qs and
n = p1 = q1q2 · · · qs.
We show that s = 1 and q1 = p1.
Let i ∈Z+ with 1 ≤i ≤s. Note that qi | p1. Hence, since qi and p are
prime, qi = p1 by Corollary 6.3.6. Thus, since i is arbitrary, p1 = ps
1. Since
s ≥2 gives a contradiction, s = 1. Hence n = p1 = q1.
Inductive Step: Let r ∈Z+. We assume the result for r (i.e., we assume that
for all s ∈Z+ with r ≤s, statement (6.8) is true), and we prove it for r + 1.
Let t ∈Z with r + 1 ≤t + 1 (i.e., r ≤t), and assume we have primes
P1 ≤P2 ≤· · · ≤Pr ≤Pr+1 and Q1 ≤Q2 ≤· · · ≤Qt ≤Qt+1
such that
n = P1P2 · · · PrPr+1 = Q1Q2 · · · QtQt+1.
Then Pr+1 | Q1Q2 · · · QtQt+1, so by Corollary 6.3.6, we may ﬁx i ∈Z+,
1 ≤i ≤t + 1, such that Pr+1 = Qi. Note then that Pr+1 ≤Qt+1. Reasoning
analogously, Qt+1 | P1P2 · · · PrPr+1, so Qt+1 ≤Pr+1. Thus Pr+1 = Qt+1.
By cancellation in Z, we have
P1P2 · · · Pr = Q1Q2 · · · Qt.
Hence by the induction hypothesis for t and P1, . . . , Pr, Q1, . . . Qt, we conclude
that r = t, and for all i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r, Pi = Qi; i.e., r + 1 = t + 1 and for
all i ∈Z+, 1 ≤i ≤r + 1, Pi = Qi, completing the Inductive Step.
Hence, by PMI, statement (6.8) is true for all r, s ∈Z+ with r ≤s; i.e.,
the factorization of any ﬁxed integer n > 1 as a product of primes written in
nondecreasing order is unique.
□
It is also possible to prove Theorem 6.3.7 by strong induction on the positive
integer being factored, rather than on the length of the factorization; see Exer-
cise 6.3.12.

144
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Exercises 6.3
1. Prove Corollary 6.3.4: for all a, b ∈Z, for all p ∈Z+, if p is prime and p | ab,
then p | a or p | b. Prove that this result does not hold in general, when p is
not prime.
2. Prove Corollary 6.3.6.
3. Let a, b ∈Z with a and b not both zero. Prove that if d = (a, b), then ( a
d, b
d) = 1.
(Note that if d = (a, b), then a
d, b
d ∈Z.)
4. Without using the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, prove that for all
a, b, c ∈Z, if a | c and b | c and (a, b) = 1, then ab | c.
Prove that this
result does not hold in general when (a, b) ̸= 1.
5. Using the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, prove that for all a, b, c ∈Z, if
a | c and b | c and (a, b) = 1, then ab | c. Prove that this result does not hold
in general when (a, b) ̸= 1.
6. Let p ∈Z+ be prime and let i ∈Z+ be such that 0 < i < p. Prove that p
divides the binomial coeﬃcient
p
i

. (See Exercise 3.1.18.)
7. Let a, b ∈Z such that (a, b) = 1. Prove that (a + b, a −b) = 1 or 2.
8. Let a, b, c ∈Z. Prove that (a, c) = (b, c) = 1 if and only if (ab, c) = 1.
9. Let a, b ∈Z. Prove that (a, b) = 1 if and only if (ab, a + b) = 1.
10. (Rational Root Theorem) Let r, s ∈Z with s ̸= 0 and (r, s) = 1, and let p be a
polynomial with integer coeﬃcients; i.e., p(x) = anxn+an−1xn−1+· · ·+a1x+a0,
where a0, a1, . . . , an ∈Z. Prove that if r
s is a rational root of p, i.e., p( r
s) = 0,
then r | a0 and s | an.
11. Note that by the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 6.3.7), every
positive integer n greater than 1 has a unique prime-power factorization; i.e.,
every integer n > 1 can be written uniquely in the form
n = pk1
1 pk2
2 · · · pkr
r ,
where p1 < p2 < · · · < pr are prime and ki ∈Z+ for all 1 ≤i ≤r.
(a) Let a, b ∈Z+ with a < b and let p1, p2, . . . , pr be the list of all distinct
primes that are factors of a or b.
(i) Explain why there exist i1, i2, . . . , ir, j1, j2, . . . , jr ∈Z≥0 such that
a = pi1
1 pi2
2 · · · pir
r
and
b = pj1
1 pj2
2 · · · pjr
r .
(ii) Prove that
(a, b) = pmin{i1,j1}
1
pmin{i2,j2}
2
· · · pmin{ir,jr}
r
,
where min{m, n} denotes the minimum of the integers m and n.
(b) Prove that all the exponents in the prime-power factorization of the integer
n > 1 are even if and only if n is a perfect square (i.e., iﬀthere exists
m ∈Z+ such that m2 = n).
12. Provide another proof of the uniqueness part of the Fundamental Theorem of
Arithmetic; i.e., prove using strong induction on n that for all n ∈Z+ with
n ≥2, n can be written uniquely as a product of primes.
www.ebook3000.com

6.4. Congruences
145
6.4. Congruences
Another important topic in number theory is the notion of “congruence modulo
m”. In fact, this is a notion with which you are already familiar, since we “tell
time” modulo 12 (or 24).
Deﬁnition 6.4.1. Let a, b ∈Z, and let m ∈Z+. The integers a and b are congruent
modulo m, written a ≡b mod m, if m | (a −b).
For the remainder of this chapter, m will always denote a ﬁxed positive integer
greater than 1 (since congruence modulo 1 isn’t interesting). We ﬁrst consider some
examples of this concept and then consider its basic properties.
Example 6.4.2.
(1) 41 ≡5 mod 12, since 41 −5 = 36 and 12 | 36.
(2) −15 ≡13 mod 4, since −15 −13 = −28 and 4 | −28.
(3) 25 ̸≡12 mod 7, since 25 −12 = 13 and 7 ∤13.
♦
The next proposition, which gives another way to think of congruence mod m,
is easy to prove.
Proposition 6.4.3. Let a, b ∈Z. Then
a ≡b
mod m ⇔(∃q ∈Z)[a = mq + b].
Proof. Exercise 6.4.1.
□
Note that congruence mod m has “equality-like” properties; namely, it is “re-
ﬂexive”, “symmetric”, and “transitive”.
Theorem 6.4.4.
(1) For all a ∈Z, a ≡a mod m (i.e., congruence modulo m is “reﬂexive”).
(2) For all a, b ∈Z, if a ≡b mod m, then b ≡a mod m (i.e., congruence modulo
m is “symmetric”).
(3) For all a, b, c ∈Z, if a ≡b mod m and b ≡c mod m, then a ≡c mod m
(i.e., congruence modulo m is “transitive”).
Proof. Let a, b, c ∈Z.
(1) To show that a ≡a mod m, note that a −a = 0, and hence m | a −a. Thus
a ≡a mod m by Deﬁnition 6.4.1.
(2) Assume that a ≡b mod m. We must show that b ≡a mod m. Since a ≡b
mod m, by Deﬁnition 6.4.1 we know that m | (a −b). Thus we may ﬁx ℓ∈Z
such that a −b = mℓ. But then b −a = m(−ℓ), so m | (b −a) and b ≡a
mod m by Deﬁnition 6.4.1.

146
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
(3) Assume that a ≡b mod m and b ≡c mod m. We must show that a ≡c
mod m. Since a ≡b mod m and b ≡c mod m, by Deﬁnition 6.4.1 we know
that m | (a−b) and m | (b−c). Thus we may ﬁx k, ℓ∈Z such that a−b = mk
and b −c = mℓ. Then
(a −b) + (b −c) = mk + mℓ,
so
a −c = m(k + ℓ).
Thus m | (a −c) and hence a ≡c mod m, by Deﬁnition 6.4.1.
□
The Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1) implies that every integer is congruent
modulo m to a unique nonnegative remainder r < m upon division by m.
Theorem 6.4.5. Let a, b ∈Z.
(1) There is a unique r ∈Z such that 0 ≤r < m and a ≡r mod m.
(2) The congruence a ≡b mod m holds if and only if there exists r ∈Z with
0 ≤r < m such that a ≡r mod m and b ≡r mod m (i.e., a and b have the
same nonnegative remainder r < m when divided by m).
Proof. Let a, b ∈Z.
(1) By the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1), there exists a unique remainder
r ∈Z, 0 ≤r < m, such that
(∃q ∈Z)[a = mq + r].
By Proposition 6.4.3, it follows that there exists a unique remainder r ∈Z,
0 ≤r < m, such that a ≡r mod m.
(2) We must prove the biconditional.
(⇒) Assume a ≡b mod m. By the Division Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1), we
may ﬁx integers q1, q2, r1, r2 such that a = mq1 + r1, b = mq2 + r2,
and also 0 ≤r1, r2 < m.
Then r1 ≡a mod m by Proposition 6.4.3
and the symmetric property Theorem 6.4.4(2). Hence r1 ≡b mod m,
since r1 ≡a mod m and a ≡b mod m, by the transitive property
Theorem 6.4.4(3).
Thus r1 ≡r2 mod m, again by transitivity, since
b ≡r2 mod m. Since 0 ≤r1, r2 < m and r1 ≡r1 mod m, we have
r1 = r2 by part (1) of this theorem.
(⇐) Assume we have r ∈Z, 0 ≤r < m, such that a ≡r mod m and also
b ≡r mod m. Then a ≡b mod m by the symmetric and transitive
properties in Theorem 6.4.4.
□
Theorem 6.4.5 says, for example, that each integer a is congruent to exactly
one of 0, 1, 2, or 3 modulo 4. This is simply a restatement of the fact that, by the
Division Algorithm, each integer a takes exactly one of the following four forms:
a = 4k, a = 4k + 1, a = 4k + 2, or a = 4k + 3, where k ∈Z. By computing modulo
m, we can greatly simplify the proofs we saw in Section 6.1.
Thus, we wish to deﬁne “arithmetic modulo m”. The next theorem shows that
all but one of the arithmetic operations behave as expected.
Theorem 6.4.6. Let a1, a2, b1, b2, c ∈Z and assume that a1 ≡a2 mod m and
b1 ≡b2 mod m. Then:
www.ebook3000.com

6.4. Congruences
147
(1) a1 + b1 ≡a2 + b2 mod m.
(2) a1 −b1 ≡a2 −b2 mod m.
(3) a1 + c ≡a2 + c mod m.
(4) a1b1 ≡a2b2 mod m.
(5) a1c ≡a2c mod m.
Proof. We prove (4) and leave the rest to Exercise 6.4.7. See also Exercises 6.4.4
and 6.4.8.
Let a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈Z. Assume that a1 ≡a2 mod m and b1 ≡b2 mod m. We
prove that a1b1 ≡a2b2 mod m. By Deﬁnition 6.4.1, we know that m | (a1 −a2)
and m | (b1 −b2), so we ﬁx k, ℓ∈Z such that a1 −a2 = mk and b1 −b2 = mℓ. We
must show that m | (a1b1 −a2b2). Note that
a1b1 −a2b2 = a1b1 −a1b2 + a1b2 −a2b2
= a1(b1 −b2) + b2(a1 −a2)
= a1mℓ+ b2mk
= m(a1ℓ+ b2k).
Hence, m | (a1b1 −a2b2) and so a1 ≡a2 mod m, as desired.
□
The notion of congruences can greatly simplify “divisibility” proofs, as well as
proofs using the Division Algorithm. As an example, we’ll provide another solution
to the problem from Example 6.1.4.
Example 6.4.7. Prove that the square of any integer has one of the forms 3k or
3k + 1, where k ∈Z.
Proof. By Proposition 6.4.3, it suﬃces to prove that the square of any integer
must be congruent to 0 or 1 modulo 3. Let x ∈Z. As before, we consider 3 cases,
and we use Theorem 6.4.6 to compute.
Case I: x ≡0 mod 3.
Then x2 ≡02 ≡0 mod 3.
Case II: x ≡1 mod 3.
Then x2 ≡12 ≡1 mod 3.
Case III: x ≡2 mod 3.
Then x2 ≡22 ≡4 ≡1 mod 3.
Hence for any x ∈Z, x2 is congruent to 0 or 1 modulo 3.
□♦
Exercises 6.4
1. Prove Proposition 6.4.3.
2. Let a, b ∈Z and m, n ∈Z+. Prove that if a ≡b mod m and n | m, then a ≡b
mod n.

148
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
3. Let a, b ∈Z and m ∈Z+. Prove that if a ≡b mod m, then (a, m) = (b, m).
(Hint: Use the same method that was used to prove Lemma 6.2.3.)
4. Give an example to show that a ̸= 0 and ab ≡ac mod m need not imply that
b ≡c mod m. Give an example to show that a2 ≡b2 mod m need not imply
that a ≡b mod m.
5. Use congruences to prove that for all integers a, a3 ≡0, 1, or 6 mod 7.
6. Redo Exercises 6.1.1, 6.1.2, and 6.1.3 using congruences in place of the Division
Algorithm.
7. Complete the proof of Theorem 6.4.6.
8. Let a, b, c ∈Z and m ∈Z+. Prove that if (c, m) = 1 and ac ≡bc mod m, then
a ≡b mod m.
9. Let p ∈Z+ be prime and let a, b ∈Z. Prove that (a + b)p ≡ap + bp mod p.
(HINT: See Exercise 3.1.19.)
10. Let a, b ∈Z and m ∈Z+.
(a) Prove that the congruence ax ≡b mod m has a solution if and only if
d | b, where d = (a, m).
(b) Solve the following congruences.
(i) 3x ≡5 mod 7.
(ii) 12x ≡5 mod 9.
11. Let n ∈Z+ be such that n ≥2, and assume that (n −1)! ≡−1 mod n. Prove
that n is prime.
12.
(a) Let p ∈Z+ be prime. Prove that for all x ∈Z, x2 ≡1 mod p if and only
if x ≡1 mod p or x ≡−1 mod p.
(b) Let p > 3 be prime and let U = {2, 3, . . . , p−2}. Prove that if a ∈U, then
there exists a unique x ∈U such that ax ≡1 mod p. (See Exercise 6.4.10.)
(c) (Wilson’s Theorem) Prove that for all primes p, (p −1)! ≡−1 mod p.
(HINT: First try an example where p = 13, to see how parts (a) and (b)
are relevant.)
13. In this exercise, we consider the following theorem of Dirichlet.
Theorem 6.4.8 (Dirichlet’s Theorem on Primes in Arithmetic Progressions
(1837)). Let a, m ∈Z+ with (a, m) = 1.
Then there exist inﬁnitely many
primes p such that p ≡a mod m; i.e., there are inﬁnitely many primes p of
the form mk + a, where k ∈Z≥0.
A proof of Dirichlet’s Theorem in its full generality uses methods beyond
the scope of this textbook, but it is possible to prove some special cases of this
theorem using the methods we have discussed.
(a) Prove that there exist inﬁnitely many primes congruent to 3 modulo 4;
i.e., there exist inﬁnitely many primes of the form 4k + 3, where k ∈Z≥0.
(HINT: Mimic the proof of Euclid’s Theorem that there exist inﬁnitely
many primes (Theorem 2.3.4). Assume that p1 < p2 < · · · < pn, where
n ∈Z+, is a complete and increasing list of the primes congruent to 3
modulo 4, and consider the positive integer n = 4p1 · p2 · · · · · pn −1.)
(b) Prove that there exist inﬁnitely many primes congruent to 5 modulo 6;
i.e., there exist inﬁnitely many primes of the form 6k + 5, where k ∈Z≥0.
www.ebook3000.com

6.5. Congruence classes
149
(c) Why does adapting your proofs of the ﬁrst two parts of this problem fail
when trying to prove that there are inﬁnitely many primes congruent to 7
modulo 8, i.e., inﬁnitely many primes of the form 8k + 7, where k ∈Z≥0?
6.5. Congruence classes
Theorem 6.4.5 essentially says that when a, b ∈Z with a ≡b mod m, then a and
b are the “same”, since they are congruent modulo m to the same nonnegative
remainder r < m.
It will be convenient, therefore, to “lump together” into a
single set integers which are the “same” modulo m and then treat that set as a
single mathematical object. This is a common mathematical technique in abstract
algebra, and we consider the general idea in Chapter 7.
Deﬁnition 6.5.1. Let a ∈Z. The congruence class of a modulo m is the set
[a]m = {x ∈Z | x ≡a
mod m}.
Example 6.5.2. Note that 27 ≡−13 mod 4 (since 27 −(−13) = 40), so 27 ∈
[−13]4. By symmetry, −13 ≡27 mod 4, so −13 ∈[27]4.
Since 27 ̸≡2 mod 4 (i.e., 27 −2 = 25 is not divisible by 4), 27 /∈[2]4.
♦
Example 6.5.3. Continuing to work modulo 4, note that
[0]4 = {x ∈Z | x ≡0
mod 4} = {x ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[x = 4k]}
(6.9)
= {. . . , −8, −4, 0, 4, 8, . . . }.
In fact (this requires proof; see Theorem 6.5.5(2)), [0]4 = [4]4 = [−8]4 = · · · ;
i.e., the congruence class [0]4 has many diﬀerent “names”.
We can continue in this way to ﬁnd all of the congruence classes mod 4.
[1]4 = {x ∈Z | x ≡1
mod 4} = {x ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[x = 4k + 1]}
(6.10)
= {. . . , −7, −3, 1, 5, 9, . . . }
= [9]4 = [−7]4 = · · · .
[2]4 = {x ∈Z | x ≡2
mod 4} = {x ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[x = 4k + 2]}
(6.11)
= {. . . , −6, −2, 2, 6, 10, . . . }
= [10]4 = [−6]4 = · · · .
[3]4 = {x ∈Z | x ≡3
mod 4} = {x ∈Z | (∃k ∈Z)[x = 4k + 3]}
(6.12)
= {. . . , −5, −1, 3, 7, 11, . . . }
= [7]4 = [−5]4 = · · · .
♦
Equations (6.9), (6.10), (6.11), and (6.12), in conjunction with the Division
Algorithm (Theorem 6.1.1), tell us that [0]4, [1]4, [2]4, [3]4 are the only congruence
classes modulo 4. In general, if m ∈Z+, then [0]m, [1]m, . . . , [m −1]m are the only
congruence classes modulo m.
Deﬁnition 6.5.4. The set of integers modulo m, denoted Zm, is the set
Zm = {[0]m, [1]m, . . . , [m −1]m}.

150
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Note that while there is a similarity between the set {0, 1, 2, 3} and the set
Z4 = {[0]4, [1]4, [2]4, [3]4}, they are not equal as sets. While {0, 1, 2, 3} is a set of
integers, Z4 is a set of sets of integers.
Furthermore, Theorem 6.4.5 tells us (since every integer is congruent to exactly
one element of the set {0, 1, 2, 3} modulo 4) that the congruence classes modulo 4
“partition” Z into four pairwise disjoint sets, i.e., that each integer is in exactly one
of these congruence classes (see Deﬁnition 7.3.1). These facts are summarized in
Theorem 6.5.5. See Figure 6.1.
Z
[1]4
[0]4
[2]4
[3]4
1, 5, 9, . . .
−3, −7, −11, . . .
0, 4, 8, 12, . . .
−4, −8, −12, . . .
−2, −6, −10, . . .
2, 6, 10, . . .
−1, −5, −9, . . .
3, 7, 11, . . .
Figure 6.1. Z4.
Theorem 6.5.5 (Congruence classes modulo m form a “partition” of Z).
(1) For all a ∈Z, a ∈[a]m.
(2) For all a, b ∈Z, a ≡b mod m iﬀ[a]m = [b]m.
(3) For all a, b ∈Z, a ̸≡b mod m iﬀ[a]m ∩[b]m = ∅.
Proof. Exercise 6.5.1. (We are relegating the proof of this important theorem to
the exercises, since we will prove the more general result Theorem 7.2.9, which
implies this one.)
□
Just as Z is an “algebraic structure” (i.e., a set equipped with an algebraic
operation +), we can make Zm into an algebraic structure by deﬁning an addition
+m of congruence classes modulo m, using arithmetic modulo m. For example, it is
reasonable to expect that [2]4 +4 [3]4 should equal [2 + 3]4 = [5]4 = [1]4. However,
there is a potential problem here, since every congruence class has “inﬁnitely many
names”. For example, since [10]4 = [2]4 and [−1]4 = [3]4, we need to be sure that
[10]4 +4 [−1]4 = [9]4 = [1]4 = [5]4 = [2]4 +4 [3]4.
Theorem 6.4.6 and Theorem 6.5.5 can be used to show that this arithmetic of
congruence classes is “well-deﬁned” (see Subsection 6.5.1), in the following sense.
www.ebook3000.com

6.5. Congruence classes
151
Theorem 6.5.6. Let a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈Z and assume that [a1]m = [a2]m and [b1]m =
[b2]m. Then:
(1) [a1 + b1]m = [a2 + b2]m.
(2) [a1 −b1]m = [a2 −b2]m.
(3) [a1b1]m = [a2b2]m.
Scratchwork. Let’s examine the Given-Goal diagram for part (1).
Given
Goal
a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈Z
[a1]m = [a2]m
[b1]m = [b2]m
[a1 + b1]m = [a2 + b2]m
By Theorem 6.5.5(2), we may rewrite the Given-Goal diagram as follows.
Given
Goal
a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈Z
a1 ≡a2 mod m
b1 ≡b2 mod m
a1 + b1 ≡a2 + b2 mod m
But this is just the Given-Goal diagram for the proof of Theorem 6.4.6(1).
We’ll include the proof of this statement, for completeness.
Proof. We prove (1) and leave the rest to Exercise 6.5.2.
Let a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈Z and assume that [a1]m = [a2]m and [b1]m = [b2]m. We
prove that [a1 + b1]m = [a2 + b2]m.
Since [a1]m = [a2]m, by Theorem 6.5.5(2), we know that a1 ≡a2 mod m.
Thus, by Proposition 6.4.3, we may ﬁx q1 ∈Z such that a1 = mq1 + a2. Similarly,
since [b1]m = [b2]m, we know that b1 ≡b2 mod m. Hence, we may ﬁx q2 ∈Z such
that b1 = mq2 + b2. Then
a1 + b1 = (mq1 + a2) + (mq2 + b2) = m(q1 + q2) + (a2 + b2).
Thus, again by Proposition 6.4.3, a1 + b1 ≡a2 + b2 mod m, and so by Theo-
rem 6.5.5(2), [a1 + b1]m = [a2 + b2]m, as desired.
□
We may thus deﬁne the arithmetic binary operations +m, −m, and ·m on Zm
as follows.
Deﬁnition 6.5.7. Given [a]m, [b]m ∈Zm,
(1) [a]m +m [b]m = [a + b]m,
(2) [a]m −m [b]m = [a −b]m,
(3) [a]m ·m [b]m = [ab]m.

152
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
Table 6.1. Addition table for Z4
+4
[0]4
[1]4
[2]4
[3]4
[0]4
[0]4
[1]4
[2]4
[3]4
[1]4
[1]4
[2]4
[3]4
[0]4
[2]4
[2]4
[3]4
[0]4
[1]4
[3]4
[3]4
[0]4
[1]4
[2]4
For example, the addition table for the algebraic structure ⟨Z4, +4⟩can be
found in Table 6.1.
In general, ⟨Zm, +m⟩is an example of an algebraic structure called a group, a
concept you will likely study in a future course called abstract algebra (see [14]).
A group consists of a set G and a binary operation ∗on G (see page 102) satisfying
the group axioms given in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2. Group axioms
(G1)
∗is associative
(∀a, b, c ∈G)[a ∗(b ∗c) = (a ∗b) ∗c].
(G2)
existence of identity
(∃e ∈G)(∀a ∈G)[a ∗e = a = e ∗a].
(G3)
existence of inverses
(∀a ∈G)(∃b ∈G)[a ∗b = e = b ∗a].
For example, the set Z of integers is a group under addition + by the Basic
Properties of Integers 1.2.3. Similarly, Zm is a group under +m (see Exercise 6.5.3).
Considering again ⟨Z4, +4⟩, note that Table 6.1 shows that [0]4 is the identity
element e in Z4 and that the inverse of [0]4 is [0]4, the inverse of [1]4 is [3]4 (and
vice versa), and the inverse of [2]4 is [2]4.
6.5.1. Well-deﬁnedness. What, exactly, do we mean when we say that a func-
tion f : X →Y is “well-deﬁned”? In some sense, this traditional terminology is
misleading; a “well-deﬁned” function f : X →Y is just a function: each input
in X maps to a unique output in Y . Well-deﬁnedness simply hasn’t arisen before
now. For example, the function f : R →R by, for all x ∈R, f(x) = x2 is clearly a
well-deﬁned function. Technically, what we mean is that if x1, x2 ∈R with x1 = x2,
then f(x1) = f(x2); i.e., (x1)2 = (x2)2. For this function, well-deﬁnedness of f is
just a property of equality.
The situation is more complicated when trying to deﬁne a function on a set
of congruence classes, such as a function f : Z4 →Z4. As we’ve already noted,
elements in Z4 have more than one name; for example, [1]4 = [5]4 = [149]4 = [−35]4.
Given [n]4 ∈Z4, if we try to deﬁne f([n]4) in terms of n (which is likely), then
we have a potential problem because it is possible to have [n1]4 = [n2]4 without
having n1 = n2. In the example above, if using the name [5]4 leads to a diﬀerent
www.ebook3000.com

6.5. Congruence classes
153
answer than using the name [1]4 when computing f([1]4), then we would be trying
to assign two diﬀerent values for the output of f([1]4). If this happens, then f isn’t
a function at all (f is “ill-deﬁned”)!
Theorem 6.5.6 states that the binary function +4 : Z4 × Z4 →Z4, which is
deﬁned by f([a]4, [b]4) = [a + b]4, i.e., in terms of a and b, is well-deﬁned. Similarly,
−4 : Z4 × Z4 →Z4 and ·4 : Z4 × Z4 →Z4 are well-deﬁned.
Exercises 6.5
1. Prove Theorem 6.5.5.
2. Complete the proof of Theorem 6.5.6.
3. Let m ∈Z+, m > 1.
(a) Show that ⟨Zm, +m⟩is a group by verifying the group axioms in Table 6.2:
(i) Show that for all [a]m, [b]m, [c]m ∈Zm,
[a]m +m ([b]m +m [c]m) = ([a]m +m [b]m) +m [c]m.
(ii) Show that for all [a]m ∈Zm,
[a]m +m [0]m = [a]m = [0]m +m [a]m.
(iii) Show that for all [a]m ∈Zm there exists [b]m ∈Zm such that
[a]m +m [b]m = [0]m = [b]m +m [a]m.
(b) In fact, +m is commutative, making ⟨Zm, +m⟩an abelian1 group: show
that for all [a]m, [b]m ∈Zm,
[a]m +m [b]m = [b]m +m [a]m.
4. Prove that if n ∈Z+ is odd, then the sum of all the elements in Zn is [0]n.
5. Given m ∈Z+, m > 1, let Z∗
m = Zm −{[0]m}.
(a) Find the multiplication tables for ⟨Z∗
4, ·4⟩and ⟨Z∗
5, ·5⟩.
(b) Is ⟨Z∗
4, ·4⟩a group? Is ⟨Z∗
5, ·5⟩a group? Why are we considering Z∗
m, rather
than Zm, under multiplication modulo m?
6. Let m ∈Z+, m > 1.
Prove that ⟨Z∗
m, ·m⟩is a group if and only if m is
prime. (HINT: For (⇒), prove the contrapositive. What element of Z∗
m plays
the role of the (multiplicative) identity e? The deﬁnition of “m isn’t prime”
will be useful for showing that axiom (G3) in Table 6.2 isn’t satisﬁed. For
(⇐), you need to verify that the three group axioms in Table 6.2 are satisﬁed,
where the binary operation ∗is ·m.
What element of Z∗
m plays the role of
the (multiplicative) identity e? For axiom (G3), you will ﬁnd Theorem 6.3.2
useful.)
7. Let n ∈Z+, n > 1, and let f : Zn →Z by, for all [a]n ∈Zn, f([a]n) = (a, n).
Prove that f is well-deﬁned. (HINT: See Exercise 6.4.3.)
8. Let f : Z5 →Z by, for all [a]5 ∈Z5, f([a]5) = (2, a). Prove that f is not
well-deﬁned.
1Abelian groups are named after the Norwegian mathematician Niels Abel, who lived during 1802–
1829.

154
6. An Introduction to Number Theory
9. Let m, n ∈Z+ with (m, n) = 1. Let f : Zmn →Zm × Zn by, for all a ∈Z,
f([a]mn) = ([a]m, [a]n).
(a) Prove that f is well-deﬁned.
(b) Let m = 4 and n = 7. Find a ∈Z such that f([a]28) = ([3]4, [5]7).
(c) Prove that f is a bijection.2
(HINT: To prove that f is onto, given
([b]m, [c]n) ∈Zm × Zn, consider x = cmr + bns, where 1 = mr + ns.)
2The fact that f is onto is known as the Chinese Remainder Theorem, as problems using this fact
appeared in Chinese mathematical writing as early as the ﬁrst century C.E.
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 7
Equivalence Relations
and Partitions
Congruence modulo m is an example of an “equivalence relation” on Z, and we
noted in the previous chapter that the congruence classes modulo m of the integers
form a “partition” of Z. In this chapter, we formally deﬁne and investigate these
notions. Our focus is on equivalence relations and partitions, as these concepts can
be found in many diﬀerent mathematical areas of study. In this chapter, we have
omitted Given-Goal diagrams, not because they aren’t important any more, but
because you can construct them yourself.
7.1. Introduction
We must deﬁne the more general notion of “relation” before we can study equiva-
lence relations. Our introduction here is very brief and focuses on binary relations.
A more thorough study of relations can be found in [15].
Deﬁnition 7.1.1. Let A and B be sets. A (binary) relation R from A to B is a
subset of A × B. A (binary) relation on A is a subset of A × A.
Example 7.1.2. Let A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and B = {a, b, c}. Then
R = {(1, b), (1, c), (3, a), (4, a), (4, c), (5, b)} ⊆A × B,
so R is a relation from A to B. Note that 3 is “R-related” to a since (3, a) ∈R,
while 3 is not “R-related” to b since (3, b) /∈R.
♦
When R ⊆A × B is a relation from A to B, elements a ∈A and b ∈B are
“R-related” when (a, b) ∈R. It will often be more transparent to use the following
notation.
155

156
7. Equivalence Relations and Partitions
Deﬁnition 7.1.3. Let A and B be sets, and let R ⊆A × B be a relation from A
to B. For a ∈A and b ∈B, we write
a R b
iﬀ(a, b) ∈R and
a ̸R b
iﬀ(a, b) /∈R.
Using the notation in Deﬁnition 7.1.3, we see in Example 7.1.2 that 3 R a,
while 3 ̸R b.
The purpose of the ﬁrst example is to emphasize that a relation is nothing
more than a set of ordered pairs. The second example emphasizes a relation you
are already familiar with.
Example 7.1.4. Let R = {(x, y) ∈R × R | x < y}.
Then (e, π) ∈R and
( 3
2, −3) /∈R. In the notation of Deﬁnition 7.1.3, e R π and 3
2 ̸R −3. However, it
is standard to identify the relation R with the symbol < used to deﬁne it and to
write e < π and 3
2 ̸< −3, as usual.
Since < is a relation on R, it is a set of ordered pairs in R × R, and hence it
has a graph in R × R.
♦
Another common notation used to represent a relation is the symbol “∼”.
Example 7.1.5. Let Z∗= Z −{0}. Deﬁne the relation ∼on Z × Z∗by, for all
a, c ∈Z and all b, d ∈Z∗,
(a, b) ∼(c, d) iﬀad = bc.
(Technically, ∼is a subset of (Z × Z∗) × (Z × Z∗); i.e., ∼is a set of ordered pairs
of ordered pairs!) Note that
(1, 2) ∼(−4, −8)
because (1)(−8) = (2)(−4) and
(−1, 3) ̸∼(2, −5)
because (−1)(−5) ̸= (3)(2).
♦
Example 7.1.6. In Deﬁnition 5.1.1, we deﬁned a function from a set X to Y
informally as a correspondence. While this is a familiar “deﬁnition”, it is not a
precise deﬁnition. What, after all, is a “correspondence”? How do we deﬁne it
mathematically? It turns out that it does no harm to think of a function in this
way, since in fact the notion can be deﬁned rigorously, in terms of relations.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of the domain of a relation.
Deﬁnition 7.1.7. Let R be a relation from a set X to a set Y ; i.e., R ⊆X × Y .
The domain of R is the set
dom R = {a ∈X | (∃b ∈Y )[(a, b) ∈R]}.
Deﬁnition 7.1.8. A relation R from a set X to a set Y is a function if for all
a ∈dom R there exists a unique b ∈Y such that (a, b) ∈R; i.e.,
(∀a ∈dom R)(∃!b ∈Y )[(a, b) ∈R].
Furthermore, R : X →Y if dom R = X.
♦
www.ebook3000.com

7.2. Equivalence relations
157
Exercises 7.1
1. Suppose that the relation R is a function R : X →Y , as deﬁned by Deﬁni-
tion 7.1.8.
(a) Write down the deﬁnition of “R is 1-1”, keeping in mind that R ⊆X × Y .
(b) Write down the deﬁnition of “R is onto”, keeping in mind that R ⊆X ×Y .
(c) Under the assumption that R is a bijection (i.e., R is 1-1 and onto), write
down the deﬁnition of the inverse function R−1, keeping in mind that
R ⊆X × Y .
2. Suppose that the relation f is a function f : X →Y and the relation g is a
function g : Y →Z, as deﬁned by Deﬁnition 7.1.8. Write down the deﬁnition of
the composite function g ◦f, keeping in mind that f ⊆X × Y and g ⊆Y × Z.
7.2. Equivalence relations
Relations such as congruence modulo m, which are reﬂexive, symmetric, and transi-
tive, as described in Theorem 6.4.4, are called “equivalence relations”. We formalize
these notions in the next deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 7.2.1. Let ∼be a relation on a set A.
(1) ∼is reﬂexive if (∀a ∈A)[a ∼a].
(2) ∼is symmetric if (∀a, b ∈A)[a ∼b ⇒b ∼a].
(3) ∼is transitive if (∀a, b, c ∈A)[(a ∼b and b ∼c) ⇒a ∼c].
(4) ∼is an equivalence relation if ∼is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive.
We consider several examples.
Example 7.2.2.
(1) The equality relation = is an equivalence relation on any set X, since
• for all x ∈X, x = x,
• for all x, y ∈X, if x = y, then y = x, and
• for all x, y, z ∈X, if x = y and y = z, then x = z.
(2) For each m ∈Z+, the congruence relation “ ≡
mod m” is an equivalence
relation on Z, by Theorem 6.4.4.
♦
Not all relations are equivalence relations. Note that Deﬁnition 7.2.1 implies
that a relation ∼on a set A is not symmetric if
(∃a, b ∈A)[a ∼b and b ̸∼a].
As an exercise (see Exercise 7.2.1), you should write down the deﬁnitions of “∼is
not reﬂexive” and “∼is not transitive”.
Example 7.2.3. Determine whether the following relations are reﬂexive, symmet-
ric, or transitive.

158
7. Equivalence Relations and Partitions
(1) ≤on R.
• ≤is reﬂexive since, given x ∈R, x ≤x.
• ≤is not symmetric because 1 ≤2, but 2 ̸≤1.
• ≤is transitive since, given x, y, z ∈R, if x ≤y and y ≤z, then x ≤z.
(2) Let A = {1, 2, 3, 4} and let the relation R on A be deﬁned by
R = {(1, 1), (2, 3), (3, 2), (2, 2), (3, 4), (4, 3)}.
• R is not reﬂexive because 3 ̸R 3; i.e., (3, 3) /∈R.
• R is symmetric. Here we must consider all possibilities for all ordered
pairs (a, b) ∈R, to be sure that (b, a) is also in R when (a, b) is.
• R is not transitive because 2 R 3 and 3 R 4, but 2 ̸R 4.
♦
In the next example, we show that the relation ∼deﬁned in Example 7.1.5 is
an equivalence relation.
Example 7.2.4. Recall that Z∗= Z −{0} and deﬁne the relation ∼on Z × Z∗by,
for all a, c ∈Z, b, d ∈Z∗,
(a, b) ∼(c, d) iﬀad = bc.
We show that ∼is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive.
∼is reﬂexive: Let (a, b) ∈Z × Z∗. Then (a, b) ∼(a, b) because ab = ba, and
hence ∼is reﬂexive.
∼is symmetric: Let (a, b), (c, d) ∈Z × Z∗and assume that (a, b) ∼(c, d). We
must show that (c, d) ∼(a, b). Since (a, b) ∼(c, d), we know that ad = bc. By
properties of equality and multiplication of integers, we know that cb = da. It
follows by deﬁnition that (c, d) ∼(a, b), and hence ∼is symmetric.
∼is transitive: Let (a, b), (c, d), (m, n) ∈Z×Z∗and assume that (a, b) ∼(c, d)
and (c, d) ∼(m, n). We must show that (a, b) ∼(m, n). Since (a, b) ∼(c, d),
we know that ad = bc, and since (c, d) ∼(m, n), we know that cn = dm. To
show that (a, b) ∼(m, n), we must show that an = bm.
Since ad = bc, we know that adn = bcn, and since cn = dm, we know that
bcn = bdm. Thus adn = bdm. Since d ̸= 0 (remember that d ∈Z∗= Z−{0}),
cancellation implies that an = bm as desired. Thus (a, b) ∼(m, n), and hence
∼is transitive.
Since ∼is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive, ∼is an equivalence relation, by
deﬁnition.
♦
7.2.1. Equivalence classes. In Section 6.5, we used the fact that congruence
modulo m is an equivalence relation in order to identify integers that are congruent
modulo m; this identiﬁcation yielded the congruence classes modulo m. Similarly,
if we have an arbitrary equivalence relation on a set X, we may identify elements
of X that are equivalent under this relation to form “equivalence classes”.
Deﬁnition 7.2.5. Let ∼be an equivalence relation on a nonempty set X, and let
a ∈X. The equivalence class of a is the set
[a] = {x ∈X | x ∼a}.
The set of all equivalence classes of ∼is denoted by
X/∼= {[a] | a ∈X}.
www.ebook3000.com

7.2. Equivalence relations
159
Note that X/∼⊆P(X).
As usual, we consider several examples.
Example 7.2.6. For convenience of notation, let ≡m denote congruence modulo
m ∈Z+; i.e., for all a, b ∈Z, let a ≡m b iﬀa ≡b mod m. Then, as we have
already noted, ≡m is an equivalence relation. Given a ∈Z, the equivalence class
[a] = {n ∈Z | n ≡m a} is just the congruence class of a modulo m; i.e.,
[a] = [a]m = {n ∈Z | n ≡a
mod m}.
The set of all equivalence classes of ≡m is
Z/≡m = Zm = {[0]m, [1]m, . . . , [m −1]m}.
♦
Example 7.2.7. Once again, recall the deﬁnition of the equivalence relation ∼on
Z × Z∗from Example 7.1.5:
(7.1)
(a, b) ∼(c, d) iﬀad = bc,
for all a, c ∈Z, b, d ∈Z∗,
where Z∗= Z −{0}.
We consider the equivalence class [(1, 2)]. Since (−4)(2) = (−8)(1), (−4, −8) ∼
(1, 2), and hence (−4, −8) ∈[(1, 2)]. Since (−1)(2) ̸= (2)(1), (−1, 2) ̸∼(1, 2), and
hence (−1, 2) /∈[(1, 2)]. We can use its deﬁnition to compute the equivalence class
[(1, 2)]. Given an arbitrary (a, b) ∈Z × Z∗,
(a, b) ∈[(1, 2)] ⇔(a, b) ∼(1, 2) ⇔2a = b.
Thus [(1, 2)] = {(a, b) ∈Z × Z∗| b = 2a}. Other elements of [(1, 2)] are (1, 2),
(7, 14), and (−9, −18).
Recall that our deﬁnition of Q in Table 1.10 was informal. The equivalence
relation in this example is used to rigorously deﬁne the rational numbers from
the integers; i.e., formally, Q = (Z × Z+)/∼.
Informally, you should think of
(a, b) ∈Z × Z+ as the fraction a
b . Informally, statement (7.1) says that a
b =
c
d
iﬀad = bc. The equivalence class [(1, 2)] collects together in a single set all the
“names” for the fraction 1
2:
1
2 = −4
−8 = 7
14 = −9
−18 = · · · ,
since (1, 2), (−4, −8), (7, 14), (−9, −18) are all elements of [(1, 2)]. In Exercise 7.2.9,
you will show that the formal deﬁnitions of +Q and ·Q for Q = (Z × Z+)/∼are
well-deﬁned.
♦
Example 7.2.8. Consider the relation ∼on R×R deﬁned by, for all a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈
R,
(a1, a2) ∼(b1, b2) iﬀ(a1)2 + (a2)2 = (b1)2 + (b2)2.
In Exercise 7.2.5, you are asked to show that ∼is an equivalence relation on R×R.
As an example,
[(1, 2)] = {(x, y) ∈R × R | (x, y) ∼(1, 2)}
= {(x, y) ∈R × R | x2 + y2 = 5};
i.e., the equivalence class [(1, 2)] is the set of all points in R × R on the circle
x2 + y2 = 5.

160
7. Equivalence Relations and Partitions
Thus (R × R)/∼is the set of all graphs of circles in the plane centered at the
origin. The equivalence class
[(0, 0)] = {(x, y) ∈R × R | x2 + y2 = 0} = {(0, 0)}
is called a “degenerate circle”. See Figure 7.1 on page 164 for a picture of the
equivalence classes of this equivalence relation.
♦
In Section 6.5, we spoke of the set of congruence classes of the integers modulo
m forming a “partition” of the integers. Similarly, the set of equivalence classes of
an equivalence relation on a set X “partitions” X into pairwise disjoint subsets, as
follows.
Theorem 7.2.9. Let ∼be an equivalence relation on a nonempty set X.
(1) For all a ∈X, a ∈[a].
(2) For all a, b ∈X, a ∼b iﬀ[a] = [b].
(3) For all a, b ∈X, a ̸∼b iﬀ[a] ∩[b] = ∅.
Proof. Let ∼be an equivalence relation on X ̸= ∅.
(1) Let a ∈X. Then a ∼a, since ∼is reﬂexive, and hence a ∈[a] by Deﬁni-
tion 7.2.5.
(2) Let a, b ∈X.
(⇒) Assume a ∼b; we must show [a] = [b]. Since [a] and [b] are sets, we prove
the usual set containments. Let x ∈[a]. Then x ∼a by deﬁnition. Hence
we have x ∼a and a ∼b, and so x ∼b by transitivity of ∼. Thus x ∈[b]
and [a] ⊆[b]. Next let x ∈[b]. Then x ∼b by deﬁnition. Since a ∼b,
we know that b ∼a since ∼is symmetric. Thus x ∼b and b ∼a, and so
x ∼a by transitivity. Thus x ∈[a] and [b] ⊆[a], and so [a] = [b].
(⇐) Assume that [a] = [b]; we must show that a ∼b. Note that a ∈[a], by
part (1). Since [a] = [b], a ∈[b], and hence a ∼b by deﬁnition, as desired.
(3) Let a, b ∈X.
(⇒) We prove the contrapositive. Assume that [a] ∩[b] ̸= ∅. We must show
that a ∼b. Since [a] ∩[b] ̸= ∅, we may ﬁx x ∈X such that x ∈[a] ∩[b].
Then x ∼a, since x ∈[a], so a ∼x since ∼is symmetric. Similarly, x ∼b,
since x ∈[b]. Thus a ∼x and x ∼b, and hence a ∼b by transitivity of
∼.
(⇐) We prove the contrapositive. Assume that a ∼b. We must show that
[a] ∩[b] ̸= ∅. Note that a ∈[a] by part (1), and since a ∼b, a ∈[b] by
deﬁnition. Thus a ∈[a] ∩[b] and so [a] ∩[b] ̸= ∅.
□
Exercises 7.2
1. Let ∼be a relation on a set A.
(a) Give the deﬁnition of “∼is not reﬂexive”.
(b) Give the deﬁnition of “∼is not transitive”.
www.ebook3000.com

7.2. Equivalence relations
161
2. Determine whether the following relations on the given sets are reﬂexive, sym-
metric, or transitive.
(a) The relation
R = {(1, 1), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 1), (3, 4), (4, 1), (4, 3), (5, 1), (5, 2)}
on the set A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}.
(b) The divisibility relation | on Z.
(c) The relation ⊆on P(Z).
(d) The relation ∼on R deﬁned by x ∼y iﬀxy ≥0.
(e) The relation R on Z deﬁned by m R n iﬀ2 | (m + n).
(f) The relation R on Z deﬁned by m R n iﬀ3 | (m + n).
3. Let A = {1, 2, 3, 4}. Give an example of a relation R on A (as a set of ordered
pairs) such that:
(a) R is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive.
(b) R is reﬂexive, symmetric, and not transitive.
(c) R is reﬂexive, not symmetric, and transitive.
(d) R is reﬂexive, not symmetric, and not transitive.
(e) R is not reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive.
(f) R is not reﬂexive, symmetric, and not transitive.
(g) R is not reﬂexive, not symmetric, and transitive.
(h) R is not reﬂexive, not symmetric, and not transitive.
4. For each of the following, prove that the relation is an equivalence relation.
Then give the information about the equivalence classes, as speciﬁed.
(a) The relation ∼on Z deﬁned by x ∼y iﬀx2 = y2. Explicitly ﬁnd the
equivalence classes [0], [4], and [−72].
(b) The relation ∼on R deﬁned by x ∼y iﬀx = y or xy = 2. Explicitly ﬁnd
the equivalence classes [2], [3], [−4
5], and [0].
(c) The relation ∼on R × R deﬁned by (x, y) ∼(u, v) iﬀ4x −y = 4u −v.
Explicitly ﬁnd the equivalence classes [(5, 2)] and [(0, 0)]. For ﬁxed values
a, b ∈R, describe [(a, b)], both as a set and geometrically.
(d) The relation ∼on R × R deﬁned by (x, y) ∼(u, v) iﬀx2 −y = u2 −v.
Explicitly ﬁnd the equivalence classes [(5, 2)] and [(0, 0)]. For ﬁxed values
a, b ∈R, describe [(a, b)], both as a set and geometrically.
(e) The relation ∼on R+ × R+ deﬁned by (x, y) ∼(u, v) iﬀx2v = u2y.
Explicitly ﬁnd the equivalence classes [(5, 2)] and [(1, 4)]. For ﬁxed values
a, b ∈R+, describe [(a, b)], both as a set and geometrically.
(f) The relation ∼on Z≥0 × Z≥0 deﬁned by (x, y) ∼(z, w) iﬀx + w = z + y.
Give three elements of the equivalence class [(2, 0)] and three elements of
the equivalence class [(0, 3)].
Note: Since subtraction and division are not always deﬁned in Z≥0 (for
example, 2 −3 and 1 ÷ 2 are not deﬁned in Z≥0), your proof should be
expressed in terms of the operation of addition and use the cancellation
property in Z≥0. This equivalence relation is used to rigorously deﬁne the
integers Z from the nonnegative integers Z≥0.
5. Deﬁne ∼on R × R by, for all a1, a2, b1, b2 ∈R, (a1, a2) ∼(b1, b2) iﬀ(a1)2 +
(a2)2 = (b1)2 + (b2)2. Show that ∼is an equivalence relation on R × R.

162
7. Equivalence Relations and Partitions
6. Let R be a relation on a set A such that (∀a ∈A)(∃b ∈A)[aRb]. Show that if
R is symmetric and transitive, then R is reﬂexive.
Warning: If you do not use all of the hypotheses in this statement, then you
do not have a proof.
7. Let A = {1, 2, 3}. Find a nontrivial (i.e., nonempty) relation on A (i.e., a set
of ordered pairs that is a subset of A × A) that is symmetric and transitive,
but not reﬂexive.
Why does your relation not contradict the statement in
Exercise 7.2.6?
8. Let n ≥1, and let Sn = {f | f : {1, 2, . . . , n}
1-1
→
onto {1, 2, . . . , n}}. Deﬁne a
relation ∼on Sn by, for all f, g ∈Sn, f ∼g iﬀthere exists h ∈Sn such that
g = h−1 ◦f ◦h.
(a) Show that ∼is an equivalence relation on Sn.
(b) Find S3.
(c) Find the equivalence classes of ∼for S3.
9. Let ∼be the equivalence relation deﬁned in Example 7.2.7. In that example,
we noted that the formal deﬁnition of the set of rational numbers is Q =
(Z×Z+)/∼. In this exercise, you will show that the usual formulas for addition
and multiplication of rational numbers, now expressed formally in (Z×Z+)/∼,
are well-deﬁned binary operations on Q = (Z × Z+)/∼.
Let (a1, b1), (a2, b2), (c1, d1), (c2, d2) ∈Z × Z+. Assume that
[(a1, b1)] = [(c1, d1)] and [(a2, b2)] = [(c2, d2)].
Prove:
(a) [(a1b2 + a2b1, b1b2)] = [(c1d2 + d1c2, d1d2)].
(b) [(a1a2, b1b2)] = [(c1c2, d1d2)].
It then follows that +Q : Q × Q →Q and ·Q : Q × Q →Q by, for all
[(a1, b1)], [(a2, b2)] ∈(Z × Z+)/∼,
[(a1, b1)] +Q [(a2, b2)] = [(a1b2 + a2b1, b1b2)] and
[(a1, b1)] ·Q [(a2, b2)] = [(a1a2, b1b2)]
are well-deﬁned.
10. Suppose that ∼is an equivalence relation on a set A and that f : A →A such
that for all a, b ∈A,
a R b =⇒f(a) R f(b).
Prove that the function F : (A/∼) →(A/∼) deﬁned by F([a]) = [f(a)] is
well-deﬁned.
7.3. Partitions
Having used the term “partition” informally several times, we now give a precise
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 7.3.1. Let X be a nonempty set, and let P be a collection of subsets
of X (i.e., P ⊆P(X)). The collection P is a partition of X if
(1) For all A ∈P, A ̸= ∅.
www.ebook3000.com

7.3. Partitions
163
(2) For all A, B ∈P, A = B or A ∩B = ∅.
(3) For all x ∈X there exists A ∈P such that x ∈A. (This says that the sets in
P cover X.)
Example 7.3.2.
(1) Let X = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. Then P = {{1, 3, 4}, {2, 5}, {6}} is a partition of X;
i.e., every integer in X is in exactly one of the sets {1, 3, 4}, {2, 5}, or {6}.
(2) The collection P = {Q+, Q−, {0}} is a partition of Q; in other words, every
rational number falls into exactly one category: positive, negative, or zero.
♦
As we have already noted informally above, every equivalence relation on a set
gives rise to, or induces, a partition of that set.
Corollary 7.3.3 (Corollary to Theorem 7.2.9). Let ∼be an equivalence relation
on a nonempty set X. Then X/∼= {[a] | a ∈X}, the set of all equivalence classes
of ∼, is a partition of X.
Proof. Given an equivalence relation ∼on a nonempty set X, X/∼satisﬁes Def-
inition 7.3.1(1) and (3) by Theorem 7.2.9(1) and X/∼satisﬁes Deﬁnition 7.3.1(2)
by Theorem 7.2.9(2) and (3), since for any a, b ∈X, either a ∼b or a ̸∼b.
□
The following examples are restatements of Examples 6.5.3 and 7.2.8.
Example 7.3.4.
(1) Z4 = {[0]4, [1]4, [2]4, [3]4} is a partition of Z.
(2) P =

{(x, y) ∈R2 | x2 + y2 = r2} | r ∈R≥0
is a partition of R × R.
Recall from Example 7.2.8 that
[(1, 2)] = {(x, y) ∈R × R | x2 + y2 = 5},
[(0, 0)] = {(0, 0)}, and in general,
[(a, b)] = {(x, y) ∈R × R | x2 + y2 = a2 + b2}
when (a, b) ∈R × R.
This says that the Cartesian plane R × R can be
partitioned into pairwise disjoint circles (where {(0, 0)} is a degenerate circle)
that cover R × R. See Figure 7.1.
♦
The converse of Corollary 7.3.3 is also true; i.e., not only does every equivalence
relation on a nonempty set give rise to a partition of that set, but also every partition
of a nonempty set gives rise to an equivalence relation on that set. In fact, we can
prove something slightly stronger.
Theorem 7.3.5. Let P be a partition of the nonempty set X. Deﬁne a relation ∼
on X by, for all a, b ∈X,
a ∼b ⇐⇒(∃A ∈P)[a ∈A and b ∈A].
Then ∼is an equivalence relation on X. Furthermore, the equivalence classes of ∼
are exactly the elements of the partition P; i.e., X/∼= P.

164
7. Equivalence Relations and Partitions
x
y
Figure 7.1. R × R partitioned into nested circles.
Proof. Let P be a partition of the nonempty set X and let ∼be deﬁned by, for
all a, b ∈X,
a ∼b ⇔(∃A ∈P)[a ∈A and b ∈A].
∼is reﬂexive: Let a ∈X. By Deﬁnition 7.3.1(3), since P covers X, we can ﬁx
A ∈P such that a ∈A. Thus a ∼a.
∼is symmetric: Let a, b ∈X, and assume that a ∼b. Then we can ﬁx A ∈P
such that a ∈P and b ∈P, by deﬁnition of ∼. But then b ∼a is immediate.
∼is transitive: Let a, b, c ∈X, and assume that a ∼b and b ∼c. We prove
that a ∼c.
Since a ∼b, we can ﬁx A ∈P such that a ∈A and b ∈A. Similarly, since
b ∼c, we can ﬁx B ∈P such that b ∈B and c ∈B. Then b ∈A ∩B, so
A∩B ̸= ∅. Since P is a partition, by Deﬁnition 7.3.1(2), we know that A = B
or A ∩B = ∅. Hence A = B and a, c ∈A. Thus a ∼c by deﬁnition of ∼.
Thus, ∼is an equivalence relation on X. We next show that X/∼= P.
Let [a] ∈X/∼.
Then a ∈X, so we can ﬁx A ∈P such that a ∈A, by
Deﬁnition 7.3.1(3). Note that [a] = A, since for all x ∈X,
x ∈[a] ⇔x ∼a
⇔x ∈A
by deﬁnition of ∼. Hence [a] ∈P and so X/∼⊆P.
Next let A ∈P. Then A ̸= ∅by Deﬁnition 7.3.1(1), so we can ﬁx an element
a ∈A. Once again we can show that [a] = A, so that A ∈X/∼and P ⊆X/∼.
Hence X/∼= P as desired.
□
www.ebook3000.com

7.3. Partitions
165
Exercises 7.3
1. Let A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Give the equivalence relation (as a set of ordered pairs
in A × A) associated with these partitions of A:
(a) {{2, 4}, {1, 3, 5}},
(b) {{2, 3, 4, 5}, {1}},
(c) {{2}, {5}, {1, 3, 4}},
(d) {{1, 5}, {2, 3}, {4}}.
2. Let X and Y be sets and let f : X →Y be onto. For all b ∈Y , let Ab =
f −1[{b}].
(a) Prove that {Ab | b ∈Y } is a partition of X.
(b) Write down the equivalence relation ∼on X associated with this partition
of X.
(c) For f : Z →{0, 1} by, for all n ∈Z,
f(n) =

0
if n is even,
1
if n is odd,
ﬁnd A0 = f −1[{0}] and A1 = f −1[{1}]. Is {A0, A1} a partition of Z?
(d) For f : R →R≥0 by, for all x ∈R, f(x) = x2, ﬁnd A0, A4, A5, and Aπ. Is
{Ab | b ∈R≥0} a partition of R?

www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 8
Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Finite and inﬁnite sets are familiar notions, but we have yet to deﬁne these terms
rigorously. In this chapter, we deﬁne mathematically what it means for two sets to
have the “same size”. We discuss several facts regarding ﬁnite sets, and we address
the question of whether all inﬁnite sets have the same size.
8.1. Introduction
Until now, we have not questioned what we mean by a ﬁnite or inﬁnite set. If
we wish to prove statements about these concepts, however, we must have mathe-
matical deﬁnitions to work with. It seems quite clear to us, and we can see “at a
glance”, that the set
X =
 
3, −6, π, 4.7,
√
2
!
is ﬁnite and that X is the “same size” as the set
Y = {■, ♣, ♠, ⋆, ♦}.
By “counting”, we see that each of these sets has ﬁve elements. Mathematically,
this says that we can put each of X and Y into 1-1 correspondence with the set
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. But we don’t even need to work out how many elements these sets
have in order to see that they are the “same size”, since we can see directly that
they have the same size by matching their elements, i.e., by constructing a bijection
between them.
3
−6
π
4.7
√
2
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
■
♣
♠
⋆
♦
We make these notions precise below. For convenience, we ﬁrst ﬁx notation.
Recall that the set N of natural numbers is the set N = Z+ = {1, 2, 3, . . . }.
167

168
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Notation 8.1.1. For n ∈N, we denote by Nn the set
Nn = {1, 2, . . . , n} = {i ∈N | i ≤n}.
We deﬁne N0 = ∅.
Deﬁnition 8.1.2. Let X and Y be sets.
(1) We say X is equinumerous with Y , denoted by X ≈Y , if there exists a
bijection f : X
1-1
→
onto Y .
(2) We say X is ﬁnite if X = ∅or there exists n ∈N such that Nn ≈X; i.e., there
is a bijection f : {1, 2, . . . , n}
1-1
→
onto X.
(3) If Nn ≈X, then we say that the cardinality of X is n and write |X| = n. We
deﬁne the cardinality |∅| of the empty set to be |∅| = 0.
(4) We say X is inﬁnite if X is not ﬁnite.
Note that ≈is an “equivalence relation”1 on the collection of all nonempty sets.
See Exercise 8.1.9.
While these deﬁnitions seem quite sensible and straightforward, it turns out
that several “common sense” facts regarding these notions are fairly complicated
to prove from the deﬁnitions, and we delay these proofs until Section 8.2.
For
example, while it is hard to imagine how it could possibly be otherwise, we need
to prove that when X is ﬁnite, the cardinality of X is well-deﬁned; i.e., if X is a
nonempty ﬁnite set, then there exists a unique natural number n such that Nn ≈X
(see Corollary 8.2.2). For now, we will assume this fact. Furthermore, while it
seems obvious that the set N of natural numbers is inﬁnite, this fact also requires
a proof from the deﬁnition (see Corollary 8.2.4).
We now consider some examples that illustrate the concepts in Deﬁnition 8.1.2.
First, let’s make the bijections in our original example explicit.
Example 8.1.3. Let X = {3, −6, π, 4.7,
√
2} and Y = {■, ♣, ♠, ⋆, ♦}. The func-
tion f : X →Y deﬁned by
f(3) = ■,
f(−6) = ♣,
f(π) = ♠,
f(4.7) = ⋆,
f(
√
2) = ♦
is a bijection that shows that X ≈Y .
The function g : N5 →X deﬁned by
g(1) = π,
g(2) = 4.7,
g(3) = −6,
g(4) =
√
2,
g(5) = 3
is a bijection that shows that X is ﬁnite and |X| = 5.
♦
The bijection g in the previous example may not have been the one you expected
to see. In fact, there are many bijections from N5 to the set X in that example
that illustrate that |X| = 5 (see Exercise 8.1.1).
The next example demonstrates two inﬁnite sets that are equinumerous.
1We put the term equivalence relation in quotation marks since the collection of all nonempty sets
is not a set.
www.ebook3000.com

8.1. Introduction
169
Example 8.1.4. N ≈Z.
It is often helpful to view the desired bijection using a picture. We need to
deﬁne the function illustrated below and show that it is a bijection between N
and Z.
1
2
3
4
5
6
. . .
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
. . .
0
1
−1
2
−2
3
. . .
Formally, deﬁne f : N →Z by, for all n ∈N,
f(n) =

n
2
if n is even,
−(n−1)
2
if n is odd.
Note that ran f ⊆Z (so that Z is a reasonable codomain), since if n is even,
then n
2 ∈Z, and if n is odd, then −(n−1)
2
∈Z.
To see that f is 1-1, let n1, n2 ∈N and assume that f(n1) = f(n2). If n1
and n2 are both even, then we have that n1
2 = n2
2 , and hence n1 = n2, as desired.
Similarly, if n1 and n2 are both odd, then we have that −(n1−1)
2
= −(n2−1)
2
, and
hence n1 = n2. Note that we cannot have n1 even and n2 odd (or vice versa), since
f(n) > 0 when n is even and f(n) ≤0 when n is odd (which you can easily check).
Hence f is 1-1.
To see that f is onto, assume that n ∈Z. If n ≥1, then f(2n) = 2n
2 = n. If
n ≤0, then −2n + 1 ≥1 and f(−2n + 1) = −((−2n+1)−1)
2
= n. Hence f is onto.
♦
Exercises 8.1
1. The bijection g given in Example 8.1.3 is not the only one that shows that
the set X deﬁned there has cardinality 5. Find another one. How many such
bijections are there?
2. The bijection given in Example 8.1.4 is not the only one that shows that N and
Z are equinumerous. Find another one, and prove that it is a bijection.
3. Prove that N ≈O∗, where O∗is the set of positive odd integers.
4. Prove that Z ≈E∗, where E∗is the set of positive even integers.
5. Prove that the interval (0, 1) ⊆R is equinumerous with the interval (3, 7).
(HINT: Graph (0, 1) on the x-axis and (3, 7) on the y-axis, and think about
lines.)
6. Let a, b, c, d ∈R with a < b and c < d. Prove that (a, b) ≈(c, d). Which other
pairs of bounded intervals with these endpoints are equinumerous?

170
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
7. Prove that [0, 1] ≈(0, 1). (HINT: The following picture gives the idea of the
proof.)
0
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
. . .
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
. . .
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
1
6
1
7
. . .
8. Prove that (0, 1) ≈R. (HINT: You will ﬁnd the inverse tangent function,
whose properties you may assume, useful.)
9. Prove the following for all nonempty sets X, Y , Z:
(a) X ≈X.
(b) If X ≈Y , then Y ≈X.
(c) If X ≈Y and Y ≈Z, then X ≈Z.
10. Let X and Y be sets and assume that X ≈Y . Prove:
(a) If X is ﬁnite and nonempty, then Y is ﬁnite and |X| = |Y |.
(b) If X is inﬁnite, then Y is inﬁnite.
11. Let A be a set and let x be any element in the underlying universe U. Prove
that {x} × A ≈A and A × {x} ≈A.
8.2. Finite sets
In this section, we prove several useful facts about ﬁnite sets, as well as prove the
statements from Section 8.1 that were given there without proof.
Deﬁnition 8.1.2(2) states that for n ̸= 0, |A| = n exactly when there is a
bijection f : Nn →A, which is the natural mathematical notion that corresponds
to our informal idea of “counting” the elements of A. Another way to think of this
is to note that when |A| = n, n ̸= 0, the elements of A can be enumerated as a list
of n elements (and so the list ends). To see this, let f : Nn
1-1
→
onto A; we can list the
elements of A as
f(1), f(2), f(3), . . . , f(n).
If we deﬁne ai = f(i) for all i ∈Nn, then we can write A as
A = {a1, a2, a3, . . . , an}.
It is easy to believe that the cardinality of a nonempty ﬁnite set is a unique
natural number, but proving it from our deﬁnitions is required. In essence, while
it is diﬃcult to imagine it happening, we need to be sure that there do not exist
a set X and functions f : Nn
1-1
→
onto X (which says |X| = n > 0) and g : Nm
1-1
→
onto X
(which says |Y | = m > 0) with n ̸= m.
Proving that the cardinality of a nonempty ﬁnite set A is a unique natural
number relies on the following “common sense” fact. We’ll leave the proof of this
fact for Subsection 8.2.1.
Theorem 8.2.1. For all n ∈N, there does not exist a bijection f : Nn →X, where
X is a proper subset of Nn.
www.ebook3000.com

8.2. Finite sets
171
Taking X = Nm, where m < n, Theorem 8.2.1 implies that there does not exist
a 1-1 function f : Nn →Nm. This fact is known as the “Pigeonhole Principle”. In
more colorful language:
If n > m and n pigeons are put into m pigeonholes, then at least
one pigeonhole contains more than one pigeon.
Along with the Addition and Multiplication Principles, the Pigeonhole Principle is
an important mathematical tool in combinatorics. The Pigeonhole Principle seems
like another “obvious” statement, and it is often treated as such in mathematics
courses that make use of it.
Accepting Theorem 8.2.1 for now without proof, we see that this result is the
tool we need to show that our deﬁnition of a ﬁnite set agrees with our intuition
about ﬁnite sets.
Corollary 8.2.2. The cardinality of a ﬁnite set is well-deﬁned; i.e., for all sets X,
if X is ﬁnite, then there exists a unique n ∈Z, n ≥0, such that |X| = n.
Proof. Assume that the cardinality of the ﬁnite set X is not well-deﬁned. We
cannot have |X| = 0 and |X| = n for some n ∈N, since |X| = 0 implies that X = ∅
and |X| = n, n ∈N, implies that X ̸= ∅.
Hence we may ﬁx n, m ∈N with n > m and bijections f : Nn
1-1
→
onto X and
g : Nm
1-1
→
onto X. Then g−1 : X
1-1
→
onto Nm by Corollary 5.4.9, and so g−1 ◦f : Nn
1-1
→Nm
by Theorem 5.3.10(1). Since n > m, this contradicts the Pigeonhole Principle.
Hence there is a unique n ∈Z with n ≥0 such that |X| = n.
□
Corollary 8.2.3. Let A be a set.
(1) If A is ﬁnite, then A is not equinumerous with a proper subset of itself.
(2) If A is equinumerous with a proper subset of itself, then A is inﬁnite.
Proof. Exercise 8.2.2.
□
Corollary 8.2.4. The set N of natural numbers is inﬁnite.
Proof 1. Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that N is ﬁnite. Since N ̸= ∅, we
may ﬁx n ∈N such that N ≈Nn. So, we ﬁx a function f : N
1-1
→
onto Nn. Deﬁne the
function g : Nn+1 →Nn by, for all k ∈Nn+1, g(k) = f(k). (The function g is called
the restriction of f to Nn+1 and is sometimes denoted by f ↾Nn+1.) Then g is 1-1,
since f is, contradicting the Pigeonhole Principle. Hence N is inﬁnite.
□
Proof 2. By Exercise 8.1.3, N is equinumerous with a proper subset of itself,
namely, the set of odd positive integers. Hence by Corollary 8.2.3(2), N is inﬁ-
nite.
□
We’re ready now to prove some theorems about cardinalities of ﬁnite sets.
Theorem 8.2.5. Let A and B be ﬁnite sets with A ∩B = ∅, and let n, m ≥0
be natural numbers such that |A| = n and |B| = m. Then A ∪B is ﬁnite and
|A ∪B| = n + m.

172
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Scratchwork. For now, let’s assume that n, m ̸= 0. It’s worth writing down a
Given-Goal diagram.
Given
Goal
m, n ̸= 0
|A| = n, |B| = m
A ∩B = ∅
|A ∪B| = n + m
We can use Deﬁnition 8.1.2(2) to immediately rewrite this as follows.
Given
Goal
m, n ̸= 0
A ∩B = ∅
f : Nn
1-1
→
onto A
g : Nm
1-1
→
onto B
h : Nn+m
1-1
→
onto A ∪B
Informally, we can see exactly why |A ∪B| = n + m. As discussed above, the
bijection f can be used to list A (here f(i) = ai for all i ∈Nn):
a1, a2, . . . , an,
and the bijection g can be used to list B (here g(i) = bi for all i ∈Nm):
b1, b2, . . . , bm.
Thus we must construct the bijection h which lists A ∪B as
a1, a2, . . . , an, b1, b2, . . . , bm.
In otherwords, we need to construct the bijection
1
2
. . .
n
n + 1
n + 2
. . .
n + m
↓
↓
. . .
↓
↓
↓
. . .
↓
a1
a2
. . .
an
b1
b2
. . .
bm.
The fact that A ∩B = ∅will be needed to show that there are no repetitions
in this listing of A ∪B, i.e., that the function h is 1-1, so that there are actually
n + m elements in this list.
The proof of the theorem simply expresses these ideas formally and, of course,
checks the details.
Proof. Let A and B be ﬁnite sets with A ∩B = ∅, and let n, m ≥0 be such that
|A| = n and |B| = m. We assume that A ̸= ∅and B ̸= ∅, leaving the case when A
or B is empty for Exercise 8.2.1.
www.ebook3000.com

8.2. Finite sets
173
By Deﬁnition 8.1.2(2), we may ﬁx m, n ∈N and bijections f : Nn
1-1
→
onto A and
g : Nm
1-1
→
onto B. We show |A ∪B| = n + m by constructing an explicit bijection
h : Nn+m
1-1
→
onto A ∪B. Deﬁne h by, for i ∈Nn+m,
h(i) =

f(i)
if 1 ≤i ≤n,
g(i −n)
if n + 1 ≤i ≤n + m.
We leave the veriﬁcation that h is a bijection for Exercise 8.2.1.
□
Corollary 8.2.6. Let A1, A2, . . . , Ak, where k ∈N, be a family of pairwise disjoint
ﬁnite sets (i.e., Ai ∩Aj = ∅when i ̸= j). Then the set k
i=1 Ai = A1 ∪A2 ∪· · ·∪Ak
is ﬁnite and |A1 ∪A2 ∪· · · ∪Ak| = |A1| + |A2| + · · · + |Ak|.
Proof. The proof is by induction on k, the number of sets. See Exercise 8.2.4.
□
Theorem 8.2.7. Let A and B be ﬁnite sets, and let n, m ≥0 be such that |A| = n
and |B| = m. Then A × B is ﬁnite, and |A × B| = nm.
Proof (Informal Sketch). Let A and B be ﬁnite sets, and let n, m ≥0 be such
that |A| = n and |B| = m. We assume that A ̸= ∅and B ̸= ∅(i.e., n, m > 0),
leaving the case when A or B is empty for Exercise 8.2.7.
We have a bijection establishing
A = {a1, a2, . . . , an}
and, similarly,
B = {b1, b2, . . . , bm}.
We must construct a bijection which lists all the elements of A × B without repe-
tition. We can visualize counting A × B using n rows, each containing m ordered
pairs:
(8.1)
(a1, b1), (a1, b2), . . . , (a1, bm)
(a2, b1), (a2, b2), . . . , (a2, bm)
...
(an, b1), (an, b2), . . . , (an, bm).
The fact that (x, y) = (u, v) if and only if x = u and y = v is used to show
that there are no repetitions in this listing of A × B, so that there are actually nm
elements in this list. See Exercise 8.2.7.
□
As before, the proof of the theorem simply expresses these ideas formally and,
of course, checks the details.
Corollary 8.2.8. Let A1, A2, . . . , Ak, where k ∈N, be a family of ﬁnite sets. Then
A1 × A2 × · · · × Ak is ﬁnite and
|A1 × A2 × · · · × Ak| = |A1| · |A2| · · · · · |Ak|.
Proof. The proof is by induction on k, the number of sets. See Exercise 8.2.8.
□

174
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Theorems 8.2.5 and 8.2.7 are important tools in the mathematical subject called
combinatorics, which studies methods of counting (see [5]). For example, a typical
exercise in combinatorics is to count the number of ﬁve-card poker hands that are
“full houses” (i.e., three of one face value, or kind, and two of a diﬀerent kind).
In combinatorics, Theorem 8.2.5 is called the Addition Principle, and it says that
the number of ways of making a single selection from categories A or B is equal to
|A|+|B| when the categories are ﬁnite and disjoint. Theorem 8.2.7 is typically called
the Multiplication Principle; the Multiplication Principle states that the number of
ways to ﬁrst select one object from a ﬁnite category A and then, independently of
the object chosen, select one object from a ﬁnite category B is |A| · |B|. Both of
these statements generalize as in Corollaries 8.2.6 and 8.2.8.
The next counting result ﬁrst appeared as an exercise in the chapter on induc-
tion: Exercise 4.2.26. Recall that if A is a set, then P(A) denotes the power set of
A, i.e., the set of all subsets of A.
Theorem 8.2.9. Let A be a ﬁnite set, and let n ≥0 be such that |A| = n. Then
P(A) is ﬁnite and |P(A)| = 2n.
Scratchwork. This result can be proved by induction on the cardinality of A.
More precisely, one proves the following statement by induction on n ≥0:
for all n ≥0, for all sets A,
if |A| = n, then |P(A)| = 2n.
Thinking of the statement of the theorem in this way will ensure that the
inductive hypothesis is general enough to be useful to us, since it is a universally
quantiﬁed statement about sets. The inductive step assumes the result for n ≥0;
namely,
(†)
for any set X, if |X| = n, then |P(X)| = 2n.
We then assume we have a set A = {a1, a2, . . . , an+1} and apply the inductive
hypothesis (†) to a diﬀerent set X in order to show |P(A)| = 2n+1.
A small example helps to illustrate how the inductive hypothesis (†) is applied
using a new set X. Let A = {a1, a2, a3} have cardinality 3. Note that
P(A) = {∅, {a1}, {a2}, {a3}, {a1, a2}, {a1, a3}, {a2, a3}, {a1, a2, a3}}.
We will think of P(A) diﬀerently, by choosing a designated element of A, say a3,
and dividing the elements of P(A) into two categories: those subsets of A not
containing a3 and those subsets of A containing a3.
Subsets of A
Subsets of A
not containing a3
containing a3
∅
{a3}
{a1}
{a1, a3}
{a2}
{a2, a3}
{a1, a2}
{a1, a2, a3}
www.ebook3000.com

8.2. Finite sets
175
Note that the subsets of A not containing a3 are just the subsets of the set
X = A −{a3} = {a1, a2}, to which the inductive hypothesis applies. Thus, there
are 22 = 4 sets in this category. Each subset of A containing {a3} in the second
category arises from adding a3 to a set in the ﬁrst category. This means that there
are 22 = 4 sets in the second category, and hence 4 + 4 = 8 subsets of A overall.
The proof of the theorem expresses these ideas formally and checks the details.
Proof. Exercise 8.2.9.
□
We end with another “common sense” result about subsets of ﬁnite sets. We
include this proof, as it gives another good example of an inductive proof of a
universally quantiﬁed statement.
Theorem 8.2.10. Let A and B be sets with A ⊆B. If B is ﬁnite, then A is also
ﬁnite and |A| ≤|B|. Furthermore, A ⊊B iﬀ|A| < |B|.
Scratchwork. We will prove the ﬁrst statement by induction on the cardinality
of B. More precisely, we will be proving the following statement by induction on
n:
(8.2)
for all n ≥0, for all sets A and B,
if A ⊆B and |B| = n, then A is ﬁnite and |A| ≤|B|.
Thinking of the statement of the theorem in this way will ensure that the inductive
hypothesis is general enough to be useful to us.
As in the induction proof of
Theorem 8.2.9, the inductive step involves choosing a designated element bn+1 ∈
B. Our cases depend on whether or not bn+1 ∈A, and we apply the induction
hypothesis to a diﬀerent set.
Proof. We prove statement (8.2) by induction on n.
Base Case: Let A and B be sets with A ⊆B and |B| = 0. We must show that
A is ﬁnite.
Since |B| = 0, it must be the case that B = ∅. Since A ⊆B, we must also
have A = ∅, and hence A is ﬁnite by Deﬁnition 8.1.2(2) and |A| = |B| = 0.
Inductive Step: Let m ≥0 and assume that for all sets X and Y , if X ⊆Y
and |Y | = m, then X is ﬁnite and |X| ≤|Y | (this is our inductive hypothesis).
Next, let A and B be sets with A ⊆B and |B| = m + 1. We must prove
that A is ﬁnite and |A| ≤m + 1.
Since |B| = m + 1, we may ﬁx a bijection f : Nm+1
1-1
→
onto B; i.e., B =
{b1, b2, . . . , bm, bm+1}, where f(i) = bi for all 1 ≤i ≤m + 1. We consider two
cases.
Case I: A ⊆{b1, b2, . . . , bm}.
Then Y = {b1, b2, . . . , bm} is a ﬁnite set with |Y | = m. Hence by the
inductive hypothesis (with X = A), A is ﬁnite and
|A| ≤|Y | = m < m + 1 = |B|.
Case II: Otherwise.
Then bm+1 ∈A. Let X = A −{bm+1}. Note that A = X ∪{bm+1} and
X ∩{bm+1} = ∅. Since A ⊆B, we have X ⊆Y = {b1, b2, . . . , bm}, where

176
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Y has cardinality m. Thus, again by the inductive hypothesis, X is a
ﬁnite set and |X| ≤|Y | = m. Hence A = X ∪{bm+1} is ﬁnite and
|A| = |X| + 1 ≤m + 1 = |B|,
by Theorem 8.2.5.
It follows by induction that statement (8.2) is true, and hence any subset of a
ﬁnite set is ﬁnite. The fact that A ⊊B iﬀ|A| < |B| is left for Exercise 8.2.11.
□
The following corollary is immediate.
Corollary 8.2.11. Let A and B be sets with A ⊆B. If A is inﬁnite, then B is
inﬁnite.
8.2.1. Debts paid. We must now pay our debts and prove Theorem 8.2.1. Our
goal is to prove the result from our deﬁnitions, rather than relying on our intuition
about ﬁnite sets. Students who are encountering these ideas for the ﬁrst time may
wish to omit this subsection on their ﬁrst reading.
Theorem 8.2.12. For all n ∈N, there does not exist a bijection f : Nn →X,
where X is a proper subset of Nn.
Scratchwork: We will prove the result by induction on n. Let’s discuss the
strategy of the inductive step.
We let m ≥1 and assume that for all sets X ⊊Nm, there does not exist a
bijection from Nm →X (this is our inductive hypothesis). Let A ⊊Nm+1, and
assume for the sake of a contradiction that we have f : Nm+1
1-1
→
onto A. We need to
convert this f into a form to which the inductive hypothesis applies.
Given
Goal
m ≥1
A ⊊Nm+1
ﬁnd X ⊊Nm and g such that
f : Nm+1
1-1
→
onto A
g : Nm
1-1
→
onto X
To move from Nm+1 to Nm, we must consider m+1, and the question is whether
or not m + 1 ∈A.
If m + 1 /∈A, then A ⊆Nm, so to apply the inductive hypothesis, we consider
the eﬀect of f on Nm, which will map Nm to the proper subset A −{f(m + 1)} of
Nm (i.e., we will restrict f to Nm).
If m + 1 ∈A, then we can ﬁx k ∈Nm+1 such that f(k) = m + 1. If k = m + 1,
then we can restrict f to Nm and consider the proper subset A−{m+1}. Otherwise,
we have the picture in Figure 8.1.
In this case, we should swap the values of f(k) and f(m + 1) and then restrict
f to Nm.
Proof. We prove Theorem 8.2.12 by induction on n.
www.ebook3000.com

8.2. Finite sets
177
Nm+1
A −{m + 1}
k
m + 1
f(m + 1)
f(k) = m + 1
Figure 8.1. The case when f(k) = m + 1 ∈A, k ̸= m + 1.
Base Case: When n = 1, the only proper subset of N1 = {1} is ∅. There is no
bijection f : {1} →∅, as desired.
Inductive Step: Let m ∈N and assume the result for m; i.e., we assume that
for all proper subsets X ⊊Nm, there does not exist a bijection from Nm to
X.
We prove the result for m + 1. Let A ⊊Nm+1, and assume for the sake
of a contradiction that we have a bijection f : Nm+1 →A.
Case I: m + 1 /∈A.
In this case, note that A ⊆Nm and the function g = f ↾Nm (i.e.,
g : Nm →A −{f(m + 1)} by, for all i ≤m, g(i) = f(i)) is a bijection
from Nm to A −{f(m + 1)} ⊊A ⊆Nm. This contradicts the induction
hypothesis for the proper subset X = A −{f(m + 1)} ⊊Nm.
Case II: m + 1 ∈A.
Then, since f is onto, we may ﬁx k ∈Nm+1 such that f(k) = m + 1.
Note that if k ̸= m + 1, then f(m + 1) ∈Nm since f is 1-1. Consider
g : Nm →A −{m + 1} by, for all i ∈Nm,
g(i) =

f(i)
if i ̸= k,
f(m + 1)
if i = k.
Then g is a bijection from Nm to the proper subset A −{m + 1} ⊊Nm,
contradicting the induction hypothesis.
Hence, it follows by induction that for all n ∈N, there does not exist a bijection
f : Nn →X, where X is a proper subset of Nn.
□
Exercises 8.2
1. Complete the proof of Theorem 8.2.5:
(a) Prove the result in the case that A = ∅or B = ∅.
(b) Prove that the function h deﬁned in the proof is a bijection. (HINT: The
proof that h is 1-1 is a proof by cases, similar to the proof in Example 8.1.4.
Cases are also needed to prove that h is onto.)

178
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
2. Prove Corollary 8.2.3.
3. Let A and B be ﬁnite sets with |A| = n and |B| = m, where m, n ∈Z with
n > m ≥0. Prove that there is no 1-1 function f : A
1-1
→B.
4. Prove Corollary 8.2.6.
5. Let A and B be ﬁnite sets.
(a) Prove that A ∩B is ﬁnite.
(b) Prove that A −B is ﬁnite and that |A −B| = |A| −|A ∩B|.
(c) Prove that A ∪B is ﬁnite and that |A ∪B| = |A| + |B| −|A ∩B|.
6. Let A be a ﬁnite set and B be an inﬁnite set. Prove that B −A is inﬁnite.
7. Prove Theorem 8.2.7. (HINT: Consider the lines of (8.1) as listing the elements
of the sets {a1} × B, {a2} × B, . . . , {an} × B.)
8. Prove Corollary 8.2.8.
9. Prove Theorem 8.2.9
(a) Use a proof by induction on n = |A| (see the scratchwork in Section 8.2).
(b) Use a less formal argument invoking the Multiplication Principle.
10. Let A and B be nonempty ﬁnite sets. Use the Multiplication Principle to show
that |{f | f : A →B}| = |B||A|.
11. Complete the proof of Theorem 8.2.10. Let A and B be sets with A ⊆B. Prove
that A ⊊B iﬀ|A| < |B|. (HINT: Use Corollary 8.2.3(1).)
12. Let A be a nonempty ﬁnite set, B ̸= ∅, and f : A →B. Prove that the image
f[A] is also ﬁnite and |f[A]| ≤|A|. Furthermore f is 1-1 iﬀ|f[A]| = |A|.
13. Let A and B be nonempty ﬁnite sets with |A| = |B|, and let f : A →B. Prove
that f is 1-1 iﬀf is onto.
14. Let n ∈Z+ and A = {a1, a2, . . . , an} ⊆R be a ﬁnite set of real numbers. We
say that M ∈R is a maximum element of A if M ∈A and for all x ∈A, x ≤M.
Similarly, we say that m ∈R is a minimum element of A if m ∈A and for all
x ∈A, m ≤x.
(a) Using induction on the cardinality of the set, prove that every nonempty
ﬁnite set has both a maximum and a minimum element. That is, prove
the following by induction on n:
for all n > 0, for all sets A ⊆R with |A| = n,
there exist m, M ∈A such that
for all x ∈A, m ≤x ≤M.
(b) Prove that the maximum and minimum elements of a ﬁnite set are unique.
That is, prove that if M1, M2 ∈R are both maximums of the nonempty
ﬁnite set A, then M1 = M2, and analogously for minimums.
www.ebook3000.com

8.3. Inﬁnite sets
179
8.3. Inﬁnite sets
In this section, we speciﬁcally study inﬁnite sets. Our focus is on material most
useful for a future course in real analysis, and our ultimate goal is to prove that R
is not equinumerous with Q.
Recall that in Example 8.1.4 we showed that N ≈Z. Sets that are equinumerous
with N are called “denumerable” or “countably inﬁnite”, since they can be “listed”
or “enumerated” without repetition. Recall the picture from Example 8.1.4, which
shows this enumeration of Z:
0, 1, −1, 2, −2, 3, . . . .
Deﬁnition 8.3.1.
(1) The set X is denumerable (enumerable) if there exists a bijection f : N
1-1
→
onto X,
i.e., if N ≈X.
(2) The set X is countable if X is ﬁnite or denumerable.
(3) The set X is uncountable if X is not countable, i.e., if X is inﬁnite and not
denumerable.
It’s worth reiterating that, informally, a set X is denumerable if X can be listed
without repetition: if f : N
1-1
→
onto X, then we can list the elements of X as
f(1), f(2), f(3), . . . .
If we deﬁne xi = f(i) for all i ∈N, then we can write X as
X = {x1, x2, x3, . . . }.
Note that because N is inﬁnite (see Corollary 8.2.4), every denumerable set is inﬁnite
(by Exercise 8.1.10b).
The use of the word “countable” to describe the sets that are either ﬁnite
or denumerable is deliberate. Informally, a countable set is one whose elements
can be “counted”, or listed, although the list may or may not “end”. Note that
some authors deﬁne the terms “denumerable” and “countable” to have the opposite
meanings, so be sure to check the deﬁnitions when using a diﬀerent source.
The goal of this section is to prove that the set Q of rational numbers is denu-
merable, while the set R of real numbers is uncountable. This will show that Q and
R are not equinumerous, i.e., the (possibly) surprising fact that inﬁnite sets do not
all have the same “size”. We will prove the results necessary to establish these facts,
leaving a more detailed investigation of the “size” (cardinality) of an inﬁnite set for
a course in set theory (see [9] or [12]). In some cases, we will provide an informal
sketch of the proof, leaving a formal proof for the exercises or for Subsection 8.3.1.
Students who are new to these ideas may wish to omit Subsection 8.3.1 on their
ﬁrst reading.
We ﬁrst note that, while an inﬁnite set A is countable if there is a bijection
from N onto A, in fact, showing there is a surjection from N onto A is enough (and
often easier).
Theorem 8.3.2. Let A be a nonempty set. If there exists a surjective function
g : N →
onto A, then A is countable; i.e., A is ﬁnite or denumerable.

180
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Proof (Informal Sketch). Assume that g : N →
onto A. If A is ﬁnite, then A is
countable, and we’re done. So we assume that A is inﬁnite and show that A is
denumerable by ﬁnding a bijection f : N
1-1
→
onto A.
The idea here is that g may not be 1-1, so g may list elements of A more than
once. To deﬁne f, we must “skip over” elements of A that have already been listed
by g and construct a new list with no “repeats” that contains all the elements of
A.
We can visualize the proof as follows, with the enumerations given vertically.
Enumeration of A
Repeats
New enumeration of A
with repeats
g(1)
f(1)
g(2)
= g(1)
g(3)
= g(1)
g(4)
f(2)
g(5)
f(3)
g(6)
= g(4)
g(7)
f(4)
g(8)
= g(5)
...
...
...
□
Proof. See Subsection 8.3.1.
□
Theorem 8.3.3. Let A and B be denumerable sets. Then A ∪B is also denumer-
able.
Scratchwork. Let A and B be denumerable, and ﬁx bijections f : N
1-1
→
onto A and
g : N
1-1
→
onto B. Thus, we can list the elements of A:
f(1), f(2), f(3), f(4), . . .
or more simply:
a1, a2, a3, a4, . . . ,
and we can list the elements of B:
g(1), g(2), g(3), g(4), . . .
or more simply:
b1, b2, b3, b4, . . . .
Unlike the proof of the analogous result for ﬁnite sets (Theorem 8.2.5), we
cannot show that A ∪B is denumerable by ﬁrst listing A and then listing B, since
the list for A doesn’t end.
So, we will instead construct a list of the elements of A ∪B by interleaving or
“dovetailing”2 the enumerations of A and B:
a1, b1, a2, b2, a3, b3, a4, b4, . . . .
2The terminology here is deliberate. A dovetail is a type of carpenter’s joint, such as the joint
between the sides and front of a drawer, that interlocks the objects being joined.
www.ebook3000.com

8.3. Inﬁnite sets
181
This shows that A ∪B is denumerable by Theorem 8.3.2, since every element of
A ∪B (which is inﬁnite) appears (at least once) on this list.
Proof. Let A and B be denumerable, and ﬁx bijective functions f : N
1-1
→
onto A and
g : N
1-1
→
onto B. Deﬁne h : N →A ∪B by, for all n ∈N,
h(n) =

f( n
2 )
if n is even,
g( n+1
2 )
if n is odd.
We show that h is onto. Assume y ∈A ∪B.
Case I: y ∈A.
Since f is onto, we may ﬁx n ∈N such that f(n) = y. Then h(2n) =
f( 2n
2 ) = f(n) = y.
Case II: y ̸∈A.
Then y ∈B, since y ∈A ∪B. Since g is onto, we may ﬁx n ∈N such that
g(n) = y. Note that 2n −1 ∈N and h(2n −1) = g

(2n−1)+1
2

= y.
Hence h is onto. It follows by Theorem 8.3.2 that A ∪B is countable.
Since A ⊆A ∪B and A is inﬁnite, A ∪B is also inﬁnite by Corollary 8.2.11.
Hence A ∪B is denumerable.
□
Note that in the proof above, the listing of the elements of A ∪B constructed
by the function h will have repeats when A ∩B ̸= ∅, but what matters is that the
list contains all elements of A ∪B.
Corollary 8.3.4. The union of ﬁnitely many denumerable sets is denumerable.
Proof. The proof is by induction on k, the number of sets. See Exercise 8.3.7.
□
A slight modiﬁcation gives the following.
Corollary 8.3.5. The union of ﬁnitely many countable sets is countable.
Just these few tools are enough to sketch a proof that Q is denumerable.
Theorem 8.3.6 (Cantor, 1874). The set Q of rational numbers is denumerable.
Proof (Informal Sketch). Note that
Q =
a
b
 a, b ∈Z and b > 0

= Q+ ∪Q−∪{0},
where Q+ =
 a
b | a, b ∈Z+
and Q−=

−a
b | a, b ∈Z+
.
We ﬁrst show that Q+ is denumerable. Begin by writing the elements of Q+,
with repeats, in a rectangular array; in the ﬁrst row we list all rational numbers
with 1 as a denominator (this set is denumerable, since we’ve listed it), in the second
row we list all rational numbers with 2 as a denominator (this set is denumerable,
since we’ve listed it), etc. We now dovetail the enumerations. See Figure 8.2.

182
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
1
. . .
1
2
2
2
3
2
4
2
5
2
. . .
1
3
2
3
3
3
4
3
5
3
. . .
1
4
2
4
3
4
4
4
5
4
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
Figure 8.2. Dovetailing the enumeration of Q+.
We claim that every positive rational number is on this list (which has repeats);
i.e., we can write down a function f : N →
onto Q+, as shown. So Q+ is countable, by
Theorem 8.3.2, and hence denumerable, since Q+ is inﬁnite.
We next note that Q+ ≈Q−, since the function g : Q+ →Q−by, for all
x ∈Q+, g(x) = −x is a bijection. Since ≈is transitive, Q−is also denumerable.
Since Q+ is inﬁnite, it follows that {0} ∪Q+ ∪Q−is denumerable, by Corol-
lary 8.3.5.
□
Proof. Two rigorous proofs that Q+ is denumerable are outlined in Exercise 8.3.12.
□
The method used to show that Q+ is denumerable is called “Cantor’s ﬁrst
diagonalization method”.
A similar argument will show that the Cartesian product N×N is denumerable;
see Exercise 8.3.9. The following theorem is then easy to prove.
Theorem 8.3.7. Let A and B be denumerable sets. Then A × B is denumerable.
Proof. Exercise 8.3.10.
□
The ﬁrst diagonalization method can also be used to prove that a denumerable
union of denumerable sets is denumerable, as long as one is willing to use the Axiom
of Choice (see Section 4.4). So as to avoid the Axiom of Choice, we state a special
case of this theorem, which you are asked to prove pictorially in Exercise 8.3.11.
Theorem 8.3.8. Assume that the enumerations
A1 = {a1
1, a2
1, a3
1, . . . },
A2 = {a1
2, a2
2, a3
2, . . . },
A3 = {a1
3, a2
3, a3
3, . . . },
...
www.ebook3000.com

8.3. Inﬁnite sets
183
of denumerable sets A1, A2, A3, . . . are given. Then the set A = 
i∈N Ai is denu-
merable.
Proof. Exercise 8.3.11.
□
For our proof that the set of real numbers is uncountable, we need one last
theorem. Informally, it says that if we can list the elements of a set, then we can
list the elements of any subset of that set. The proof is similar to the proof of
Theorem 8.3.2.
Theorem 8.3.9. Let A be denumerable and let B ⊆A be inﬁnite. Then B is
denumerable.
Proof (Informal Sketch). Assume that A is denumerable and ﬁx f : N
1-1
→
onto A.
Let B ⊆A be inﬁnite. We must deﬁne a function g : N
1-1
→
onto B to show that B is
denumerable. The idea is to use f to enumerate A but “skip over” any elements
of A that are not also in B. The example below shows the general idea, with the
enumerations of A and B given vertically.
enumeration of A
in B?
enumeration of B
f(1)
No
f(2)
Yes
g(1)
f(3)
Yes
g(2)
f(4)
No
f(5)
Yes
g(3)
f(6)
No
f(7)
No
f(8)
Yes
g(4)
...
...
...
□
Proof. Exercise 8.3.15.
□
Corollary 8.3.10. Let A and B be sets with B ⊆A.
(1) If A is countable, then B is countable.
(2) If B is uncountable, then A is uncountable.
Proof. Exercise 8.3.16.
□
We are now ready to show that the set R of real numbers is uncountable.
Theorem 8.3.11 (Cantor, 1874). R is uncountable.
Proof. Recall that to show that a set is uncountable we must show that it is neither
ﬁnite nor denumerable. Since R is inﬁnite, we must show that it is not denumerable.
We will do this using a proof by contradiction. First, we must give some necessary
background information about real numbers, which we present here without proof
and discuss further in Chapter 9.

184
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Claim. Every real number has a decimal expansion
d.d1d2d3d4 . . . ,
where d ∈Z and for all i ∈Z+, di ∈Z with 0 ≤di ≤9. The integer d is called the
integer part of the real number, and .d1d2d3d4 . . . is called the decimal part.
In most cases, the decimal expansion of a real number is unique, except for
instances such as
0.49 = 0.49999 . . . = 0.5 = 0.50000 . . . .
The interval [0, 1] consists of all real numbers that can expressed with an integer
part of 0. We will show that [0, 1] is uncountable; it follows that R is uncountable
by Corollary 8.3.10.
Assume for the sake of a contradiction that [0, 1] is countable. Since [0, 1] is
inﬁnite, it is denumerable. Hence we may ﬁx a function f : N
1-1
→
onto [0, 1] that lists
the real numbers in [0, 1] as f(0), f(1), f(2), . . . . Given i, j ∈N, let dj
i denote the
ith decimal digit of the real number f(j). Thus, the real numbers in [0, 1] form the
following (now vertical) list:
f(1) = 0.d1
1d1
2d1
3d1
4d1
5 . . . ,
f(2) = 0.d2
1d2
2d2
3d2
4d2
5 . . . ,
f(3) = 0.d3
1d3
2d3
3d3
4d3
5 . . . ,
f(4) = 0.d4
1d4
2d4
3d4
4d4
5 . . . ,
f(5) = 0.d5
1d5
2d5
3d5
4d5
5 . . . ,
...
We obtain a contradiction by constructing a real number
r = 0.r1r2r3r4r5 . . .
in the interval [0, 1] such that r ̸∈ran f. Given i ∈N, the ith decimal digit ri of r
is deﬁned as follows:
ri =

7
if di
i ̸= 7,
2
if di
i = 7.
Since f : N
1-1
→
onto [0, 1] and r ∈[0, 1], r ∈ran f. Thus we can ﬁx k ∈Z+ such
that
r = f(k) = 0.dk
1dk
2dk
3dk
4dk
5 . . . dk
k . . . .
The kth decimal digit of r is rk, by deﬁnition. Also, the kth decimal digit of r is
dk
k, since r = f(k). However, rk ̸= dk
k by deﬁnition of rk. Since r is not a real
number with two diﬀerent decimal expansions (we have avoided the repeating 9’s
problem), r ̸= f(k), a contradiction.
Thus [0, 1], and hence R, is uncountable.
□
To help us understand the proof of Theorem 8.3.11, let’s look at the deﬁnition
of r in that proof from a hypothetical listing f(0), f(1), f(2), . . . of the real numbers
www.ebook3000.com

8.3. Inﬁnite sets
185
in [0, 1]:
f(1) = 0.257132601 . . . ,
f(2) = 0.372694237 . . . ,
f(3) = 0.999352196 . . . ,
f(4) = 0.50000000 . . . ,
f(5) = 0.62347182 . . . ,
...
We can see the diagonalization if we circle the digit in each f(k), k ≥1, that is
changed to form the decimal digit rk.
f(1) = 0. 2 57132601 . . . ,
f(2) = 0.3 7 2694237 . . . ,
f(3) = 0.99 9 352196 . . . ,
f(4) = 0.500 0 0000 . . . ,
f(5) = 0.6234 7 182 . . . ,
...
Then r is deﬁned to be r = 0.72772 . . . , and we can see that, for all k ∈Z+,
r ̸= f(k) because rk ̸= dk
k.
The method used to show that [0, 1] is uncountable is called “Cantor’s sec-
ond diagonalization method”. One important consequence of the fact that R is
uncountable is that any list of real numbers
x1, x2, x3, . . .
cannot include all real numbers. In other words, no proof of a statement of the
form
for all x ∈R . . .
can begin with
let x1, x2, x3, . . . be a list of all real numbers.
8.3.1. Debts paid. In this subsection, which is optional, we provide a rigorous
proof of Theorem 8.3.2.
Theorem 8.3.2. Let A be a nonempty set. If there exists a surjective function
g : N →
onto A, then A is countable; i.e., A is ﬁnite or denumerable.
Proof. Let A be a set and assume that there is a surjection g : N →
onto A. We show
that A is countable. If A is ﬁnite, then A is countable, and we’re done. So we
assume that A is inﬁnite, and we show that A is denumerable by ﬁnding a bijection
f : N
1-1
→
onto A.

186
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Remember that the idea is to deﬁne f(n) to be the nth new element in the
sequence g(1), g(2), g(3), . . . . Formally, we deﬁne f : N
1-1
→
onto A by recursion; we
make f 1-1 “as we go” and ensure that each element of the range of g is in the
range of f.
First let f(1) = g(1).
Next, for the recursion, let n ∈N and assume that
f(1), . . . , f(n) have been deﬁned (so each is an element of A) in such a way that
for all i and j with 1 ≤i, j ≤n,
i ̸= j =⇒f(i) ̸= f(j)
(i.e., the part of f deﬁned so far is 1-1). We also inductively assume that
g(1), . . . , g(n) ∈{f(1), . . . , f(n)}.
We will deﬁne f(n + 1).
The set {f(1), . . . , f(n)} is ﬁnite, and ran g = A is inﬁnite, so the set of positive
integers
X = {m ∈N | g(m) ̸∈{f(1), . . . , f(n)}}
is nonempty. Hence X has a least element m0 by the Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3.
Deﬁne f(n + 1) to be g(m0), so that g(m0) ̸∈{f(1), . . . , f(n)}.
Note that by
deﬁnition, f(n + 1) ̸= f(i) for all i ≤n. Furthermore, the deﬁnition of m0 ensures
that m0 > n and
g(1), . . . , g(m0) ∈{f(1), . . . , f(n + 1)}.
In particular, since m0 > n, we have that
g(1), . . . , g(n + 1) ∈{f(1), . . . , f(n + 1)}.
We can then prove by induction on n that for all positive integers i and n, if
i < n, then f(i) ̸= f(n). It follows that f is 1-1. Induction also proves that for all
positive integers n,
g(1), . . . , g(n) ∈{f(1), . . . , f(n)}.
Hence f is onto A, since g is.
□
Exercises 8.3
1. Let A be a denumerable set and let x be any element of the underlying universe.
Prove that A∪{x} is denumerable. (HINT: Consider two cases, depending on
whether x ∈A.)
2. Use the deﬁnition to prove that any denumerable set is equinumerous with a
proper subset of itself.
3. Use the deﬁnition to prove that the set X = {n ∈Z | 5 | n} is denumerable.
4. Given n ∈N, deﬁne Qn =
 a
n | a ∈N

. Use the deﬁnition to prove that for all
n ∈N, Qn is denumerable.
5. Prove that the union of a ﬁnite set and a denumerable set is denumerable.
6. Prove that the union of a ﬁnite set and a countable set is countable.
7. Prove Corollary 8.3.4.
www.ebook3000.com

8.3. Inﬁnite sets
187
8. Prove Corollary 8.3.5.
9. Prove that N × N is denumerable in the following ways:
(a) Pictorially and formally, using Cantor’s ﬁrst diagonalization method (see
Exercise 5.3.10).
(b) Formally, by showing that the function f : N × N →N by
f(m, n) = 2m−1(2n −1)
for all (m, n) ∈N × N is a bijection. (HINT: You will need the Funda-
mental Theorem of Arithmetic (Theorem 3.2.3).)
10. Prove Theorem 8.3.7.
11. Prove Theorem 8.3.8 pictorially.
12. Prove that Q+ is denumerable in the following ways:
(a) By proving the existence of a surjection f : N × N →Q+ and explaining
why the result follows from this fact.
(b) Using Exercise 8.3.4 and Theorem 8.3.8.
13. Prove that the set of all ﬁnite subsets of Z+ is denumerable.
14. Prove that a set A is countable iﬀthere exists an injection f : A
1-1
→N.
15. Prove Theorem 8.3.9.
(HINT: The proof is similar to the proof of Theo-
rem 8.3.2.)
16. Prove Corollary 8.3.10.
17. Assume that A is uncountable and B is a countable subset of A. Prove that
A −B is uncountable.
18. A sequence (x1, x2, x3, . . . ) of real numbers is a function f : N →R deﬁned by
f(n) = xn for all n ∈N. Prove that the set X of inﬁnite binary sequences (i.e.,
inﬁnite sequences of 0’s and 1’s) is uncountable (HINT: Use Cantor’s second
diagonalization method.)
19. A real number α is deﬁned to be algebraic if there exists a polynomial p of
degree at least 1 with integer coeﬃcients such that p(α) = 0. A real number is
transcendental if it is not algebraic.
(a) Prove that all rational numbers are algebraic.
(b) Prove that
√
2,
√
3, and
√
2 +
√
3 are algebraic.
(c) Prove that if α ∈R is algebraic and α ̸= 0, then α−1 = 1
α is algebraic.
(d) Let A be the set of real algebraic numbers. Prove that A is denumerable.
(HINT: You will need to use Exercise 6.1.6b.)3
(e) Prove that the set of transcendental real numbers is uncountable. (Note:
This problem is not asking you to exhibit a transcendental number. It
turns out that the familiar numbers e and π are transcendental, but it is
quite diﬃcult to prove this.)
3It turns out that the set of all real algebraic numbers is an ordered ﬁeld (see Deﬁnition 9.1.1), but
this is beyond the scope of this book. Furthermore, the set of all complex algebraic numbers (i.e., the
set of all complex numbers α = a + bi (a, b ∈R, i2 = −1) such that p(α) = 0 for some polynomial with
integer coeﬃcients) forms a denumerable algebraically closed ﬁeld, i.e., a denumerable ﬁeld F with the
property that for every polynomial p of degree at least 1 with coeﬃcients in F, there exists α ∈F such
that p(α) = 0.

188
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
8.4. What next?
Our approach to ﬁnite and inﬁnite sets in this chapter has been a “blinders on”
approach. We have focused only on the most basic facts about ﬁnite sets, and our
discussion of inﬁnite sets had as its goal the results about the sizes of Q and R.
In the previous section, we have shown that there are at least two diﬀerent
“sizes” of inﬁnite sets: the size of N (i.e., the size of a denumerable set) and the
size of R. At this point, one can ask several questions. What do we mean by the
“size” of an inﬁnite set? Are there more than two “sizes of inﬁnity”? Does there
exist an inﬁnite set whose size is strictly between the size of N and the size of R?
Recall from our earlier discussion of the history of set theory in Section 4.4
(which is drawn from [16]) that Georg Cantor contributed to the development of
“naive” set theory in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As part of
his theory of inﬁnite sets, he deﬁned a theory of sizes (or cardinalities) of inﬁnite
sets. While a rigorous deﬁnition of the cardinality of an arbitrary set is beyond the
scope of this book, the idea of equinumerosity, which we’ve already considered, and
the idea of “comparing” sizes of sets can be safely expressed inside our informal set
theory.
Deﬁnition 8.4.1. Let A and B be sets.
(1) If there is a 1-1 function f : A
1-1
→B, then we write A ⪯B.
(2) If A ⪯B and A ̸≈B, then we write A ≺B.
What you should be thinking here is that, however the size or cardinality |X|
of the set X is deﬁned, A ≈B should mean that A and B have the same number
of elements:
A ≈B ⇔|A| = |B|.
Furthermore, A ⪯B should mean that A has at most as many elements as B (or B
has at least as many elements as A). In other words, cardinality should be deﬁned
so that there is an ordering ≤of cardinalities that satisﬁes
A ⪯B ⇔|A| ≤|B|.
Finally, A ≺B should mean that A has strictly fewer elements than B:
A ≺B ⇔|A| < |B|.
Thus, we hope that for all sets A and B,
(A ⪯B and B ⪯A) ⇒A ≈B.
In fact, the proof of this statement, which is called the Cantor-Schr¨oder-Bernstein
Theorem, is nontrivial (see [9] or [16]).
One can prove in ZFC that for every set X, |X| exists (i.e., |X| is a set). In
addition, the statement that for all sets A and B, A ⪯B or B ⪯A is equivalent to
the Axiom of Choice.
In the previous section we showed that N ̸≈R. Notice that N ⪯R since the
inclusion function I : N →R by I(x) = x for all x ∈N is 1-1. Thus N ≺R; i.e.,
|N| < |R|.
www.ebook3000.com

8.4. What next?
189
The diagonalization argument that establishes N ≺R can be generalized to
show that for any size of an inﬁnite set, there is always a set whose size is strictly
larger. In fact, the proof of this result is the earliest example of a proof using a
diagonalization argument.
Theorem 8.4.2 (Cantor, 1873). No set is equinumerous with its power set.
Proof. Let A be a set, and assume for a contradiction that A ≈P(A). Fix a
bijection f : A
1-1
→
onto P(A). Note that, given x ∈A, f(x) ∈P(A), so that f(x) ⊆A.
We diagonalize to construct a set B ⊆A such that B ̸∈ran f. We deﬁne
B = {x ∈A | x ̸∈f(x)}.
Since B ⊆A and f is onto, we can ﬁx a ∈A such that B = f(a). We now ask
whether a ∈B. Notice that
a ∈B ⇒a /∈f(a) ⇒a ̸∈B
and
a ̸∈B ⇒a ∈f(a) ⇒a ∈B.
Thus, a ∈B ⇔a ̸∈B, which is a contradiction.
Hence, A is not equinumerous with P(A).
□
Note the similarity of this proof to the argument in Russell’s paradox, which
was also used to show in ZF that there does not exist a set of all sets.
Corollary 8.4.3. For any set A, A ≺P(A); i.e., |A| < |P(A)|.
Proof. Let A be a set. We have already shown that A ̸≈P(A). As an exercise,
you should show that the function f : A →P(A) by, for all x ∈A, f(x) = {x} is
1-1, which implies that A ⪯B.
□
Note that Corollary 8.4.3 tells us that there is no largest size of inﬁnite set,
since
|N| < |P(N)| < |P(P(N))| < |P(P(P(N)))| < · · · .
A natural question to ask, then, is whether there exists a set A such that |N| <
A < |P(N)|. Cantor conjectured that no such set A existed but could not prove it.
Continuum Hypothesis 8.4.4 (Cantor, 1878). There does not exist a set A such
that N ≺A ≺P(N).
The Continuum Hypothesis can be stated another way. As we have already
noted, the set Q of rational numbers is countable and |N| = |Q|. We know that R is
uncountable; in fact, it is possible to prove that R ≈P(N). Thus, the Continuum
Hypothesis can be rephrased as
there is no set X ⊆R such that |Q| < |X| < |R|; i.e., every uncount-
able subset of real numbers has the same cardinality as R.

190
8. Finite and Inﬁnite Sets
Perhaps surprisingly, the Continuum Hypothesis can be neither proved nor
disproved from the usual axioms of ZF set theory; set theorists say that the formal
statement of the Continuum Hypothesis (which we denote by CH) is independent of
ZF. To prove that the Continuum Hypothesis cannot be disproved in ZF, one must
show that, assuming ZF is consistent, there is a universe (i.e., model) satisfying the
axioms of ZF where CH is true. This was proved by Kurt G¨odel in 1938; in fact,
the universe constructed by G¨odel also satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice, so that AC
also cannot be disproved in ZF. To prove that the Continuum Hypothesis cannot
be proved in ZF, one must show that, assuming ZF is consistent, there is a universe
satisfying the axioms of ZF where CH is false. This was proved by Paul Cohen
in 1963; in fact, the Axiom of Choice is also false in the universe constructed by
Cohen, so that AC also cannot be proved in ZF.
For more information, see [12] and [16].
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 9
Foundations of Analysis
9.1. Introduction
We have spent considerable time studying properties of integers; in this chapter, we
return to a discussion of the real numbers. In Chapter 2, we noted that our deﬁni-
tion of R was informal only. We also quite conﬁdently proved that
√
2 is irrational,
i.e., that
√
2 is a real number that is not rational. However, we never proved that
√
2 is a real number! You might wonder what there is to prove. Basically, we are
asserting that
(∃x ∈R)[x2 = 2].
How do we know that such a real number x exists? What, in fact, is a real number?
Perhaps a diﬀerent question one could ask is why the deﬁnition we gave in
Chapter 2 is only an informal one. There, we said that x is a real number exactly
when it has a decimal expansion. So, for example, we are very comfortable in saying
that
0.35210476 . . .
is a real number (although we’re not sure what happens at the . . . ). But what does
the decimal notation really mean?
0.35210476 . . . = 3
10 +
5
102 +
2
103 +
1
104 +
0
105 +
4
106 +
7
107 +
6
108 + · · · .
This inﬁnite sum should make you nervous (especially if you have taken calculus);
what does it mean to say that the sum of inﬁnitely many numbers is a number (in
the language of calculus, how do you know that this inﬁnite series converges)?
In fact, there are several ways to rigorously deﬁne what is meant by a real
number; here, we will take an axiomatic point of view, which is the point of view
often taken in a beginning undergraduate course in analysis. This means that we
will write down a short list of properties that R “clearly” satisﬁes and from which
we can prove that all other properties follow. The properties we have been using
since Chapter 2 are those of an ordered ﬁeld.
191

192
9. Foundations of Analysis
Deﬁnition 9.1.1. An ordered ﬁeld is a nonempty set F of objects equipped with
two operations called addition and multiplication and a relation < on F such that
the following properties hold.
(Closure under +)
For all a, b ∈F, there is a unique element a + b ∈F.
(Closure under ·)
For all a, b ∈F, there is a unique element ab ∈F.
(A1)
For all a, b, c ∈F, a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c.
(A2)
For all a, b ∈F, a + b = b + a.
(A3)
F contains an element 0 such that for all a ∈F,
a + 0 = a.
(A4)
For all a ∈F there exists b ∈F such that a + b = 0.
(M1)
For all a, b, c ∈F, a(bc) = (ab)c.
(M2)
For all a, b ∈F, ab = ba.
(M3)
F contains an element 1 ̸= 0 such that for all a ∈F,
a · 1 = a.
(M4)
For all a ∈F with a ̸= 0, there exists b ∈F
such that ab = 1.
(D)
For all a, b, c ∈F, a(b + c) = ab + ac.
(O1)
For all a, b ∈F, exactly one of
a < b or a = b or b < a holds.
(O2)
For all a, b, c ∈F, if a < b and b < c, then a < c.
(O3)
For all a, b, c ∈F, if a > 0 and b > 0, then a + b > 0.
(O4)
For all a, b, c ∈F, if a > 0 and b > 0, then ab > 0.
(O5)
For all a, b ∈F, a < b iﬀb −a > 0.
It certainly seems reasonable to assume that R is an ordered ﬁeld. However, Q
is also an ordered ﬁeld, and yet Q and R seem very diﬀerent. Certainly, as we saw
in the previous chapter, Q is denumerable while R is uncountable. Right away this
tells us that R satisﬁes some property not on this list that Q does not satisfy. To
help isolate what this property could be, notice further that, informally, Q has a
“hole” where
√
2 “ought to be”, and R does not. This can be expressed in several
ways.
In Q:
• the equation x2 = 2 has no solution;
• the sequence of rational numbers
1, 1.4, 1.41, 1.414, 1.4142, 1.41421, . . .
has no limit;
• the set {x ∈Q+ | x2 < 2} is “bounded above” but has no “least upper bound”.
In R:
• the equation x2 = 2 has a solution;
• the sequence of rational (and hence real) numbers
1, 1.4, 1.41, 1.414, 1.4142, 1.41421, . . .
has a limit;
• the set {x ∈R+ | x2 < 2} has a “least upper bound”.
www.ebook3000.com

9.2. The Completeness Axiom
193
In turns out that we need only assume one additional axiom (the Completeness
Axiom) in order to capture what makes R diﬀerent from Q. That axiom is related
to the notion of a least upper bound of a set, mentioned above, which we deﬁne in
the next section.
9.2. The Completeness Axiom
First, we review the notion of a maximum (or minimum) of a set.
Deﬁnition 9.2.1. Let S ⊆R be nonempty. Let M, m ∈R.
(1) We say that M is the maximum element of S and write max S = M if M ∈S
and for all x ∈S, x ≤M.
(2) We say that m is the minimum element of S and write min S = m if m ∈S
and for all x ∈S, m ≤x.
Note that one should prove that the maximum and minimum elements of a
nonempty ﬁnite set S ⊆R are well-deﬁned. See Exercise 8.2.14.
Example 9.2.2.
(1) Let S = {0, −16
3 , −27, 2798.999, π} ⊆R. Then max S = 2798.999 and min S =
−27.
(2) Let S = [−1, 2) = {x ∈R | −1 ≤x < 2} ⊆R. From the deﬁnition of S, we
see that min S = −1. However, S has no maximum element. While this may
seem obvious, we’ll prove it. Suppose for the sake of a contradiction that we
have M ∈R such that max S = M. Then M ∈S, so M < 2 by deﬁnition of
S. By Exercise 2.1.11, we know that M < M+2
2
< 2, so M+2
2
∈S is greater
than max S, a contradiction.
♦
Example 9.2.2(1) illustrates an important property of ﬁnite sets.
Proposition 9.2.3. Every ﬁnite, nonempty set S ⊆R has both a maximum ele-
ment and a minimum element.
Proof. This was Exercise 8.2.14.
□
While the set [−1, 2) has no maximum element, it is bounded above.
The
diﬀerence is that an upper bound of a nonempty set is not required to be a member
of the set (and may or may not be an element of the set).
Deﬁnition 9.2.4. Let S ⊆R be nonempty.
(1) The real number M is an upper bound of S if for all x ∈S, x ≤M.
(2) The set S is bounded above if there exists M ∈R such that M is an upper
bound of S (i.e., if (∃M ∈R)(∀x ∈S)[x ≤M]).
(3) The real number m is a lower bound of S if for all x ∈S, m ≤x.
(4) The set S is bounded below if there exists m ∈R such that m is a lower bound
of S (i.e., if (∃m ∈R)(∀x ∈S)[m ≤x]).
(5) The set S is bounded if S is both bounded above and bounded below.

194
9. Foundations of Analysis
Let S ⊆R be nonempty and let m, M ∈R. As an exercise, you should write
down the deﬁnitions of “M is not an upper bound of S”, “m is not a lower bound
of S”, “S is not bounded above”, and “S is not bounded below”. It’s also worth
taking a moment to write down the general Given-Goal diagrams for showing that
“M ∈R is an upper bound of S”, “M is not an upper bound of S”, and “S is not
bounded above”. We leave writing down the analogous Given-Goal diagrams for
proving that “m ∈R is a lower bound of S”, “m ∈R is not a lower bound of S”,
and “S is not bounded below” as an exercise.
Table 9.1. M is an upper bound of S.
Given
Goal
S ̸= ∅
x ∈S arbitrary
deﬁnition of M
x ≤M
Table 9.2. M is not an upper bound of S.
Given
Goal
S ̸= ∅
deﬁnition of M
ﬁnd x ∈S such that x > M
Table 9.3. S is not bounded above.
Given
Goal
S ̸= ∅
M ∈R arbitrary
ﬁnd x ∈S such that x > M
Example 9.2.5.
(1) Let S = [−1, 2) = {x ∈R | −1 ≤x < 2} ⊆R. Note that S is bounded
below; each of the numbers −25, −472, −1 is a lower bound of S (in fact, S
has inﬁnitely many lower bounds). In addition, S is bounded above; each of
the numbers 49, e, 2.0000001, 2 is an upper bound of S (in fact, S has inﬁnitely
many upper bounds). Thus, S is a bounded set.
(2) Let S = { 1
n | n ∈Z+} = {1, 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, . . .} ⊆R. Then S is bounded, since (for
example) 12 is an upper bound of S and −8
9 is a lower bound of S.
(3) Let S = (0, ∞) = {x ∈R | x > 0} ⊆R. Note that S is bounded below by any
real number r ≤0, since if r ≤0 and x ∈S, then r ≤0 < x. However, S is
not bounded above. Again, while this may seem obvious to you, we will prove
it. By Deﬁnition 9.2.4, we must prove
(∀M ∈R)(∃x ∈S)[x > M].
Let M ∈R. If M ≤0, then 1 ∈S and 1 > M. If M > 0, then M + 1 > 0.
Thus M + 1 ∈S with M + 1 > M. Thus S = (0, ∞) is not bounded above.
www.ebook3000.com

9.2. The Completeness Axiom
195
(4) Let S = Z+ = {1, 2, 3, . . .} ⊆R. Again, S is bounded below, say by any
real number r ≤1. It seems obvious that S is not bounded above. However,
unlike the previous example, we cannot yet prove this, for the proof requires
the Completeness Axiom! (Try it: one needs to prove
(∀M ∈R)(∃n ∈Z+)[n > M].
If you ﬁnd yourself talking about decimal expansions, then you are using the
Completeness Axiom.)
♦
While the set [−1, 2) has many upper bounds (and lower bounds), the number
2 appears to be its “least upper bound”.
Deﬁnition 9.2.6. Let S ⊆R be nonempty.
(1) Suppose that S is bounded above. The real number β is the supremum (least
upper bound) of S if
(a) β is an upper bound of S and
(b) for all γ ∈R, if γ is an upper bound of S, then β ≤γ.
If β is the supremum of S, then we write sup S = β.
(2) Suppose that S is bounded below. The real number α is the inﬁmum (greatest
lower bound) of S if
(a) α is a lower bound of S and
(b) for all γ ∈R, if γ is a lower bound of S, then γ ≤α.
If α is the inﬁmum of S, then we write inf S = α.
Note that one should prove that if they exist, then the supremum and inﬁmum
of a nonempty set S ⊆R are unique. See Exercise 9.2.3.
Let S ⊆R be nonempty and let α, β ∈R. Note that in order to prove that
sup S = β (respectively, inf S = α), one must prove both statements (1a) and (1b)
(respectively, (2a) and (2b)) in Deﬁnition 9.2.6. It’s worth taking a moment to
write down the general Given-Goal diagrams for proving that β is the supremum
of S; we leave writing down the analogous Given-Goal diagrams for proving that α
is the inﬁmum of S as an exercise. The Given-Goal diagram for showing that β is
an upper bound of S is given in Table 9.1. Two possible Given-Goal diagrams for
showing that an upper bound β of S is the least of all upper bounds of S are given
in Table 9.4. The left Given-Goal diagram corresponds to a direct proof, while the
right Given-Goal diagram corresponds to proving the contrapositive.
Table 9.4. The upper bound β is the least of all upper bounds of S.
Given
Goal
Given
Goal
S ̸= ∅
S ̸= ∅
deﬁnition of β
deﬁnition of β
(∀x ∈S)[x ≤β]
(∀x ∈S)[x ≤β]
γ ∈R
γ ∈R arbitrary
γ is not an
(∀x ∈S)[x ≤γ]
β ≤γ
γ < β
upper bound of S

196
9. Foundations of Analysis
Also useful is the general Given-Goal diagram for showing that an upper bound
β is not the least upper bound of S. We again leave the analogous Given-Goal
diagram for inﬁmums as an exercise.
Table 9.5. Upper bound β is not sup S.
Given
Goal
S ̸= ∅
deﬁnition of β
ﬁnd γ ∈R such that
(∀x ∈S)[x ≤β]
γ is an upper bound of S and γ < β
Even though we don’t have all the necessary tools available to us right now,
it is still useful to consider some examples. One of these relies, for now, on our
intuition.
Example 9.2.7.
(1) Let S = [−1, 2) = {x ∈R | −1 ≤x < 2}. We claim that inf S = −1 and
sup S = 2.
That inf S = −1 follows from the fact that min S = −1. See Proposi-
tion 9.2.8. We’ll show that sup S = 2. By Deﬁnition 9.2.6, we must show
that
(a) 2 is an upper bound of S, which we can see from the deﬁnition of S, and
(b) if γ ∈R is an upper bound of S, then 2 ≤γ.
We prove the contrapositive of (b). Following the right Given-Goal dia-
gram in Table 9.4, let γ ∈R and assume that γ < 2. We show that γ is not
an upper bound of S. Note that if γ < −1, then γ is not an upper bound of S
because −1 ∈S. So we assume that −1 ≤γ < 2. But then by Exercise 2.1.11,
γ < γ+2
2
< 2; i.e., γ < γ+2
2
and γ+2
2
∈S, so that γ is not an upper bound of
S. Hence statement (b) is true and 2 = sup S.
(2) Let S = { 1
n | n ∈Z+} = {1, 1
2, 1
3, 1
4, . . .} ⊆R. Then inf S = 0 and sup S = 1.
That sup S = 1 follows since max S = 1. We defer proving inf S = 0 until
Example 9.3.3, after we have discussed the Completeness Axiom.
(3) Let S = (0, ∞) = {x ∈R | x > 0}. We claim that inf S = 0 and that sup S
doesn’t exist.
The deﬁnition of S shows that 0 is a lower bound of S. To show that 0
is the greatest lower bound of S, we assume that γ ∈R satisﬁes 0 < γ, and
we show that γ is not a lower bound of S. Let x = γ
2 . Then 0 < x < γ, and
by deﬁnition x ∈S. Hence γ is not a lower bound of S, and so inf S = 0 by
Deﬁnition 9.2.6. We showed in Example 9.2.5(3) that S is not bounded above,
and hence sup S does not exist, again by Deﬁnition 9.2.6.
♦
We mentioned some straightforward properties about sup S and inf S in the
example above, which we now state for convenience.
Proposition 9.2.8. Let S ⊆R be nonempty.
(1) If max S exists, then sup S = max S. Conversely, if sup S ∈S, then sup S =
max S.
www.ebook3000.com

9.2. The Completeness Axiom
197
(2) If min S exists, then inf S = min S. Conversely, if inf S ∈S, then inf S =
min S.
Proof. Exercise 9.2.5.
□
Example 9.2.7 shows that an arbitrary nonempty set of real numbers may or
may not have a supremum or inﬁmum.
One set that demonstrates why Q has
“holes” is S = {x ∈Q | x > 0 and x2 < 2}. This set is bounded above in Q by, say,
2. This set has no supremum (i.e., no least upper bound) in Q (hence the “hole”),
while the analogous subset of R does have a supremum in R, namely,
√
2 (all of
these statements require proof). Thus, one of the problems with Q is that there
exist nonempty subsets of Q that are bounded above in Q but with no least upper
bound in Q. This is the property that distinguishes Q from R.
Completeness Axiom 9.2.9. Every nonempty set of real numbers that has an
upper bound has a supremum.
The analogous property regarding sets that are bounded below follows imme-
diately.
Corollary 9.2.10. Every nonempty set of real numbers that has a lower bound has
an inﬁmum.
Proof. Exercise 9.2.6.
□
The Completeness Axiom is the last axiom that we need to assume about the
real numbers, and it will guarantee the existence of
√
2 and all the other real roots.
We say that R is a complete ordered ﬁeld, while Q is an incomplete ordered ﬁeld. In
fact, in a sense that can be made mathematically precise, R is the only “completion”
of Q with respect to the usual order < on Q.
The Completeness Axiom also guarantees that every real number has a (usu-
ally) unique decimal expansion and that every decimal expansion represents a real
number. This is the use of the Completeness Axiom in the proof in Section 8.3 that
R is uncountable, and this is what makes that proof fail in Q. We consider decimal
expansions in Section 9.3.
9.2.1. The existence of
√
2. In this subsection, which is optional, we prove
using the Completeness Axiom that
√
2 is a real number. We also show that Q
does not satisfy a Completeness Axiom. Students who are encountering these ideas
for the ﬁrst time may wish to omit this subsection on their ﬁrst reading.
Theorem 9.2.11. There exists a real number x such that x2 = 2.
Scratchwork: We consider the set S = {x ∈R | x > 0 and x2 < 2}. We must
use the Completeness Theorem to argue that β = sup S exists and that 1 < β < 2.
Our proof will repeatedly make use of the following fact about real numbers
(see Exercise 2.1.2 and Proposition 2.2.5):
(∀w, z > 0)[w < z ⇔w2 < z2].

198
9. Foundations of Analysis
It then follows that
(9.1)
if z > 0 and z2 > 2 , then z is an upper bound of S,
since for all x ∈S, x > 0 and x2 < 2.
To show that β =
√
2, we must show that β2 = 2. The Trichotomy Axiom
asserts that either
β2 < 2
or
β2 = 2
or
β2 > 2.
Thus, we must show that both of the assumptions β2 < 2 and β2 > 2 lead to a
contradiction.
Our intuition should be that if β2 < 2, then β is too small to be an upper
bound of S, which contradicts the fact that β = sup S. The speciﬁc version of the
Given-Goal diagram in Table 9.2 that we need is below.
Given
Goal
β = sup S
1 < β < 2
ﬁnd x ∈R with x > 0 and x2 < 2 (i.e., x ∈S)
β2 < 2
satisfying β < x
It will be helpful to make our Given-Goal diagram more explicit.
Given
Goal
β = sup S
1 < β < 2
ﬁnd h ∈R with 0 < h < 1 and (β + h)2 < 2
β2 < 2
(i.e., β + h ∈S, where β < β + h)
We work backwards to ﬁnd h, under the assumption that 0 < h < 1 (this will
have to be veriﬁed in the proof), which implies that h2 < h.
(β + h)2 = β2 + 2βh + h2
< β2 + 2βh + h
= β2 + h(2β + 1)
< β2 + 5h,
since β < 2 and h > 0.
Thus, to make (β + h)2 < 2, we can make β2 + 5h ≤2, so we’ll try h = 2−β2
5
.
Again, we will have to demonstrate in the proof that this deﬁnition of h satisﬁes
0 < h < 1.
Moving to the next case, our intuition should be that if β2 > 2, then β is too big
to be the least upper bound of S, which again contradicts the fact that β = sup S.
The speciﬁc version of the Given-Goal diagram in Table 9.5 that we need is below.
www.ebook3000.com

9.2. The Completeness Axiom
199
Given
Goal
β = sup S
1 < β < 2
ﬁnd z ∈R with z < β such that
β2 > 2
z is an upper bound of S
As before, it will be helpful to make our Given-Goal diagram more explicit.
Note that, by statement (9.1), we can ensure that a real number z > 0 is an upper
bound of S by ensuring that z2 > 2.
Given
Goal
β = sup S
1 < β < 2
ﬁnd h ∈R with 0 < h < 1 and (β −h)2 > 2
β2 > 2
(i.e., β −h is an upper bound of S, where β −h < β)
We work backwards to ﬁnd h, under the assumption that 0 < h < 1 (this will
have to be veriﬁed in the proof).
(β −h)2 = β2 −2βh + h2
> β2 −2βh
> β2 −4h,
since 0 < β < 2 and h > 0. Thus, to make (β −h)2 > 2, we can make β2 −4h ≥2,
so we’ll try h = β2−2
4
. Again, we will have to demonstrate in the proof that this
deﬁnition of h satisﬁes 0 < h < 1.
We are now ready for the proof that
√
2 is a real number.
Proof. Let S = {x ∈R | x > 0 and x2 < 2} ⊆R. Then S ̸= ∅, since
 4
3
2 = 16
9 <
2, and so 4
3 ∈S. In addition, S is bounded above by 3
2 by statement (9.1), since
 3
2
2 = 9
4 > 2. Hence by the Completeness Axiom, β = sup S exists.
Note that 1 < 4
3 ≤β since 4
3 ∈S. Furthermore β ≤3
2 < 2 since 3
2 is an upper
bound of S. We show that β2 = 2 by showing that β2 < 2 and β2 > 2 lead to
contradictions (note the use of the Trichotomy Axiom here).
Assume that β2 < 2. We will ﬁnd h ∈R with 0 < h < 1 and (β + h)2 < 2.
This implies that β + h ∈S, but β < β + h, so then β can’t be an upper bound of
S, a contradiction.

200
9. Foundations of Analysis
Consider h =
2−β2
5
.
Then h > 0 since β2 < 2.
In addition, h =
2−β2
5
=
2
5 −β2
5 < 2
5 < 1, and hence h2 < h. Thus, since β < 2 and 0 < h < 1, we have
(β + h)2 = β2 + 2βh + h2
< β2 + 2βh + h
= β2 + h(2β + 1)
< β2 + 5h
= β2 + 5
2 −β2
5

= 2,
as desired, our contradiction.
Next assume that β2 > 2. We’ll ﬁnd h ∈R such that 0 < h < 1 and (β −h)2 >
2. Then β −h > 0, since 1 < β and h < 1. Furthermore, β −h is an upper bound
of S by statement (9.1). If we can ﬁnd such an h, then β −h < β, and therefore β
isn’t the least upper bound of S, a contradiction.
Consider h = β2−2
4
. Note that h > 0 and h = β2
4 −1
2 < 4
4 −1
2 < 1, since
0 < β < 2. Also, since 0 < β < 2 and h > 0, we have
(β −h)2 = β2 −2βh + h2
> β2 −2βh
> β2 −4h
= β2 −4
β2 −2
4

= 2,
as desired, our contradiction.
Thus, β2 < 2 and β2 > 2 both lead to contradictions. Hence by the Trichotomy
Axiom, β2 = 2; i.e., β =
√
2.
□
Corollary 9.2.12 (Corollary to the proof of Theorem 9.2.11). Q does not satisfy
a Completeness Axiom.
Proof. Let T = {x ∈Q | x > 0 and x2 < 2}, and note, as in the proof of
Theorem 9.2.11, that
3
2 ∈Q is an upper bound of T. We show that T has no
supremum in Q. Assume for the sake of a contradiction that there exists a rational
number β such that β = sup T. By the proof of Theorem 9.2.11, β2 < 2 leads to
a contradiction since h = 2−β2
5
∈Q, and β + h ∈T with β < β + h, so that β
cannot be an upper bound of T. Similarly, by the proof of Theorem 9.2.11, β2 > 2
leads to a contradiction since h = β2−2
4
∈Q, and β −h is an upper bound of T
with β −h < β, so that β cannot be the least upper bound of T. Since Q is an
ordered ﬁeld, it follows by the Trichotomy Axiom that β2 = 2, which contradicts
Theorem 2.3.1, since β ∈Q. Hence T has no supremum in Q.
□
www.ebook3000.com

9.2. The Completeness Axiom
201
Exercises 9.2
1. Let a < b be real numbers and let S = {x ∈R | a < x < b}. Show that
inf S = a and sup S = b.
2. Find sup{x ∈R | x2 + 4 < 5x}.
3. Let S ⊆R be nonempty.
(a) Prove that if sup S exists, then it is unique; i.e., if S is bounded above
and both β1, β2 ∈R satisfy the deﬁnition of sup S in Deﬁnition 9.2.6, then
β1 = β2.
(b) Prove that if inf S exists, then it is unique; i.e., if S is bounded below
and both α1, α2 ∈R satisfy the deﬁnition of inf S in Deﬁnition 9.2.6, then
α1 = α2.
4. Assume S ⊆R is nonempty and bounded, and let α, β ∈R such that α is a
lower bound of S and β is an upper bound of S.
(a) Prove that β = sup S iﬀ(∀ε > 0)(∃x ∈S)[β −ε < x].
(b) Prove that α = inf S iﬀ(∀ε > 0)(∃x ∈S)[x < α + ε].
5. Prove Proposition 9.2.8.
6. Prove Corollary 9.2.10. (HINT: Use “mirrors”. Let T ⊆R be bounded below,
and let α ∈R be a lower bound of T. Apply the Completeness Axiom to the
set S = {−x | x ∈T}.)
7. Let S ⊆R be bounded and nonempty, and let T ⊆S be nonempty. Prove that
T is bounded and
inf S ≤inf T ≤sup T ≤sup S.
8. Let S ⊆R be nonempty and let c ∈R be nonzero. Let T = {cx ∈x ∈S}.
(a) Assume that S is bounded above and c > 0. Prove that T is bounded
above and sup T = c · sup S.
(b) Assume that S is bounded above and c < 0. Prove that T is bounded
below and inf T = c · sup S.
(c) Assume that S is bounded below and c > 0. Prove that T is bounded
below and inf T = c · inf S.
(d) Assume that S is bounded below and c < 0. Prove that T is bounded
above and sup T = c · inf S.
9. Let S ⊆R be bounded and nonempty, and let c ∈R. Let T = {x + c | x ∈S}.
Prove that T is bounded and that sup T = c + sup S and inf T = c + inf S.
10. Use the method of Theorem 9.2.11 to prove the following:
(a)
√
3 is a real number; i.e., there exists a real number x such that x2 = 3.
(b)
3√
2 is a real number; i.e., there exists a real number x such that x3 = 2.
11. In this problem, we (ﬁnally) formally deﬁne the term “interval”.
Deﬁnition 9.2.13. The set S ⊆R is an interval if S contains at least two
distinct real numbers and, for all x, y ∈S, if x < y, then for all z ∈R with
x < z < y, z ∈S.

202
9. Foundations of Analysis
Let S ⊆R. Prove that S is an interval if and only if S takes one of the
forms in Notation 4.1.10.
9.3. The Archimedean Property and its consequences
Probably one of the most surprising claims made in Section 9.2 was that we did not
have the tools necessary to prove that the set of positive integers (as a subset of R)
is not bounded above in R. What is needed is a consequence of the Completeness
Axiom known as the Archimedean Property, which is a very useful tool in real
analysis.
Theorem 9.3.1 (The Archimedean Property). Let a, b ∈R with 0 < a < b. Then
there exists n ∈Z+ such that na > b.
A picture of the Archimedean Property is given in Figure 9.1. Imagine having
line segments of length a and b. The Archimedean Property essentially says that,
regardless of how large b is and how small a is, it is possible to ﬁnd a large enough
positive integer n such that laying down n line segments of length a end to end on
a line will produce a line segment that is longer than b.
0
a
b
0
9a
Figure 9.1. The segment of length 9a is longer than the segment of length b.
Scratchwork: Given real numbers 0 < a < b, we will proceed by contradiction.
Our intuition is that the contradiction will involve the Completeness Axiom, so
we will be looking for (in this instance) a nonempty set of real numbers that is
bounded above but has no supremum. Writing down the Given part of the Given-
Goal diagram gives us the right idea for what set to look at.
Given
Goal
0 < a < b in R
(∀n ∈Z+)[na ≤b]
{na | n ∈Z+} is bounded above but has no supremum
Proof. Let a, b ∈R and assume that 0 < a < b. Assume also for the sake of a
contradiction that for all n ∈Z+, na ≤b.
Consider S = {na | n ∈Z+}. Then S ̸= ∅, and S is bounded above by b, by
assumption. By the Completeness Axiom, S has a supremum; let β = sup S.
www.ebook3000.com

9.3. The Archimedean Property and its consequences
203
Note that β −a < β, since a > 0. Hence β −a is not an upper bound of S
since β = sup S. Thus we can ﬁx x ∈S such that β −a < x. Since x ∈S, we can
ﬁx m ∈Z+ such that x = ma. Then
β < x + a
= ma + a
= (m + 1)a.
But then β is not an upper bound of S, since (m + 1)a ∈S by deﬁnition, contra-
dicting the fact that sup S = β.
Hence there exists n ∈Z+ such that na > b, as desired.
□
The facts below, which all follow from the Archimedean Property, are frequently
used in proofs in analysis. In part (3) below, you should imagine that, regardless
of how small x > 0 is, you can always ﬁnd a large enough positive integer n where
1
n is even smaller.
Corollary 9.3.2.
(1) Z+ is not bounded above in R; i.e.,
(∀x ∈R)(∃n ∈Z+)[n > x].
(2) For all x ∈R, there exists n ∈Z with n ≤x < n + 1.
(3) For all x ∈R+, there exists n ∈Z+ with 0 < 1
n < x.
Scratchwork for part (2): Given x ∈R, by part (1) there is a positive integer
greater than x. The least such positive integer should be the integer n + 1 we seek,
and it exists by the Well-Ordering Principle.
Proof. We leave parts (1) and (3) for Exercise 9.3.1 and prove (2).
Let x ∈R; we must ﬁnd n ∈Z such that n ≤x < n + 1. We consider three
cases.
Case I: x ∈Z.
Then x ≤x < x + 1, and we’re done (i.e., x is the integer n we seek).
Case II: x ̸∈Z and x > 0.
Let S = {m ∈Z+ | x < m}. Note that S ̸= ∅, since otherwise m ≤x
for all positive integers m; i.e., x is an upper bound of Z+, contradicting part
(1). Thus by the Well-Ordering Principle 6.1.3, S has a least element. Let mx
be the least element of S, and note that x < mx. (We are using a subscript
notation here to emphasize the fact that this integer depends on x.)
Notice that mx −1 ≤x by deﬁnition of mx. Taking n = mx −1 ∈Z, we
have n ≤x < n + 1, as desired.
Case III: x ̸∈Z and x < 0.
We use “mirrors”. Note that −x > 0, so by Case II we can ﬁx m ∈Z
such that m ≤−x < m + 1. Then −m −1 < x ≤−m. Since x /∈Z, we have
−m −1 < x < m. Thus n = −m −1 is the integer we seek.
□
We are now in a position to complete our discussion of Example 9.2.7(2).

204
9. Foundations of Analysis
Example 9.3.3. Let S = { 1
n |∈Z+}. We show that inf S = 0.
Certainly 0 is a lower bound of S; i.e., for all n ∈Z+, 0 ≤1
n. We must show
that 0 is the greatest lower bound of S. Let α ∈R be such that 0 < α. We show
that α is not a lower bound of S. By Corollary 9.3.2(3), we can ﬁx n ∈Z+ such that
1
n < α. Since 1
n ∈S, α is not a lower bound of S, as desired. Hence inf S = 0.
♦
The results here on the Archimedean Property form the beginnings of a course
in real analysis, which you may take in future.
9.3.1. Decimal expansions. This subsection is optional.
Students who are
encountering these ideas for the ﬁrst time may wish to omit the details of this
subsection on their ﬁrst reading.
So what, after all, is a real number? That’s easy: a real number is an element
of the set R.
But then, what’s R? Well, the approach that’s often taken in a real analysis
course is that we simply make the assumption that R is a complete ordered ﬁeld;
i.e., R is a set F that satisﬁes all the axioms of an ordered ﬁeld in Deﬁnition 9.1.1 as
well as the Completeness Axiom 9.2.9. Thus, the deﬁnition of R is quite abstract.
If you’re starting to think that you no longer know what a real number is, then
that’s normal.
So, let’s connect this back to what you do know; let’s go back to decimal
expansions. This is how we originally informally deﬁned R, and we needed decimal
expansions in our proof that R is uncountable (Theorem 8.3.11).
First, we need to make sense of the inﬁnite sum
0.35210476 . . . = 3
10 +
5
102 +
2
103 +
1
104 +
0
105 +
4
106 +
7
107 +
6
108 + · · ·
at the beginning of this chapter.
We avoid the sum altogether and go back to
thinking in terms of “terminating” decimal expansions, which we do understand.
In other words, we want to think of 0.35210476 . . . as the “limit” of the sequence
0.3, 0.35, 0.352, 0.3521, 0.35210, 0.352104, 0.3521047, 0.35210476, . . .
of rational numbers. Thus, we want to think of 0.35210476 . . . as the supremum of
the set
{0.3, 0.35, 0.352, 0.3521, 0.35210, 0.352104, 0.3521047, 0.35210476, . . .}.
Deﬁnition 9.3.4. Let d0 ∈Z≥0 and, for all i ∈Z+, di ∈Z with 0 ≤di ≤9.
We deﬁne the decimal expansion d0.d1d2d3 . . . to be notation that represents the
supremum of the set
{d0, d0.d1, d0.d1d2, . . .} = {d0} ∪

d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n
 n ∈Z+

of real numbers.
The integers d1, d2, d3, . . . are called the decimal digits of the
decimal expansion d0.d1d2d3 . . .. We say that the decimal expansion d0.d1d2d3 . . .
is terminating if there exists N ∈Z+ such that for all n ≥N, dn = 0. Otherwise,
we say that the decimal expansion is nonterminating.
www.ebook3000.com

9.3. The Archimedean Property and its consequences
205
Notice that the supremum of the set mentioned in Deﬁnition 9.3.4 exists because
d0 +1 ∈R is an upper bound for that set (this requires explanation). Furthermore,
every decimal expansion is a nonnegative real number.
As an example, for the
decimal expansion of
√
2,
1.414213562 . . . = sup{1, 1.4, 1.414, 1.4142, 1.41421, 1.414213, . . .}.
We will prove that every nonnegative real number has (is) a decimal expan-
sion.
It then follows that every real number has (is) a decimal expansion (see
Exercise 9.3.6).
Theorem 9.3.5. Every nonnegative real number is a decimal expansion.
Proof. Let x ∈R+. We will deﬁne by recursion a sequence {dn}∞
n=0 of decimal
digits of x; i.e., the sequence {dn}∞
n=0 will have the property that x = sup S, where
S = {d0, d0.d1, d0.d1d2, . . .} = {d0} ∪

d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n
 n ∈Z+

.
To deﬁne d0, by Corollary 9.3.2(2), ﬁx d0 ∈Z such that d0 ≤x < d0 + 1, and
note that d0 ≥0.
Next, deﬁne d1 to be the largest integer such that 0 ≤d1 ≤9 and
d0 + d1
10 ≤x.
Note that d1 exists because it is the maximum element of the nonempty ﬁnite set
A =

m ∈Z≥0
 d0 + m
10 ≤x

.
This set A is nonempty because 0 ∈A and ﬁnite because A ⊆{0, 1, . . . , 9}: if
m ∈Z with m ≥10, then
d0 + m
10 ≥d0 + 10
10 = d0 + 1 > x,
a contradiction.
Hence, for the recursion step, let n ∈Z+ and assume that
d0, d1, . . . , dn have been deﬁned and inductively satisfy the property that for all
i, 1 ≤i ≤n, di is the largest integer such that 0 ≤di ≤9 and
d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + di
10i ≤x.
We deﬁne dn+1 to be the largest integer such that 0 ≤dn+1 ≤9 and
d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n + dn+1
10n+1 ≤x.
An argument similar to that for d1 proves that dn+1 exists: if m ∈Z with m ≥10,
then
d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n +
m
10n+1 ≥d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n +
10
10n+1
= d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn + 1
10n
> x,
by the inductive hypothesis on dn.

206
9. Foundations of Analysis
Given the recursively deﬁned sequence {dn}∞
n=0, we then deﬁne
S = {d0} ∪

d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dn
10n
 n ∈Z+

,
which is bounded above by x, by construction. By the Completeness Axiom, let
δ ∈R be the supremum of S, and note that δ is a decimal expansion, by deﬁnition.
We claim that δ = x. We know that δ ≤x by deﬁnition of sup S, since x is an
upper bound of S.
Assume for a contradiction that δ < x; i.e., x −δ > 0. By Corollary 9.3.2(3),
we can ﬁx k ∈Z+ such that 1
k < x −δ. Then
1
10k < 1
k < x −δ by Exercise 3.1.7,
so δ +
1
10k < x. Also note that, by maximality of dk and the fact that δ = sup S,
x < d0 + d1
10 + d2
102 + · · · + dk + 1
10k
≤δ +
1
10k
< x.
This is our contradiction. Hence δ = x, so x is a decimal expansion, as desired.
□
We end this subsection by noting that we need slightly more than Theorem 9.3.5
for our proof of Theorem 8.3.11 that R is uncountable. That proof also relies on
the fact that the decimal expansion of a real number is unique, except for instances
such as
0.49 = 0.49999 . . . = 0.5 = 0.50000 . . . .
What is needed are the following two additional results about decimal expansions,
whose proofs we omit. See [13], where hints are provided.
Theorem 9.3.6. If x ∈R+ has more than one decimal expansion, then there exist
m, n ∈Z+ such that x =
m
10n , and in this case, the rational number x has exactly
two decimal expansions.
Theorem 9.3.7. If δ1, δ2 ∈R+ are nonterminating decimal expansions that dis-
agree in at least one decimal digit, then δ1 ̸= δ2.
We’ve made the connection from our abstract deﬁnition of R back to decimal
expansions, but in fact we don’t really need it to study real analysis. A real number
is just an element of R, and R is a set that satisﬁes the axioms of a complete
ordered ﬁeld. This is enough. With these axioms, and the Completeness Axiom in
particular, it is possible to deﬁne the usual notions from calculus, most importantly,
the notion of a limit. And, we can prove all the important theorems of calculus,
such as the Intermediate Value Theorem and the Mean Value Theorem. This is
what we want, and it is the subject of a course in real analysis.
Exercises 9.3
1. Prove parts (1) and (3) of Corollary 9.3.2.
2. Let S = {1 −1
n | n ∈Z+}. Prove that inf S = 0 and sup S = 1.
www.ebook3000.com

9.4. What next?
207
3. Let a ∈R+. Prove that for all x ∈R, there exists n ∈Z such that na ≤x <
(n + 1)a.
4. (Nested Interval Theorem) For all n ∈Z+, let In = [an, bn] ⊆R (so an < bn).
Assume that for all n ∈Z+, In+1 ⊆In. Prove that 
n∈Z+ In ̸= ∅.
5. Does the result of Exercise 9.3.4 still hold if we replace In = [an, bn] by In =
(an, bn) for all n ∈Z+? Prove that your answer is correct.
6. Given a decimal expansion d0.d1d2d3 . . ., where d0 ∈Z≥0 and, for all i ∈Z+,
di ∈Z with 0 ≤di ≤9, show that the set X =
{−d0, −d0.d1, −d0.d1d2, . . .}
= {−d0} ∪

−d0 −d1
10 −d2
102 −· · · −dn
10n
 n ∈Z+

is bounded below. Thus, we deﬁne −d0.d1d2d3 . . . to be the inﬁmum of the
set X and say that −d0.d1d2d3 . . . is also a decimal expansion.
Prove that
every negative real number is a decimal expansion. (HINT: You will need
Exercise 9.2.8b.)
7. Prove that 0.9 = 0.999 . . . = 1. In other words, prove that
1 = sup

0, 9
10, 99
100, 999
1000, . . .

.
8.
(a) Prove that for all real numbers x < y, there exists z ∈Q such that
x < z < y (i.e., prove that Q is dense in R). (HINT: Consider cases
0 < x, x < y < 0, and x < 0 < y. You will need Corollary 9.3.2(2) and
(3).)
(b) Prove that for all x, y ∈R with x < y, there exists an irrational number z
such that x < z < y. (HINT: Apply part (a) to
x
√
2 and
y
√
2.)
9.4. What next?
Let’s go back to the last paragraph of Subsection 9.3.1. We said there that
a real number is just an element of R, and R is a set that satisﬁes the
axioms of a complete ordered ﬁeld.
How do we know that there is any set that satisﬁes the axioms of a complete
ordered ﬁeld?
Let’s brieﬂy return to set theory. We said in Section 4.4 that “a great deal
of mathematics can be derived in ZF.” What we mean is that, from the axioms
in ZF, we can give set-theoretic deﬁnitions of N, Z, Q, and R, including the rel-
evant arithmetic operations and order relations, and prove that these deﬁnitions
satisfy the usual properties. See Exercise 7.2.4f for Z, as well as Example 7.2.7 and
Exercise 7.2.9 for Q.
There are two ways to give a deﬁnition of R in ZF. One method deﬁnes a
real number to be an equivalence class of Cauchy sequences (a particular type of
sequence), and the other deﬁnes a real number to be a Dedekind cut (a particular

208
9. Foundations of Analysis
type of set of rational numbers). In either case, one must deﬁne in ZF the arithmetic
operations and order relation on R and prove in ZF that the axioms of a complete
ordered ﬁeld are satisﬁed. Saying more than this is beyond the scope of this book,
so interested readers should consult [9] or [12].
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix
Writing Mathematics
Chances are the mathematics course you are currently taking will require far more
“writing in English” than any other math course you have previously taken, which
may be surprising to you. Whereas in previous courses you may have written so-
lutions to problems by simply writing line after line of formulas, with no English
words at all, now you are required to write complete English sentences and para-
graphs. This does not mean that no formulas will appear, but rather, formulas
should be incorporated grammatically into sentences.
In any subject, whether it be history, biology, economics, or mathematics, our
job is to communicate what we know, and how we know it, to others. Learning
to write mathematics well requires a lot of practice and can be diﬃcult at the
beginning. The following guidelines1 for writing mathematics point out some of
the issues you’ll want to keep in mind.
(1) All proofs (or solutions involving some sort of explanation) should be written
in grammatically correct, complete English sentences.
(2) Begin a proof by assuming the relevant hypotheses. End each proof with a
sentence that reiterates what has been proved.
• For example, if you are trying to prove that the product of two odd
numbers is odd, then you should begin by saying, “Let m and n be odd
integers.” The last line of the proof might be something like, “Hence, mn
is odd, as desired.”
(3) Proofs (or solutions involving some sort of explanation) should include enough
detail for the reader to understand your reasoning. Do not assume that the
reader knows what you are talking about. Assume that your reader has the
same mathematical background as you but does not know the proof you are
writing.
1These guidelines were originally inspired by a “Writing checklist” created by Dr. Annalisa Crannell
of Franklin & Marshall College. I have adapted them over time in the various “proof courses” I have
taught in my career at Allegheny College.
209

210
A. Writing Mathematics
(4) Be sure that what you have written is mathematically precise. Mean what
you write, and write what you mean.
(5) Use proper mathematical notation and terminology.
• All variables must be explicitly deﬁned.
– For example, if you are trying to prove that the product of two odd
numbers is odd, then you should begin by saying, “Let m and n be
odd integers.” If you are then tempted to write “m = 2k+1”, then
you should explicitly identify what k is and explain why it exists.
• Mathematical symbols should not be confused with English words. For
example, the symbol “=” should be used only in mathematical formulas
and computations, not as the verb “is” in a sentence.
(6) Proofs should explicitly make reference to any deﬁnitions or theorems used.
(7) Proofs should not contain any scratchwork or work done in the margins, nor
any large sections of “crossed out” work.
(8) Proofread all solutions for correctness and clarity. Recopying your solutions
is one useful way to accomplish this.
www.ebook3000.com

Bibliography
[1] R. B. J. T. Allenby, Rings, Fields, and Groups: An Introduction to Abstract Algebra,
Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd., 1983.
[2] Robert G. Bartle and Donald R. Sherbert, Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd edition,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2000.
[3] John A. Beachy and William D. Blair, Abstract Algebra, 2nd edition, Waveland Press,
Inc., 1990.
[4] Robert J. Bond and William J. Keane, An Introduction to Abstract Mathematics,
Brooks/Cole, 1999.
[5] Richard A. Brualdi, Introductory Combinatorics, 5th edition, Pearson Education,
Inc., 2009.
[6] David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory, 5th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2002.
[7] Keith Devlin, Sets, Functions, and Logic: An Introduction to Abstract Mathematics,
2nd edition, Chapman & Hall Mathematics, 1992.
[8] Peter J. Eccles, An Introduction to Mathematical Reasoning: Numbers, Sets and
Functions, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[9] Herbert B. Enderton, Elements of Set Theory, Academic Press, Inc., 1977.
[10] Herbert B. Enderton, A Mathematical Introduction to Logic, 2nd edition, Har-
court/Academic Press, 2001.
[11] Russell A. Gordon, Real Analysis: A First Course, 2nd edition, Pearson Education,
Inc., 2002.
[12] Karel Hrbacek and Thomas Jech, Introduction to Set Theory, 2nd edition, revised
and expanded, Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1984.
[13] Kenneth Rogers, Advanced Calculus, Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co., 1976.
[14] Dan Saracino, Abstract Algebra: A First Course, 2nd edition, Waveland Press, 2008.
[15] Daniel J. Velleman, How to Prove It: A Structured Approach, Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
[16] Robert S. Wolf, A Tour through Mathematical Logic, The Mathematical Association
of America (Incorporated), 2005.
211

www.ebook3000.com

Index
In the ﬁrst part of this index, mathematical symbols and expressions
are listed in their order of appearance in the book.
∧, 2
∨, 3
¬, 3
⇒, 5
⇔, 6
N, 9, 10
∀, 9
∃, 9
∈, 9, 67
/∈, 9, 67
R, 9, 10, 197
Z, 10
Q, 10
Z+, 11
Q+, 11
R+, 11
|, 25
∤, 25
∃!, 35
n
k=1 ak, 54
n!, 57
n
k

, 61
{an}∞
n=1, 61
∅, 69
⊆, 69
̸⊆, 69
⊊, 71
∪, 74
∩, 74
B −A, 74
B\A, 74
A, 74
×, 77
An, 77
P( ), 79
n
i=1 Ai, 83
n
i=1 Ai, 83
∞
i=1 Ai, 85
∞
i=1 Ai, 85

i∈I Ai, 87

i∈I Ai, 87
ZF, 91
ZFC, 91
AC, 91
dom, 94, 156
f : X →Y , 94
ran, 95
im, 95
IX, 96
P, 103
1-1, 108
f : X
1-1
→Y , 108
f : X →
onto Y , 108
1-1 correspondence, 108
f −1, 117
f[A], 121
f −1[B], 122
Z≥0, 132
(a, b), 136
≡
mod m, 145
[ ]m, 149
Zm, 149
+m, 151
213

214
Index
−m, 151
·m, 151
Z∗
m, 153
Z∗, 156
[ ], 158
X/∼, 158
Nn, 168
≈, 168
|X|, 168
↾, 171
CH, 190
max S, 193
min S, 193
sup S, 195
inf S, 195
absolute value function, 33
addition principle, 174
algebraic, 187
and, 2
antecedent, 6
Archimedean Property, 202
associative, 23, 27, 106
axiom, 22
Axiom of Choice, 91
Banach-Tarski paradox, 91
base case, 54, 57
Basic Properties of Integers, 23
Basic Properties of Real Numbers, 27
Bernoulli’s Inequality, 60
biconditional, 6
bijective, bijection, 108
binary operation, 102
binomial coeﬃcient, 61
binomial theorem, 61
bounded, 193
above, 193
below, 193
cancellation, 23
Cantor-Schr¨oder-Bernstein Theorem,
188
cardinality, 168, 188
well-deﬁned, 171
Cartesian product, 77
circular argument, 45
closed formula, 62
closure, 23, 27
codomain, 94
coeﬃcient, 96
commutative, 23, 27
complement, 74
Completeness Axiom, 197
conclusion, 6
conditional, 5
congruence class
mod m, 149
congruent mod m, 145
conjunct, 2
conjunction, 2
consequent, 6
Continuum Hypothesis, 189
contradiction, 14, 39
contrapositive, 8
converse, 8
coprime, 141
countable, 179
counterexample, 10, 29
cover, 163
decimal digits, 204
decimal expansion, 204
nonterminating, 204
terminating, 204
decreasing, 103
deﬁnitions
special status, 18
degree, 96
DeMorgan’s Laws, 4, 77
dense, 207
denumerable, 179
diﬀerence, 74
disjoint, 75
pairwise, 173
disjunct, 3
disjunction, 3
disprove, 29
distributive, 23, 27
divides, 25
Division Algorithm, 131
divisor, 25
greatest common, 136
domain
function, 94
implicit, natural, 98
relation, 156
dovetail, 180, 181
element, 9, 67
empty set, 69
enumerable, 179
equality
of functions, 96
of ordered n-tuples, 78
www.ebook3000.com

Index
215
of ordered pairs, 78
of sets, 71
equinumerous, 168
equivalence class, 158
equivalence relation, 157
equivalent, 6
Euclid’s Lemma, 141
Euclidean Algorithm, 136, 139
even, 18
existential instantiation, 21
factorial function, 57
family of sets, 84
Fibonacci numbers, 60
ﬁnite, 168
free variable, 2
function, 94
composite, composition, 104
decreasing, 103
equality, 96
increasing, 103
inverse, 114
invertible, 114
polynomial, 96
rational, 98
real-valued, 98
well-deﬁned, 152, 162
Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic,
45
Existence, 64
Uniqueness, 142
gcd, 136
Given-Goal diagram, 19
graph, 95
group, 152
hypothesis, 6
identity function, 96
if, 6
if . . . , then, 5
iﬀ, 6
image, 94, 95
of a set under a function, 121
implication, 5
implies, 5
increasing, 103
index set, 84
indexed family of sets, 84
induction, 53
inductive deﬁnition, 57
inductive hypothesis, 55
inductive step, 54, 57
inﬁmum, 195
inﬁnite, 168
injective, injection, 108
integers, 10
integers
mod m, 149
intersection, 74
interval, 201
interval notation, 73
inverse
left, 121
right, 121
inverse function, 114
inverse image
of a set under a function, 122
invertible, 114
left-, 121
right-, 121
irrational number, 40
linear combination, 138
logical connectives, 2, 5
logically equivalent, 4, 14
lower bound, 193
greatest, 195
maps to, 94
matrix, 37
multiplication, 38
maximum, 193
metric, 104
minimum, 193
modus ponens, 16
multiplication principle, 174
natural numbers, 9
necessary, 6
negation, 3
not, 3
n-tuple, 77
null set, 69
odd, 18
one-to-one, 108
only if, 6
onto, 108
or, 3
exclusive, 3
inclusive, 3

216
Index
ordered ﬁeld, 192
ordered pair, 77
partition, 162
Pigeonhole Principle, 171
PMI, 53
polynomial, 96
power set, 79
predicate, 9
preimage, 94
of a set under a function, 122
prime, 29, 45
Principle of Mathematical Induction, 53
modiﬁed, 58
Principle of Strong Mathematical
Induction, 63
proof
by cases, 30
by contradiction, 38
direct, 17
indirect, 38
of the contrapositive, 41
uniqueness, 34
proposition, 1
PSMI, 63
quantiﬁer, 9
alternating, 47
existential, 9
hidden, 12
implied, 12
mixed, 47
modiﬁed, 12
universal, 9
range, 95
rational function, 98
rational numbers, 10
real numbers, 10, 197
algebraic, 187
transcendental, 187
real-valued, 98
recursion step, 57
recursive deﬁnition, 57
reﬂection, 104
reﬂexive, 157
relation, 155
binary, 155
relatively prime, 141
restriction, 171
rigid motion, 103
rule of deduction, 16
Russell’s paradox, 90
sequence, 61
set
complement, 74
conditional deﬁnition, 68
constructive deﬁnition, 68
diﬀerence, 74
empty, 69
equality, 71
indexed family, 84
intersection, 74
null, 69
power, 79
symmetric diﬀerence, 82
union, 74
sigma notation, 54
solution, 37
statement letter, 2
subset, 69
proper, 71
suﬃcient, 6
supremum, 195
surjective, surjection, 108
symmetric, 157
symmetric diﬀerence, 82
tautology, 14
transcendental, 187
transitive, 23, 26, 27, 157
translation, 104
triangle inequality, 37
trichotomy, 5, 23, 27
truth table, 2
uncountable, 179
union, 74
uniqueness proof, 34
universal set, 67
universe, 2
upper bound, 193
least, 195
useful denial, 5
conjunction, 5
disjunction, 5
implication, 7
quantifed statements, 11
vacuously true, 73
well-deﬁned, 10, 150, 152, 162
+Q, ·Q, 162
cardinality, 171
www.ebook3000.com

Index
217
Well-Ordering Principle, 132
without loss of generality, 127
WLOG, 127
WOP, 132
working backwards, 31

Th is accessible textbook gives beginning undergraduate mathematics students a 
ﬁ rst exposure to introductory logic, proofs, sets, functions, number theory, rela-
tions, ﬁ nite and inﬁ nite sets, and the foundations of analysis. Th e book provides 
students with a quick path to writing proofs and a practical collection of tools 
that they can use in later mathematics courses such as abstract algebra and anal-
ysis. Th e importance of the logical structure of a mathematical statement as a 
framework for ﬁ nding a proof of that statement, and the proper use of variables, 
is an early and consistent theme used throughout the book.
AMS on the Web  
www.ams.org
AMSTEXT/26
For additional information
and updates on this book, visit
www.ams.org/bookpages/amstext-26
       
The Sally
     SERIES
Th is series was founded by the highly respected
mathematician and educator, Paul J. Sally, Jr.
www.ebook3000.com

