

THE ALL NEW ILLUSTRATED GUIDE  
to EVERYTHING SOLD in  
HARDWARE 
ST
RES

© 2017 Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc.
First-edition text © 2003 Running Press
First edition published in 2003 by Running Press. Tis edition published in 2017 by Cool Springs Press, an imprint of Quarto 
Publishing Group USA Inc., 400 First Avenue North, Suite 400, Minneapolis, MN 55401 USA. Telephone: (612) 344-8100  
Fax: (612) 344-8692
quartoknows.com
Visit our blogs at quartoknows.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without writen permission of the copyright owners. All 
images in this book have been reproduced with the knowledge and prior consent of the artists concerned, and no responsibility 
is accepted by producer, publisher, or printer for any infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising from the contents of this 
publication. Every eﬀort has been made to ensure that credits accurately comply with information supplied. We apologize for any 
inaccuracies that may have occurred and will resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent reprinting of the book.
Cool Springs Press titles are also available at discounts in bulk quantity for industrial or sales-promotional use. For details contact 
the Special Sales Manager at Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc., 400 First Avenue North, Suite 400, Minneapolis, MN 55401 USA.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ISBN: 978-1-59186-686-2  
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Etlinger, Steve, author. | Schmidt, Philip, author.
Title: Te all new illustrated guide to everything sold in hardware stores /
   Steve Etlinger & Phil Schmidt.
Other titles: Complete illustrated guide to everything sold in hardware stores
Description: Minneapolis, MN : Quarto Publishing Group USA, Inc., [2017]
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016052148 | ISBN 9781591866862 (sc)
Subjects: LCSH: Hardware--United States--Catalogs. | Hardware--Terminology.
Classiﬁcation: LCC TS405 .E79 2017 | DDC 683--dc23
LC record available at htps://lccn.loc.gov/2016052148
Acquiring Editor: Bryan Trandem
Project Manager: Alyssa Bluhm
Art Director: James Kegley
Cover Designer: Kim Winscher
Layout: Kim Winscher
Photography: Lightbox Images
PHOTO CREDITS
Shuterstock: 5, 6, 9, 67, 99, 129, 147, 197
Printed in China
FSC logo
Digital edition: 978-0-76035-773-6
Softcover edition: 978-1-59186-686-2

THE ALL NEW ILLUSTRATED GUIDE  
to EVERYTHING SOLD in  
HARDWARE 
ST
RES
BY STEVE ETTLINGER
& PHILIP SCHMIDT

4 
 
PREFACE
This is the latest iteration of a book that first hit the shelves back in 1988, and which has seen a few updates 
and many, many readers over the years. Its uncommon longevity and popularity can be attributed to two 
things. First, it’s a great concept: a book that helps you identify what you need before you get to the hardware 
store and start scanning its endless merchandise. And second, it’s a universally helpful resource: who 
doesn’t need help with hardware? Most folks feel lost in hardware stores, and even tradespeople and handy 
homeowners have gray areas. You may be able to singlehandedly build a shed or retile a bathroom, but do 
you know the difference between an AFCI and a GFCI? (This book tells you, by the way.)
If you’re out shopping for an electrical outlet, you actually do need to know the difference between an  
AFCI and a GFCI. Just like you need to know when stainless-steel screws are worth the cost and why not  
to use duct tape on ducts. These kinds of details were the inspiration for the original version of this book,  
and are the reasons for this new edition. While some things haven’t changed much over the last few 
decades—houses are still built largely with nails, and deck stain still needs to be reapplied more often  
than we’d like—hardware products are constantly changing, as are the rules for using them properly and 
safely in your house. The updated content and new, color photos in this edition will help you find just what 
you need for today’s projects. 
Perhaps what’s changed most of all is the hardware store itself. Hardware retailers have always carried a wide 
variety of items—it’s the nature of the business—but today’s large home centers have taken selection to a 
whole new level, some offering upwards of 40,000 different products under one roof. They’re well staffed, for 
sure, but it still helps enormously to have a good idea of what you need when you get in the door. After all, 
out of those 40,000 items, you might be in search of exactly one. And that’s why this book is more necessary 
and, we hope, more helpful than ever. 
—Phil Schmidt, Edition Editor
This book is dedicated to all of us who have ever walked into a hardware store,  
home center, or lumberyard and asked for a whatchamacallit or thingamajig.

5
INTRODUCTION  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
PART I: General Hardware
1. Nails .................................................... 10
2. Screws ................................................. 16
3. Nuts & Bolts ......................................... 25
4. Wall Anchors & Hanging Hardware ......... 33
5. Specialty Fasteners & Supports ............. 44
6. Hinges, Hasps & Latches ....................... 51
7. Chain & Cable ...................................... 56
8. Wire & Wire Products ............................ 64
PART II: General Materials
9. Adhesives, Caulks & Sealants ............... 68
10. Metal & Plastic Sheeting ....................... 76
11. Window & Door Screen (and Supplies) .... 82
12. Rope & Line ......................................... 86
13. Lubricants ............................................ 90
14. Tape ..................................................... 94
PART III: Paints, Stains & Other Finishes
15. Interior Paints ..................................... 102
16. Exterior Paints & Stains ....................... 106
17. Specialty Paints .................................. 109
18. Interior Stains & Clear  
 
Wood Finishes .................................... 112
19. Thinners, Cleaners, Removers  
 
& Preparers ........................................ 122
PART IV: Wall, Ceiling & Floor Repair 
Materials
20. Drywall & Plaster Patching Materials ...... 130
21. Interior Floor Repair Materials ............. 136
22. Concrete Floor & Wall  
 
Repair Materials ................................. 140
PART V: Plumbing Supplies 
23. Pipe & Accessories ............................. 149
24. Fittings ............................................... 160
25. Joint Compounds & Sealants .............. 174
26. Faucets & Faucet Parts ....................... 180
27. Valves ................................................. 186
28. Toilet Parts .......................................... 190
PART VI: Electrical Supplies
29. Extension Cords, Plugs  
 
& Power Strips .................................... 200
30. Lamp & Light Fixture Repair Parts ........ 206
31. Switches & Receptacles ...................... 212
32. Electrical Wire & Connectors ............... 220
33. Electrical Boxes & Conduit .................. 227
INDEX  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .236
CONTENTS

6 
 
INTRODUCTION
WHY THIS BOOK
Whether you are a homeowner, an apartment dweller, or a renovator, you no doubt have often entered a 
hardware store, lumberyard, or home center full of fear prior to making a small purchase.
Probably the most frustrating thing is that when you ask a clerk for an item—whether a succinct request for 
a paintbrush or pliers, or the more typical “whatchamacallit that fits over the thing that you turn to make the 
doohickey work” (accompanied, no doubt, by broad, dramatic, descriptive hand gestures)—the clerk will 
come back at you, nine times out of ten, with a barrage of questions: “Well, what are you using it for?” “What 
size do you want?” “You want top-of-the-line or cheap?” “Silicone or acrylic?” “Galvanized or plain?” If you 
haven’t thought these questions through, this can be pretty demoralizing, embarrassing, and intimidating.  
I know. That's just the kind of experience that gave birth to this book.
The All New Illustrated Guide to Everything Sold in Hardware Stores should serve to end your intimidation, help 
you avoid wrong purchases, and enable even you, too, to walk fearlessly into a hardware store or lumberyard 
and get exactly what you need.

 7
 
HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
The more common items are in the front of each section, and groups of items follow this in a logical sequence 
wherever possible.
The item names are the result of months of research with manufacturers and catalogs, and though the names 
reflect the most accurate and common terms you'll find on a store’s label, in many cases it may not be the 
name with which you are most familiar—the name you hear on the job site, for example. That’s where the 
“Also Known As” element for each item comes into play. The idea for this section comes from the original 
inspiration for this book, when someone told me to get a cat’s paw, which is not the most common name for 
the tool I needed, more properly called a nail claw.
We all call these tools by the names we’ve learned informally—from where we grew up, in the Navy, on 
the farm, from some old boss who picked up hardware nomenclature from who knows where. It has been 
fun collecting all the various aliases that might be out there. Some are dead wrong and may come from 
authoritative sources (even a popular TV show host), others are rare and folkloric. But someone, somewhere, 
calls the thing by that name, and so it finds its way into print.
“About” sections cover the basics of broad categories, such as screws or electrical switches. 
“Description” tells you what the item looks like and notes key features, and “Use” tells you what it’s most 
commonly used for. 
“Use Tips” expand on one or more uses for the items and offer expert advice on specific applications. 
“Buying Tips” help you choose between more or less expensive options, suggest an essential purchase, or 
help you distinguish one type from another. 
WHAT THIS BOOK DOES NOT INCLUDE
Though a good hardware store, lumberyard, or home center carries tens and even hundreds of thousands of 
items in stock, this book includes only those that the average homeowner/handyperson will find necessary 
for typical repairs and DIY projects. It does not include many items used primarily by professionals or things 
that are used most commonly in commercial buildings. And because selection varies so much regionally, we 
have excluded most tools from this volume. 
There is also a conscious avoidance of extensive how-to advice. The tips given are meant to echo the friendly 
advice a good clerk would give you as you leave a store; they are definitely not the comprehensive and 
detailed instructions required for many projects.
—Steve Ettlinger, author

PART I
GENERAL HARDWARE

 

10
NAILS
CHAPTER 1
ABOUT NAILS
There are two categories of nails: those ordinarily used for assembling wood members, be it fine work or 
rough construction, and specialized nails—those having a variety of single purposes. Actually, there are 
hundreds of different types when you include various esoteric coatings, ends, materials, and heads. Here, 
we deal only with the more commonly found ones. Most of the regular nails for wood may be referred to 
as wire nails.
For wood, though you can get nails smaller and larger, nails are generally available in 1- to 6-inch sizes; as 
the nail gets longer it gets larger and thicker in diameter. After 6 inches in length, nails are often called spikes 
and can range up to 18 inches long.
Basic wood nails are sized according to length, expressed by the letter d (verbalized as “penny”). 
Originally this was an early English symbol for a pound of weight—from the ancient Roman coin, the 
denarius—and related to the weight of 1,000 nails in pounds. Some say it was the cost of 100 nails in pence, 
abbreviated “d.” Sizes run from 2d (2-penny or 1 inch long) to 60d (60-penny or 6 inches long)—6d nails are 
2 inches long, 10d nails are 3 inches long, etc. This is shown on the following table.
NAIL SIZING
2d—1"
3d—1¼"
4d—1½"
5d—1¾"
6d—2"
7d—2¼"
8d—2½"
9d—2¾"
10d—3"
12d—3½"
16d—3½"
20d—4"
30d—4½"
40d—5"
50d—5½"
60d—6"
70d—7"
80d—8"
Nails and screws have different strengths and weaknesses. Screws typically offer better holding power, 
thanks to threads that grip the wood or other material, but most screws are relatively brittle and cannot bend 
far without breaking. Nails have relatively poor holding power (particularly standard nails) but offer greater 
shear strength than screws: they can bend without breaking. The holding power (and driving ease) of nails 
is increased by coating them with resin. These are called cement-coated (CC) nails, resin-coated nails, coated 
sinkers or sinkers, or coolers. Holding power also can be increased by various deformations, or threading, of 
the shaft, such as barbs, chemical etching, annular rings, spiral threads, or flutes. These nails are very difficult 
if not impossible to remove without damaging the wood, while screws are easily removed. 
Plain common nails with no coating are called bright. Nails come in boxes, brown paper bags, and carded; 
the latter is the most expensive way to buy them. If you need a lot of nails, buy them in 25- or 30-pound 
boxes or kegs to save money.
NOTE: 
Because of the increased holding power of coated or deformed nails, they are a little bit shorter than the same 
d-size common nail.

BUYING TIPS: 
Choose the right nail material 
for outdoor use. Standard nails 
will quickly rust with weather 
exposure, and the wrong type 
of nail can “bleed” (leave dark 
streaks) onto wood fencing, 
decking, and trim. The best 
all-around material that’s 
guaranteed not to rust or bleed is 
stainless steel, but it’s expensive. 
Aluminum nails won’t rust, but 
they can bleed on cedar and 
redwood and often are not strong 
enough for structural work. Hot-
dipped galvanized nails are a reliable, economical option. They have a thick coating of zinc to resist corrosion 
combined with the strength of steel. However, galvanized nails will bleed on cedar and redwood (due to a 
chemical reaction with the wood), even when the project is painted. Galvanized nails with an electroplated 
coating offer much less corrosion-resistance than hot-dipped and should be used only where there is no 
direct exposure to weather. Finally, use only stainless-steel or hot-dipped galvanized nails with pressure-
treated lumber. The chemical treatment in the wood will corrode other materials.  
Common Nail
DESCRIPTION: 
Fairly thick with a large, round, flat head.
USE: 
General construction work, such as framing and a wide variety of other purposes. Comes in many different 
sizes. Use common nails for structural applications.
USE TIPS: 
When driving common nails with a hammer, try to snap your wrist rather than hitting the nail with arm 
power. If you are using cement-coated nails, do not stop hammering until the nail is driven all the way in. If 
you stop, the cement (which is actually a friction-sensitive glue) will set, and when you start again the nail 
might bend.
Electroplated 
galvanized steel
Hot-dipped 
galvanized 
steel
Coated steel 
(sinker)
Plain steel 
(bright)
CHAPTER 1 11
Nail Materials.

12 
PART I
Nails.
Box Nail
DESCRIPTION: 
Looks like the common nail but is thinner and  
a little shorter than the common nail d-length 
normally indicates. Smooth sides. Made of specially 
hardened wire.
USE: 
A variation on the common nail but with a thinner diameter 
(lighter gauge) and slightly blunted tip, making it good where 
there is a danger of the nail splitting thin wood, such as 1x lumber and exterior trim. Does not hold as well 
and is not as a strong as a common nail. Suitable for general, nonstructural applications.
Finishing Nail
ALSO KNOWN AS:
Finish nail, brad.
DESCRIPTION: 
Thin, with a very small, cupped head. Comes in both very small and fairly long sizes and may be sized 
according to wire gauge (diameter) with a number from 12 down to 20 (the higher the number, the smaller 
the diameter) as well as by actual length and by the d system.
USE:
For wherever you don’t want nail heads to show, such as when installing interior trim. The head is small and 
cupped so it can be easily countersunk, or driven beneath the wood surface, with a hammer and nail set. The 
hole is then filled with wood putty and sanded for a near-invisible finish.
Common nail
Masonry nail
Drywall nail
Annular ring nail
Roofing nail
Duplex nail
Casing nail
Finishing nail
Box nail

CHAPTER 1 13
NAILS
Casing Nail
DESCRIPTION: 
Looks like a large finishing nail but is thicker and has a flat rather than a cupped head.
USE: 
This is a close cousin of the finishing nail and gets its name from its main use: securing case molding and 
other rough trim. It is thicker and harder than a finishing nail, so you can use fewer of them.
Ringed, Threaded, or Barbed Nails
DESCRIPTIONS & USES:
Nails with shanks that have been shaped to have the greatest holding power possible:
ANNULAR RING NAIL: 
Shank has many sharp ridges. Uses include underlayment, shingles, siding, and paneling. Typically used 
with finish materials such as paneling or siding.
DRYWALL NAIL: 
Has a partially barbed or ringed shank and may be resin-coated; has a large, cupped head. Used for 
securing drywall panels to wood framing. A plasterboard or lath nail is another version of this, with a 
larger head and smaller barbs.
ROOFING NAIL: 
Large head and a barbed shank, usually galvanized steel or aluminum. Used for securing asphalt shingles 
and building paper. Nails for metal roofing have a rubber or plastic washer under the head to create 
a water seal. Cap nails have a large plastic or metal washer; used for securing sheet materials, such as 
building paper (roofing felt) and housewrap.
SPIRAL NAIL: 
Small head with a spiral shank. Traditionally used to install subflooring and some wood flooring but is 
much less commonly used today.
USE TIPS: 
DRYWALL: 
Hit it just hard enough so that the nail head dimples the surface paper but goes no deeper. Screws should 
generally be used with drywall.
ROOFING: 
Comes in various sizes up to l ¼ inches. Carefully size the nail to the thickness of the roofing being 
fastened. Available in rust-resistant materials, such as aluminum or stainless steel. Strike as few times as 
possible to avoid scratching off the rust-resistant coating.

14 
PART I
Cut Flooring Nail
DESCRIPTION: 
Flat, tapered shank and head. Looks like old-fashioned, hand-forged nails.
USE: 
For nailing into edges of floorboards without splintering (typically used with floor nailers) and for decorative 
purposes in restoration.
Duplex Nail
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Duplex head nail, sprig nail, double-head scaffold nail, staging nail.
DESCRIPTION:
Regular common nail with a second head (ring) about ¼ inch below the top head.
USE: 
For temporary work, such as scaffolding and concrete forms. You drive it in up to the first head like a normal 
nail but can easily remove it by pulling on the top head.
Panel Nail
DESCRIPTION: 
Decorative brads available in a variety of colors. Some come with annular rings for better holding power.
USE: 
Securing wood paneling to wall when nails are to be inconspicuous.
Masonry Nail
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Concrete nail.
DESCRIPTION: 
Looks like a thick common nail but is made of case-hardened and tempered steel. Its shank comes four ways: 
round, fluted (or knurled), flat (cut), or square. The cut-type masonry nail looks like an old-fashioned cut nail. 
Another version is the hammer drive pin, a hardened-steel pin inside a ¼-inch-diameter flanged sleeve—the sleeve 
is inserted into a predrilled hole, then the pin is driven with a hammer to expand and secure the sleeve in the hole.

NAILS
CHAPTER 1 15
USE: 
Securing items such as electrical conduit furring strips to masonry 
(brick, concrete, block, etc.), where great holding power is not needed. 
Hammered in.
USE TIPS: 
Use a 2-pound or bricklayer’s hammer to drive these nails. Wear safety 
glasses to protect against flying masonry chips, and use as few blows  
as possible.
Tack
TYPES:
Common tack, ornamental, or ornamental tack
DESCRIPTION & USE:
COMMON TACK: 
Short, flat- or round-sided nail, some with an extra sharp “cut” end. Mainly used for securing carpeting.
ORNAMENTAL: 
Has a tack-like shaft, or shank, and a large, fancy head, often mushroom-shaped. Used for  
securing upholstery.
USE TIPS:
Available with a blued finish or in copper and aluminum. The latter are impervious to weather and are good 
for boating applications but also for securing webbing on outdoor furniture. Starting tacks without a small-
headed hammer, such as a tack hammer, is difficult but can be done by holding the tack with a hairpin or 
needlenose pliers instead of your fingers.
Corrugated Fastener
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Corrugated nail.
DESCRIPTION: 
Short, wide, wavy piece of thin metal with one sharpened edge.
USE:
Nailed across miter joints, such as in picture frames and boxes.
Corrugated 
fastener
Cap nail
Tack

16
SCREWS
CHAPTER 2
ABOUT SCREWS
Screws have developed in performance and popularity over the years, and have gradually supplanted nails for 
many household applications, including decking, drywall, subflooring, cabinetry, fencing, and many general 
construction tasks. Where once a hobbyist might have reached for some box or finishing nails to assemble 
a simple utility cabinet or set of shelves, he or she now is more likely to use drywall screws instead. The 
primary advantage of screws is that they hold better than most nails and resist pulling out, which means fewer 
squeaks in floors due to loose subflooring, ceiling drywall that doesn’t droop as much over time, and decking 
boards that stay flatter. Screws also are easier to install in many situations (particularly for beginners), and 
they’re much easier to remove than nails without damaging the host materials. 
Screws typically are driven with screwdrivers (or screw tips on power drills), except for lag screws, which 
are driven with a wrench. Most screws are pointed and tapered (unlike bolts, which have blunt ends and are 
straight), except for machine screws, which are actually bolts. Still with us? 
When selecting a screw for a job, a number of factors come into play: length, gauge (diameter), material, 
head style, drive type, and thread, as follows:
LENGTH: 
Screws range in size from ¼ inch up to around 6 inches long. Note that length typically is measured from 
the point (tip) of the screw to the level where the screw head meets the material the screw is installed in. 
For example, a deck screw is installed flush (or slightly deeper than flush) with decking, so the screw is 
measured from the top of the head to the point. A standard sheet metal screw’s head sits on the surface of 
the metal, so its length is measured from the bottom of the head to the screw point. 
Screw head styles.
Truss
head
Hex
Washer 
head
Oval
Bugle
Round
Pan
Hex 
washer
Flat

GAUGE: 
The diameter of the unthreaded shank under the screw head is described according to numbers 
commonly ranging from No. (or #) 5 to No. 14, with the higher number being the larger. The total range 
is No. 2 to No. 24. A No. 5 screw is about ⅛ inch in diameter. Screws of the same gauge are available in 
different lengths. Always order a screw by length and number: ½-inch No. 8, for example.
MATERIAL: 
Most screws are made with steel and may be plain steel or coated with various metals or other materials 
for corrosion-resistance. Common types include coated (as in deck screws), galvanized, zinc-plated, 
brass-plated, and chrome-plated. There are also stainless-steel and solid-brass screws, both of which are 
essentially rust-proof but can cause other metals to corrode when the dissimilar metals come into 
contact. For outdoor use, screws must be stainless steel (or brass) or galvanized or otherwise coated for 
corrosion resistance. Bleeding (see page 11) is likely to occur on cedar and redwood if the screws aren’t 
stainless steel or specially coated and guaranteed not to bleed on these natural woods. 
HEAD STYLE: 
The shape of the screw head. In truth, there are too many shapes to describe here, but the photo (page 76) 
shows the most common head styles. Generally, screw heads that are flat on the bottom are intended to sit 
on top of the receiving material. Heads that are beveled or conical on the bottom are designed to embed into 
the material, so the top of the head is flush with the surface. 
DRIVE TYPE: 
Refers to the shape of the screwdriver or screw tip used to drive the screw. The most common are the 
slotted (straight slot) and Phillips (cross-shaped slot), but there are several others, all of which perform 
better than the two historic standards. These include Pozidriv®, square-drive (Robertson), hex-drive 
(Allen), and Torx (star-drive). It’s important that you match up not only the right screw tip with the screw 
but also the right size of screw tip. For example, square-drive, Pozidriv®, and even the old standby Phillips-
drive come in five or more different sizes, but the most common are 1, 2, and 3. Torx and hex-drive screws 
come in many sizes. 
Screw drive types.
Slotted
Pozidriv®
Hex-drive
Torx
Square-drive 
(Robertson)
Phillips
CHAPTER 2 17

18 
PART I
THREADS: 
Screw threads vary by depth (how deep the grooves are), pitch (how steeply they spiral up the screw 
shank), and spacing (how far apart they are). Threads also can run all the way from the point to the head 
or stop somewhere short of the head, leaving a smooth shank that slides through the first host material to 
help pull it against the mating material that receives the screw threads. Thread specifications are simpler 
for wood screws and other basic construction screws than they are for machine screws and bolts and may 
simply be designated as “coarse” or “fine,” or by a threads-per-inch (TPI) count. Since screws go into 
material rather than nuts or threaded holes, the thread should be suited for the intended material. 
USE TIP: 
Phillips and Pozidriv screws look almost the same at a glance, but they perform differently and require 
different screw tips. Phillips have a simple cross-shaped drive slot, usually with no additional markings. 
Pozidriv have a cross-shaped slot with a square center and four additional indentations around the cross, 
each indicated by a tick mark. Pozidriv® screw tips have a shape to match, with a square center and four 
tapered ridges that fit into the additional indentations. These give the Pozidriv superior grip over Phillips 
screws, to minimize stripping and provide more driving power. A Phillips tip works, if poorly, in a Pozidriv 
screw, but a Pozidriv® tip doesn’t fit in a Phillips screw head. Phillips tips are marked with a size number and 
the letters “PH.” Pozidriv® have a number and the letters “PZ.” 
Standard Wood Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Threads along about three-fourths of a tapered shaft, with a variety of head styles. Most 
common material is zinc chromate-treated steel. Commonly sold 100 to a box, as well 
as in smaller and larger containers.
USE: 
Securing wood items to one another. Generally, oval- and flat-head screws are 
used when countersinking for decorative purposes or with hardware such 
as hinges, but an oval head is generally easier to remove and slightly better-
looking. Round-head screws are used with thin woods and with washers.
USE TIPS:
Use coarse-thread wood screws for softwoods and fine-thread screws for most 
hardwoods. Traditional wood screws still have a place in some woodworking and furniture-making applications 
and for installing hinges and other hardware, but they have been replaced by other types of wood screws, such 
as deck screws, drywall screws, and multi-material screws, for many general construction projects. Slot-head 
wood screws should be avoided unless the single slot is desired for aesthetics or you’re using very small screws 
that can be driven by hand with a regular screwdriver. Finishing screws (page 19) and pocket screws (page 19) 
are two variations on the conventional wood screw that offer specific advantages. 
Wood screw.

CHAPTER 2 19
SCREWS
Finishing Screw
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Trim-head screw.
DESCRIPTION: 
Essentially the screw version of a 
finishing nail (page 12). Its slender shank is designed for fine or thin wood finish materials, and its small, 
rounded head countersinks cleanly into the material, leaving only a small hole. Typically Torx or square-drive. 
USE: 
Installing trim, assembling cabinets, and other finish work in wood. 
USE TIPS: 
Use finishing screws where appearance counts and when you need more holding power than a finishing nail can 
provide. Drill pilot holes to prevent splitting the wood and to aid countersinking, particularly in hardwood.  
Pocket Screw
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Pocket-hole screw.
DESCRIPTION: 
Specialty wood screw for pocket-hole joints. Partial 
threading helps pull mating pieces tightly together. Washer 
head helps create a tight joint and prevents the head from 
sinking into soft or fragile materials, such as particleboard. 
USE: 
Wood-to-wood connections employing pocket  
holes—steeply angled pilot holes drilled through the 
face of one piece and into the edge or end grain of  
the mating piece. 
USE TIPS: 
A pocket-hole joint hides the fasteners on the inside or underside of the assembly and creates a stronger 
connection than screws driven at right angles to the joint. Pocket holes have long been a secret weapon of 
furniture makers and woodworkers but now are popular among hobbyists and DIYers. Pocket screws cost 
more than conventional wood screws but are worth their weight in gold when performance counts. 
Finishing screw.
Pocket screws.

20 
PART I
Drywall Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Thin, straight, blued (looks black) screw with deep threads, especially sharp point, and a flat Phillips head 
(actually a special design called a bugle head, which prevents tearing the surface paper of drywall). Self-
tapping—needs no predrilled hole in soft materials. There are two kinds—fine thread for metal studs and 
coarse thread for wooden studs. Some drywall screws for metal studs are self-drilling and have a tiny drill-bit-
like tip for cutting a starter hole into light-gauge metal framing. 
USE: 
Securing drywall or wood to wood or metal (stud framing, beams, furring, or joists).
USE TIPS: 
Drywall screws are the only type to use for 
installing drywall, but they also work quite 
well for general wood construction projects, 
provided the project is non-structural and 
not outdoors. Drywall screws are relatively 
weak and very brittle (they can’t bend 
without breaking), and they’re not corrosion-
resistant. 
Deck Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Thin wood screw with deep, sharp threads designed to penetrate lumber without a pilot 
hole. Similar to a coarse-thread drywall screw, but stronger and less brittle. Either stainless 
steel or galvanized, or otherwise coated for corrosion-resistance. 
USE: 
Wood deck construction and almost any other outdoor wood project. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Check the screw material carefully for each application. Many types, including 
galvanized, will bleed onto cedar and redwood (see page 11). Deck screws with special 
coatings are corrosion-resistant only when the coating remains intact; quality counts. 
Hot-dipped galvanized and stainless-steel screws are suitable for use in pressure-
treated lumber (the standard material for deck understructures); most coated screws 
are not. 
Deck screw.
Drywall screws.
Fine
Coarse

CHAPTER 2 21
SCREWS
Multi-Material Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Variety of premium screws optimized for wood and other materials and a range 
of applications. SPAX is one common brand and includes special features, such 
as serrated threads that cut into wood to minimize splitting and ease driving and 
ridged heads that create their own countersink holes to help bury the head flush.  
USE: 
Specialty applications where conventional wood, deck, or drywall screws are 
problematic. Versions for wood are excellent for screwing into the edges of 
plywood. Types designed for MDF, particleboard, and plastic hold better than 
conventional screws. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Basically a better mousetrap. Not always worth the extra cost, but can make a difference in certain applications. 
Choose the right screw for the materials and conditions. Some can be used outdoors and in masonry. 
Lag Screw
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Lag bolt, or simply “lag.”
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy-duty wood screw with coarse threads and a large, nut-like head driven with 
a socket wrench (or power drill with socket). 
USE: 
Structural connections for wood framing, such as on a deck, arbor, play structure, fence, or 
outdoor furniture. 
USE TIP:
Drill a pilot hole for the threaded portion of the lag and a clearance hole for the shank to ease 
driving and prevent splitting the wood. If desired, also drill a countersink hole for recessing the 
head (and washer). Always use a washer for soft woods and all structural wood connections to 
prevent the head from tearing and sinking into the wood, which compromises both appearance and 
strength. For structural connections where you have access to both sides of the adjoining members,  
a carriage bolt (page 27) provides a stronger connection than a lag screw. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Lag screws are typically used outdoors, but not all are equally corrosion-resistant. Shiny, zinc-plated lags 
usually offer less protection than hot-dipped galvanized versions. Stainless steel, as usual, is the gold standard. 
Multi-material screw.
Lag screw.

22 
Part I
Timber Screw
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Heavy-duty wood screw, ledger screw.
DESCRIPTION: 
High-strength, often very long, wood 
screw with coarse threads along the first few inches of the screw’s shank. Typically with washered head, either 
hex head (for driving with a drill and hex-drive attachment) or Torx-drive. 
USE: 
Structural framing connections in wood. Used in place of lag screws in some applications and in place 
of common nails in others. Commonly used for joining roof rafters or trusses to wall frames, fastening 
landscape timbers, and building decks and other outdoor framed structures. Some are code-approved for 
installing deck ledger boards. 
USE TIPS: 
Timber screws can replace lag screws and even wood framing connectors in some applications, but always 
confirm their use with the project designer/engineer and the local building code, as applicable.  
Sheet Metal Screw
DESCRIPTION:
Similar to a wood screw but threaded along entire length of shank. 
Wide variety of head-styles, including flat, oval, pan, hex, and 
washered hex (and others). Most are self-tapping, while some 
are self-drilling (with a drill-bit-like screw tip). Versions for metal 
roofing have neoprene washers or gaskets under the head to create a 
waterproof seal. 
USE: 
Fastening thin metal to thin metal. Longer versions typically hold 
pretty well in wood as well as metal. 
USE TIP: 
Be careful not to over-tighten screws in thin metal, as the self-tapped holes strip easily. The screw stays in 
place, but the connection might not be tight.  
Sheet metal screws.
Timber screw.

CHAPTER 2 23
SCREWS
Concrete Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Hardened-steel screw with either tapered flat head or hex washer head; coated against 
corrosion. Hi-low threads have alternating deep and shallow thread channels for better grip 
in hard materials. Often sold with special carbide-tipped masonry drill bit for drilling pilot 
holes. Available in ¼- and ⅜-inch diameters and a variety of lengths.
USE: 
Screws directly into concrete, brick, mortar, and other masonry materials without the 
need for an anchor sleeve or other device. Ideal for attaching wood and other materials to 
concrete and masonry, and for mounting items to masonry walls. 
USE TIPS: 
Always drill an appropriately sized pilot hole, as specified by the manufacturer. Make sure 
holes are deep enough, and blow them out with air to remove dust and debris. A shallow 
or partially filled hole will stop your screw short. 
Cementboard Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Similar to a concrete screw, with hi-low threads and a corrosion-resistant coating. Flat 
head for flush installation, often with ridges below head for cutting a countersink hole. 
USE: 
Installing cementboard to walls and floors. Worth the extra cost for a quality tile 
installation. Screws install cleanly without pilot holes and minimize damage to brittle 
cementboard. Hold better than galvanized roofing nails and are strong and corrosion-
resistant (unlike drywall screws). 
Screw Washers
DESCRIPTION: 
Small metal circles that come in three shapes: flat, countersunk (slightly 
cone-shaped), and flush (slightly funnel-shaped). The latter two are 
known as finishing washers. Size matches screw being used.
USE: 
Washers provide a hard surface for a screw to be tightened against, 
thereby preventing damage to the surface and allowing a tighter fit. Countersunk (for oval-head screws) and 
flush (for flat-head screws) are more attractive as well. Flat washers are for use with round-head screws.
Concrete screw.
Cementboard screw.
Countersunk  
finishing washers.

24 
PART I
Dowel Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Essentially a two-pointed lag screw, often with a flat-faceted center 
section for turning the fastener. A similar item is the hanger bolt 
(page 42). 
USE: 
Hidden fastener for furniture assembly, hanging wood items from ceilings, and installing wood finials on stair 
newels and other wood posts.
Gutter Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Very long (about 7 inches) screw with partial wood-screw threads and a hex- or square-drive head. Commonly sold 
with a special hanger bracket or a gutter ferrule—a long metal cylinder through which the gutter screw is driven. 
USE: 
Replacing loose/missing gutter spikes or other hangers on conventional metal gutters. 
USE TIPS: 
Gutter screws are easier to install than traditional spikes (with ferrules) and can be driven anywhere along a 
fascia board (the wide trim board behind gutters, covering the ends of the roof rafters). 
BUYING TIPS: 
Metal ferrules are more durable than plastic ferrules. Hangers are good for lifting gutters that sag along the 
front (outside) edge.  
Gutter screw with bracket.
Dowel screw.

25
NUTS & BOLTS
CHAPTER 3
ABOUT NUTS & BOLTS
Bolts have a lot in common with screws, but there are several ways to tell them apart. While screws are 
driven into virgin material (or into pilot holes drilled into virgin material), bolts are mated with nuts or with 
threaded holes in the host material. Screws have sharp points, tapered shanks, and steeply pitched threads 
for burrowing into material; bolts have blunt ends, shanks without taper, and fine threads (typically) that 
must match their mating nut or threaded hole. Threads on bolts are universally called machine threads, 
distinguishing them from the wood-screw threads found on most screws. 
Bolt diameters are noted in inches or millimeters, and thread size follows accordingly. When a bolt 
diameter is given in inches (standard US system), the thread count is measured in threads per inch (TPI).  
For example, a ¼-inch × 20 bolt is ¼ inch long and has 20 threads per inch. The higher the TPI count, the 
finer the threads. Alternatively, when the bolt diameter is given in millimeters (metric units), the thread size 
is indicated by thread pitch, or how far apart the threads are from one another. The standard thread pitch for  
a 7mm bolt, for example, is 1mm, meaning the threads are spaced 1mm apart. 
However, even if you know all of this about bolt size and threading, there’s no guarantee you’ll get the 
right bolt and nut simply using the number system, because the notation isn’t always consistent among 
manufacturers and suppliers. It’s best to test-fit bolts and nuts in the store, and if you have a bolt that you 
have to match, bring it with you to make sure everything fits. Hardware stores often have bolt-thread displays 
with threaded inserts into which you can thread your bolt to learn its diameter and thread configuration. 
Machine Bolt
TYPES: 
Hex bolt
Tap bolt
Flange bolt 
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Used primarily for assembling metal parts. The main types have slightly different features: 
HEX BOLT: 
Partially threaded shank with a flat end and either a square or hex head. The standard, classic bolt.
TAP BOLT: 
Similar to a hex bolt but with a fully threaded shank.
FLANGE BOLT: 
Similar to a hex bolt but with a smaller hex head with a flange underneath to serve as a washer. 

USE TIPS: 
There are several ways to keep 
nuts from coming off of bolts 
because of vibration, such as on 
machinery: the “double-nut” 
technique (two nuts per bolt); 
using a locknut (page 31); using 
a lock washer, either the split-ring 
type or the internal-tooth type 
(page 32); or using anaerobic 
adhesive (page 71), a type of 
adhesive that comes in small 
plastic tubes, one drop of which 
hardens inside the threads.
Carriage bolts (page 27) and 
machine bolts come with rolled 
or cut threads, but the cut thread 
is better. Here the thread is cut 
directly into the steel shaft used 
for the bolt, while the rolled 
thread is added separately after the shaft is machined. The rolled-thread type uses less metal. In smaller 
sizes this may not matter, but in larger sizes the shank part of the bolt may match the drilled hole perfectly 
but the rolled or threaded part may not. The result is a sloppy fit.
Machine Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Threaded along its entire length, it has a flat tip and a round or flat 
head, and is designed primarily to be screwed into prethreaded holes in 
metal, though of course it works with nuts too. Actually a type of bolt, 
although it is driven with a screwdriver instead of a wrench.
Machine screw threads commonly come in two sizes: coarse  
(24 TPI) and fine (32 TPI). When a screw is specified (such as in 
electrical work) as a 6-32 screw, what is meant is a 6-gauge diameter, or 
No. 6 size, with fine threads. The length should be given in inches after  
the size, as in 6-32 × ¾ inch. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Most electrical boxes need 8-32 machine screws.
Flange bolt
Tap bolt 
Hex bolt 
Machine screw.
Machine bolts.
26 
PART I

CHAPTER 3 27
Stove Bolt
DESCRIPTION: 
Usually threaded its entire length, with a round or flat head that 
has a straight screw slot; driven with a screwdriver. The most 
often used sizes (diameters) are ⅛, 5∕32, and 3∕16 inches. Exactly the 
same item as a machine screw (page 26), the difference being that 
stove bolts are supplied to the customer with nuts and intended 
for use with nuts, while the machine screw is intended for use in 
prethreaded holes in metal (shown with a square nut).
USE: 
Light assembly (such as basic kitchen appliances), because a  
screwdriver has less tightening power than a wrench.
Carriage Bolt
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Carriage screw.
DESCRIPTION: 
A large bolt, partially threaded, with a smooth, rounded head that has a square-sided portion just beneath it. 
That square part cuts into wood as the nut is tightened and resists the turning motion. A similar but smaller 
version is the ribbed bolt.
USE: 
Used in wood where particular strength is required, where you will not be able to reach the head with a 
wrench, or where you do not want a turnable head exposed (there is no slot in the oval head).
USE TIPS: 
Use washers under the nut on carriage bolts where the wood is very soft and you don’t want the nut to dig 
in and cause damage, such as in outdoor redwood furniture. Also use a washer for all structural connections, 
such as in deck construction. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Carriage bolts used outdoors must 
be corrosion-resistant. Hot-dipped 
galvanized (slightly rough; dull gray) 
is the economical standard and offers 
better corrosion-resistance than 
Round-head 
stove bolt.
Flat-head 
stove bolt.
Carriage bolt.
NUTS & BOLTS

28 
PART I
zinc-plated (smooth; shinier silver) bolts. The nuts must also be hot-dipped galvanized because they are 
sized slightly larger to accommodate the thick galvanized coating on the bolts. Stainless steel is a more 
expensive option for carriage bolts but is usually overkill for standard building projects. 
Socket Screw
DESCRIPTION: 
Similar to a machine screw or machine bolt, depending on its size, 
but with a socket head that accepts an Allen wrench. A socket-head 
capscrew has a cylindrical head, typically knurled on the outside. 
Other types of socket screws have a button head or a flat head, the 
latter for mounting flush with the host material. 
USE: 
Securing metal parts, with raised or flush installation. 
Setscrew
DESCRIPTION: 
Typically small, short cylinder threaded along its entire length. One 
end tapered to a blunt point; the other end with a hex-shaped recess for 
accepting an Allen wrench. Headless design allows a setscrew to be driven 
all the way into a threaded hole for a flush installation, with no head 
protruding above the finished surface. 
USE: 
Used to secure an outer element to an inner element, such as a shaft. Faucet handles and spouts, doorknobs, 
and metal collars are commonly fastened to other parts with setscrews, which are hidden inside their own 
threaded holes. 
USE TIPS: 
If it’s not obvious how a metal part is joined to another metal part—that is, there are no visible bolts, clamps, 
screw heads, etc.—there’s a good chance they’re joined by a setscrew. Look for a small hole in an inconspicuous 
area of the outer part, then insert different Allen wrenches into the hole until you find the right fit. 
Setscrew.
Socket-head 
capscrew.

CHAPTER 3 29
NUTS & BOLTS
Sex Bolts
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Chicago bolts, barrel nuts.
DESCRIPTION: 
Mating bolt-and-nut pair with male and female halves. Female half 
has a broad, flat head attached to a cylinder with interior threads. 
Male half is a machine bolt with a similarly broad, flat head. Either 
head may be slotted or recessed with a variety of drive types. 
Available in a range of lengths. Some heads have serrated undersides for increased holding power. 
USE: 
Joining a variety of items and materials, particularly when a finished look and easy disassembly are desired.  
USE TIPS: 
One of the handiest bolts you’ve never heard of (or given much notice). Sex bolts are great for craft projects, 
such as hand-bound books and photo albums, where a conventional bolt and nut would ruin the aesthetics. 
The threaded cylinder and bolt allow for some adjustability to accommodate different material thicknesses. 
U-Bolts & J-Bolts
Sex bolts.
U-bolt.
J-bolt.

30 
PART I
DESCRIPTION: 
Threaded steel rod bent into either a U or J shape (rounded or squared off). The most useful U-bolt has a 
slotted bar across both ends that clamps down as the nuts are tightened. A very small version with a large 
cast-metal piece across the opening is used for clamping cable ends.
USE: 
Clamping odd shapes or hanging items, or creating tie-down anchors. Often used in conjunction with 
S-hooks and 8-hooks (figure-8-shaped steel pieces). Some large J-bolts are actually L-shaped, and are designed 
for embedding into concrete foundations and deck footings for anchoring wood framing members and metal 
post bases. 
Threaded Rod
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
All thread.
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal rod threaded along its entire length. Commonly available in lengths 2 feet and longer and in the 
following diameters: 3∕16, ¼, 5∕16, 3∕8, and 1∕2 inches. Much larger sizes can also be obtained on special order. 
Think of it as an infinitely long bolt.
Rod may be made of stainless steel, plain steel, electroplated, zinc-plated, and hot-dipped galvanized. 
Stainless steel and hot-dipped galvanized are suitable for outdoor use. 
USE: 
Used with nuts and washers for many different jobs: hanging, bracing, fastening, supporting, and mounting. 
Also useful where a bolt doesn’t have sufficient threads to work. For example, a 6-inch bolt may have only  
1½ inches of thread; a threaded rod will have sufficient threads.
USE TIPS: 
To avoid burrs when cutting the rod (it may be cut with a hacksaw or bolt cutters), make the cut between 
two nuts, then turn the nuts off the cut ends to remove the burrs. Cut ends can be sharp; either file them 
smooth (after installing all nuts) or cover ends with a cap nut (page 31). Join lengths of threaded rod  
end-to-end with a coupling nut (page 32). 

CHAPTER 3 31
NUTS & BOLTS
Miscellaneous Nuts
DESCRIPTION:
HEX: 
Standard six-sided nut.
SQUARE:
Similar to hex nut but with only four sides.
JAM: 
Thin hex nut. Sometimes used in conjunction with hex nuts to lock the two together.
FLANGE: 
Hex nut with flanged bottom to serve as washer.
LOCKNUT: 
Hex nut with a plastic insert to prevent unintended loosening. Maintains tension even when vibrated 
repeatedly, such as on machinery.
CAP: 
Closed-end nut with a smooth rounded or pointed dome for finished appearance and/or safety. Also 
called acorn nut, particularly when cap is pointed. 
AXLE: 
Two versions: Stamped, unthreaded cap that is pressed or hammered onto the end of an axle to secure a 
wheel on a wagon, baby carriage, cart, etc., and a threaded version with a center hole so a small axle shaft 
can extend through the nut.
Coupling nut.
Axle cap nut 
(press-on).
Axle nut 
(threaded).
Wing nut.
Flange nut.
Jam nut.
Locknut.
Square nut.
Hex nut.
Slotted nut.
Cap nut.

32 
PART I
WING: 
Two upward-projecting wings flanking a threaded middle. Good for light use when something needs to 
be regularly disassembled by hand. Not intended for use with wrenches.
SLOTTED NUT:
Also called a castle nut. Hex nut with notched top edge for accepting a cotter pin (page 44) inserted 
through hole in bolt or axle. Pin prevents nut from turning. 
COUPLING: 
Long, six-sided nut used to join two lengths of threaded rod.  
Nut & Bolt Washers
DESCRIPTION: 
FLAT: 
Flat, circular shape, available in various thicknesses and with a range of 
inner and outer diameters. Smaller sizes provide a smooth surface for 
a nut or bolt head to be tightened against. Washers also prevent bolt 
heads and nuts from digging into wood and other materials. 
FENDER: 
Common term for flat washers with large outer diameters. 
SPLIT-RING LOCK: 
Spring action of slight spiral creates pressure that keeps a nut from 
loosening. Typically used with metal materials. 
INTERNAL-TOOTH LOCK: 
Many small teeth pointing in toward hole serve to keep nut  
from loosening.
EXTERNAL-TOOTH LOCK: 
Many small teeth pointing outward that serve to keep nut from 
loosening. Can be used with wood screws.
SEALING WASHER: 
Flat metal washer with a bonded rubber gasket to create a watertight 
seal around bolt or screw hole. 
Fender washer.
Flat washer.
Split-ring lock washer.
Internal-tooth lock washer.
External-tooth lock washer.
Sealing washer.

33
WALL ANCHORS  
& HANGING HARDWARE
CHAPTER 4
ABOUT WALL ANCHORS
Wall anchors, or fasteners, are particularly useful on two kinds of wall construction: hollow wall (usually 
drywall), if there is no stud or solid material to simply drive a screw or nail into; and hardwall, such as plaster 
or masonry, where the wall material is too hard for screws to take hold in. Wall anchors come in a variety of 
sizes and types, and new designs and brand names appear often. Be sure to check all your sources for the best 
ones available in your area. Below are some of the most popular types, which fall into three categories: light 
duty, for any kind of wall; masonry; and hollow-wall fasteners.
Plastic Expansion Anchor
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Light-duty wall anchor, tubular anchor, plastic anchor, hollow 
anchor, plastic shield. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Cone-shaped or cylindrical plastic sheaths of various sizes corresponding 
to various-sized screws. They expand against the sides of the hole when 
the screw is driven into them.
USE: 
Anchoring wood screws in drywall, plaster, or masonry. They are 
inserted into a predrilled hole and tapped flush with a hammer. 
USE TIPS: 
The hole must be just the right size—too big and the anchor won’t hold, too small and it won’t go in far 
enough to work. Use these anchors for hanging lightweight objects only. Also use them only for objects that 
hang straight down, as they provide very little pullout resistance. 
Plastic  
expansion 
anchor.  

Threaded Drywall Anchor
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Screw-in wall anchor, self-drilling anchor. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Screw-like anchor with oversize threads and a double-pointed tip 
for burrowing into drywall without a pilot hole. Made of metal or 
hard plastic. Butt end has cross-slots for Phillips screw tip, used for 
installing anchor. 
USE: 
Hanging lightweight items from drywall. Does not work well on 
plaster or other materials. 
USE TIPS: 
These light-duty, hollow-wall anchors can handle a little more weight and offer somewhat more pullout 
resistance than plastic expansion anchors (page 33), but they are still suitable only for lightweight items.  
Use a screwdriver or drill to drive them directly into drywall, applying heavy pressure and stopping when the 
anchor is flush with the surface. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Most anchors are designed to accept a #6 or #8 sheet metal screw, and screws often are packaged with the anchors. 
Buy metal anchors whenever possible. Plastic versions are weak and can easily break or twist out of shape. 
Toggle Bolt & Anchor
ALSO KNOWN AS:
Toggles, spring-wing toggle,  
umbrella bolt.
DESCRIPTION: 
Typically, a machine screw threaded into 
a set of collapsible “wings.” One type has 
spring-loaded wings that squeeze together 
to fit through the installation hole, which 
then open up when they reach the open space 
behind the drywall; the other type uses gravity. 
The wings are pulled against the backside of the 
drywall when the machine screw is tightened from 
the front side of the wall. Suitable for hanging 
a wide range of items from drywall and plaster. 
Threaded  
drywall anchor.
Metal 
toggle bolt
Plastic  
toggle anchor
Heavy-duty 
toggle anchor
Toggle bolts and anchors.
34 
PART I

CHAPTER 4 35
Most toggles are metal, but there are plastic versions with wings that are activated when a screw is driven into 
the anchor; these generally are lighter-duty than most metal toggles. Some heavy-duty toggles have a solid 
bar that you pivot into position (parallel to the wall surface) after inserting it through the hole. 
USE: 
Hanging heavy items on drywall and plaster walls and ceilings. In drywall and plaster, toggles are far superior 
to plastic expansion and threaded anchors.
USE TIPS: 
Note that the toggle will drop if the bolt is removed, and large holes are required to fit the wings through the 
wall material.
BUYING TIPS: 
The toggle’s machine screw must be inserted through the item you’re hanging before you thread the wings onto 
the screw. Make sure the screw is long enough to accommodate the thickness of the item plus the drywall 
thickness (or plaster and lath thickness) plus the length of the wings when collapsed. If the screw isn’t long 
enough, the wings won’t reach into the open space behind the wall and therefore won’t open up; the toggle 
will pull right out when tightened. 
Molly Bolt
NOTE: 
Molly bolt has become incorrectly used as a generic 
household term for toggle bolts and other types of 
hollow-wall anchors, but this is not accurate. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Consists of a machine screw built into a metal sleeve with wings 
that bend outward as the screw is tightened. A similar but smaller 
model, called a jack nut, is made for anchoring into hollow doors. 
Some brands have a plastic-tipped model that is hammered into 
drywall like a nail and then screwed tight.
USE: 
Fastening medium-weight items to drywall and plaster walls. Provides more pullout resistance than 
expanding plastic and threaded drywall anchors, but not as much as toggle bolts. 
USE TIPS: 
Drill a clean, solid hole so the anchor can be anchored tightly in it and not turn around as you turn the screw. 
The anchor will remain in place even if the screw is removed, making it slightly more convenient than a toggle 
(page 34). A small wrench, a V-shaped wire device, is sometimes supplied to keep the sleeve from turning as you 
tighten the bolt.
Molly bolt.
WALL ANCHORS & HANGING HARDWARE

36 
PART I
Expansion Shield
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Lead shield, lag shield.
DESCRIPTION: 
The most common type consists of a thick, slotted metal sleeve, 
usually made of lead. There is a one-piece design for use with wood 
screws and a two-piece design for use with lag bolts (most popular) and 
machine bolts. Another version, a hammer drive pin, is a nail-like device that 
is hammered in place. The shield expands slightly against the hole as the screw is 
driven into it.
USE: 
For anchoring items into brick, concrete block, and concrete.
USE TIPS: 
Bear in mind that these shields require very large holes to be drilled in masonry. You need a power drill and 
a masonry bit or, preferably, a hammer drill and bit, to make such holes, and alignment is not always easy. An 
alternative may be to use simple masonry nails (page 14) and furring strips (thin boards). If you are putting 
up a large job with furring strips, you may want to rent or buy a powder-actuated nailer—a nail gun that fires 
hardened pins into masonry.
Wedge Anchor
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Concrete wedge anchor.
DESCRIPTION: 
Large bolt with machine threads over most of its length, smooth 
and flared at bottom end with a collar that is expanded by the 
flared end. Washer and nut at top end. 
USE: 
Heavy-duty anchor for solid concrete. Anchor is inserted into predrilled hole. 
When the nut is tightened, the flared bottom end pulls up against the collar, locking the anchor in the hole.  
Anchor cannot be removed once it is tightened. 
Wedge anchor.
Expansion 
shield.

CHAPTER 4 37
WALL ANCHORS & HANGING HARDWARE
Picture-Hanging Hardware
DESCRIPTION:
PICTURE HOOKS: 
Metal hooks with holes for driving nails through at an angle. Come in various sizes and weight ratings, 
and in plain and ornamental styles. Standard types are best for drywall. Types with special hardened nails  
(sometimes with a knurled head for easy removal) are less likely to chip plaster walls. 
ADJUSTABLE SAWTOOTH HANGER:
Strip of metal with serrations on one edge, nailed onto wood picture frame or screwed into plastic or wood items.
ADHESIVE PICTURE HANGER: 
Hook or other device secured with a strip of adhesive. Adhesive is typically removable and is suitable for a 
range of hard surfaces. 
Standard 
picture 
hook
Picture hook with 
hardened nail
Sawtooth 
hanger
Adhesive  
picture hanger
Hardwall 
hanger
Mirror 
hanger
Picture-hanging hardware.

38 
PART I
HARDWALL HANGER: 
Picture hook with special pins capable of being driven into hard material, such as masonry and plaster. 
Three-pin versions are standard, while larger four-pin hangers are heavier duty. 
MIRROR HANGER: 
Small offset clip with screw hole in one end.
USE: 
Hanging pictures, mirrors, etc. of various weights.
USE TIPS: 
Picture hooks typically needn’t be driven into studs. They may be secured directly to drywall, plaster, and 
wood materials. To keep plaster from flaking, a small piece of transparent tape can be applied to the area 
where the nail is to be driven.
French Cleat
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy-duty picture hanger consisting of two large metal strips that interlock. One strip mounts to wall and 
has an upward-facing lip; other strip mounts to picture (or other item) and has a downward-facing strip. 
French cleat.
USE:
Large picture 
frames and 
artwork. Can be used 
as a hidden (“floating”) 
shelf support, but can be 
disconnected from wall if shelf is 
lifted or bumped upward.

Chapter 4 39
ABOUT SCREW EYES, SCREW HOOKS,  
EYE BOLTS & BOLT HOOKS
Haanging hooks and eyes with screw or bolt ends are available in a wide range of sizes, from cup hooks that 
you can install with your thumb and forefinger to heavy-duty eye bolts that might anchor a porch swing or 
a large chandelier. The critical factor to consider is the load rating, or how much weight the hardware can 
support. The hardware must have a working load rating that is higher than the weight of the item anchored by 
the hardware, including any additional loads or stresses placed on the hardware when the item is in use. And 
remember that any anchor is only as strong as the material it’s anchored into. 
Screw Eyes & Screw Hooks
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal shaft with one end formed into a ring or a hook and the other threaded and pointed like a wood screw. 
Sizes range from tiny cup hooks to heavy pieces with shank diameters up to 5⁄₈ inch. Large versions are 
similar to a lag screw with a hook or eye end. 
USE: 
Hanging objects from walls, ceilings, and other horizontal and vertical wood structures. A range of specialty 
screw hooks are designed for specific uses: 
CUP HOOK: 
Small screw hook for hanging teacups and mugs by their handles. Also handy for hanging keys and other 
small items.
CEILING HOOK: 
Somewhat decorative screw hook often used for hanging plants.
BICYCLE HOOK: 
Large screw hook with plastic sheathing for hanging bicycles upside down from a garage ceiling. 
UTILITY HOOK: 
Similar to bicycle hook but larger and typically with squared corners. Sized for hanging ladders and other 
large—but not very heavy—tools and equipment.
SWAG HOOK: 
Decorative hook anchor for hanging light fixtures (or their cords/chains) or plants. Screw-in versions 
have a wood-screw end; hollow-wall versions have a threaded bolt with a toggle-type anchor. 
L-HOOK: 
Hanging utensils, securing picture frames directly to walls (without hanging from a wire), holding  
curtain rods.
Wall anchors & hanging hardWare

40 
PART I
Screw 
hook
Cup 
hook
Ceiling 
hook
Bicycle 
hook
Utility hook
Swag hook
L-hook
Screw  
eye
Screw eyes and screw hooks.

CHAPTER 4 41
WALL ANCHORS & HANGING HARDWARE
USE TIPS: 
All but the smallest screw eyes and hooks should be installed into pilot holes drilled into the receiving 
wood member. This ensures that you can drive the threads to full depth without excessive force and helps to 
prevent splitting the wood. Pilot hole diameters should be slightly smaller than the shank (not the threads) of 
the screw portion. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Most screw eyes and hooks are made with heavy metal wire bent into the desired shape. Wire screw eyes are 
identified by a slight gap at the base of the eye loop; these offer moderate strength at best. Forged screw eyes 
offer the highest load ratings and have a solid (continuous) eye made by forging the metal, not bending it. 
Eye Bolts & Hook Bolts
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal hook or eye (closed loop) with a 
machine-threaded bolt end for securing with a 
washer and nut. Sold in a wide range of sizes, 
shank diameters, and overall lengths. 
USES: 
Hanging items from horizontal or  
vertical supports made of metal, wood,  
or other suitable materials. Because bolts are 
inserted all the way through and are secured on 
the backside of the host member with a nut, 
they offer a much stronger connection than 
screw eyes or hooks, which rely solely on the 
grip of the screw threads. 
BUYING TIPS: 
As with screw eyes, there are wire eye bolts and forged eye bolts. Wire bolts are bent into shape and do not 
have a continuous eye loop. They are not as strong as forged bolts. Some eye bolts can have very high load 
ratings, but note that most eye bolts are not designed for angular loads—loads that pulling on the eye at an 
angle, instead of pulling straight down. An eye bolt with a shoulder allows you to compress the material with 
the bolt without using a nut on the eye-end of the threads. 
Forged eye 
bolt with 
shoulder
Hook 
bolt
Wire  
eye bolt
Forged 
eye bolt

42 
PART I
Hanger Bolt
DESCRIPTION: 
Has coarse wood-screw threads on one 
end and bolt threads on the other, with a 
smooth portion in the middle.
USE: 
Commonly used to assemble commercial furniture. For do-it-yourselfers the hanger bolt is excellent for 
mounting in a joist or ceiling beam in order to hang fixtures.
Shelf Supports
TYPES:
Utility brackets
Standards & brackets
Pilasters & clips
Shelf pins
Floating shelf bracket
DESCRIPTION:
UTILITY BRACKETS: 
Basic metal brackets with a center ridge and 
screw holes for securing to walls. One leg is 
longer than the other. Available in  
a range of sizes for various shelf depths. 
CLOSET SHELF BRACKET: 
Triangular metal bracket with a hook from the  
front corner for supporting a closet rod.
DECORATIVE BRACKET: 
Wood or metal. Available in a huge range of styles and sizes. Most mount to walls with screws. Solid-
wood versions may have recessed metal hangers along back edge for hiding screws.
STANDARDS & BRACKETS: 
C-shaped, long pieces of strong metal, with many small vertical slots, that are mounted on a wall. 
Brackets, which come in various lengths from 4 to 18 inches for corresponding shelf depths, have hook-
Hanger bolt.
Utility bracket.

CHAPTER 4 43
WALL ANCHORS & HANGING HARDWARE
shaped sections that lock into the 
slots on the standards. Heavy-duty 
versions have two columns of slots 
and corresponding double-hook 
brackets for added strength and 
stability.
PILASTERS & CLIPS: 
Shallow, C-shaped light metal 
standards with horizontal slots 
that are installed in the sides of 
a cabinet or bookcase and hold 
small, V-shaped metal clips that 
snap into the vertical standards. 
Made in two versions: for surface 
mounting and for recessed 
mounting into channels cut into 
the cabinet sides.
SHELF PINS: 
May be metal or plastic. Very small 
piece with a post on one side and 
flat support on the other; comes 
in various designs, including a 
rounded one called spoon type. Pins 
fit into predrilled ¼-inch holes in 
the sides of the cabinet or bookcase 
to support shelf ends.
USE TIPS: 
Anchor shelf supports into wall studs 
whenever possible. Otherwise, use 
heavy-duty hollow-wall anchors, such 
as toggle bolts (page 34). Floating 
shelf brackets must be mounted to wall 
framing (studs or wood blocking). 
BUYING TIPS: 
For adjustable shelves, choose 
standards, pilasters, or shelf pins. 
WALL ANCHORS & HANGING HARDWARE
Pilaster & clip.
Shelf pins.
Standard  
& bracket.
Closet  
shelf bracket.

44
SPECIALTY FASTENERS & SUPPORTS
CHAPTER 5
Cotter Pin
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal pin bent back upon itself, with slight open loop at the bend, similar to a 
hairpin. Generally only about 2 inches long, but available in smaller 
and larger sizes.
USE: 
Generally used for holding metal rods or shafts, or to prevent slotted or castle nuts (page 32) from turning. 
The cotter pin is put through a tight hole and its tips are then bent to prevent it from sliding back out. The pin 
is removed by bending the tips straight again and pulling on the loop end with pliers.
USE TIP: 
If you have to remove cotter pins repeatedly, get a small tool that looks like a hooked screwdriver, called a 
cotter pin puller.
Rivets & Similar Fasteners
DESCRIPTION & USE:
BLIND RIVET: 
Commonly called a POP® rivet. A nail-like shaft fitted 
into a small, flanged, cylindrical head. The nail end is 
inserted into a rivet gun (a simple hand tool) and the 
head is inserted into a predrilled hole in the materials 
to be riveted. Squeezing the gun handles compresses 
the head, fastening the parts together, then cuts off the 
excess shaft. Available in grip range sizes corresponding to the thickness of the host materials. Used to 
fasten together pieces of light metal when there is access from one side only.
PUSH-IN RIVET:  
Plastic rivet with a broad, flat head and a barbed shaft. The shaft is inserted into a hole drilled in the 
material until the head is flush with the material. One version has a piston in the center of the head; 
after pushing in the shaft, you strike the piston with a hammer to secure the rivet. Used to join plastic 
automotive parts (such as bumper covers and underbelly pans) or to secure plastic or other thin paneling 
to walls and ceilings.
Cotter pin.
Blind rivet
Push-in rivets
Rivets.

CHAPTER 5 45
GROMMET: 
Two ring-shaped parts that are pressed or driven together over the host material with grommet pliers or 
a hammer and grommet anvil. Anvils are commonly included in packages of grommets. Used to create a 
reinforced hole in tarps and other material, through which to thread rope. 
T-nut
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Tee nut.
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal fastener with a cylindrical barrel with internal threads and a flat cap with three sharp prongs. Barrel is 
inserted into predrilled hole in host material, then cap is hammered so prongs are driven into material until 
cap is flush with surface. A machine bolt is inserted through hole from other side 
of material and threaded into the T-nut. 
USE: 
Commonly used to anchor items to plywood and other wood sheet materials. 
T-nut stays in place, while bolt can be removed and reinstalled indefinitely. 
Threaded Insert
DESCRIPTION: 
Steel or brass cylinder with coarse wood-screw threads on its outside and machine-bolt threads on its 
inside. Insert is screwed into predrilled hole in wood with a large flat-head screwdriver. Bolt is threaded 
into insert to secure mating parts. A barrel nut is a similar fastener that is slip-fit into a hole rather then 
being threaded in.
USE: 
Hidden connections on furniture, particularly modular, ready-to-assemble units 
or pieces with “knockdown” design that can be disassembled and reassembled. 
T-nut.
Threaded insert.

46 
PART I
Zip Tie
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Cable tie, plastic cable tie,  
nylon tie.
DESCRIPTION: 
Small piece of plastic strap 4 
inches or longer, one end of 
which has a small buckle that 
the other end is pulled through. 
Strap has a ribbed side that locks 
with the buckle. Conventional 
zip ties can only be tightened, 
never loosened, but there are 
also releasable or reusable versions. 
Disposable item; sold by the bagful.
USE: 
One of the world’s handiest fasteners. Far 
quicker than rope or string, neater than 
duct tape, and able to secure items very 
tightly. Also waterproof. Originally developed 
for binding cables together in electrical 
systems; can be applied to household tying tasks 
of all descriptions.
USE TIPS: 
CAUTION: Because these ties are easy to use and usually impossible to loosen, do not let unsupervised children 
play with them. Police and military personnel use heavy-duty zip ties as handcuffs. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Choose UV-resistant ties (typically colored black) for use in areas with sun exposure.
Zip ties.

CHAPTER 5 47
SPECIALTY FASTENERS & SUPPORTS
Turnbuckle
DESCRIPTION: 
An open, barrel-like metal device, internally threaded on both ends, with two threaded rods screwed in, one a 
left-handed thread, the other right-handed. The rods are usually less than a foot long, and may have an eye at 
both ends, a hook on one end and an eye on the other, or hooks on each end.
USE: 
Acts as an adjustable segment of a cable or wire. The variations available allow flexibility of use: for instance, on 
one end, a cable could be attached to a hook while on the other a snap fastener and rope. A common use for a 
turnbuckle is to brace a screen door or a gate to prevent sagging.
USE TIPS: 
The smaller sizes are zinc-plated, but the larger ones (all the way up to 2 feet) are galvanized.
BUYING TIPS:
Turnbuckles are sometimes sold in kits, such as for straightening out a screen door.
Screen door/gate 
turnbuckle.
Hook-and-eye 
turnbuckle.

48 
PART I
Braces & Plates
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Door and window braces.
DESCRIPTION: 
All are flat metal, available in  
zinc- and brass-plated finishes.
INSIDE CORNER BRACE: 
L-shaped piece with screw holes 
for mounting inside a corner. 
Comes in sizes 1 inch long and 
½ inch wide to 8 inches long 
and 1 inch wide. Screw holes 
are staggered rather than being 
in a straight line. Specialty 
sources sell a thicker 
version excellent for 
chairs. Used for 
strengthening 
and supporting 
box and chair 
corners.
FLAT CORNER BRACE: L-shaped piece with screw holes for mounting on surface, at right angles to the 
corner brace version (above). A thicker, embossed version is specially made for screens. Used for bracing 
corners on window frames and doors.
MENDING PLATE: 
Flat length of metal with screw holes. Used for joining two pieces of wood end-to-end, as well as many 
other applications—from reinforcing screen doors to strengthening furniture.
T-PLATE: 
Flat metal piece made in the shape of the letter T; both horizontal and vertical legs of the T are the same 
length. Common use is for joining horizontal and vertical screen-door members.
Flat corner 
brace
Mending 
plate
T-plate
Inside corner 
brace
Braces and plates.

CHAPTER 5 49
SPECIALTY FASTENERS & SUPPORTS
Bar stock.
Slotted angle iron.
Metal Angle
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Angle iron.
DESCRIPTION: 
L-shaped steel or aluminum bar sold in a 
variety of sizes up to about 2 inches wide up 
to around ¼ inch thick, and sold by the foot. 
Plain steel angle has no holes; slotted angle has 
evenly spaced round and elongated holes  
along both sides; punched angle has round  
holes along both sides. 
USES: 
Punched and slotted angle are commonly used for bracing 
garage door tracks and automatic openers, and are handy for 
similar applications elsewhere around the house. Angle pieces are 
fastened to wood supports with lag screws or bolts and to one another 
with short bolts and nuts. Plain steel angle is useful for bracing or for 
creating a structural cleat or shelf edge on a wall. Requires drilling holes in 
fasteners, or pieces can be welded together, depending on the material. 
Bar Stock
DESCRIPTION: 
Steel or aluminum flat bar 
commonly ⅛ or ¼ inches thick 
and 1 to 4 inches wide. May be 
plain (no holes) or punched/
slotted (with holes). Can be cut 
to length with a hacksaw and 
drilled for fastener holes. Some 
types can be welded together. 
USE: 
Commonly used for creating 
custom braces and supports. 

50 
PART I
Metal Framing Channel
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Unistrut® (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Galvanized metal channel with an 
overall square shape in cross section. 
One face is open, creating the channel; 
the opposing face is perforated with 
elongated holes for fastening pieces 
with bolts and nuts. Compatible with 
a variety of fittings and brackets for 
hanging or securing items from vertical 
and horizontal surfaces. 
USE: 
Miscellaneous bracing and support, and 
for structural assemblies, often in place of 
lumber. Commonly used in commercial construction for hanging (via threaded rod; see page 30) electrical 
conduit, plumbing pipe, and air ducts from ceilings. 
Metal  
framing channel.

HINGES, HASPS & LATCHES
CHAPTER 6
Butt hinge.
51
ABOUT HINGES
Hinges come in a tremendous array of styles and types, but there are some basics you can learn to help you 
make the best selection from the various models available.
Technically, hinges are “handed”—specified for use on left- or right-hand doors. But this can get 
complicated, and unless you're doing a special job you can forget it. Just flip the hinge over and it becomes 
left- or right-handed, as needed.
Hinges come in different sizes to support different weights. But this, too, can get complicated. To 
select the proper size, just determine if the hinge is in proportion, size-wise, to the door being hung and 
you’ll be fine, even if you’re undersized a bit—hinges are designed to be up to eight times stronger than 
they need to be.
Hinges also come in a variety of finishes and materials. Brass and plated brass are the most common, but 
there are many others, including stainless steel, galvanized steel, chrome-plated, and painted. Hinges also are 
designed for either surface-mounting or for recessing (“mortising”) on the door and/or the frame. Self-closing 
hinges include spring-loaded hinges and rising hinges that are designed with an angular joint that uses gravity 
to close the door automatically.
Butt Hinge
DESCRIPTION: 
Two rectangular metal plates, called “leaves,” with 
screw holes and a pin joining the leaves. Each loop 
that holds the pin hole is called a “knuckle,” and the 
knuckles and pin together are called the “barrel.” 
Includes most standard door hinges and basic  
utility hinges.
USE: 
Hanging interior and exterior house doors. Installing 
doors and other hinged parts on various projects. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Historically, a butt hinge has a non-removable pin 
that requires you to remove the door to take out the 
screws in one of the leaves; while a loose-pin hinge has 
a removable pin that you can pull or tap out to remove the door. However, many butt hinges have removable 
pins, so if security is a concern, look for butt hinges with non-removable hinge pins. 

52 
PART I
Strap Hinge
DESCRIPTION: 
Utility hinge with long, narrow leaves. Some strap 
hinges have two identical leaves; others have a 
rectangular leaf for the door frame and a strap-style leaf 
for the door; sometimes called a T-hinge. Ornamental 
versions have traditional or antique styling and 
attractive materials, such as hammered iron. 
USE: 
Utility projects where a rustic or industrial look is 
appropriate. Commonly used on outdoor projects, 
sheds, and storage boxes. Ornamental versions are 
available for all types of doors, including cabinet 
doors, house entry doors, barn doors, and gates. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Choose galvanized or stainless-steel hinges for outdoor use. 
Gate Hinge
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy-duty outdoor hinges, often decorative, 
with one or two strap-style leaves. Installed with 
exterior wood screws, lag screws, or bolts. T-style 
gate hinges have a rectangular leaf that mounts 
to the door frame. Strap-style have two strap-style 
leaves. Pintle hinges have a lag-screw or bolt fitting with 
a large vertical pin (the pintle) that fastens to the gate post; a 
strap with a loop end fastens to the door and fits over  
the pintle. 
Strap hinges.
Gate hinge.

CHAPTER 6 53
Piano Hinge
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Continuous hinge.
DESCRIPTION: 
Long, narrow hinge, commonly 1½ inches wide and up to  
6 feet long, with screw holes every 2 inches. 
USE: 
Box and cabinet lids, furniture, and, of course, piano parts.  
Hinge can be cut to length with a hacksaw. Offers a finished look  
and precise motion with no side-to-side play. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Available in several finishes, including brass, nickel, stainless steel,  
and chrome.
ABOUT CABINET HINGES
Cabinet hinges come in more types and styles than perhaps any other household hardware. To find the 
right hinge for your application, you first have to consider how the door is installed. Full-overlay doors 
completely overlap the frame around the cabinet opening. Partial-inset, or “lipped,” doors have a recess  
cut into their edges; the recessed portion fits inside the cabinet opening, while the lip overlaps the front  
of the opening frame. Inset, or flush, doors fit inside the opening so their front faces are flush with the 
cabinet front. 
Next, consider how much of the hinge should be visible when the door is closed. Concealed  
hinges are not visible. With a semiconcealed hinge, the barrel and some or all of the frame-side leaf are  
exposed. An exposed or surface-mount hinge is installed on the front face of the door and frame and is  
fully visible. 
Then, there are the hinge styles, which can grouped very generally into two types: traditional hinges, 
with two leaves and a pin, similar to a butt hinge (page 51); and European-style, which have a cupped 
plate that is recessed into the door and is connected to the hinge body. The hinge body is clipped onto 
a surface-mount plate on the cabinet. European-style hinges are commonly used on European-style 
“frameless” cabinets, which have no face frame around the cabinet opening; but there are also many 
varieties designed for traditional cabinets with face frames, called “framed.” European-style hinges 
typically are concealed and offer the great advantage of being fully adjustable, so you can fine-tune  
each door’s position after the doors are hung. 
Piano hinge.
HINGES, HASPS & LATCHES

54 
PART I
Semi-concealed 
hinge
Surface-mount hinge
European-style 
hinge
Hasp (safety style)
Cabinet Hinges
DESCRIPTION:
SEMI-CONCEALED: 
The historical standard. Used for overlay and partial-inset doors 
on framed cabinets. 
EUROPEAN-STYLE: 
The modern standard for kitchen cabinets. 
Concealed hinges, typically with multiple 
adjustment features. Various types and styles 
available for framed and frameless cabinets. 
SURFACE-MOUNT: 
Hinge with two flat, decorative leaves, similar to 
a butt hinge (page 51). Typically traditional or 
antique styling but also available for contemporary 
and retro-modern looks. Usually require framed 
cabinets with inset doors. 
PIVOT: 
Mounted on or near top and bottom of door. Hinged on 
a pivot mechanism rather than a pin. Concealed and semi-
concealed versions available, with types for overlay, partial-
inset, and inset doors. 
BUYING TIPS: 
When replacing old hinges, it’s best to bring a set of the original hinges 
to the store for comparison to make sure you get the correct style and size. 
Cabinet door and drawer knobs and pulls are available in styles and finishes 
to match hinges. 
Hasps
DESCRIPTION: 
Hasps may be plain or decorative, with 
the length of the slotted part ranging 
from 2¼ to 6¼ inches, with staples (the 
part with the ring for the lock)  
of proportionate sizes and hasp widths 1 to 2 inches. Some models may have a key lock instead of a ring.

A safety hasp has a slotted part that conceals the screws, securing the hasp when it is closed. Some safety 
hasps are heavy-duty and have a square hole for insertion of a 5∕16-inch carriage bolt.
Another type of hasp is designed for use on chests and sliding doors. Here, the end is upturned and also 
hides the mounting screws.
Decorative hasps are available with bright brass finishes.
USE: 
Securing doors, usually outdoor types, with a padlock that goes through the ring.
Latches
BASIC TYPES: 
Sliding, or barrel, bolt
Hook-and-eye latch
Cane bolt
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Devices that keep gates and doors closed but typically not locked. They can also block gates open. Generally 
consists of a horizontal piece attached to a gate or door that either slides, falls, or snaps into a catch on the 
doorframe or gate post. Many different types and styles, including:
SLIDING, OR BARREL, BOLT: 
Long bolt with handle projecting from middle slides in and out of curved piece 
on door frame. Available in lightweight versions for decorative purposes 
and in extreme heavyweight versions, sometimes called square 
spring bolts or night latches, for security purposes, such as on the 
insides of exterior doors. Larger bolts come with a hole in the 
bolt so that they can be padlocked.
HOOK-AND-EYE LATCH: 
Also called gate hook. Consists of a screw eye that screws into a 
gate post or door frame and a corresponding screw eye and hook 
that is secured to the gate or door. Common sizes are 1 to 5 inches 
long but can be up to 18 inches long. A “safety” version is available 
with a spring-loaded bolt that snaps across the hook opening to 
keep small children from unhooking the gate.
CANE BOLT: 
L-shaped bolt that slides through two mounting brackets. 
Installed vertically to use gravity action. Typically used to 
secure one of the double doors on a shed or barn.
Sliding bolt
Cane bolt
Hook-and-eye latch
Latches.
CHAPTER 6 55
HINGES, HASPS & LATCHES

CHAIN & CABLE
CHAPTER 7
Part I
Chapter 7
Chain & Cable
ABOUT CHAIN
Chain comes in around forty different 
varieties, but most of your needs will be 
filled by the small selection commonly 
available in stores, as described here. 
Sections are usually cut to your order from 
reels, though some decorative chain comes 
packaged. Size denominations vary from type 
to type, so study the label on the reel or package 
for important technical information.
Chain may be put into two groups: chain whose 
primary purpose is strength, and chain whose main 
purpose is decoration. Whatever type you buy, however, 
check to make sure it’s strong enough for the job at hand. All 
chain is classified and marked according to its working load limit, 
meaning how much stress may be applied before the chain snaps. Most 
are specifically marked “not for overhead lifting.”
Load limits vary according to the thickness of the chain and the metal it’s 
made of. So, for example, #10 (1-inch-long links) brass jack chain, which is decorative, has a working load 
limit of 34 pounds. But grade 30-proof coil chain in about the same size, but made of steel, has a load limit 
of 800 pounds. And a cam-alloy version has a limit of 5,100 pounds in the same size. Check the label of the 
chain container or the manufacturer's catalog for the chain's working load limit.
In addition to the specific chains detailed below, which are mainly available from reels, there are packaged 
chains designed for specific purposes, such as dog runners, hanging porch swings, and various vehicular jobs. 
Chain also comes in pails, boxes, drums, and bags.
For safety, you should observe the following:
• Follow load limits on a chain—don't overload it. Dealers can supply load limits from charts they have. 
However, it is okay to load it right up to its limit.
• Don’t use a chain for overhead lifting unless it is specified for that use.
• Don’t apply tension if a chain is twisted.
• Pull a chain gradually from an at-rest position—don’t jerk it.
• Don’t use a chain that looks damaged.
56

CHAPTER 7 57
Bead Chain
DESCRIPTION: 
Hollow, round metal beads joined by dumbbell-shaped connectors. Beads 
may also be elliptically shaped. Comes in chrome-, brass-, and nickel-
plated finishes.
USE: 
Used for decorative purposes around the home and as lamp pulls.
USE TIPS: 
The main advantage of bead chain is that it will not kink or tangle. You can 
twist it every which way and it will fall out straight.
BUYING TIPS: 
At local stores you are likely to get only a couple of sizes of bead chain, 
plus packaged chain for lamp pulls. Hardware stores carry catalogs that list 
manufacturers from whom you can get a much wider selection. You can 
buy connectors separately, such as when you want to lengthen a bead chain.
Decorative Chain
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Decor chain.
DESCRIPTION: 
Lightweight chain available in a variety of handsome finishes, including brass and 
colors—antique white, antique copper, and black. Loops are generally large ovals 
of wire.
USE: 
Hanging lamps, plants, and for hanging on draperies and other decorative effects.
Bead chain.
Decorative chain.

58 
PART I
Double-Loop Chain
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Weldless, non-welded, Inco (brand name), Tenso (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Lightweight steel links that are knotted into long double loops for linkage instead 
of being welded. Sizes run from No. 5 (smallest) though 0 to 8/0 (largest).  
A single-loop, or lock link, version is available, primarily for use in machinery.
USE: 
Household jobs from decoration to shelf supports. Among the strongest of the  
decorative chains. Heavier sizes—over 1/0—can be used to hang hammocks and 
some playground equipment.
Proof Coil Chain
DESCRIPTION: 
Strongest steel chain, with welded, slightly oblong links. Available in galvanized, 
plain steel, and zinc finishes. Comes in four grades: Grade 30 (most common), 
40, 70 (“high test”), and 80 (made of alloy steel, with the highest load limits—up 
to 80,000 pounds). The 5∕16-inch size Grade 30 has a working load limit of 1,900 
pounds. The fractional sizes refer to the diameter of the steel.
USE: 
Very heavy pulling jobs where motorized equipment is involved, such as in 
agriculture or for towing cars.
Jack Chain
DESCRIPTION: 
A strong decorative chain of varying load limits made of twisted figure-
eight links. Comes in hot-galvanized, brass-plated, bright zinc, and solid 
brass; and in single and double versions.
USES: 
Often used for functions where decoration and light support are 
needed, such as for hanging large plants, signs, and children's toys.
Proof coil chain.
Jack chain.
Double-loop chain.

CHAPTER 7 59
CHAIN & CABLE
Welded General-Use Chain
TYPES:
Coil chain
Machine chain
Passing link chain
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Similar to but not as strong as proof coil chain (page 58). Material is less 
than ¼ inch thick. Sizes are measured in gauges, from No. 4 (smallest—
inside of links about ½ inch long) through 3, 2, 1, and on to 1/0 to 5/0 
(largest—inside of links about 1 inch long). Commonly used on agricultural 
implements, tailgates, overhead doors, for security purposes, or general utility.
COIL: 
Longest link of these three. Available in straight-link and twist-link styles.
MACHINE: 
Slightly shorter links. Also available in straight-link and twist-link styles.
PASSING LINK: 
Slightly rounded links that prevent binding and kinking.
Safety Chain
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Plumber’s chain.
DESCRIPTION: 
Flat, stamped brass chain of oval links that resist entanglement.
USE: 
Used by plumbers in toilet tanks (as link between flush lever and flapper) and as 
a general utility chain. It is available in bright zinc and solid brass and may also be 
used for decorative purposes.
Straight-link 
machine chain.
Safety chain.

60 
PART I
Sash Chain
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Weldless flat chain.
DESCRIPTION: 
Flat, teardrop-shaped stamped links that appear folded over one another.
USE: 
Good replacement material for sash cords on double-hung windows, as it 
rides over window pulleys easily; also for tub and basin stoppers. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Sash chain comes in plain metal and bronze, but if you live in an area where 
sea air is present, sash chain is inadvisable—it can rust out.
Plastic Chain
DESCRIPTION: 
Available in a variety of colors and shapes. 
USE: 
Strictly decorative and non–weight-bearing jobs. Plastic chain offers no reliable 
load rating and can easily develop hidden cracks or become brittle. 
Chain Connectors
TYPES:
S-hook
Clevis slip hook
Clevis grab hook
Lap link
Quick link
Mechanical connecting link
Cold shut
Plastic 
chain.
Cold shut
S-hook
Clevis grab 
hook
Lap link
Quick 
link
Sash chain
Chain connectors.

CHAPTER 7 61
CHAIN & CABLE
DESCRIPTION:
S-HOOK: 
Open-ended metal link shaped like the letter S. Small, lightweight versions can be crimped shut with 
pliers after being hooked onto chain. Stronger types should not be bent or closed. Because S-hooks don’t 
close, they are suitable only for downward forces, and they are not designed for anything that requires a 
high degree of safety, such as swings and other play equipment.
CLEVIS SLIP HOOK: 
Looks like a hefty fishhook. Used for looping chain and hooking it back onto itself to create a loop of any 
size. The clevis (pin) end of the slip hook is secured to the end of the chain, while the chain is slipped 
through the hook to form the lasso loop.
CLEVIS GRAB HOOK: 
Shaped like a clevis slip hook, but is narrower. Works like a clevis slip hook, but its narrowness allows it to 
lock onto one link.
LAP LINK:
Also called repair link. Partially open link that looks like it has almost been cut in half sidewise. Can be 
used wherever life or limb does not depend on link’s integrity to link two sections of any chain together. 
Lap link is hooked onto chain links, then squeezed closed with pliers. Commonly used with tire chains.
QUICK LINK: 
Link with a gap on one side that has a coupling nut on one end and threads on the other. Nut is tightened 
with a wrench after chains are connected. The closed connection makes quick links more secure than 
S-hooks and stronger than spring-loaded connectors, such as carabiners. However, they should not be 
used as permanent connectors, because the nut can potentially loosen by itself and therefore should  
be checked periodically.  
MECHANICAL CONNECTING LINK: 
Also called coupling link. Two U-shaped link halves joined by a metal pin system activated with a hammer. 
For heavy-duty permanent or semipermanent connections. 
COLD SHUT: 
Open-ended link device that is hammered shut after connecting chain sections. Designed for permanent 
connections (they cannot be reused after being shut once), but loading is questionable because link can 
reopen or not close completely, and because bending metal always weakens it. 
BUYING TIPS: 
All chain connectors should have an equal or greater load rating than the chain(s) which with they are used. 

62 
PART I
Cable
DESCRIPTION: 
What most of us call “cable” (as in 
strong metal cable, not cable-TV 
cable), the hardware industry typically 
calls “wire rope.” Technically speaking, 
cable often refers to stranded metal 
wire or rope that is up to 3/8 inch in 
diameter, while wire rope is greater 
than 3/8 inch, but this terminology is 
used inconsistently. In any case, if a 
hardware supplier sells wire rope, it is stranded metal cable—the same thing. 
Cable commonly sold in stores ranges in size from 1/8 to 3/8 inches in 
diameter and in spooled lengths up to about 200 feet. Choose a cable with a load rating—or breaking 
strength—suitable for your purpose. If corrosion-resistance is important, choose 302 or 304 stainless-steel 
cable. Galvanized cable offers some corrosion-resistance but will rust if its zinc coating is breached. As with 
chain, cable is only as strong as its connections, so be sure to use appropriately rated clamps and other fittings 
(page 63) and install them as directed by the manufacturer. 
NOTE: 
Cable sold by hardware suppliers typically is not strong enough for zip lines or overhead loads. Zip lines are 
made with high-strength aircraft cable, and even a small backyard setup should have cable with a load rating 
of 7,000 pounds or more. 
USE:
Dog runs, guy wires for anchoring trees and fences, clothesline, general tie-down applications. Cable does 
not stretch and is generally stronger than rope and easier to use than chain. Vinyl-coated cable is popular 
for dog runs and clotheslines because it’s cleaner and more visible than standard uncoated cable. Coated 
cable may or may not be galvanized; galvanized is better because it’s less likely to rust when the vinyl coating 
(inevitably) becomes damaged. 
USE TIPS:
Always use cable clamps (page 63) for securing cable ends and thimbles (page 63) for making loops in cable. 
Tying cable into knots or using unsuitable hardware significantly decreases its strength and corrosion-resistance. 
Vinyl-coated 
cable.
Stainless 
steel cable.
Galvanized  
cable.

CHAPTER 7 63
CHAIN & CABLE
Cable Fittings
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
CLAMP: 
U-shaped bolt with a 
clamping saddle and two 
nuts. Secures two sections 
of cable when making a loop 
in a single cable or splicing 
two cables together (requires 
multiple clamps). 
FERRULE 
Also called sleeve. Metal 
sleeve designed for crimping 
onto one or two cables (or two 
sections of same cable) to create loops 
or splices. Alternative to a cable clamp. 
Requires a swaging tool to properly crimp.
STOP: 
Metal ring used to crimp around cable end to 
prevent cable from slipping through a hole or fitting and to prevent unraveling. A swaging tool is required 
for proper crimping. 
THIMBLE:
Teardrop-shaped metal sleeve for forming a loop in cable. Cable is wrapped around outside of thimble, 
then clamped tightly at pointed end of thimble. Protects cable from abrasion and wear, and prevents 
kinking, which decreases strength. 
SHACKLE: 
Horseshoe-shaped metal fitting with threaded bolt at open end of horseshoe. Used to secure cable to an 
eye bolt or other anchor point. Shackle connects to cable via a loop created with a thimble. 
Clamp
Shackle
Thimble
Stop
Ferrule
Cable fittings.

Wire
DESCRIPTION: 
May be single-strand drawn wire or twisted strand; the first is a single piece of wire, the latter three or four 
strands twisted together. Both types come galvanized for outdoor use (short lengths are available in 
copper and aluminum, too) and both may be had in various gauges, from about 10 gauge to 24 gauge. 
Picture-hanging wire comes in stainless steel and even nylon, sometimes called “invisible.” Heavy metal 
wire may be categorized as cable or wire rope (page 62). Very thin wire may be called hobby wire or  
flower wire. Picture wire is woven cable of medium strength.
USE:
General-purpose wire is useful for any number of tasks, from binding other materials to mending fences. 
In the very light gauges—18 and 20—wire can be used for hanging pictures or tying Christmas wreaths. 
Tie-wire for rebar is an inexpensive steel wire that’s handy for quick fastening, bundling branches, and 
other temporary jobs; it bends, twists, and cuts easily but also breaks easily if twisted too much. 
Hardware Cloth
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Wire mesh.
DESCRIPTION: 
Galvanized metal screening made of wire welded into a grid. 
Relatively flexible, it comes in rolls of widths ranging from 24 to 
36 or 48 inches, and in 19- and 23-gauge wire; 19-gauge is heavier 
and stronger. Mesh size—the size of the squares in the wire grid—is 
typically 1/4 or 1/2 inch. 
USE: 
Various: as a sifter of sand and topsoil; a pet cage material; as a fence wherever 
you want extra security. It is frequently used to keep birds, bats, and squirrels out of 
houses and rabbits and deer out of gardens.
USE TIPS: 
Much better than chicken wire for animal containment/control, due to smaller openings and stronger 
wire. You can cut hardware cloth quite easily with tin snips or aviation snips.
WIRE & WIRE PRODUCTS
CHAPTER 8
64

CHAPTER 8 65
Poultry Netting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Chicken wire, hexagonal netting.
DESCRIPTION: 
Galvanized wire woven—not welded—into a netting that 
has large squares or hexagons—1 or 2 inches wide—and 
comes in various heights up to 6 feet and lengths of 50 
to 150 feet. The wire is of a lighter gauge than hardware 
cloth (page 64). Some brands have horizontal lines of 
wire through the lower hexagons to make a tighter mesh.
USE: 
Protection against encroachment of small animals on 
property; for example, installation on a split-rail fence as a way to keep a dog confined.
BUYING TIPS: 
Though not as strong as hardware cloth, netting is very inexpensive and can serve well for many jobs. 
Ironically, chicken wire is not recommended for protecting chickens from predators; coyotes and other 
animals can tear through the material, and rats can fit through the openings in standard chicken wire. 
Welded Wire Fencing
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Horse fence, garden fence, rabbit netting.
DESCRIPTION: 
Galvanized wire mesh welded into rectangular grid pattern. 
Sold in rolls 25 to 200 feet long and heights from 24 to 72 
inches. Wire gauges include 12, 14, and 16, with 12 being the 
heaviest. Mesh sizes (rectangular openings) range from 1/2 
to 2 inches wide and 1 to 4 inches tall. Vinyl-coated versions 
available in green and black. 
USE: 
Permanent or temporary infill material between wood or metal fence posts, commonly used for animal 
enclosures. Handy for temporary fencing to protect trees and garden areas from animals. 
USE TIPS:
Attaches to wood supports with U-shaped nails (also called poultry staples) and to metal supports with 
galvanized wire. Cut fencing with heavy-duty wire cutters or linesman pliers. 

PART II
GENERAL MATERIALS


68
ADHESIVES, CAULKS & SEALANTS
CHAPTER 9
Wood Glue
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Woodworker’s glue, yellow glue, carpenter’s glue, aliphatic glue, aliphatic resin glue.
DESCRIPTION: 
Classic wood glue is similar to household white glue but is yellowish and slightly thicker. It’s still the best 
option for wood-to-wood joints that fit snugly. It dries relatively quickly and cleans up with water. Available 
in standard (for indoor projects) and waterproof (for indoor or outdoor projects) formulas. 
USE TIPS: 
When properly applied to clean wood joints, the bond typically is stronger than the wood itself. However, 
wood glue does not fill gaps in joints, so if there’s any looseness in the joint or play between the mating parts, 
use polyurethane glue (page 69) instead. 
Some of the adhesives useful in home carpentry include carpenter’s wood glue, exterior carpenter’s glue, liquid hide 
glue, polyurethane glue, panel adhesive, latex caulk, silicone caulk, and a hot glue gun with glue sticks.

Polyurethane Glue
ALSO KNOWN AS:
Gorilla Glue® (brand name), all-purpose glue.
DESCRIPTION: 
The Superman of household adhesives. Thick, super-sticky, brownish liquid glue sold in small squeeze 
bottles. Bonds to wood, metal, plastic, stone, foam, glass, ceramic, masonry, and more. Waterproof. Not 
affected by hot or cold temperatures. Expands as it cures, making it great for tightening up loose-fitting joints, 
such as those on rickety chair legs. 
USE TIPS: 
Follow the manufacturer’s application instructions carefully. This moisture-cured glue requires moistening of 
one of the mating parts to activate the curing process. Also somewhat messy, nearly impossible to clean from 
unwanted surfaces, and stains anything it touches, including your hands (the brownish stains have to wear off 
over a few days). Don’t apply too much because the glue foams up during curing, expanding to three times its 
original volume. 
Super Glue
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Instant glue, Krazy Glue® (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Thin, clear liquid glue sold in tiny tubes and squeeze bottles. Technically known as cyanoacrylate adhesive. 
The classic choice for repairing broken coffee cups and other non-porous materials, as well as just about 
anything else it’ll stick to. 
USE TIPS: 
Apply sparingly; often won’t stick if too much is applied. Requires a tight-fitting joint; won’t fill even  
small gaps. Works best if you can hold the mating pieces together for 30 to 60 seconds while the glue sets.  
Warning: Sticks extremely well to skin!
Epoxy
DESCRIPTION: 
Two-part, all-purpose adhesive consisting of a catalyst and hardener that are mixed prior to application. 
Bonds to virtually everything. Sold in double-barreled syringes that do the mixing for you or in small tubes 
for mixing yourself. When you have a job that you can’t imagine a glue doing, think epoxy. 
CHAPTER 9 69

70 
PART II
70 
PART II
USE TIPS: 
Epoxy dries to a very hard, typically clear, plastic. It sticks to more materials than super glue (page 69) and 
is excellent at filling gaps, so it’s often used like a heavy-duty super glue. It’s also thicker than super glue and 
therefore more visible when dried. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Epoxy syringes are handy and less messy than tubes, but tubes typically last longer in storage because 
syringes tend to dry or cure at the tips. Most epoxies do a similar job, but some are harder and/or more heat-
tolerant than others. The strongest typically are sold in tubes.  
Construction Adhesive
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Liquid Nails® (brand name), construction glue.
DESCRIPTION: 
Goopy, tan-colored adhesive sold in large tubes (for applying with a caulking gun) and smaller squeeze tubes. 
Very strong, general-purpose adhesive for heavy-duty construction joints. 
USE: 
Commonly used to bond wood to wood or wood to masonry, such as wall framing to concrete slabs or 
foundation walls. Also excellent for bonding brick, concrete block, stone, and other masonry materials. 
Waterproof for outdoor projects.  
Contact Cement
DESCRIPTION: 
Mid-weight, sticky adhesive sold in paint-style cans. Applied to large, flat, smooth surfaces with a foam roller 
(small paint roller). Must be applied comprehensively to both mating surfaces and allowed to become tacky 
or dry to the touch before the surfaces are bonded together. Forms an extremely strong bond that remains 
somewhat flexible over time. 
USE: 
Most often used to bond plastic laminate (such as Formica®) to particleboard and other materials for 
countertops and cabinets. Similarly useful for bonding other sheet materials to flat surfaces. 
USE TIPS: 
When you apply contact adhesive to one of the mating materials and let it dry to the touch, the glue itself 
isn’t very sticky, but once it touches the cement on the other glued surface it forms an instant, very strong 
bond that gets stronger when pressure is applied. Make sure your mating pieces are properly aligned before 
letting the glued surfaces touch. Once joined, press the pieces together with a hard-rubber roller (called a 
J-roller or laminate roller) or similar tool. Heavy fumes; use in well-ventilated areas. 

CHAPTER 9 71
ADHESIVES, CAULKS & SEALANTS
Thread-Lock Adhesive
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Thread-locker, thread sealant, Loctite® (brand name), anaerobic adhesive.
DESCRIPTION: 
One-part adhesive that cures without air. Seals nuts and bolt threads to prevent them from loosing due  
to vibration. 
USE: 
When you really don’t want a nut or bolt coming loose and it’s not designed for a cotter pin (page 44), squirt 
a little thread-locker onto the threads. Forms a hard plastic that stays on the metal parts but can be broken 
when you loosen the parts with a wrench or other tool. Can replace or be used with lock washers, setscrews, 
locking nuts, etc. 
Caulk
ABOUT CAULK (& SEALANT):
Don’t make the common mistake of assuming all caulks are more or less the same. In reality, caulk (and 
caulk-like sealants) is as diverse as tape. You wouldn’t use Scotch tape on your ductwork, just as you 
shouldn’t use painter’s caulk for your plumbing fixtures. Caulk manufacturers tend to exaggerate the suitable 
applications of their products, so don’t rely on the product labels alone. It’s better to focus on the caulk 
material and narrow down your options from there. Caulks that are called “sealants” typically are designed 
for outdoor applications, such as windows and doors, siding, and roofing. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Elastomeric (flexible) and adhesive goo of various materials and colors most often sold in 6-ounce squeeze tubes 
or 10- to 11-ounce, 8-inch-long cartridges for applying with a caulking gun. Used to seal gaps, joints, and seams in 
a range of materials, for appearance and/or to protect against moisture. May or may not be paintable; may or may 
not be mildew resistant; more or less flexible or adhesive depending on formulation and quality. 
USE: 
Different caulks and sealants are designed for different applications. Here are the basic material categories, 
their characteristics, and common uses: 
ACRYLIC OR VINYL LATEX CAULK: 
Generally, water-based caulks (as opposed to silicone or rubber caulks, below). Standard “painter’s caulk,” 
commonly used for interior materials such as trimwork, cabinets, wall and ceiling corners, and other 
areas that usually get painted. Easy to apply and cleans up with water. Dries quickly. Formulations with 
silicone offer improved durability and flexibility over standard versions but should not be used in place 
of true silicone caulk. Good for interior work, but generally not durable in outdoor applications, despite 
manufacturer claims. 

72 
PART II
SILICONE CAULK: 
Pure (100 percent) silicone caulk remains the standard for sinks, faucets, ceramic tile, countertops, 
tubs, showers, and other indoor areas where long-term water resistance is critical. It’s messier, smellier, 
and harder to apply than latex caulk, but it holds up much better in wet conditions and remains flexible 
for far longer. For kitchens and bathrooms, choose mildew- and bacteria-resistant formulas to protect 
against damage and staining from mold and mildew. Silicone works well in cold and hot temperatures 
and adheres best to nonporous surfaces, such as metal, glass, and ceramic. It does not bond well to wood. 
When applying to metal, choose a “neutral-cure” formula, which bonds better and is less likely to corrode 
some metals than standard “acid-cure” silicone that contains acetoxy and has a vinegar-like odor.  
POLYURETHANE SEALANT: 
High-performance exterior caulk for sealing wood, metal, and masonry joints. More flexible and durable than 
latex/acrylic and other standard “exterior” caulk formulas. Unlike pure silicone, urethane sealants often are 
paintable. Expensive, but worth it for critical applications, such as doors and windows and metal roof flashing. 
RUBBER CAULK: 
Exterior caulk made with butyl or other synthetic rubber compounds. Goopy, messy, but ultra water-
resistant. Good for patching gutters and metal roofing and flashing. Not compatible with some roofing 
materials, such as modified-bitumen flashing tape and rubberized asphalt flashing and roof membranes. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Splurge for the good stuff and avoid the cheap stuff, especially for outdoor projects. A few extra bucks for a 
tube of good caulk can prevent hundreds or thousands of dollars of damage to the materials it’s protecting. 
Spray Foam Insulation
DESCRIPTION: 
High-tech foam insulation in an 
aerosol can. Comes with a straw-
like applicator tip that allows you 
to spray the foam into narrow 
crevices and cracks. The foam 
is incredibly sticky and expands 
to fill cavities. Dries to a hard or 
semi-flexible state, depending on 
the type. Different formulas have 
different expansion rates. High-
expanding versions grow to many 
times their applied volume. Low-
expanding and non-expanding 
Spray foam insulation.

CHAPTER 9 73
ADHESIVES, CAULKS & SEALANTS
foams grow only a little and do so with less force to prevent bowing of door and window jambs, among 
other problems caused by excessive expansion. 
USE: 
Air-sealing and insulating around door and window frames; wall, ceiling, and roof penetrations; foundation 
walls; light fixtures; etc. It’s not pretty, so use it only where looks aren’t important or where it will be hidden 
by finish materials. For example, to seal around door and window frames, you remove the interior casing 
(trim molding) and spray the foam between the structural wall framing and the door/window jambs. Using 
spray foam is much more effective for sealing and insulating than the old familiar technique of cramming 
fiberglass insulation into small cavities. 
USE TIPS: 
Apply carefully and beware of expansion! Spray foam does an excellent job sticking to everything in its path, 
including clothes, skin, wood—everything. All spray foams expand, including non-expanding types, so use 
sparingly—especially when you first use, until you know how much the foam will grow. 
Blacktop Sealer
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Driveway sealer.
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy black liquid with coal tar or neoprene base. Ordinarily comes in five-gallon cans but also available in 
smaller containers as a crack patcher.
USE: 
To renew the appearance of asphalt driveways and to provide a waterproof coating that also protects against 
oil and other staining materials. Also for sealing small cracks.
USE TIPS: 
Blacktop sealer can be applied with a brush, roller, or push broom. Using a roller on a stick or a push broom 
makes the job easier.
BUYING TIPS: 
Blacktop sealer can vary in quality greatly; poor-quality material can be as thin as water. The thicker the 
material, the better.

74 
PART II
Blacktop Patcher
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Asphalt patch, cold patcher, cold-mix asphalt.
DESCRIPTION: 
Chunky black material with the consistency of very soft tar. Comes ready to use in various-sized bags or 
plastic buckets.
USE: 
Repair large cracks and holes in asphalt driveways; used to pave small walks.
USE TIPS: 
Blacktop patcher is poured in place and then tamped to a solid density. Driving a car back and forth over a 
small patch is one good way to compress it, or use a heavy lawn roller.
Roofing Cements
TYPES:
Asphalt plastic roof cement
Damp patch roof cement
Lap/double-coverage roof cement
Quick-setting asphalt roof cement
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Mastic.
DESCRIPTION: 
All of these roofing cements  
contain petroleum solvents; use 
outdoors only.
ASPHALT PLASTIC CEMENT: 
Fairly viscous black goo of 
asphalt and mineral fibers. 
Comes in two grades: regular, 
and flashing, which is thicker. 
Adheres to any dry surface. 

CHAPTER 9 75
ADHESIVES, CAULKS & SEALANTS
Like most cements, comes in one- and five-gallon cans. However, some similar products are available in 
standard 10.5-ounce caulking cartridges for application with a caulking gun. The standard material for 
sealing edges of flashing and patches in flat roofs, as well as installation of the bottom layers of roll roofing. 
Also for repairing leaks in gutters. Applied with a trowel over reinforcement fabric or roofing tape—a  
4- to 6-inch-wide, loosely woven glass fiber or cotton mesh membrane, sold in long rolls.
DAMP PATCH CEMENT (ALSO KNOWN AS WET OR DRY ROOF CEMENT): 
Similar to the above but specially formulated to adhere to wet surfaces. Used for emergency repairs under 
extreme dampness, such as leaks under snow buildup or during a major rainstorm. Applied with a trowel.
LAP CEMENT:
Thick black adhesive, similar to the above cement but thinner. Used to seal overlapping strips of roll 
roofing or shingle tabs. Applied with a brush or roller.
QUICK-SETTING ASPHALT CEMENT: 
As the name implies, this sets very quickly. Basically an asphalt plastic cement with more solvent in it. 
Comes in various consistencies from fluid to thick. Used to adhere strip shingles in windy areas.
USE TIPS: 
Patching over and over again may indicate a more serious problem that needs to be solved by a new roof or an 
overall coating with a material called roof coating, or asphalt roof paint, which is applied with a big brush. This 
will fill small gaps. Roof coating, also called foundation coating, is a masonry waterproofer. Both can extend 
the life of a flat roof.

76
METAL & PLASTIC SHEETING
CHAPTER 10
Sheet Metal
TYPES:
Diamond plate
Galvanized steel sheet
Aluminum sheet, perforated
Aluminum sheet, plain
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Thin metal (typically less than 1/16 inch thick) that is easily bent and cut without special equipment other 
than tin snips.
DIAMOND PLATE:
Aluminum or galvanized steel sheet covered on one side with crisscrossed diamond pattern, creating a 
textured surface that is somewhat decorative and slip-resistant. Heavier-duty than standard sheet metals. 
Used for a variety of applications, such as door kickplates, high-traffic floor areas, and loading ramps.
1. Diamond plate; 2. galvanized steel; 3. perforated aluminum; 4. plain aluminum. 
1
2
3
4

METAL & PLASTIC SHEETING
CHAPTER 10 77
GALVANIZED STEEL: 
Standard sheet metal, sometimes called “tin.” Sold in sheets of various sizes and in rolls commonly  
2 feet wide and 8 feet long. Used for a variety of repair and hole-patching jobs.
ALUMINUM SHEET, PERFORATED: 
Sold in 3 × 3-foot squares and 3 × 8-foot sheets in various perforations. Available also in anodized 
finishes, such as gold, and many different patterns. Sometimes called radiator grill, after its main use  
of concealing old-fashioned radiators.  
ALUMINUM SHEET, PLAIN: 
Most often sold in 2 × 3-foot and 3 × 3-foot squares. Used for lining walls next to stoves, hobby  
projects, etc.
BUYING TIPS: 
Thin, plain sheet metal is often stocked with HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) parts and 
equipment, because that’s what most air ducting is made from. 
Rigid Plastic Sheet
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Plexiglas®, Lucite® (brand names), Lexan™, acrylic sheet, plastic glazing.
DESCRIPTION: 
The most common rigid plastic is acrylic; it comes clear or in textures and colors. Sold in a range of sizes 
that you can cut to size as needed. Common thicknesses are about 1/8 and 1/4 inches. Plexiglas® and Lucite® 
are acrylic. Lexan™ is polycarbonate, which is much stronger than acrylic (also more expensive); use it when 
strength  
is important. 
USE: 
Extremely versatile product used in an infinite array of decorative and functional projects, including art, 
hobbies, small shelves, and repairs—and to replace glass window panes. 
USE TIPS: 
Can be bent by heating slightly, drilled at slow speed, cut with a variety of tools, as well as glued (in some 
cases) and sanded on the edges (not the surfaces). Cuts easily with a circular saw, jigsaw, or hacksaw but 
should be well supported to prevent cracking the brittle material. Also can be scored and snapped with a 
utility knife or a special tool called a plastic cutter. Just score it several times along a line and then break it off. 
When drilling holes, support it directly underneath the hole with a block of wood. Leave the protective paper 
on both sides of the material until you’re ready to install it or put it to use. Plastic sheeting scratches very 
easily (especially acrylic) and cannot be repaired. 

78 
PART II
Roof Flashing
TYPES:
Step flashing
Flat flashing
Roll flashing
Pipe/vent flashing
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Sheet metal pieces for roof 
repairs and installations. May 
be copper .01 inches thick 
or more, but aluminum and 
galvanized steel are much more 
common. Sold in a wide variety 
of shapes and sizes. Standard 
types for roof repairs include:
STEP FLASHING: 
L-shaped pieces about 7 
inches long and 4 inches wide on each side of the L. Designed to be layered into shingle courses going up a 
sloped roof. Commonly used along chimneys and where a sloped roof abuts a wall. 
FLAT FLASHING: 
Flat sheet metal that can be cut and bent as needed. Used as an all-purpose flashing material. 
ROLL FLASHING: 
Also called valley flashing (and sometimes "w" flashing, due to it's shape). Thin, flat metal sold in rolls 
from 6 to 20 inches wide and lengths up to 50 feet. Used to create a runoff channel where two sloping 
roof planes meet. Valleys typically are replaced only during roof replacement, but the rolls are handy 
for other flashing job and miscellaneous roof repairs. 
PIPE/VENT FLASHING: 
Flat metal base with a raised dome (or other shape) near the center. The dome has a hole and is covered with, 
or made of, rubber to seal around plumbing pipes and other materials that penetrate up through roofing. 
NOTE: 
Flashing is also a verb and may refer to the use of roof cement/sealant products around chimneys, skylights, 
and edges of roofs.
Roll 
flashing
Drip 
edge
Preformed  
 valley  
  flashing
Step 
flashing
Flat flashing 
(small pieces)
Aviation 
snips
Pipe/vent 
flashing

CHAPTER 10 79
METAL & PLASTIC SHEETING
USE TIPS: 
Make sure that the flashing used is compatible with the roofing. For example, don’t use copper with red 
cedar shakes, because copper will darken the cedar. Be sure to seal flashing at the edges with roofing 
cement or sealant. Cut flashing with aviation snips or similar shears made for thin metals.
Plastic Sheeting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Polyethylene sheeting, Visqueen (brand name). 
DESCRIPTION: 
All-purpose plastic sheet available in roll form and in various thicknesses—2-mil, 4-mil, 6-mil, etc.— 
and a wide range of widths and lengths. Note that “mil” is a unit of measure equal to 1/1,000 of an inch 
(0.001 inches); it is not an abbreviation for “millimeter.” The standard thickness for many construction jobs 
is 6-mil. Sold in clear and black. 
USE: 
Many different uses, but chiefly as covers and drop cloths. Used in construction projects for moisture barriers 
under concrete slabs and vapor barriers in insulated walls and ceilings. 
USE TIPS: 
Do not use thin plastic sheeting on floors—it is extremely slippery.
BUYING TIPS: 
If you are using plastic as a drop cloth, make sure you get 6-mil or thicker material. The thinnest ones 
available tear very easily, making them worthless for that purpose (and they are generally hard to use).
Window Film
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Window kit, shrink film kit, window insulator.
DESCRIPTION: 
Ultra-thin, clear plastic sheeting that shrinks when heat is applied with a hair dryer. Commonly sold in kits 
containing the plastic film and double-sided tape. Also available in bulk rolls of film, which is more cost-
effective when you have a lot of windows to seal. 
USE: 
Sealing over drafty windows in winter. To apply window film, you cut a piece a little bit larger than the 
window opening and apply it to the trim frame around the window with double-sided tape. Then, you heat 
the film with a hair dryer, causing it to shrink tight to remove any sags and wrinkles. 

80 
PART II
Corrugated Roofing
DESCRIPTION: 
Roofing panels about 26 inches wide and up to 12 feet long. Made of polycarbonate plastic, fiberglass, or metal. 
Corrugations may be formed with a continuous wave pattern (sometimes called “sine-wave”) or have peaks made 
with three flat surfaces. Available in a range of thicknesses or weights; thicker or heavier generally is stronger. All 
types available in different colors, while polycarbonate also comes in clear. Metal panels are made of aluminum or 
with steel that’s galvanized or specially coated for corrosion-resistance. Galvanized steel is what’s popularly called 
“tin” roofing, but is not made with tin. 
USE: 
As awnings over patios, carport roofs, porches, and the like. They let light in but keep out some of the sun’s 
rays and heat. Also commonly used as siding on outbuildings and greenhouses. 
USE TIPS: 
Plastic and fiberglass panels can be cut with a fine-toothed handsaw or power saws. Metal roofing can be cut 
with metal shears or with a circular saw fitted with an abrasive metal-cutting blade. Follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions carefully to prevent leaks, cracking due to expansion, and other problems. Best to install using 
screws with rubber washers. 
Plastic Laminate
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Laminate, Formica® (brand name), laminate countertop.
DESCRIPTION: 
Hard and brittle 1/16-inch-thick sheet material sold by length and from 24 to 60 inches wide. Standard type 
has a hard plastic color surface and a base or core that’s brown; premium types have the top color going all 
the way through (called “color core” or “color through”). Plastic laminate has great stain resistance and  
easy-clean qualities, and, once installed, can take a lot of punishment.
USE: 
Still a favorite countertop surface due to its low cost, ease of installation, durability, and other benefits. 
Countertops are typically built with laminate bonded to a particleboard substrate using contact cement 
(page 70). Can be cut to rough size with saws or metal shears, then trimmed flush with a router. Also suitable 
for covering cabinets and walls, but for these and other vertical applications, thinner roll laminate (page 81) 
is typically used. 
USE TIPS: 
Handle plastic laminate with care before installation. It’s very brittle. Also, the edges are extremely sharp 
when cut or routed and must be filed with a fine file to blunt the razor-sharpness of the plastic. 

CHAPTER 10 81
METAL & PLASTIC SHEETING
Roll Laminate
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic laminate in roll form, which is thinner than the better-quality countertop laminate (page 80).
USE: 
Best for vertical surfaces that don’t require as much durability as countertops. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Roll laminate is not as good as sheet laminate, but it does work.
Vinyl Patching Kit
DESCRIPTION:
Kit containing patching material, graining “papers,” and backing material.
USE: 
For repairing holes in vinyl upholstery.
USE TIPS: 
Don’t expect color-match perfection when using one of these kits.
Fiberglass-Reinforced Plastic (FRP)
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
FRP, FRP wall panels/paneling.
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible plastic paneling, about 1/8 inch thick and 4 × 8 feet, with a textured front face. Sold with a variety of 
plastic moldings for creating a highly washable, water-resistant surface. Installs over drywall with latex mastic 
or over masonry with oil-based panel adhesive. 
USE: 
Covering walls behind sinks and toilets and in other wet areas. Commonly used in commercial bathrooms 
and kitchens but also handy around the house for protecting walls behind mop/utility sinks and laundry 
rooms or as an economical substitute for ceramic tile around a shower or bathtub. 
USE TIPS: 
Cuts best with power shears (sheet metal shears), but can be cut with metal snips. Leave about 1/4-inch 
expansion space with all moldings, and seal joints where panel edges meet moldings with silicone caulk, if 
water-resistance is important. 

82
WINDOW & DOOR SCREEN  
(AND SUPPLIES)
CHAPTER 11
ABOUT SCREEN MATERIALS
Screening is available in more materials, sizes, strengths, and colors than you probably realize. This may 
seem like overkill if your cat has torn up the patio screen (again) and you just need a quick fix, but when you 
understand what’s behind the different screen options, they start to make a lot of sense. Screen weave denotes 
the number of strands per inch: standard weave is 18 × 16, which has 18 strands per inch in one direction 
and 16 strands in the other direction. 
Screening
TYPES: 
Fiberglass
Aluminum
Premium metals
Sun control
Pet screen
No-see-um
DESCRIPTION: 
FIBERGLASS: 
Standard fiberglass screening is the most common screen material on modern windows and doors. 
Inexpensive and offers good visibility due to minimal glare from sunlight. Won’t crease like aluminum 
and other metal screens. Easiest type to install but also the weakest and most prone to tears and 
stretching. Commonly available in black, silver gray, and charcoal; black tends to produce the  
least glare. 
ALUMINUM: 
The other standard screen material. Offers excellent visibility, but glare can be a problem, especially 
with shiny gray/silver screen. More rigid than fiberglass and thus a little harder to install but 
also more durable; less prone to tears and stretching. Be careful not to crease or dent it during 
installation, as this cannot be fixed. Available in gray, black, and charcoal; black typically is best  
for visibility. 

CHAPTER 11 83
PREMIUM METALS: 
Specialty materials include bronze, stainless steel, copper, and monel (a nickel-copper alloy). All of these 
except copper are suitable for seaside climates, which cause oxidizing on standard aluminum screen. 
Premium metals are also desired for a high-end look. 
SUN CONTROL: 
Also called solar screen, sun screen, etc. Has thick strands and a special weave that helps block sunlight and 
solar heat while allowing for decent visibility and keeping out bugs. Often made of PVC-coated fabric 
strands. Available in a range of colors. 
PET SCREEN: 
High-strength screen to resist pet claws and paws (also children, who always push the screen and 
never the door frame). Offers poor visibility, so you might want to use this tough screen only on lower 
portions of doors or windows (unless you have a Great Dane or grown-up children who still push on 
the screen). 
NO-SEE-UM: 
Also called small-insect screen. Similar to standard screen, typically fiberglass, but with a tight 20 × 20 
weave to block tiny bugs. 
USE TIPS: 
Most screen is held in place with screen spline (below). You can reuse old spline, but it gets brittle with age, 
so it’s a good idea to buy new spline along with screen material when replacing old screens. It’s also worth it 
to buy a spline roller tool (page 84) for installing screen and spline. 
Screen Spline
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible vinyl cord with fine 
longitudinal ridges designed 
to fit into a matching size of 
channel in screen frames. Comes 
in diameters of about 1/8 to 3/8 
inches and lengths up to 100 feet. 
Commonly available in gray  
and black. 
Screen spline.

84 
PART II
USE: 
Securing window and door screen into their frames. 
USE TIPS: 
Install screen spline with a spline roller (below). If you don’t have a spline roller, use a blunt tool to press the 
spline into the screen frame channels. Don’t use a screwdriver or other pointed tool, which will cut through 
the screen before you know it. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Spline diameters mentioned above are approximate. In reality, sizes are absurdly precise and include 
dimensions such as 0.140 and 0.225 inches. But close is good enough; the rubbery spline can be crammed 
into place as needed. Bring a piece of the old spline to the store for comparison. 
Spline Roller
DESCRIPTION: 
Simple hand tool with a small 
metal wheel on each end of a 
wooden handle. One wheel has 
a relatively narrow, tapered edge 
for pressing the screen material 
into the screen-frame channels. 
The other wheel has a relatively 
wide, concave (or channeled) 
edge for pressing the spline into 
the channel atop the screening. 
USE: 
Installing window screening and spline.
USE TIPS: 
The tapered wheel usually is necessary only for metal screen, which must be pre-pressed into the screen-
frame channels prior to installing the spline. Do this gently with a couple of light passes to prevent cutting 
the screen with the wheel. Standard fiberglass screen can simply be pressed into the channels along with the 
spline. Use the concave wheel to press and smooth the spline with all types of screen.
BUYING TIPS: 
This tool is a true unitasker—it’s good for only one job—but it’s indispensible for installing screening. 
Substitute tools tend to cut the screen, and they make it very hard to flatten the spline smooth in the frame 
channels. Costs only a few bucks, and you’ll probably never need to replace. 
Spline roller.

CHAPTER 11 85
WINDOW & DOOR SCREEN (AND SUPPLIES)
WINDOW & DOOR SCREEN (AND SUPPLIES)
Screen Frame & Corners
DESCRIPTION: 
Bulk lengths of metal screen frame 
and L-shaped corner pieces—
often called keys—for joining the 
frame pieces at the corners. Some 
keys simply slip into the ends of 
the frame pieces or clip onto the 
backsides of the frame corners; 
others are secured with screws or 
with peens that you hammer into 
place with a screwdriver or punch. 
Tilt keys have a small cylindrical post extended from one side for tilt-out  
screen systems. Frame pieces and keys are sold separately or together as kits. 
USE: 
Frame pieces and corners are used for building custom-size screens to replace old damaged 
or missing screens. Frame corners can be used to replace loose or broken corners on 
existing frames. 
USE TIPS: 
Frame pieces can be cut to length with a hacksaw. Many corner keys are designed for square-end frame 
pieces, which means you don’t have to make tricky miter cuts for the frame corners. 
Corner keys.

ROPE & LINE
CHAPTER 12
ABOUT ROPE
Similar to chain and cable, rope is rated for safe working load, or a working load limit (WLL)—how much weight 
it should be used to support. It also may carry a rating for breaking strength, or tensile strength, a weight value 
based on a laboratory test that stretches the rope until it breaks. The safe working load is only about 20 percent 
of the breaking strength, so it’s important not to confuse the two. Never exceed the safe working load when 
using rope. Also check the condition of any rope before applying tension to it, because wear, age, dirt, and 
sunlight can weaken a rope considerably. Knots also reduce a rope’s strength—by about 50 percent. The basic 
options for choosing rope include material, diameter, and weave.
Rope
DESCRIPTION:
MANILA: 
Made from hemp. Resists sunlight, doesn’t melt or stretch, and ties easily. Like most rope, it is available in 
diameters ranging from 1/4 to 3/4 inches and is normally sold by the foot from reels. Because it’s a natural 
material, manila offers limited rot-resistance and is best for use in dry areas. Generally not as strong as 
synthetic-fiber rope. 
1
2
3
4
5
1. Sisal rope; 2. Nylon rope;  
3. Polyester rope; 4. Polypropylene  
rope; 5. Manila rope.  

SISAL: 
Another natural-fiber rope; has less strength than Manila. Best for temporary use or craft projects. 
NYLON: 
Synthetic-fiber rope offering high strength, rot-resistance and some shock absorption. Suitable for 
outdoor use. Its big advantage is that it stretches, so if you have a job where the rope may need to take a 
shock and stretch, by all means use nylon—but beware of jobs where stretching would be a problem.
POLYPROPYLENE: 
Synthetic rope that floats and therefore is commonly used as a marker in pools and as a tow rope for 
boats. Hard to tie. Rot-resistant, but not as UV-resistant as nylon or polyester. 
POLYESTER: 
Synthetic rope similar in performance to nylon, but not quite as strong; also less elastic, which is an 
advantage for some applications. UV-resistant and rot-resistant. 
USE TIPS: 
The ends of all synthetic rope unravels when cut. Melt the fibers with a match flame to prevent unraveling.
BUYING TIPS: 
Braided rope generally is much stronger than twisted rope. Braided also offers a better handhold. You can buy 
rope prepackaged in various lengths, but it’s cheaper by the foot, taken off a reel. 
Mason’s Line
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Builder’s line, mason’s string,  
string line.
DESCRIPTION: 
Very strong, thin cord, typically 
made of braided nylon. Usually 
in a bright color, such as yellow, 
yellowish-green, orange, or pink, for 
high visibility. Sold in plain spools or 
with a winder tool with a handle and 
spinning spool for easy playing out 
and winding up of the line. Has some 
stretch and can be pulled very taut to 
create straight and level guide lines 
for various projects.
Mason’s line.
CHAPTER 12 87

88 
PART II
USE: 
Many layout and construction applications. A traditional alignment tool for laying bricks and other masonry. 
Great for laying out fence posts, patio excavations, garden plots, and outdoor walls. Often used with a line 
level, a small bubble level, to create a level guideline across long distances. 
Clothesline
DESCRIPTION: 
There are various types. The classic version is braided cotton and has a filler inside to add body and bulk. 
Other types include plastic (vinyl), braided polyester (or a cotton/poly blend), and vinyl-coated wire or 
cable. Sold in standard lengths of 50 and 100 feet. 
USE: 
Hanging clothes to dry, of course, but also a handy all-purpose rope for various household tasks. Do not use 
clothesline for any kind of weight-bearing application; it’s not strong and is susceptible to damage and weak 
spots, particularly cotton line. 
BUYING TIPS: 
There’s a wide variety of hardware for installing and tightening clothesline, including hooks with integrated 
mounting plates, line tensioners, pulleys, and clothesline separators (to prevent sagging when running two 
lines in the same plane). 
Twine
DESCRIPTION: 
Lightweight rope or cord made of plies twisted just once. There are different kinds: Polypropylene is strongest 
and sometimes the least expensive. Jute and sisal twine have fuzzy surfaces that bind well when tied.
USE: 
Good for lightweight and decorative tying jobs. Jute and sisal are popular in gardening applications because 
they rot quickly.
Miscellaneous Rope Accessories
DESCRIPTION & USE:
PULLEY: 
Grooved wheel held in a housing that has a hook, eye, or bracket for connecting to a rope or piece of 
hardware or for anchoring to a support. Rope is fed through the pulley and travels along the wheel’s 
groove. Commonly used for clotheslines, but heavy-duty versions can also form the core of a rig winch  

CHAPTER 12 89
ROPE & LINE
Clothesline 
pulley
Swivel eye 
bolt snap
Snap 
hook
Carabiner
for hauling up building 
materials and other tasks. A 
single pulley makes it easier 
to lift a weight by reversing 
the direction of the applied 
force; it’s easier to pull down 
on a rope than to lift up a 
weight. Using multiple pulleys 
on the same rope reduces the 
force required to a degree 
proportionate to the number 
of pulleys. 
ROPE SNAPS: 
Metal clips, usually with a 
spring-loaded locking device, 
for quick connections of rope 
or line. A few different versions include a bolt 
snap (with or without a swiveling eye), a snap 
hook (a heavier-duty hook with a spring-loaded 
gate), and a carabiner (triangular or oval-shaped clip with a spring-loaded gate). 
USE TIPS: 
Carabiners are particularly versatile and easily clip onto many different materials. Although carabiners are 
standard equipment for rock climbing, cheap utility versions are not very strong and should not be used for 
load-bearing applications. 
Cleat
DESCRIPTION: 
Long, narrow metal piece with screw holes on a flat base 
for anchoring onto a wall or other support structure. 
Various sizes. A rope hook, which has a flat part with screw 
holes, is used to hold the coiled rope or cord.
USE: 
Quick tying of rope or cord, for flagpoles, window blinds, 
and other applications.
Cleat.
Rope accessories.

90
LUBRICANTS
CHAPTER 13
Household Oil
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
All-purpose oil, 3-in-1® (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Light oil in cans or sprays.
USE: 
Lubricating small machinery, doors, and tools around the house. Particularly good for breaking up rust. 
Cleans and polishes, removes tarnish.
USE TIPS: 
Although suitable for most lubrication needs, keep in mind that there are many specialized oils for sewing 
machines, cycles and mowers, and so on.
Penetrating Oil
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Bolt loosener, easing oil.
DESCRIPTION: 
Extremely thin petroleum/graphite mixture 
in liquid or aerosol spray. Liquid Wrench® is a 
common brand, as is WD-40®, which comes only 
as an aerosol spray. Both contain solvents.
USE: 
Loosens “frozen” nuts and bolts, “seized” 
machinery, or corroded galvanized-steel piping 
when allowed to penetrate for several minutes. 
WD-40® can be used as a plain solvent as well 
as a rust preventer on large metal items, such as 
shovels and lawnmowers. Liquid Wrench® can 
also be used to remove rust.
Penetrating oil (in use).

USE TIPS: 
After applying penetrating oil, make sure you give it enough time to work. The spray type is good for spots 
with limited access. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Liquid Wrench® and WD-40® both make other formulations for various uses, so be sure you have the right 
item if you ask for it by brand.
Dry Spray Lubricant
DESCRIPTION: 
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE; also known as Teflon™) or silicone, available in aerosol cans. Both types go 
on wet but then dry and cling well to a variety of surfaces. PTFE lubricant doesn’t collect dust, making it a 
good choice for dusty and dirty environments, but is not reliable for outdoor use. Silicone repels water and 
can be used to dry electrical contacts. A very slick lubricant, best for parts that slide together. Unlike PTFE 
lube, silicone collects dust. 
USE: 
Often used to slicken surfaces of drawers, doors, and windows for smoother operation. Works on paint, plastic, 
wood, glass, leather, and many other surfaces not suitable for liquids. Good lubricant for lock mechanisms.
Synthetic Grease
DESCRIPTION: 
High-performance, all-purpose grease. Heat- and water-resistant and long lasting. Similar to conventional 
petroleum-based grease, but is less prone to breaking down over time. Some formulas are nontoxic and even 
rated as food-safe.
USE: 
Bearings, gears, axles, chains (motor-driven chains, not bike chains), and other moving parts requiring a 
hard-working lubricant that can handle stress. 
Marine Grease
DESCRIPTION: 
Thick, waterproof grease for use in wet environments. Effective rust inhibitor; helps prevent against 
corrosion and seizing parts. 
CHAPTER 13 91

92 
PART II
USE: 
Metal parts on boats and in marine environments. Trailer axles and bearings. Parts that experience constant 
outdoor exposure or wetness. Can be submerged in water. 
Waterproof Grease
DESCRIPTION: 
Highly water-resistant grease for faucet parts. Sold in 
small tubs and jars. 
USE: 
Lubricating rubber washers, O-rings, stems,  
and other parts in faucets. Won’t contaminate  
water supplies. 
BUYING TIPS: 
There are many varieties of “waterproof” grease, 
many of which are thick bearing greases designed for 
cars, motorcycles, and bicycles. These are not suitable 
for faucets. Be sure the product you use is intended 
for plumbing fixtures, and is safe for water supplies.  
Graphite
DESCRIPTION: 
Comes as a powder and is applied with puffer tube.
USE: 
Usually used on locks but also good for squeaking floors and stairways.
USE TIPS: 
Take care when applying graphite. It can create a mess.
Lock Fluid
DESCRIPTION: 
Graphite in fluid or spray form.
USE: 
Freeing up lock mechanisms.
Waterproof grease in plumbing application.

CHAPTER 13 93
LUBRICANTS
Dripless Oil
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
White lubricant.
DESCRIPTION: 
White, high-viscosity oil—virtually a grease—that will not dry up and become ineffective (as silicone,  
below, does).
USE: 
For hinges and typewriters.
Stick Lubricant
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Stainless stick, stainless lubricant.
DESCRIPTION: 
Comes as a grease stick and is applied like a crayon. May be made with mineral oil, wax, or silicone.
USE: 
Can be used on metal, plastic, glass, wood. Often advertised as lube for car door hinges. Good for keeping 
drawers moving freely as well as enhancing the use of drills, saw blades, and other cutting tools. 
USE TIPS: 
“Stainless” is a misnomer, as oil, wax, and silicone all can stain many materials. A better description is “no-
mess.” Okay to use on wood, but be aware that the lubricant may inhibit bonding of paint, stain, and other 
finishes, particularly if the lube contains silicone. 

94
TAPE
CHAPTER 14
Duct Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
Reinforced cloth tape with a vinyl backing, commonly 2 inches wide but available in other widths. Also 
available in a range of strengths—of both the adhesive and the backing—and grades, although the grading 
is neither official nor consistent. The best indicator of quality is price. In recent years, a few heavy-duty duct 
tapes have entered the market and offer appreciably stronger adhesive and backing than standard versions. 
USE: 
Handy for taping almost anything around the house except—notably—ductwork. That’s right: standard cloth-
and-plastic duct tape is not suitable for taping metal air duct. It’ll stick to ducts initially but quickly dries out and 
looses its grip, failing entirely to create an air seal. The proper tape for ducts is foil tape (below). 
BUYING TIPS: 
Inexpensive duct tape is not a good buy—the adhesive will be gummy and the tape may slip. Probably one of 
humankind’s most useful inventions. Keep at least two rolls on hand: a good-quality standard duct tape and 
perhaps a roll of heavy-duty tape for tougher jobs. 
Foil Tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Metal repair tape, HVAC tape.
DESCRIPTION: 
The real duct tape, designed to stick to metal duct material and to withstand a wide range of temperature 
without failure. Has a very strong adhesive and a metal foil backing. Similar widths to standard cloth-and-
plastic duct tape. The adhesive side is covered with a non-stick paper strip that you remove as you apply  
the tape. 
USE: 
Sealing joints and covering gaps and holes in rigid metal duct, creating an air seal to prevent loss of heated 
and cooled air in the duct system. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Make sure your tape is designed for sealing rigid metal duct, if that’s your application. Some foil tapes are 
not up to the job, and there are plastic duct tapes that are rated for flexible ductwork but not necessarily rigid 
metal duct.

Electrical Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
Black tape usually no more than 1 inch wide. Two kinds: one is a fabric that is sticky on both sides, known as 
friction tape, and adheres only to itself; the other is plastic with adhesive on one side only. The plastic tape 
stretches quite a bit and thus creates a tightening tension when wrapping wires.
USE: 
For wrapping electrical wires, typically for repair or to reinforce electrical connections. 
USE TIPS: 
Never join wires with electrical tape alone. It’s not designed to make electrical connections; it’s simply a non-
conductive material that covers bare wire or electrical contacts. In most household wiring, wires should be 
joined together with plastic wire connectors. or wire nuts (page 225). It’s ok to apply tape over installed wire 
nuts, but usually this is not necessary. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Some tapes look and feel just like electrical tape, although these often come in bright colors, in addition to 
black. Any tape used on electrical equipment should be called “electrical tape.” 
Masking Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
Paper-backed adhesive tape that comes in various widths up to about 3 inches. The standard size you 
probably have in your kitchen drawer is 3/4 inch wide. This is an all-purpose tape with a relatively strong 
adhesive. Wider tapes may have weaker adhesive and are designed for masking off windows and other items 
before painting, although painter’s tape (page 96) is better for this job. 
USE: 
Packaging and general light use. One particularly handy feature of masking tape is that you can write on it with 
pencil or any kind of pen. It also sticks surprisingly well to most fabrics and works in a pinch to hem pants and 
patch tears (apply it on the inside of the garment, and burnish the tape well for a good bond). 
USE TIPS: 
Remove masking tape shortly after use. If left on a surface it tends to leave a gummy residue that can be 
removed only with a strong solvent such as lacquer thinner. Don’t bother with very old masking tape.  
It doesn’t release from the roll well and doesn’t stick properly where you want it to. 
CHAPTER 14 95

96 
PART II
Painter’s Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
Paper-backed tape similar to masking tape but with 
a special adhesive that releases easily when you pull 
off the tape. This also makes the tape less likely to 
damage surfaces it’s stuck to. Tears easily and has 
crisp, straight edges, more features that suit its  
sole purpose. 
USE: 
Masking off areas prior to painting or other 
finishing. If you have any masking to do, painter’s 
tape is always worth buying. 
USE TIPS: 
Like masking tape, painter’s tape becomes reluctant 
to let go if left on a surface for long periods. Also, any 
paint that overlaps onto the tape can peel off more 
than you want if the paint is allowed to cure for a long 
time. Best to remove it as soon as the paint dries.
Anti-Slip Tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Slip-resistant tape, tread tape, grip tape.
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy tape with gritty surface, available in light and medium duty and in various widths. 
USE: 
Provides traction for bare feet around pools, on stairways, and in bathrooms.
Painter’s tape (in use).

CHAPTER 14 97
TAPE
Carpet Tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Double-sided carpet tape.
DESCRIPTION: 
Reinforced cloth with adhesive on both sides (one side protected with a removable paper strip).
USE: 
Securing carpeting and other flooring.
Flashing Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
A thick, rubbery tape, about 6 inches wide and in long rolls with removable film covering the adhesive side. 
Butyl rubber backing covered with a plastic backing film. Very strong adhesive. When applied, the tape can 
be stretched to wrap around right angles of window and door frames and even make 90° turns. 
USE: 
Like metal roof flashing (page 78), this 
heavy-duty builder's tape keeps water 
out by bridging over gaps and seams 
between building components. It’s 
become the new standard for window 
and door installation, used to cover the 
sill of window openings or the threshold 
of door openings before the window or 
door goes in. After the unit is installed, 
flashing tape is applied over the flanges 
of the unit’s frame. 
Flashing tape.

PART III
PAINTS, STAINS  
& OTHER FINISHES


100 PART II
100 PART III
ABOUT PAINT
There is no question that painting jobs are made easier and better when you use top-quality paint (and 
painting supplies, such as brushes and rollers). Scrimping here is not a good idea. Getting the cheapest paint 
will almost always yield an inferior job that takes longer, requires more paint, and needs repainting sooner. 
You can expect to pay more for better-quality paint, but in the end it will cover better, have richer color, and 
last longer than lower-quality paint. You don’t necessarily need to get the premier option or pay extra for 
so-called “one-coat” formulas (which are a pipe dream in many cases). If you stick with the top one or two 
grades offered by major brands, you can’t go wrong. 
Check paint-can labels to get an indication of quality. Paint is made of three components: a vehicle 
(solvent or water); a pigment (color); and a binder, usually a resin, to hold it all together. Resin can be natural 
(old-fashioned linseed oil) or synthetic (alkyd, or acrylic polyvinyl acetate). The more pigment and resin the 
better; likewise, the more vehicle the cheaper it is and the less covering power it has (and what good is paint 
that won’t cover well?). For common household paints, pigment content of about one-third and a vehicle and 
binder content of about two-thirds is considered good. Ask for the technical specifications sheet.
Regular decorative paints are generally divided into two types: interior and exterior. Those types are 
generally available in either alkyd/oil-based or latex/water-based formulas, as explained below. Where you 
will be using paint (bathroom, ceiling, shingles, etc.) determines what kind of paint you should buy. 
A final note: Any paint job can be torpedoed by bad surface preparation. This cannot be overemphasized. 
Good wall preparation will make any job that much better—and poor preparation will ruin it. In addition to 
careful surface prep to remove dirt, grime, loose paint, etc., many surfaces should be primed before they are 
painted (see Interior & Exterior Primer, page 103). 
ABOUT LATEX & ALKYD PAINTS
While the overwhelming majority of interior and exterior house paints are latex (water-based), you can still 
find plenty of alkyd or oil-based paint formulas, and these may be preferable for a some specific applications. 

 101
Alkyds, the modern replacement of old-fashioned linseed oil-based paint, are actually a blend of cooked 
vegetable oils and resins that dry faster and have less odor than the old petroleum oil paints. You can use 
either alkyd or latex paint for most painting jobs, but not always. These differences are detailed in the items 
below and on the paint-can labels.
Adding to the confusion is an inconsistency on the part of manufacturers in names. “Latex” is little more 
than a nickname for water-based paint, as standard paint formulas do not contain latex. Many water-based 
paints today are called “acrylic,” which refers to the type of binder used in the paint. Acrylic (and acrylic latex) 
are water-based paints that have acrylic binders. 
The basic difference is that alkyd paints are thinned and cleaned up with paint thinner, or turpentine, 
while latex paints are thinned and cleaned up with warm water, making them mighty popular with the average 
user. Latex paints dry much faster than alkyd paints, have less odor and fewer noxious fumes (see Buying Tip, 
below), and are slightly porous to moisture. However, alkyd paints tend to cover a bit better, and are slightly 
more durable and less prone to showing brush marks. These qualities make alkyd paints the favorite of many 
professionals for painting furniture, cabinets, and trimwork—particularly when a high-gloss sheen (which 
tends to show brush marks) is desired. 
BUYING TIP
Should you worry about low-VOC versus no-VOC? Probably not. Most water-based paint these days is 
relatively low in Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs). VOCs are chemical compounds found in paint 
(and other finishes) that are released into the air as vapor during the drying process. Most VOCs escape as 
the paint is initially drying, which is why you should always paint in a well-ventilated area. VOCs are toxic 
and can cause headaches, nausea, eye irritation, and other problems (usually when you don’t adequately 
ventilate). They also contribute to ground-level smog as they escape into the atmosphere. Oil-based paints 
typically have much higher VOC levels than water-based paints. With all that in mind, a lower level of VOCs 
is a good thing, but you probably don’t need to make no-VOC (or zero-VOC) a requirement unless you’re 
particularly sensitive to chemicals. 

102
INTERIOR PAINTS
CHAPTER 15
Standard Interior Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
Most commonly water-based paint but also available in alkyd (oil-based) as well as specialty types, such as 
linseed oil, soy-based, and old-fashioned milk paint. Labeled for interior use. Interior paints are generally 
available in a variety of sheens—indicating how shiny the paint is when dried. The standard sheens are (from 
the dullest to the shiniest): flat (matte), eggshell, satin, semi-gloss (medium gloss), and gloss or high-gloss. 
Sheen categorization and terminology vary by manufacturer, so that what’s “eggshell” in one brand might be 
“satin” in another. 
Some paints are labeled as “enamel.” This is a loosely applied term but often is used to suggest hardness 
and/or glossiness. As with sheens, usage varies among manufacturers. The term latex enamel is actually a 
misnomer, as enamels technically are oil-based varnish with pigments.
USE: 
Choose a paint sheen based on the application. The higher the sheen the more shiny, washable, and durable 
the surface. But more sheen also means you get more glare from light and that flaws in the underlying surface 
are more visible. Flat paint is best for ceilings, which don’t need to be washed and should not produce glare. 
Eggshell and satin are for living-area walls, offering some washability along with reduced glare and soft 
colors. Semi-gloss is often used for bathroom and kitchen walls, but eggshell or satin also can be used. Gloss 
is used for wood trim, cabinets, and doors, where maximum durability and washability are desired. 
Paint sheens.

USE TIPS: 
Flat paints dry lighter than the color on the label, while glosses tend to dry darker. Textured walls often look 
best with low-glare paint, so opt for eggshell or satin over semi-gloss. A gallon of paint will generally cover 
300 to 400 square feet with one coat.
BUYING TIPS: 
The best way to judge a paint color is to buy a sample in the sheen you intend to use and paint it directly onto 
your wall. This is the only way to see how the color is affected by light and is particularly important on highly 
textured surfaces, which have a lot of reflection and shadowing. Not all paint retailers offer samples in a range 
of sheens; find one that does. 
Interior & Exterior Primer
TYPES:
Alkali-resistant primer
Alkyd primer
Enamel undercoat
Latex primer
Stain-blocking primer
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Sealer, conditioner, undercoater, base coat, primer-sealer, 
stain killer (stain-blocking primer).
DESCRIPTION: 
Primers are almost always a white paint that sticks well to 
a variety of surfaces. Alkyd is thinned with solvent, latex 
with water, and shellac-based stain-blocking primer with 
denatured alcohol.
USE: 
Providing a good, solid, even base for finish paint, because pigmented finish paints cannot sink in and bond 
as well as primer. Primer generally is used on previously unpainted (especially porous) surfaces, such as 
drywall and wood; on surfaces that have been heavily patched; when using high-gloss paint; and when 
changing from a dark to a light color. Finish paint label will indicate the primer recommended. Stain-
blocking primer is used when hiding stains, graffiti, soot, crayon, tape, grease, or knotholes, although some 
new latex and oil paints have stain killer in them. Block filler is used on masonry surfaces. Alkali-resistant 
primer is for damp masonry. (Metal primers are covered on page 109.)
Drywall primer/sealer.
Chapter 15 103

104 PART III
USE TIPS: 
Any primer helps seal and bond. However, for tough stains and surfaces, use a shellac-based, stain-killing 
primer (this stuff solves more problems than any other paint). It’s great for water stains and seals over crayon, 
soot, oil-based adhesives (such as that left by old paneling that’s been removed), and other materials that 
easily bleed through ordinary primer and paint. Shellac primers require only one coat and create strong 
fumes; ventilate the area well. 
NOTE: 
Nail and screw heads will rust through latex primer unless they are sealed off. Alkyd is best for new drywall 
that is going to be wallpapered; latex primer should be used if the drywall is going to be painted. Figure 
coverage of about 250 square feet to the gallon. It is okay to paint over alkyd primer with latex. Primers can 
be tinted at the paint store to give them a little more hiding power and to make the finish paint “holidays” 
(missed spots) less evident.
BUYING TIPS: 
Primer typically is less expensive than standard paint and tends to stick better to more surfaces. Therefore, 
applying an extra coat of standard paint instead of a primer coat usually doesn’t make sense. 
Ceiling Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
White, glare-resistant paint in both latex and alkyd formulations, with more and coarser pigment than wall paint.
USE: 
For ceilings. Some people use ceiling paint on walls, but it is very dull and not as washable as wall paint; it gives 
a dead-flat effect. Wall paint is perfectly all right for use on ceilings, but a flat sheen is recommended. 
USE TIPS: 
Painting ceilings is usually easier if you paint while there is natural light from a window to detect wet, freshly 
painted areas. If white ceiling paint doesn’t cover well, add a teaspoon or two of either lamp black or burnt 
umber colorant. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Ceiling paint costs less than wall paint. 

CHAPTER 15 105
INTERIOR PAINTS
INTERIOR PAINTS
Texture Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
Thick-bodied paint in various 
consistencies ranging from relatively 
thin liquid to material that can be 
worked almost like grout or mortar. 
Comes in a few different forms, 
including: powder that is mixed with 
water or other base; dry additive, such 
as sand or perlite, for mixing into the 
paint of your choice; and in premixed 
white paints. 
USE: 
Matching existing textured walls. 
Hiding badly scarred and cracked 
ceilings or walls. Also just for 
decorative purposes, to create  
various finishes. 
USE TIPS: 
Many different tools, such as crumpled paper, trowels, special paint rollers, and sponges, may be used in 
working texture paint while wet. If you don’t like one effect, you can always rework it. Texture paint is not 
a cure for badly peeling or flaking paint, as its weight will pull the rest of the old paint off—the cause of 
the damage must be cured first. Light textures, such as sand or light stippling textures, are easy to apply 
and tend to yield good results. Thicker textures require expertise; don’t expect a heavily textured wall to 
look like a professional job. Use heavy textures for small patch jobs rather than whole walls or ceilings. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Because of its thick consistency, coverage per gallon of texture paint is limited. It is therefore expensive, but 
it does solve minor problems. An alternative to texture paint is to apply spray texture (page 135) to new or 
patched drywall or plaster, then paint over the texture material. 
Texture paint applied with a roller. 

106
EXTERIOR PAINTS & STAINS
CHAPTER 16
ABOUT EXTERIOR PAINTS & STAINS
When coating exterior wood (and some masonry) surfaces, you have the choice between paint and stain. 
Exterior paint is very much like interior paint, but is designed for outdoor exposure. Exterior stain ranges 
in thickness and opacity: At one end of the range, solid stain is nearly identical to paint if perhaps somewhat 
thinner. At the other end, semi-transparent stain can be very thin and lightly pigmented, making it more 
similar to stain that you might rub onto an indoor furniture project. 
Paint is used on all types of siding and outdoor trim materials, while stain typically is used on wood, and 
specifically on bare wood or previously stained wood. Stain is also the standard choice for decks, fences, and 
other outdoor wood projects. The particulars of exterior paint and stain are discussed below, but as a general 
rule of thumb, if you want to preserve some of the natural coloring and texture of real wood surfaces, look at 
your options for semi-transparent stain; look at solid stain if you want to keep some of the wood texture but 
not the color. 
Like interior paint, exterior paints and stains may be water-based or oil-based. Water-based is preferred by 
most DIYers for its ease of cleanup and its gentler fumes. It’s also somewhat more flexible than oil formulas 
and can adhere better to more surfaces, including vinyl and aluminum siding. Compatibility with the existing 
surface is an important consideration. Water-based paint can be applied over water-based or oil-based paint 
or primer, while oil-based paint should be applied only over oil-based paint or primer. If your house has 
several layers of old oil-based paint, use oil-based for the new paint job; water-based paint over old oil-based 
can lead to cracked and peeling paint. 
Standard Exterior Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
Typically available in the standard range of sheens: flat (matte), eggshell, satin, semi-gloss, and gloss or high-
gloss. Flat paint does a good job hiding imperfections and is commonly used on textured siding and trim and 
on old, weathered siding. Eggshell and satin may be preferred for relatively smooth siding. Semi-gloss and 
gloss are often used for doors, windows, smooth trim, and other smooth surfaces, such as gutters. 
USE: 
Painting siding, trim, doors and window, gutters, soffits, and other exterior elements.
USE TIPS:
Application conditions count with exterior paint. The ideal conditions are when the temperature is between 
50° and 90°F, there’s little or no wind, and you’re in the shade. It’s worth waiting for these conditions 
whenever possible. Wind and direct sunlight dry the paint too quickly and make it difficult to apply. Cold 
temperatures hinder drying and adhesion. Don’t paint very early in the morning or late in the evening, 
because dew can interfere with paint adhesion and drying.

BUYING TIPS: 
The best all-around water-based paint for most houses is 100-percent acrylic. It sticks well and lasts longer 
than most other formulas, including acrylic-vinyl products. 
Exterior Stains
TYPES:
Solid (or opaque) stain (also known as shingle paint)
Semi-transparent stain
Preservative stain (also known as waterproofers)
Specialized stains
DESCRIPTION: 
Oil- or water-based, with pigments and additives to 
resist mildew and moisture. Somewhat like a diluted 
paint with preservatives. In general, the more solid or 
opaque a stain is, the more UV protection it provides 
for the wood. Light, semi-transparent stains offer 
very little protection from sunlight. 
SOLID STAIN: 
Like standard paint, imparts an opaque finish.
SEMI-TRANSPARENT STAIN: 
Contains less pigment and allows the wood grain 
to show through.
PRESERVATIVE: 
Clear; merely darkens the wood slightly. 
Intended only for decay-resistance and not used 
as a decorative finish. 
SPECIALIZED STAINS: 
Include deck stains, weathering stains, and others.
USE: 
Penetrates and preserves exterior wood. Solid and 
semi-transparent stains are designed for use on all 
kinds of wood siding. They color the wood to varying 
degrees and enable it to repel water. Preservatives 
enable wood to repel water and kill wood-rotting 
Waterproofing sealer.
Semi-transparent stain.
Solid-color stain.
CHAPTER 16 107

108 PART III
organisms, especially for wood in contact with soil or water. Among the specialized stains, deck stains are for 
application on decks only, while weathering stains give cedar and redwood an aged look upon application.
USE TIPS: 
Compared to paint, solid and semi-transparent stain is less forgiving of bad application techniques. The 
chief problem is lap mark—stain dries so quickly that before you can apply a fresh brushfull, the previously 
applied stain is dry, causing lap marks. The key is to work in small areas quickly, always keeping a wet edge. 
Also, stir stain frequently to ensure that pigment is properly mixed with the vehicle. Depending on label 
instructions, it may be applied with brushes, high-nap rollers, or spray. When spraying, always “back-
brush”—immediately follow a spray application with a brush or roller to even out the stain and cover any  
thin or missed areas. 
NOTE: 
Observe product safety precautions carefully. Many stains and preservatives are highly toxic and create 
noxious fumes. Rags and other materials containing oil-based products can spontaneously combust if not 
ventilated properly (seems like an old wives’ tale, but this really happens). 
BUYING TIPS: 
Seek expert advice when choosing a stain. The words “protect” and “protection” are used very liberally on 
product packaging. Don’t underestimate the power of sunlight to discolor and wear wood, and remember 
that you have to block light to protect wood from UV damage. Clear and lightly pigmented finishes do not 
block light. 
Concrete Stain
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Acid stain, etching stain.
DESCRIPTION: 
Acid-based liquid with colorant that penetrates concrete surfaces, adding permanent color through a 
chemical process. Creates a semi-transparent finish with varied depth of color. 
USE: 
Decorative finishes for concrete patios, walkways, driveways, and interior concrete floors. The most 
permanent way to color concrete, especially outdoors. Conventional paint doesn’t last long on concrete,  
and even epoxy paint (page 110) isn’t rated for weather exposure. Concrete stain won’t wash off or peel  
like paint can. 
USE TIPS: 
Follow manufacturer’s instructions to the letter. Acid stain is strong stuff and must be mixed and applied 
properly. Careful surface prep is critical for good results.

109
SPECIALTY PAINTS
CHAPTER 17
Metal Primers
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
ZINC CHROMATE: 
White or yellow paint primer thinned with a chemical solvent, such as turpentine. It is used on metal that 
is inside and not expected to be subject to moisture. 
ZINC OXIDE: 
Red primer, also thinned with a chemical solvent. Used on metal that will be exposed to moisture.
USE TIPS: 
Follow primer labels for how to use the material. Once primed, you can use any finish paint—latex or 
alkyd—on the metal as long as it’s compatible with the primer. Read the label on the paint. Alkyd primer will 
generally stand up better.
Rust-Inhibiting Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
Paint with a rust-inhibiting agent (primer) that is part of the formula of the paint. In other words, the paint is 
primer and finish paint in one.
USE: 
Painting metal.
USE TIPS: 
Read the label carefully to ensure that the paint is a primer/finish in one. Some companies make alkyd 
enamels that are purportedly single-coat metal paints, but they require that a primer be used.
Aluminum Paint
DESCRIPTION: 
Aluminum-colored paint consisting of aluminum with a resin base.
USE: 
Painting any kind of exterior or interior metal—fences, radiators, sheds, mailboxes, flashing, etc.

110 PART III
USE TIP: 
Aluminum paint should be allowed to dry overnight before recoating.
BUYING TIPS: 
Cheaper than other metal paints. Great results are easy in spray form.
Epoxy Paint
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Epoxy coating, garage floor paint, epoxy floor paint.
DESCRIPTION: 
Paint or coating for interior or garage concrete floors. Comes in two containers, the contents of which are 
mixed together before use; dries to a hard, glossy finish. May include colorant or color flakes that can be 
added to mix if desired. Often sold in kits containing applicators. 
USE: 
Painting porcelain fixtures, such as sinks and tubs, metal, concrete—just about anything.
USE TIPS: 
Epoxy is volatile and can be dangerous to use. Read cautionary material on the label and make sure area 
where you’re working is well ventilated. It is not cost-effective to use epoxy where other, less-expensive paints 
can be used.
BUYING TIPS: 
A true epoxy is a two-container material. There are one-container, so-called epoxy enamels but these are 
not true epoxies and will not perform like the two-container material. “Epoxy paint” typically describes a 
residential-grade coating that’s designed for easy DIY application. Commercial- and marine-grade products 
are often called “epoxy coatings” and are generally thicker and more durable than epoxy paint and often 
somewhat more difficult to apply (and more expensive). 

CHAPTER 17 111
Stove Paint
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
High-temp paint, high-heat paint.
DESCRIPTION: 
Aerosol spray paint designed for high-temperature surfaces, such as wood-burning stoves and vent pipes 
(chimneys) and barbecue grills. Commonly available in flat-black, but specialty suppliers may offer a range  
of colors. 
USE: 
Touch-ups on wood stoves and vent pipes, outdoor grills, smokers, and the like. Some products can be used 
on stainless steel and other metals. 
USE TIPS: 
Apply spray paint in three or more very thin coats rather than fewer thicker coats. Follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions for curing the paint. Repeated applications over time can help protect against rust. 
Chalkboard Paint
DESCRIPTION:
Flat-black, multi-surface paint that creates a chalkboard-like surface for writing on. Some formulas make the 
surface magnetic as well. 
USE: 
Walls, signs, and craft projects. 
USE TIPS: 
Smooth, hard surfaces work best as chalkboards, for obvious reasons. For a smooth finish, apply the paint in 
several light coats, using a dense foam roller. 
SPECIALTY PAINTS

112
INTERIOR STAINS  
& CLEAR WOOD FINISHES
ABOUT INTERIOR STAINS
Stains are an alternative to paint when you want the grain of the wood to show. As for which is best to use 
in which cases, it is often a matter of personal preference. Surface preparation and application are extremely 
important to a good job, even more so than with paint. 
Standard stain penetrates and permanently colors wood fibers, but it does not provide protection 
from moisture and wear. Some 
manufacturers combine stain 
with a protective finish material, 
such as tung oil or polyurethane, 
creating an all-in-one formula 
that not only colors but also 
seals wood for protection. In 
most cases, however, a separate 
protective finish is applied over 
the stain—even when the stain 
totally hides the wood.
Getting the results you 
want from stain can be tricky. 
The look of stain varies on 
different woods and even on 
different areas of the same piece 
of wood. The only way to see 
the true color is to try it on 
the wood itself. That’s why it’s 
best to test a stain on a piece 
of scrap wood or, if you don’t 
have scraps of the same wood, 
on an inconspicuous area of 
the furniture piece you will be 
staining. Also test a second coat, 
if you’re applying one. 
Testing stain colors on a hidden area.
CHAPTER 18

Interior Stains
TYPES:
Pigmented stain
Dye stain
Gel stain
ALSO KNOWN AS:
PIGMENTED STAIN: 
Pigmented wiping stain, 
pigmented oil stain,  
wiping stain.
DYE: 
Aniline, spirit stain (if 
mixed with lacquer or other 
solvent), water stain, alcohol 
stain, non-grain raising 
(NGR) stain (if mixed with 
certain solvents), penetrating, 
dye-type.
GEL STAIN: 
Heavy-bodied stain.
DESCRIPTION:
PIGMENTED: 
Tiny particles of pigment suspended in either oil or latex (latex is water-based but not a water stain). 
Most common kind—almost like very thin paint. Designed to be brushed on or wiped on with a cloth. 
Penetrates wood fibers and is typically used only on wood.
DYE: 
Aniline dye in powder form, mixed by user with water, oil, or alcohol. When mixed with certain solvents 
becomes an NGR stain, which dries very fast.
GEL: 
Similar to standard pigmented stain but with a thick, gel-like consistency. Unlike standard stain, which 
soaks into the wood, gel stain coats the surface. This makes it good for woods such as pine and birch, 
Gel stain application.
CHAPTER 18 113

114 PART III
which have a closed grain that doesn’t accept standard stain consistently. Gel stain also is preferred for 
vertical surfaces because it doesn’t run during application. It can be applied to a variety of surfaces, 
including engineered wood products, such as hardboard, as well as metal and other materials. 
USE: 
All stains color wood (and other materials, as applicable) and enhance its grain to varying degrees, but 
provide no protection.
USE TIPS: 
Read product label closely for recommended method of application.
PIGMENTED: 
Stir constantly, as the pigment never dissolves—it is merely suspended. Wiping-type is easiest to use 
because you have more control over the rather slow process. Even though the colors are not as pure or 
transparent as dye stains, the results are quite good and color-fast.
DYE: 
Clearest, deepest penetrating colors—but the hardest to obtain and hardest to apply. Tends to raise grain. 
Surface and NGR types—or any mixed with lacquer, alcohol, or varnish—are hardest to handle and 
should be left to professionals. Used on the finest hardwoods; not sun-resistant.
GEL: 
Generally more foolproof than standard liquid stain. Easier to achieve consistent coloring, particularly on 
difficult woods. Hides wood grain better than lighter-bodied stain. Sticks to surfaces without running but 
also collects in corners and crevices. A good option for beginners but only if consistent coloring is more 
important than highlighting wood grain. 
Stain Remover
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Aniline stain remover.
USE: 
Removes deeply imbedded stains and water marks.
USE TIPS: 
If stains cannot be completely removed, sanding the wood will make it lighter. If it is an alcohol-based or 
lacquer-based stain, the wood can be lightened slightly by rubbing with denatured alcohol, lacquer thinner, 
or a mixture of both.

CHAPTER 18 115
Bleach
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Bleaching solution, wood bleach.
DESCRIPTION: 
Liquid product, generally sold in two parts. Similar product but less strong (although poisonous) is oxalic 
acid, which is sold as crystals or powder.
USE: 
Applied to bare wood prior to final finishing to produce lighter tones, remove water marks, or to make an 
uneven surface color even.
USE TIP: 
Use caution when working with these caustic products.
ABOUT CLEAR WOOD FINISHES
Technically, paint is just another finish for wood. But when one thinks of wood finishes, one ordinarily 
thinks of products that allow the wood to show through to varying degrees. There are two basic types of 
protective wood finish: surface and penetrating. Surface, or surface-forming, finishes create a continuous, 
often glossy, layer on top of the wood and offer the most protection from moisture and daily wear. 
Penetrating finishes soak into the wood surface and harden, forming a lighter protective layer within the 
wood fibers.
In general, if you want a surface to be washable or, rather, wipeable with a damp cloth, use a surface 
finish. If you want to retain (most of) the feel of the wood and won’t leave sweating drink glasses or other 
wet stuff on the surface, use a penetrating finish. 
Clear finishes do one of two things: They protect the wood or, if they have some stain mixed in them, 
both color and protect it at the same time. However, even the clearest finish will darken wood somewhat. 
Think of varnish as oil paint without the pigment. Whatever you use, it is always a good idea to test the 
product on a separate piece of wood or in an out-of-the-way spot to ensure that you will be getting the 
finish you really want.
ABOUT SURFACE FINISHES
This group of finishes stays right on top of the wood. The coloring of the wood grain shows through, but the 
finished surface feels more like plastic than wood. Surface finishes typically are applied in multiple thin layers 
to achieve a buildup.
INTERIOR STAINS & CLEAR WOOD FINISHES

116 PART III
Polyurethane
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Urethane, poly.
DESCRIPTION: 
Available as both a petroleum derivative with a resin base (“oil-based”) and in a water-based formula.  
Very similar to traditional oil-based varnish, of which it is the modern version. Dries quickly, and when 
thinned can act as its own primer/sealer. Comes in satin or high-gloss, often called gymnasium finish.
Polyurethane gloss finishes.

CHAPTER 18 117
USE: 
All-around protective coating for wood furniture, trim, and floors. Resists alcohol, household chemicals, 
abrasion, and chipping. Most durable finish. Usually applied with a brush or lamb’s-wool applicator, but 
also can be wiped on. Wipe-on formulas are the easiest to apply but create thinner coats than conventional 
versions, requiring more coats for the same protection. 
USE TIPS: 
Can outlast traditional varnish two to one. As rugged as it is after curing, polyurethane must be carefully 
applied and directions for temperature, thinning, and surface preparation followed rigorously. Also, oil-
based polyurethane vapors and sanding dust are potentially harmful, so use maximum ventilation and an 
appropriate respirator. Allow plenty of time for each coat to cure—days in some cases.
BUYING TIPS: 
Oil-based versus water-based? Oil-based finishes impart a warm, amber coloring, particularly to light-colored 
woods, such as oak, birch, and maple. They create stronger fumes and take longer to dry but often require 
fewer coats. Water-based formulas are clear, less smelly, and they dry faster, but they may need one more coat 
than oil-based. 
Varnish
TYPES:
Alkyd varnish
Spar varnish
Tung oil varnish
ALSO KNOWN AS:
SPAR: 
Marine spar, outdoor, phenolic.
TUNG OIL: 
Penetrating oil varnish.
NOTE: 
The term varnish is sometimes used generically for all clear surface finishes and usually includes 
polyurethane, which is listed separately here because it is used so widely.
DESCRIPTION: 
Various durable formulations with a finish ranging from flat to high-gloss. Regular varnishes take a day 
or more to dry, but quick-drying, rubbing varnishes take only five hours or so to dry. Some types are also 
available in water-based formulas. 
INTERIOR STAINS & CLEAR WOOD FINISHES

118 PART III
USE: 
Finishing wood trim inside and outside the house.
USE TIPS: 
Most varnishes take a long time to dry, so dust can be a problem. Varnish generally needs renewing from 
time to time. Spar varnish resists sunlight, water (and salt water), and alcohol more than others, but is not 
recommended for indoor use. Alkyd is less durable.
BUYING TIPS: 
The alkyd formulation is least expensive; tung oil the most expensive.
Shellac
DESCRIPTION: 
A mixture of a liquid traditionally made from an Indian insect—the lac bug—and alcohol. Currently, artificial 
substitutes are used as well. Comes as a cream-colored liquid known as white shellac as well as an amber-colored 
one known as orange. It is available in a number of different “cuts,” referring to the number of pounds of lac 
flakes, the basic shellac component, per gallon of denatured alcohol. For example, a three-pound “cut” means 
three pounds of flakes mixed with one gallon of alcohol. Also available in flake form for mixing on location.
USE: 
Furniture finish that dries very quickly. Also used as a paint primer/sealer over hard-to-hide colors, patterns, 
or knotholes.
USE TIPS: 
Shellac is not waterproof and responds badly to alcohol; it is also brittle. But as easy as it is to damage, it is 
easy to repair. It may be waxed for protection too.
BUYING TIPS:
Shellac has a short shelf life. If a can is not dated, test it for clarity and drying time.
Lacquer
DESCRIPTION: 
High-gloss finish that dries almost instantly. Thins with lacquer thinner.
USE: 
Favored by professional furniture finishers because it dries so quickly. Somewhat similar to varnish. Goes on 
in thin coats.

CHAPTER 18 119
USE TIPS: 
Apply with spray. It dries too quickly to be applied by brush unless specifically formulated. Somewhat 
delicate to use for amateurs, except as a touch-up using aerosol spray cans.
ABOUT PENETRATING OIL FINISHES
These finishes are absorbed into the fibers of the wood and actually become part of the wood. They are 
known for giving the more natural appearance of being “hand-rubbed” and are thus quite different from the 
surface finishes described above. However, the principle is similar—protecting wood.
Penetrating Oil Finishes
TYPES:
Linseed oil
Tung oil
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
BLENDS: 
Danish oil, antique  
oil, Danish penetrating oil, 
drying oil finish.
TUNG: 
China wood oil, China 
nut oil.
DESCRIPTION: 
Oil that penetrates into 
wood fibers and hardens 
(polymerizes). Typically 
leaves a satin finish with a 
hand-rubbed look. Many 
different types of blends 
are available, but most are 
formulations that include 
either tung oil and/or 
linseed oil and solvents and 
dryers. They often have stains 
Penetrating oil application.
INTERIOR STAINS & CLEAR WOOD FINISHES

120 PART III
incorporated as well. Some of the most popular brands are mostly linseed oil, which costs much less than 
tung oil. Some purists still use pure linseed or tung oil, but the blends solve a multitude of problems found in 
the pure oils.
Tung oil is made from the nut of the tung tree, originally found only in China, and is a major ingredient in 
enamels and varnishes. Many finishes with varying amounts of tung oil in them use “tung oil” in their name, 
but some might only have a little in them. Check the label. 
USE: 
Protects wood trim and furniture inside the home. Easy to apply—brushes or wipes on with rag or hand. 
Very durable—needs little maintenance. Successive layers make for a greater sheen.
USE TIPS: 
Some types are safe for surfaces that come into contact with food. Tung oil is highly resistant to water and 
mildew, and it dries fast. However, it is harder to get good results with pure tung oil than with the many 
modern penetrating oils that mix tung with various additives to give a much more predictable product. 
Similarly, linseed oil, squeezed from flax seeds, is the prime ingredient in some of the more popular blends 
but can also be found pure. It should be “boiled” rather than “raw.” Raw linseed oil takes months to dry or 
may not completely dry at all.
Linseed oil tends to darken with age and need renewal. It is difficult to apply by itself. Like tung  
oil, it is a common ingredient in other products. Pure linseed oil is not recommended for the average  
do-it-yourselfer.
BUYING TIPS: 
Some brands are available in a combination with stain and sealer for one-step usage. Others are formulated 
for filling small gaps.

CHAPTER 18 121
INTERIOR STAINS & CLEAR WOOD FINISHES
Sealer
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Sanding sealer.
DESCRIPTION: 
Clear oil that penetrates deep into wood fibers and seals the surface.
USE: 
Protects against grain raising, moisture, and general weathering; as a conditioner and as a primer for varnish, 
penetrating stain, polyurethane, or high-gloss paints, preventing blotches. Can also be used as a rust inhibitor 
on metal.
Wood Filler
DESCRIPTION: 
Finely ground silex (rock) paste.
USE: 
Fills pores of open-grain wood and acts as a primer for varnish, polyurethane, and some lacquer. Can be 
tinted to match wood.
BUYING TIPS: 
Available in oil- and water-based formulas. Oil-based is thicker and easier to apply because of its much longer 
working time. Water-based is more compatible with a variety of wood finishes. 

122
THINNERS, CLEANERS, REMOVERS  
& PREPARERS
CHAPTER 19
ABOUT THINNERS
Warning: Thinners are known generally as solvents, or reducers. Most are petroleum distillates and therefore 
volatile and flammable. Handle with care.
Paint Thinner
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Mineral spirits.
DESCRIPTION: 
Petroleum distillate product. Lowest of a number of grades of chemicals distilled from coal, such as benzene, 
acetone, or naphtha. Extremely volatile and flammable. Generally has only a mild odor.
USE: 
Thinning and cleaning up oil-based paints; cleaning up various adhesives and other materials.
USE TIPS: 
Avoid splashing in eyes or prolonged contact with skin by wearing goggles and gloves. Avoid diluting final 
coats of paint; use primarily on prime coats.
BUYING TIPS: 
Least expensive of this family of products. Used thinner can be recycled, as paint sinks to the bottom of the 
container. Don’t buy premium-priced “odorless” thinners. It’s the paint that smells, and you can’t do much 
about that.
Turpentine
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Pure gum spirits, turps.
DESCRIPTION: 
Distilled from pine sap. Slightly lower-quality turpentine, called steamed distilled turpentine, is distilled from 
steamed pine tree bark. Has pronounced odor.

USE: 
Thins fine paints; particularly good for thinning exterior oil-based paints, making them easier to apply; 
general cleanup of all paints. Excellent for cleaning smooth surfaces.
USE TIPS: 
Better, quicker, stronger solvent than paint thinner, but has odor.
BUYING TIPS: 
Much more expensive than paint thinner, which does most of the jobs that turpentine does.
Lacquer Thinner
DESCRIPTION: 
Extremely volatile petroleum-based solvent.
USE: 
Cleaning, removing, and thinning lacquer or other oil-based paint products. Cleaning any durable surface, 
especially removal of tape or adhesive residue.
USE TIP: 
Extremely flammable; use with maximum ventilation.
Denatured Alcohol
DESCRIPTION: 
Volatile solvent. Ethyl alcohol containing additives that add odor and toxicity (so that people don’t drink it, 
believe it or not). 
USE:
Thinning and removing paints and varnishes, removing grease and other smudges, fuel for chafing dishes. 
Main solvent for shellac.
USE TIPS: 
Toxic, but generally safer to use than wood or methanol alcohols, which are strong poisons.
CHAPTER 19 123

124 PART III
Paint & Varnish Remover
TYPES:
Water wash off remover
Solvent wash off remover
No-wash remover
Latex paint remover
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Stripper, chemical stripper,  
paint remover.
DESCRIPTION: 
All are dangerous, strong 
chemicals with varying degrees  
of volatility.
WATER WASH OFF: 
Liquid or paste containing detergents that allow it to be washed off with water. Very volatile, but 
nonflammable—unlike other removers.
SOLVENT WASH OFF: 
Liquid or paste that is washed away with solvent—either a petroleum distillate or denatured alcohol.
NO-WASH: 
Remover that can be merely wiped off surface with an absorbent cloth.
LATEX PAINT REMOVER: 
Solvent or water-based chemical that acts only on latex, not oil-based, paints.
USE: 
Removes paint, varnishes, and other finishes from wood. Typically, the remover is applied, allowed to remain 
a specified time, and then it—and the old finish—is scraped off. Latex paint removers also remove crayon, 
tape residue, gum, and grease.
USE TIPS: 
Removers work, but most are messy and include dangerous, very strong chemicals. Read labels carefully 
for cautions. Use proper safety equipment: goggles and heavy rubber gloves, long sleeves and long pants, 
and adequate ventilation; and keep a water source ready in case you get some caustic chemical on your skin. 
Do not use in direct sunlight. Note that other, safer chemicals may be able to remove finishes. For example, 
denatured alcohol will remove shellac, as well as some varnishes. Lacquer thinner takes off lacquer. Heat 
removes paint (but not varnish) very well, through the use of heat guns or plates, and it is not toxic—though 
Solvent-based chemical stripper (in use).

CHAPTER 19 125
the old paint may be. Use a liquid remover only on horizontal surfaces, or it will run off. A paste remover can 
be used on vertical and horizontal surfaces. Water-based strippers raise the wood grain. Plastic abrasive pads 
are excellent substitutes for steel wool when removing gooey paint residue.
BUYING TIPS: 
There are many different removers available, ranging from high to low toxicity and even “nontoxic,” which 
does not mean it’s okay if ingested or gets in your eyes. Generally, the strongest chemical formulas work the 
fastest but are the most toxic. Strippers containing methylene chloride (dichloromethane) typically are  
the most toxic and noxious, followed by those made with N-Methylpyrrolidone (NMP). “Safe” stripper 
formulas may be sufficiently low-toxicity to use indoors, and include citrus-based and soy-based formulas. 
Wood Scratch & Hole Fillers
TYPES:
Color stick
Lacquer stick
Liquid colorant
Shellac stick
Wood putty
Wood patch
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
WOOD PUTTY: 
Wood dough, Plastic Wood® (brand name; premixed type), wood patcher, wood patching compound, 
wood filler.
DESCRIPTION:
COLOR STICK: 
Relatively soft, crayon-like stick in various wood colors.
LACQUER & SHELLAC STICKS: 
Lacquer and shellac in hard stick form. They come in a variety of wood colors and are melted for use.
LIQUID COLORANT: 
Aniline dyes in small bottles in various colors.
WOOD PUTTY: 
Permanently soft putty often made of fibers and adhesives, available in a range of wood colors, sold in 
small containers. Wood Putty™ is also a brand name.
THINNERS, CLEANERS, REMOVERS & PREPARERS

126 PART III
WOOD PATCH: 
Paste that hardens and may or may not be paintable and stainable, water (latex) or solvent-based, quick-
setting or not, or is a two-part epoxy or polyester compound. Water Putty® is a brand name for a gypsum-
based (plaster) powder that is mixed with water and quickly becomes extremely hard.
USE: 
Shellac, lacquer stick, and water putty are for holes, though they can also be used on deep scratches. Color sticks 
and dyes are for scratches; the former is rubbed over the scratch while the latter is applied with a tiny brush.
BUYING TIPS: 
Powdered water putty is amazingly useful. Unused portions can be stored indefinitely (the premixed kind 
tends to dry out), and it can be used for large holes and even as a floor leveler. No worker should be without 
a large can.
Sandpaper
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Abrasive paper, coated abrasive, garnet paper, production paper.
DESCRIPTION: 
Sandpaper is made in various degrees of coarseness, with different abrasive materials adhered to various 
backings. Some (the very finest grades) can be used dry or wet—that is, moistened with water or oil.  
This keeps the dust down and acts as a lubricant to prevent scratches on very smooth or polished surfaces. 
Sandpaper comes described both by number—either of two kinds—and verbally. With either system, the 
higher the number, the finer the grit of the paper. The range commonly available includes:
Very fine (8/0 to 6/0, or 280- to 220-grit)
Fine (5/0 to 4/0, or 180- to 150-grit)
Medium (3/0 to 1/0, or 120- to 80-grit)
Coarse (1/2 to 1 1/2, or 60- to 40-grit)
Extreme ranges include grits of 12 on the coarse end and upwards of 2,500 on the fine end of the scale. 
Grit numbers refer to the size of the abrasive grains themselves; the numbers are higher for finer grades 
because there are more pieces of grit per square inch.
This classification is only relative and varies somewhat from manufacturer to manufacturer and material 
to material. Remember that the grit, or mesh, is your most accurate guide from brand to brand.
Sandpaper also comes with closed and open coat, meaning the grit is farther apart or closer together. 
If closed coat, the grit covers 100 percent of the surface; with open coat, the grit may cover only 60 to 70 
percent. Open coat tends to clog up less with sawdust, which is a big advantage on belt sanders, and it lasts 
longer, but closed coat will cut faster.

CHAPTER 19 127
Three common kinds of paper are flint (least durable and least expensive), emery (called emery cloth or 
emery paper), and aluminum oxide (most common). Flint is cream or tan; emery, black; and aluminum oxide, 
a reddish color. The weight—the thickness or stiffness of the backing material—is designated by letters. 
Paper backing is rated A to E, thin to thick; C or D is usually best. Cloth backing is rated J or X; J is thinner 
and more flexible, while X is thicker and used for heavy-duty and power sanding.
Sandpaper is available in many forms, including the familiar 9 × 11-inch sheets, peel-and-stick or Velcro-
backed pieces for easy adhering to power sanders, and sanding sponges that work as handy sanding blocks 
and have beveled edges for reaching fine edges and tight corners. 
USE TIPS: 
For even hand-sanding, wrap sandpaper sheets around a wood block (or an old sanding sponge) for flat 
surfaces and straight edges, or around a wood dowel for sanding curves. Many common materials, some 
types of paint, plaster, and treated wood, yield a toxic sanding dust. Use wet sandpaper and/or a respirator,  
as applicable.
Steel Wool
DESCRIPTION: 
Steel thread of various thicknesses loosely woven into hand-sized pads; also sold in bulk packages. Bronze 
wool, also available, is simply steel wool made of bronze. Now, synthetic steel wool (also known as abrasive 
nylon pads or sanding pads) is widely available. Pads are made from synthetic fibers and abrasive particles in 
various thicknesses; they resemble dishwashing scouring pads.
USE: 
Steel wool is used for a variety of purposes, including a final wiping of wood and other surfaces prior to 
finishing, taking the gloss off a surface prior to painting or finishing, removing hardened substances such as 
dried paint, and applying final finishing materials, such as wax.
Steel wool comes in six or seven grades ranging from 0000 (super-fine), through 000 (extra-fine),  
00 (very fine), 0 (medium fine), No. 1 (medium), No. 2 (medium coarse), and No. 3 (coarse).
USE TIPS: 
Bronze, stainless steel, and synthetic pads are better for use with water-based finishes, as loose strands will 
not rust. Fine steel wool is great for putting a shine back on old metal parts and can even be used to clean 
window glass (with 0000 wool only). 
BUYING TIPS: 
For removal jobs, synthetic steel wool is the way to go. It won't shed, splinter, or rust. It can be rinsed and 
reused a few times, and it is generally longer lasting, safer, and cleaner to use.
THINNERS, CLEANERS, REMOVERS & PREPARERS

PART IV
WALL, CEILING &  
FLOOR REPAIR MATERIALS


130
130
DRYWALL & PLASTER  
PATCHING MATERIALS
CHAPTER 20
ABOUT DRYWALL & PLASTER REPAIR
Both drywall and plaster are made with gypsum—the chalky, white dust that drizzles all over the floor 
whenever you drill into your wall or ceiling. Because of this, drywall and plaster can be repaired with the 
same materials, by and large. If you’re just filling holes left over from hanging pictures or curtain hardware 
and the like, use some spackling compound. This is also the best stuff to have on hand when prepping walls 
and ceilings for a new paint job. For pretty much every other type of wall or ceiling repair, you can use 
drywall joint compound or patching plaster.
Large holes that go through drywall or plaster usually call for a patch of new drywall or a drywall patch 
kit. Seams around drywall patches should be covered with drywall joint tape and coated with three layers of 
drywall compound. You can also use compound to create a texture to blend repairs into the surrounding area. 
Joint Compound
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Drywall compound, drywall mud.
DESCRIPTION: 
Available as premixed paste and in powder form that is mixed with water. Comes in three main types: setting 
(or taping), topping, and all-purpose. Setting-type dries fast and hard and is used most commonly for the first 
coat over drywall joint tape (page 131), when finishing new drywall. Topping is a lighter, softer formula used 
for the finish coats over the taping coat. These two types are most commonly used by professionals when 
finishing new drywall installations. However, setting compound is also suitable for plaster and drywall repairs 
in relatively small areas. All-purpose compound is softer (and a bit easier to work) than setting-type and is 
harder than topping-type, so it’s used for both taping and finish coats, as well as general repairs. 
USE: 
Sealing drywall joints with joint tape as well as extremely shallow patching, such as in areas where paint has 
peeled. Intended for use over wide areas in thin, successive coats. A number of applications will likely be 
required because joint compound shrinks as it dries. Must be primed (with primer or flat latex paint) prior  
to painting. 
USE TIPS: 
Joint compound works best when applied in multiple thin layers to prevent excessive shrinking and cracking 
of the compound. Apply with a 4-inch putty knife (for very small areas) or a 6-inch or wider drywall knife, 
smoothing each layer with the knife and feathering it out beyond the previous coat. Smooth each coat further 

after it dries by sanding with sandpaper or, to minimize dust, with a damp drywall sanding sponge. To create 
texture, use compound thinned slightly with water and apply with anything that creates the desired effect—
whisk broom, trowel, rag, sponge, etc. Experiment on a scrap of drywall or plywood to see what works best. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Premixed all-purpose joint compound is typically recommended for DIYers because it’s already mixed to the 
proper consistency and it has a long working time before it sets up. However, it usually has to dry overnight 
and, while it stores well, the compound in the container eventually dries out too. If you need only a little 
compound here and there and/or you’re pressed for time, consider a dry mix of setting-type compound. 
This can set in as little as 15 minutes (the number on the bag indicates the working time) and often can be 
recoated or painted in just a few hours. The dry mix lasts forever in storage as long as it doesn’t get wet. Mix 
batches with small amounts of water to the consistency of warm peanut butter. A potato masher speeds 
mixing and prevents lumps (rinse off all the mud before putting the masher in the dishwasher). 
Joint Tape
TYPES:
Paper tape
Fiberglass mesh tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Wallboard tape, drywall tape.
DESCRIPTION: 
Two-inch-wide paper or fiberglass 
mesh strip sold in rolls of various 
lengths. Paper tape is non-adhesive 
and has a crease down the middle 
to facilitate folding it in half 
lengthwise to apply to inside 
corners of walls or ceilings. It must 
be applied over a continuous layer 
of joint compound (page 130) to adhere it to the wall or ceiling surface. Fiberglass mesh is self-adhesive 
and is applied the wall or ceiling surface before being covered with joint compound. Cementboard or alkali-
resistant mesh tape is a special type of joint tape for use with cementboard (tile backer) and the cement-based 
mortar used to cover cementboard joints. 
USE: 
Always used in conjunction with joint compound, joint tape is essential to creating lasting finishes over joints 
(seams) in drywall panels and repairs. It can also span over small holes (up to about 2 inches in diameter, 
such as the dimple created by a doorknob) to eliminate the need to install a drywall patch. 
Fiberglass  
mesh joint tape.
Paper 
joint tape.
CHAPTER 20 131

132 PART IV
USE TIPS: 
For beginners, fiberglass mesh is much easier to use than paper tape, because you can stick it to the wall 
and add a thin layer of joint compound whenever you’re ready. Paper tape must be embedded in an even 
layer of wet compound, then smoothed and flattened carefully with a drywall knife, pushing out just 
the right amount of mud from behind the tape. Because mesh-tape joints generally are not as strong as 
paper-tape joints, manufacturers recommend using setting-type joint compound for at least the first  
layer over mesh tape. However, strength is more important for new drywall panel installation and for 
joints over doors and windows (which tend to move and crack) than it is for patches, holes, and other 
basic repairs.  
Patching Plaster
ALSO KNOWN AS:
Wall patch, plaster patch, plaster of Paris, painter’s plaster.
DESCRIPTION: 
Plaster-based paste commonly sold as a dry powder that you mix with water. Contains additives to make it 
more workable, and to give it a longer set time than traditional wall plaster or plaster of Paris. Applied to wall or 
ceiling with a trowel, typically in one application. Sets in approximately 90 minutes. Plaster of Paris is the generic 
name for a very common product made of ground-up and treated gypsum rock (originally mined near Paris). 
USE:
PATCHING PLASTER: 
Filling large cracks and breaks in plaster surfaces, but not holes. Similar to setting-type joint compound 
but better for repairing large defects, because it can be applied thicker. Not suitable for molding/casting. 
PLASTER OF PARIS: 
Reconstructing plaster molding and other details; filling very large patches; anchoring ceramic bathroom 
fixtures; hobby projects, such as molding and casting (check the product literature; not all plaster of Paris 
should come in contact with skin). 
USE TIPS: 
Dampen surfaces before applying, or use a bonding agent (page 133), to ensure adhesion to old plaster and 
lath (the wood strips that hold the plaster to the wall or ceiling framing). Use patching plaster for repairing 
large defects, not for fine cracks (use spackling compound instead) or for smoothing over broad areas (use 
all-purpose joint compound). 

DRYWALL & PLASTER PATCHING MATERIALS
CHAPTER 20 133
Spackling Compound
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Spackle® (brand name), spackling, spackling paste.
DESCRIPTION: 
Lightweight, gypsum-based paste. Extremely fast setting and nonshrinking. Sold in tubs, tubes, and even 
pencil-like dispensers. The verb “to spackle” comes from the German verb spachteln, meaning to fill or smooth  
a surface; Spackle is a brand name that is used—incorrectly—in a generic way for this family of products.
USE: 
Filling small and/or shallow holes and depressions in drywall and plaster surfaces. Applied with a putty  
knife or small drywall knife, or by hand for small nail and tack holes. Ideal for quick, single application prior 
to painting. 
BUYING TIPS: 
“Lightweight” spackling compound is almost fluffy and dries so fast it can be painted in about 15 minutes, 
but it doesn’t spread smoothly like standard spackling. Use lightweight for nail and screw holes, smoothing it 
flat with a putty knife or even your finger.  
Bonding Agent
DESCRIPTION: 
Resinous emulsion that is brushed or rolled onto wall surface and allowed to dry until it becomes tacky.
USE: 
Dramatically increases bonding of new plaster or cementitious material to any structurally sound surface. Virtually 
welds the patch to the old material. Useful for repairing cracks in and gaps of peeling paint on old plaster.
USE TIPS: 
While it is necessary to wait until this becomes tacky, it is okay to wait as much as two weeks after application 
to apply the plaster to it.
BUYING TIPS: 
Yields excellent results. Some types are made specifically for plaster or concrete, while others work with both 
or are marked for interior or exterior use. Check the label carefully.
DRYWALL & PLASTER PATCHING MATERIALS

134 PART IV
Self-Adhesive Wall Patch
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Metal drywall repair patch.
DESCRIPTION: 
Four- to eight-inch square piece of fiberglass mesh with adhesive backing, containing a perforated aluminum 
plate in its center. Peel-and-stick patching tape has no metal and is slightly flexible.
USE: 
Patching large holes in drywall, plaster, or hollow-core doors with a minimum of patching material. The 
aluminum eliminates the need to fill the hole with drywall, and the adhesive mesh eliminates the need for 
pre-mudding. Smaller versions, made only of very stiff mesh, are specifically designed to bridge the gap 
between drywall and electrical boxes, a gap that is particularly hard to fill without cracking. They are placed 
over the entire hole and then the inside is cut out to leave the electrical box open while providing surface 
around it for patching compound. Patching tape is for small holes and cracks in plaster.

CHAPTER 20 135
DRYWALL & PLASTER PATCHING MATERIALS
DRYWALL & PLASTER PATCHING MATERIALS
Drywall Repair Clip
DESCRIPTION: 
Small, perforated, flat metal clip with openings on opposite sides.
USE: 
Provides instant bracing for repair of large holes in drywall. The “filler” piece of drywall is simply clipped in 
place and then covered with patching compound. Eliminates the need to cut back the surrounding drywall to 
the nearest studs or to install wood bracing. 
Spray Texture
DESCRIPTION: 
Wall/ceiling texture in a can. Aerosol spray containing a paint-like medium and filler material for  
instant texturing of wall or ceiling surfaces. Simulates the spray equipment used by professionals to create 
various effects.
USE: 
Texturing patches and repairs to blend them with the original surface texture. Different formulas available for 
recreating various popular textures, including orange-peel, knockdown, and popcorn (acoustical) textures. 
USE TIPS: 
Works pretty well for areas up to a few square feet. Is not suitable for texturing an entire wall or ceiling of new 
drywall (call a pro for that). Always test the texture on a clean scrap of drywall or cardboard. Shake can well 
before application. If you don’t like how it looks on the wall, scrape it off with a drywall knife or wide putty 
knife while it’s still wet. Let the surface dry, then try again. 

136
INTERIOR FLOOR  
REPAIR MATERIALS
CHAPTER 21
Vinyl Seam Adhesive
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Vinyl repair adhesive.
DESCRIPTION: 
Special glue for vinyl (resilient) flooring. Sold in a squeeze bottle with a pointed applicator tip. Most types 
are washable with a wet rag. 
USE: 
Vinyl flooring repairs, including installing patches to replace damaged areas and resticking loose edges  
and seams. 
USE TIPS: 
Clean the repair area thoroughly before applying adhesive. Roll flooring with a seam roller (wallpaper seam 
roller) to flatten and smooth the vinyl and create a strong bond. Repair damaged flooring by replacing area 
with a patch of leftover flooring (if you have some; if not, remove a piece from under an appliance or other 
inconspicuous area). Place the patch material over the floor and double-cut through both layers to create a 
perfectly sized patch. 
Flooring Repair Kit
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Floor and tile repair kit, vinyl repair kit.
DESCRIPTION:
Liquid or paste compound made with vinyl, acrylic, or similar materials. Essentially a hole-filler that dries 
to a hard finish and can be painted or stained and sometimes textured. Kits may include special applicators, 
mixing vessels, colorants (for mixing custom colors), or texture paper (a textured film for embossing the 
repair material to match flooring). 
USE: 
Repairing small tears, holes, and gouges in vinyl, linoleum, ceramic tile, wood, and laminate flooring. Some 
formulas can be used on laminate countertops. Kits specifically for laminate and wood flooring often include 
a clear lacquer for sealing over the repair and blending with prefinished or polyurethane-coated flooring.

CHAPTER 21 137
Carpet Seam Tape
DESCRIPTION: 
Wide, double-sided tape designed to stick 
to subflooring on the bottom side and 
carpet backing on the top side. Various 
types available, including thin plastic 
versions, heavy-duty types with mesh 
backing, and traditional hot-melt tape 
that requires a carpet seaming iron to 
melt the adhesive. Also types are available 
specifically for indoor/outdoor carpet. 
USE: 
Repairing or reattaching loose carpet seams 
and edges, installing carpet patches. 
BUYING TIPS: 
The best type for installing carpet repair 
patches or securing loose seams is pressure-sensitive tape with a heavy-duty mesh backing. It’s strong and 
bonds well to carpet backing without the need for heat. 
Tile Repair Adhesive
DESCRIPTION: 
Water-based adhesive in a caulking-type tube, applied with a caulk gun. Similar look and consistency to 
standard white school glue. 
USE: 
Filling voids under tile (ceramic, porcelain, stone) and bonding tile to substrate to eliminate hollow sound or 
to re-adhere loose or rocking tile. Adhesive is squirted into holes drilled through the grout joints surrounding 
the problem tile. Cleans up with water. Holes are filled with matching grout to complete repair. 
Tile Adhesive
TYPES:
Mastic
Thinset
Pressure-sensitive 
carpet seam tape.

138 PART IV
DESCRIPTION: 
Two types of adhesive for 
installing ceramic, porcelain, 
or stone tile. Mastic is a latex 
(usually water-based but may be 
solvent-based) formula that comes 
premixed in plastic tubs. It’s 
typically used for wall tile. Thinset 
is a cement-based powder that you 
mix with water, typically used for 
floor tile and always for tile laid 
over concrete or cementboard.
USE: 
Installing tile for repairs or  
new installation. 
USE TIPS: 
Both mastic and thinset are 
applied with a notched trowel, 
which spreads the adhesive 
in V-shaped or square-edged 
channels. This helps the tiles lie 
flat—at the right height—and aids 
adhesion by creating a suction effect. You can spread the adhesive with a putty knife, but if you use too much 
or too little, the tile will sit too high or low. Scrape out oozed adhesive from grout joints before it dries. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Small plastic containers of thinset are handy for repairs. They have extra space for adding water and mixing 
right in the container, which is discarded when you’re done. 
Grout
DESCRIPTION: 
Cement-based mortar sold in dry powder that you mix with water. Forms a gritty paste with consistency of 
peanut butter. Comes in sanded and unsanded (non-sanded) versions. Sold in large bags and various tub sizes 
in a range of colors. 

CHAPTER 21 139
USE: 
Filling the joints (spaces) around ceramic, porcelain, and stone tile. Used when installing new tile, replacing 
broken or loose tile, or replacing just the grout around well-adhered tiles. 
USE TIPS: 
Mix grout by adding water to the dry powder and stirring until entirely moistened, then let the mixture sit for 
about ten minutes (called “slaking”). Stir the mixture again just before applying, but do not add more water. 
Grout sets up in about 15 minutes after slaking, so work quickly. Apply with a grout float or, if you have just a 
tile or two to fix or very small joints, you can use your finger. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Sanded grout is most commonly used for floor tile or any grout joints 1/8 inch wide and wider. Unsanded grout is for 
joints under 1/8 inch wide. Bring a chunk of the old grout with you to the store to find the best color match. 
INTERIOR FLOOR REPAIR MATERIALS

140
CONCRETE FLOOR &  
WALL REPAIR MATERIALS
CHAPTER 22
ABOUT CONCRETE REPAIRS
Repairing concrete is largely a cosmetic effort, as concrete slabs and walls are massive monolithic structures 
that can’t be fixed with surface treatments. That said, patching holes and filling cracks in concrete can help 
forestall or prevent further damage by keeping out water that can freeze and expand inside the cavities, and to 
keep out weeds and soil. 
Repair materials include various concrete mixes, cement-based mortars with special additives, thin 
surfacing mixtures, and caulks and sealants. Often, the appropriate material is determined by the thickness 
of the repair. For example, standard bagged concrete contains large gravel and is thus suitable for repairs that 
are over 1/2 inch in thickness. Caulks are suitable for narrow cracks, while wide cracks call for a cementitious 
mortar product that locks itself into place. 
Despite popular usage, cement and concrete are not the same thing. Cement is merely the glue, or 
binder, in concrete, mortar, and grout mixes. Concrete is a blend of cement, gravel and/or sand (known as 
aggregate), and sometimes additives that add strength, workability, and other properties. 
Concrete & Mortar
DESCRIPTION: 
Premixed concrete and mortar mixes are sold in 10- to 80-pound bags and are mixed with water. 
Standard concrete contains both gravel and sand and offers the most strength. Sand mix concrete has  
only sand (no gravel) as its aggregate. It can be spread thinly and fill small voids, but it’s not as strong  
as standard concrete. Mortar is also a blend of fine sand and cement and comes in various types for 
specific applications. Various types are available for special purposes. Strength rated according to  
type M (strongest), S, N, O (weakest).
USE:
STANDARD CONCRETE: 
Used for all sorts of construction projects, including slabs, walls, steps, curbs, and deck footings. Fast-
setting mix is favored for anchoring fence posts, because it cures more quickly than standard concrete. 
Can be used to rebuild broken steps and other structures as well as fill large holes. 

SAND MIX CONCRETE: 
Used for repairing cracks, holes, and other small masonry patching jobs. Sometimes used for concrete 
overlay—a 1/2- to 2-inch-thick layer of new concrete over an old concrete slab or walkway. Also useful for 
casting projects with fine detail, where gravel in standard concrete would be problematic. 
MORTAR: 
Used for repairing (tuck-pointing) or making mortar joints in brick and concrete block. Various types 
and strengths have different uses: type M is the strongest, followed by types S, N, and O (the weakest). 
Type S is typically used for brick walls, and type N for concrete block.
USE TIPS: 
Proper mixing is critical to making concrete and mortar workable and ultimately strong. Too little water 
makes it crumbly and hard to work with; too much water makes it soupy and weakens the finished product. 
Add small amounts of water to the dry mix until the proper consistency is achieved. Concrete cures 
(hardens) through a chemical process and should not be allowed to dry too quickly. Latex masonry adhesive 
or emulsion can be added to sand mixes to increase bonding ability and curing quality. 
Cement & Concrete Patchers
TYPES:
Anchoring cement
Epoxy cement
Hydraulic cement
Latex cement
Standard cement
Vinyl patching cement
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Cement mixed with a bonding agent 
and other additives that increase 
adhesion strength and allow for thin-
setting ability. Some are ready-to-use, 
others need water. 
ANCHORING CEMENT:
Also known as expanding cement. Slightly expanding, fast-setting cement, ready to use, although some 
brands need water added. Used for anchoring metal railings and gate posts, fences, and bolts. Slower 
setting than hydraulic cement.
CHAPTER 22 141

142 PART IV
EPOXY CEMENT: 
Comes as a bag of dry cement, hardener, and emulsion that is mixed together before use. May be used to 
patch any kind of material, including glass and steel, particularly where strength is important, and may be 
used to set flagstone and other patio paving materials.
HYDRAULIC CEMENT: 
Comes as a powder. Similar to anchoring, but faster setting. Expands as it cures to fill cracks tightly. 
Applied directly to a water leak in masonry and quickly hardens in place. Commonly used to fill and seal 
cracks in concrete basement walls and retaining walls. 
LATEX CEMENT: 
Powder mixed with a latex liquid before use. Can be troweled to 1/16-inch thickness. Excellent adhering 
power. Used for smoothing rough surfaces and repairing hairline cracks.
STANDARD CEMENT: 
Blend of cement and sand that is mixed with water. Used for repairing small holes and cracks; cracks need 
to be undercut first to create a “key” that the repair can lock into. 
VINYL CEMENT: 
Powder mixed with water. Can be troweled to 1/8-inch thickness. Excellent adhering power, more than 
regular cement and sand mixtures. Used to repair small cracks in concrete, glass, marble, tile, and brick. 
Vinyl bonding is strong.
USE TIPS: 
Surfaces should be well cleaned using a concrete cleaner, etching material, or degreaser before application of 
patchers. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Epoxy is the most expensive patcher. Acrylic, resinous, or latex bonding agents or adhesives are also sold 
separately as additives or primers.
Masonry Sealers
TYPES:
Acrylic resin sealer
Bituminous sealer
Cement latex sealer
Cement mortar
Epoxy resins
Silicone

CHAPTER 22 143
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Masonry waterproofers, waterproofers, waterproof cement paint.
DESCRIPTION: 
Many proprietary formulations. Most common are:
ACRYLIC RESIN: 
Rubber and Portland cement mixture applied by brush.
BITUMINOUS: 
Thick, black tar-like material that can be applied hot or cold.
CEMENT LATEX: 
Cement-based with latex additives.
CONCRETE FLOOR & WALL REPAIR MATERIALS

144 PART IV
CEMENT MORTAR: 
Composed of one part water and one part cement.
EPOXY: 
Synthetic material that sets very quickly.
SILICONE: 
Highly viscous material that goes on like paint.
USES: 
To seal masonry walls against moisture penetration, dusting, staining, spalling, and the effects of weather. 
Decorative, as well. Bituminous may be used as a roof coating.
USE TIPS: 
Before using a waterproofer, make sure that the problem is moisture intruding through the walls and not 
condensation due to moisture inside the building. Always try to cure the source of the moisture. Follow 
surface preparation directions exactly. Note if product requires use of etching and cleaning compound. Most 
sealers won’t work over old paint. Take precautions to avoid eye and skin irritations as specified on the label.
BUYING TIPS: 
Quality sealers penetrate and swell to become an integral part of the masonry, not just a surface coating. 
Some products contain a mildewcide too. Some have better white tones than others; check regarding colors. 
Application may include special additives.
Concrete Caulk
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Crack filler, concrete sealant, concrete repair caulk.
DESCRIPTION: 
Exterior-grade caulk formulated for concrete and other masonry materials. Various types include acrylic, 
silicone, and urethane. Some caulks contain sand for texture. Many are thinner than standard caulk and are 
self-leveling, so they spread out into a smooth plane when applied to horizontal surfaces.
USE: 
Filling cracks and expansion joints in concrete floors, driveways, patios, walkways, and walls, as well as other 
masonry structures. 

USE TIPS: 
Fill wide and/or deep cracks and joints with backer 
rod (foam rope sold in various diameters) before 
caulking the crack. Tuck the rod into the crack 
so it is about ½ inch below the concrete 
surface, then caulk directly over the rod, 
making sure the caulk completely 
bridges the gap. 
BUYING TIPS: 
You get what you pay for. 
High-performance caulk 
(many of these are 
urethane) lasts many 
times longer and stays 
more flexible than low-
quality products. 
CONCRETE FLOOR & WALL REPAIR MATERIALS
Foam backer rod.
CHAPTER 22 145

PART V
PLUMBING SUPPLIES


148 PART V
A NOTE ABOUT PLUMBING CODES
When planning a plumbing project and choosing products to buy, take 
into account local building and plumbing codes. These are sets of rules 
and regulations enforced by the local building authority—usually part 
of your city’s building department—and they govern what products may 
be used and how the installations must be done. Similar codes exist for 
electrical and general construction work. 
If you’re just replacing some old parts with identical or similar new 
parts, you probably don’t need to check the code. But if your project 
involves significant replacement or modification of what’s there, or if 
you’re installing new plumbing (particularly any new supply, drain, or 
vent lines), it’s important to know the code requirements that apply. Also 
be aware that code rules change over time; what might have been “code” 
when your house was built may not be code today. And the general rule 
is that any modifications or updates you make to existing work must be 
done to code. 
Plumbing codes have a simple purpose: to ensure that the installed 
plumbing is done safely and does not jeopardize the health of a building's 
occupants. However, despite this seemingly straightforward goal, 
plumbing codes vary greatly from community to community, sometimes 
in a contradictory manner. But they must be followed. If they are not, 
a plumbing inspector (on a project that requires a permit) can order 
the removal of any installation that violates the code, even though the 
installation may be perfectly safe. If your project requires a permit but you 
don’t get one (and thus code violations aren’t caught by a city inspector) 
you can still get flagged for faulty work—by the house inspector when 
you try to sell your house. 
The local building department can tell you what types of plumbing 
projects need permits and where to find the relevant code information. 
Local plumbers usually know the same. 

149
PIPE & ACCESSORIES
CHAPTER 23
ABOUT PIPE & FITTINGS
There are two kinds of pipe in a house: water supply and waste. Water supply pipe (sometimes called 
distribution pipe) supplies cold water to the house from the city main or well and distributes hot and cold 
water inside the house. Waste pipe transports waste, “used,” or soiled, water to a sewer, septic tank, or 
other disposal facility. Water piping inside the home typically is 1/4 to 3/4 inches in diameter; waste is bigger, 
typically ranging from 11/4 to 4 inches.
Water supply pipe is also known as supply pipe or simply water pipe. Waste pipe is also known as drainage 
pipe, soil pipe, sewer pipe, drain pipe, drain-waste-vent (DWV) pipe, and discharge pipe. Technically, although all 
carry waste, only soil pipes carry toilet discharge. All drain systems include one or more vent pipes—open-
topped pipes that typically extend up through the roof and allow air into the drain system to prevent suction 
that would hinder natural drainage (which relies solely on gravity to work). Vent piping is the same material 
as drain/waste piping.
Pipe sections are connected with fittings (Chapters 24 and 25) that allow piping to make turns and 
to connect it to fixtures, including sinks, tubs, and toilets. Every type of pipe has its own type and kind of 
fittings, i.e., copper pipe/copper fittings. Pipe size is almost always described and ordered in terms of its 
inside diameter—a 1-inch pipe has a 1-inch inside diameter. This is the “nominal” size; it is not meant to be 
exact. The outside diameter varies with the wall thickness of the pipe material. For example, cast-iron pipe is 
thicker than copper pipe, so 1-inch cast-iron pipe has a larger outside diameter than 1-inch copper pipe. You 
don’t need to know the outside diameter when choosing pipe, but it’s something to keep in mind for projects, 
such as when a pipe has to fit through a hole in a wall. 
Pipe is considered a male component and the fittings into which it fits are female. Threaded male pipe has 
threads on the outside; threaded female fittings have threads on the inside. This male-female designation is 
used to describe all fittings. Fittings that don’t have threads are often called slip (for plastic fittings, which are 
glued in place) or sweat (for copper fittings, which are soldered in place). 
As a general rule, use the same type of pipe and fittings for each piping run or installation. Different 
plastics don’t always bond properly to one another, and joining different metals can lead to corrosion 
(through a process called electrolytic, or galvanic, action). Where dissimilar materials are joined, you must 
use a fitting designed for the specific materials and application. 
Copper Pipe & Tubing
DESCRIPTION: 
Rigid copper pipe for water comes in diameters from 1/8 to 12 inch (measured on the outside diameter, 
or “O.D.”), and of various wall thicknesses known as types K (thick), L (medium), and M (thin), as well 
as DWV type (thin). Available in rigid 20- or 21-foot lengths with unthreaded ends, 10-foot lengths with 

150 PART V
threaded ends capped for protection, and coils of 45, 60, 100, and 200 feet (types K and L). Drawn is hard; 
annealed is soft.
USE: 
Hot- and cold-water supply piping, hot-water heating systems, waste piping. 
USE TIPS: 
Type L is most common for residential use. It can be cut with a hacksaw, but cuts with an inexpensive hand tool 
called a tubing cutter are easier and much cleaner and straighter. Connections for water piping are usually made 
with sweat-soldered fittings (page 161) or compression fittings (page 161). Professionals use flare fittings (page 
164) for some connections. You can also use push-in fittings (page 162) for water-pipe connections, if allowed 
by local code. Use only the same thickness (types K, L, or M) in a single contiguous line of plumbing. Flexible 
copper tubing, commonly 1/4 inch, is used for supplying water to refrigerator ice makers. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Copper remains the gold standard for water piping and is preferred by many plumbers. However, due to its 
high cost, the skill required to make reliable solder joints, and the challenges of installing rigid pipe runs, it is 
being replaced by PEX tubing (page 153) in many applications. Copper is very seldom used as drain/waste 
pipe, due to the cost. 
1/4" flexible 
copper tubing
1/2" rigid 
copper pipe

CHAPTER 23 151
PIPE & ACCESSORIES
Rigid Plastic Pipe
TYPES: 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC)
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) 
DESCRIPTION: 
The most common rigid plastic piping used 
in homes. Sold in 10- and 20-foot lengths 
and in smaller, precut sizes. Standard 
diameters used in homes are 1/2, 3/4, 11/4, 
11/2, 2, 3, and 4 inches. Standard grade for 
residential use is Schedule 40, which refers 
to the thickness of the pipe wall (schedule 
80 is thicker). Rigid plastic pipe and fittings 
are permanently joined with solvent cement 
(page 152). Threaded fittings are also 
available. There are many color varieties, 
but PVC is typically white (also commonly 
gray), CPVC is off-white, and ABS is 
usually black. 
USE: 
PVC: 
Drain/waste piping. Code rules 
vary on other uses. In many areas, PVC is used for underground supply piping between the city water 
main and the house, and sometimes it is approved for cold-water supply inside houses, though this 
use is uncommon. It is not approved for hot-water supply. If used outdoors, may require paint or other 
protection from sunlight, which weakens PVC over time. 
CPVC: 
Indoor hot- and cold-water piping. Rated for higher temperatures than PVC. 
ABS: 
Drain/waste piping. 
USE TIPS: 
Cuts most easily and quickly with a power miter saw. Also can be cut with a ratcheting plastic pipe cutter 
(scissor-like hand tool), hacksaw, or most wood-cutting saws. Remove burrs from cut ends before joining 
ABS pipe
CPVC pipe
PVC pipe

152 PART V
pipe to fittings. PVC is a favorite among DIYers because it’s cheap and very easy to work with. Also a handy 
material for crafts and outdoor building projects. Non-plumbing projects can be assembled with or without 
solvent cement. 
Solvent Cement (& Primer)
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Solvent weld, solvent glue, PVC cement.
DESCRIPTION: 
Liquid chemical glue sold in small metal containers (two sizes). The container cap is also an applicator and 
is connected to a metal rod with a fiber “dauber” end for spreading the glue around pipes and inside fittings. 
Bonds plastic plumbing parts through a chemical fusing process, not conventional adhesion, making a 
permanent connection. Primer is a similar liquid applied to both parts of a joint prior to applying the cement; 
required for some types of solvent cement. All-in-one cement is a primer and cement in one formula. 
NOTE: 
Use the specific cement and primer intended for the type of pipe; e.g., PVC cement for PVC pipe;  
ABS cement for ABS pipe. Do not use PVC cement on ABS or vice versa. 
USE: 
Joining PVC, CPVC, and ABS pipe to fittings of the same material. 
USE TIPS: 
Solvent cement is easy to use and pretty foolproof, but there are right and wrong ways to use it. Follow the 
manufacturer’s instructions carefully. Pipe must be fully seated inside fittings to create a reliable seal. Hold 
the pipe and fitting together for 30 seconds while cement bonds; if not held, the pieces can be pushed apart 
slightly by the cement. 
Solvent cements and primers.

CHAPTER 23 153
PIPE & ACCESSORIES
PEX Tubing 
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible plastic pipe made of 
cross-linked polyethylene. 
Sold in long coils of 50 to 
500 feet, in standard supply 
pipe diameters of 1/4, 3/8, 1/2, 
3/4, and 1 inch. Connections 
are made with special fittings, 
with the pipe secured with 
a metal ring that’s crimped 
with a special hand tool; 
no soldering or solvent 
cement required. Also can 
be joined with compatible 
push-in fittings (page 162). 
Tubing can be bent 90° (or 
more, with a guide fitting) 
so no elbows are needed, as with rigid piping. Can be spliced onto copper, iron, PVC, and CPVC pipe with 
appropriate transition fittings. Resistant to damage from freezing but not freezeproof; must be protected 
against freezing, as with other supply piping. Must not be exposed to sunlight or high temperatures. 
USE: 
Hot- and cold-water supply piping and hot-water heating systems. Commonly used in new construction and 
remodels as an alternative to copper pipe. 
USE TIPS: 
PEX is now widely accepted by code authorities for use in homes, but confirm all installation rules and 
requirements with your local authority. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Tubing, fittings, and other devices from different manufacturers are not interchangeable; you may void 
warranties if you mix materials from different manufacturers. Choose the appropriate material type for your 
application—water supply tubing may not be the same as tubing for heating systems, for example. Some 
manufacturers offer the same tubing in different colors for distinguishing between hot and cold water, 
primarily for convenience. 
PEX tubing.

154 Part V
Galvanized Steel Pipe
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Iron pipe, malleable pipe, steel pipe.
DESCRIPTION: 
Gray, zinc-treated steel. The zinc (galvanized) treatment, 
makes the steel rust-resistant if not scratched. Commonly comes 
in 21-foot lengths, which plumbing stores and larger hardware stores 
will cut to order, as well as in shorter precut lengths, usually in sections  
of 6 inches up to 6 feet, threaded on both ends. Pipe diameters range from 1/8 to 
6 inches. Common water sizes are 3/8 to 1 inch. Common waste sizes are 11/2, 2, and 
3 inches. Both ends should be threaded to be screwed into correspondingly threaded 
fittings; lengths can be threaded on one end only (T.O.E.) if you want. 
USE: 
Water pipe, waste pipe, and various structural applications, such as fence posts and other vertical supports.
NOTE: 
Galvanized pipe cannot be used for gas or steam piping.
BUYING TIPS: 
Check to make sure the threads are not damaged before leaving the store. Because galvanized pipes corrode 
over time, it is often replaced with copper, PEX, CPVC, or PVC piping, depending on the application. 
Black Iron Pipe
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
B.I. pipe, black pipe.
DESCRIPTION: 
Similar to galvanized steel pipe, but not treated for rust resistance. 
Darker and often more seamless than steel pipe. Slightly greasy to the touch.
USE: 
Traditionally used for steam or gas piping. Also popular today for DIY building 
projects, used as supports for bookshelves and desks, and for light fixtures. The wide, round 
flange fittings (page 172) are handy for mounting pipe structures to walls, ceilings, and floors. 
USE TIPS:
Only black fittings can be used with black iron pipe. Gas and steam piping is best left to a professional 
plumber. Black pipe is not suitable for water or waste piping. 
Galvanized steel pipe.
Black iron pipe.

PIPE & ACCESSORIES
CHAPTER 23 155
Cast-Iron Pipe
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Soil pipe, soil stack.
DESCRIPTION: 
Very heavy pipe that comes in two weights—service and extra-heavy. It is commonly sold in lengths of 5 and 
10 feet and in diameters of 2, 3, and 4 inches. Two kinds exist. The old, classic kind has a bell hub on one 
end and a spigot hub (raised end) on the other, but the new kind is plain and known as No-Hub® or hubless. 
Sections of the old kind are joined with a packing of oakum and lead, while the hubless kind is joined with a 
special hubless fitting (page 163) that is simply tightened down over the joint.
USE: 
Waste piping. 
USE TIPS: 
Only a professional should tackle oakum and lead 
joints. The new, hubless pipe can be done by the 
do-it-yourselfer, if allowed by local code, but the 
pipe is so heavy and hard to handle that is not 
recommended. It’s often easiest to replace damaged 
sections or entire pipe runs with plastic ABS or 
PVC pipe. You can splice plastic pipe onto old iron 
with a hubless fitting. Remove unneeded iron pipe, 
such as during renovations, by shattering it with a 
sledgehammer or cutting it into manageable pieces 
with a reciprocating saw.
Brass Pipe
DESCRIPTION: 
Solid brass, usually sold in unthreaded 12-foot lengths and in all standard sizes. Comes in various weights.
USE: 
Water supply and distribution, where resistance to corrosion is the main concern.
USE TIPS: 
All threaded connections. Not commonly used in homes.
BUYING TIPS: 
More expensive than other types of pipe.
Note: Hubbed fitting shown cut away. 
Cast iron 
pipe
Oakum
Lead

156 PART V
PE Tubing
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible plastic tubing made of polyethylene. PE material is used for many types of tubing, but the most 
common household types are lightweight black tubing for irrigation systems and 4-inch corrugated pipe for 
drainage systems. The former comes in 1/2-, 3/4-, and 1-inch diameters and coiled lengths from 100 to 500 feet. 
It is very thin-walled and easy to cut with a utility knife or tubing cutter. Connections are made with insert 
fittings (page 163), with or without hose clamps (page 159). 
USE: 
STANDARD TUBING: 
Lawn-sprinkler systems and drip irrigation systems. 
CORRUGATED PIPE: 
Landscape drainage systems, French drains,  
foundation drains. 
USE TIPS: 
Irrigation tubing is durable and UV-resistant, but its thin walls are easily cut by shovels and the like. Be careful 
where you dig around sprinkler systems and where you work in the garden around aboveground tubing. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Buy plenty of “goof plugs” for repairing holes made by mistake when installing drip systems or when you 
move a branch/drip line to another location on the main tubing. 
ABOUT TUBULAR GOODS
Tubular goods are drain pipes used underneath sinks and sometimes bathtubs. They have their own type of 
joining system, using slip nuts, and are easy to work with.
Tubular Goods
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Drainage fittings, drain pipes, drain kits, slip-joint pipe, sink drains.
DESCRIPTION: 
Specialty pipes and fittings that make up a drain assembly under a sink. Piping is made of plastic or chromed 
brass, and even chromed plastic. Pipes for kitchen sinks are usually 11/2 inches in diameter; bathroom sinks 
(lavatory) usually 11/4 inches. Typically held together and made watertight by slip-joints, consisting of slip 
nuts and plastic or rubber washers, though some tailpieces that attach to sink strainers have threaded ends. 
Washers may be called cut sj washers. 
PE tubing.

CHAPTER 23 157
PIPE & ACCESSORIES
The main parts of a sink drain assembly include the 
tailpiece, a vertical pipe that connects to the sink drain 
assembly, may also include the assembly that mounts to 
both sides of the sink basin, and contains a sink strainer 
(kitchen) or the stopper assembly (bathroom). The 
P-trap, also called J-bend, a short drain piece shaped 
like the letter J, connects to the tailpiece. And the trap 
arm, a straight drain piece with a 90° bend at one end, 
attaches to drain pipe in wall. Kitchen sinks with two 
basins (and some double bathroom sinks) also have 
an additional drain pipe with a 90° bend (similar to a 
trap arm) and a waste tee, which connects the additional 
drain pipe to the main drain assembly. 
Corrugated flexible drain is plastic pipe that can 
be bent as needed to accommodate drain parts that 
are out of alignment. Although these pipes are widely 
available, they are not allowed by code in most areas because they collect solid waste in the corrugation folds and 
are prone to clogging; they never should be used in place of a P-trap. 
USE: 
To route waste water from a sink, disposer, or tub to other drain pipes. P-traps retain water in their bends to 
provide a barrier against sewer odors and vermin.
USE TIPS: 
Most slip nuts can simply be hand-tightened. If necessary, you can loosen or tighten a slip nut with tongue-and-
groove pliers, but do so carefully, as the nuts and drain parts are relatively weak. After assembly, run lots of water 
down the sink and check all slip-joints for leaks. Usually aligning the pipes and tightening the slip nuts a bit 
stops any leaking. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Plain plastic is the cheapest material, but not the best looking. If the lines will be out of sight, plastic is fine. 
If it’s visible, chromed brass is recommended over chromed plastic. Some brands come with slip fittings and 
others do not; be sure to check before leaving the store. Some P-traps include a cleanout plug at the bottom 
of the bend. These come in handy occasionally, but usually it’s best to remove the trap entirely for a thorough 
cleaning of the trap and the sink tailpiece. 
Water Supply Tubes
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Faucet supply lines, water connectors, toilet supply tube, supply hose.
Washer
Trap arm
Slip nut
Drain 
tailpiece
P-trap

158 PART V
DESCRIPTION: 
Short 3/8-inch-diameter tubes in common lengths of 8 to 24 inches  
but are available up to 96 inches. Made of braided steel, 
copper, chromed copper or brass, corrugated copper, or vinyl 
mesh. Most types have ends designed for compression fittings; 
some with two female ends with nuts, some with one female 
and one male, etc. 
USE: 
Makes the connection between the water supply valve  
(page 186) and a sink faucet, toilet, dishwasher, ice maker, 
or other fixtures. 
USE TIPS: 
Braided steel and vinyl mesh are highly flexible and the 
easiest to use. Steel (which has a core of vinyl and/or nylon) 
is more durable than vinyl mesh, which is primarily used for 
kitchen sink sprayers. Copper tubing can be kinked easily 
(making it highly prone to leaks) and must be cut to the proper length and bent carefully. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Check the size of the fittings/nuts at both ends of the tubing; they may not be the same—for example, a tube 
may be sized for a 1/2-inch connection at one end and a 3/8-inch connection at the other. Choose a length  
of flexible tubing that allows for some slack; you don’t want to pull the tubing tight between connections. 
Too long is better than too short, because you can coil the excess. 
Flexible Gas Hose
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Gas range or dryer connector, gas supply tubing.
DESCRIPTION: 
Stainless steel, either corrugated (CSST) or steel-wire hose, with or without a PVC coating, with brass hex fittings 
on the ends. Comes in a range of lengths from 6 to 12 inches in 1/2- or 3/4-inch diameters. Modern appliances have 1/2-
inch fittings, but typical supply lines are 3/4 inch. Adapters for reducing the connection are available with the hose. 
USE: 
Connects gas supply line to kitchen gas stove, gas clothes dryer, outdoor grill, or gas water heater.
USE TIPS: 
Use plenty of pipe dope (page 174)—not tape—and care. Make sure no kinks are in the line. Test completed 
connections by brushing with soapy water and examining connection for bubbles.
Vinyl 
mesh
Chromed 
brass
Water supply tubes.
Braided 
steel

CHAPTER 23 159
PIPE & ACCESSORIES
Pipe-Hanging Tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Hanger strap, pipe hanger, band iron, band clamp.
DESCRIPTION: 
Steel, copper, or plastic band with holes at regular intervals, sold in coils.
USE: 
Suspending pipes of all sizes from walls and ceilings,  
using screws. 
USE TIPS: 
On copper pipe, use only copper tape, not steel. 
Pipe Strap & Tube Strap
DESCRIPTION: 
Pipe strap is a U-shaped piece of plastic or galvanized steel with two holes in flanges; tube strap is similar but made 
of copper for copper tubing. A suspension clamp is a split ring with two ears for suspending pipe from framing. 
USE: 
Screwed or nailed to wood framing or other structure to secure pipe, typically used with water pipe. Helps 
keep pipe from rubbing or banging against framing when it moves. 
Hose Clamp
DESCRIPTION: 
Stainless-steel band with notches and a gear mechanism that tightens and loosens the band. Gear is driven 
with a 5/16-inch socket wrench or nut driver, or a flathead screwdriver. Another type is a spring-type clamp, 
made of thick metal wire and commonly used on car radiator hoses and clothes dryer vents; these are not 
suitable for connections on water-supply piping. 
USE: 
To apply even pressure around pipe or hose; in particular to clamp 
a hose or a gasket onto a tube or pipe. Also used with insert fittings 
(page 163).
USE TIPS: 
Don’t overtighten. If you have many to do, use a 5/16-inch nut driver or 
a T-handle torque wrench.
Pipe-hanging tape.
Hose clamp.

160
FITTINGS
CHAPTER 24
ABOUT FITTINGS
Fittings are devices that allow plumbing pipes to be joined together, change direction, or connect to fixtures. For 
each kind of pipe and tubing there are fittings made of the same material, wall thickness, and sizes. Exceptions 
include the metal fittings used with PEX and other plastic pipe, as well as neoprene couplings used with cast-iron 
pipe. Pages 160 to 165 cover the basic types of fitting—such as threaded or soldered. Pages 166 to 173 discuss the 
most common shapes or forms of fittings, such as elbows and tees. Most fittings come in more than one type. 
A word on terminology: the opening of a fitting may be called a socket, outlet, or port. Socket is the logical 
term for female openings, outlet for male, but there are no official rules about this usage. 
ABOUT THREADED FITTINGS
Threaded fittings are often described by a coding system that dates back to the days when all threaded pipe 
was iron or steel. The coding refers to the thread type. Metal pipe and fittings are either MPT (also MIPT), 
for Male Iron Pipe Thread, or FPT (also FIPT), for Female Iron Pipe Thread. A pipe with an MPT-threaded 
end fits an FPT fitting. 
Rigid plastic parts follow a different system. They may be labeled NPT, for National Pipe Thread, or 
NIPT, for National Iron Pipe Thread, which means the same thing (never mind that plastic pipe has nothing 
to do with iron). MPT/FPT and NPT threads are not compatible. A third threading system is hose thread, 
which fits garden hoses and sillcocks; this threading is not compatible with either MPT/FPT or NPT. 
If you’re using pipe and fittings of the same material, chances are they will have compatible threads. But if 
you mix materials, make sure the threads are the same type, or use an adapter or coupling that has the right 
threads for each piece. 
Threaded Fitting
DESCRIPTION: 
The most common type of fitting, with male (exterior) or female (interior) threads at each opening. Comes 
in most materials and sizes. Fittings may have only threaded sockets or outlets (sometimes called adapters; 
see page 164), or they may have unthreaded openings as well as threaded. 
USE: 
Connecting water supply, waste, steam, and gas piping systems in all kinds of  
threaded pipe.
USE TIPS: 
Use plenty of pipe dope (page 174) or thread seal tape (page 175) on the threads of 
metal pipes to prevent leaks and reduce corrosion.
Threaded nipple.

CHAPTER 24 161
Sweat-Soldered Fitting
ALSO KNOWN AS:
Copper fitting (incorrect), sweats.
DESCRIPTION: 
Smooth-ended (no threads) copper pipe fitting with a slightly enlarged end 
that receives copper pipe.
USE: 
Connecting copper pipe or tubing.
USE TIPS: 
Ensure that fittings are clean before soldering and that plenty of flux (page 176) is used. Soldering copper 
pipe joints is not all that difficult, but the technique must be mastered before you attempt it on water supply 
piping, lest you end up with leaks hidden behind walls, etc. Do not use lead solder on water supply lines.
BUYING TIPS: 
Also available with solder pre-applied.
Compression Fitting
DESCRIPTION: 
Two-piece copper or plastic device that uses a nut and a metal or plastic 
ring on the end of a pipe that is inserted into a fitting. As the nut is 
tightened the ring presses into the fitting and the pipe, making a 
 
watertight seal. 
USE: 
Connecting water supply tubes, fittings, and valves 
supplying fixtures or wherever one wants to avoid using 
sweat fittings. A compression union splices the ends of 
two pipes together. Compression fittings are removable and 
are commonly used on water supply valves and tubing for 
faucets, toilets, and other fixtures where the connections 
are easily accessible. They are not recommended for 
joints in enclosed cavities, such as inside walls and 
floors, where leaks can go unnoticed for long periods.
BUYING TIPS: 
The small rings and nuts can be bought individually in 
case one is lost.
Copper sweat fitting.
Compression fitting.

162 PART V
Push-In Fitting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
SharkBite® (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal fitting that works by simply pushing the pipe end about 1 inch into the fitting port. Contains internal 
stainless-steel teeth that hold the pipe firmly and a plastic washer that creates a watertight seal. Pipe end can 
be removed from fitting with a small, plastic, horseshoe-shaped disconnect tool, by pressing the tool against 
a plastic sleeve around the pipe. Wide range of fittings available, as well as valves and couplings. Expensive 
compared to standard fittings, but extremely handy, particularly where soldering copper is difficult or when 
making quick repairs. 
USE: 
Joints for copper, PEX, PVC, and CPVC supply pipe only. Designed for permanent watertight connections, 
but must be installed according to manufacturer’s directions. 
USE TIPS: 
Confirm use and installation requirements with the local building code authority. May not be allowed in all 
areas or for some concealed connections (joints hidden behind drywall, etc.). 
Push-in fitting and disconnect tools.

CHAPTER 24 163
Solvent-Welded Fittings
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Slip fittings, glued fittings, cemented fittings.
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic fittings with slightly enlarged, threadless sockets 
designed for use with solvent cement (page 152). Called slip 
fittings in the trade. They look similar to copper sweat-soldered 
fittings (page 161). Considered the best joining method for 
plastic pipe and fittings. “Slip” may refer to an individual socket on 
a fitting; a fitting with one slip socket and one threaded socket is commonly 
designated as “slip x thread” or “slip-by-thread.” 
USE: 
Rigid plastic plumbing connections.
Insert Fitting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Barbed fitting, insert.
DESCRIPTION: 
Ridged plastic or metal piece that is inserted into the end of flexible 
plastic pipe and typically clamped in place with a stainless-steel 
hose-type clamp (page 159). Made of brass, nylon, polypropylene, 
or polystyrene.
USE: 
Connecting flexible plastic pipe to other pieces or fittings, including 
to standard female threads. Common on lawn sprinkler systems.
Hubless Fitting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
No-Hub®, no-hub clamp, no-hub band, banded coupling.
DESCRIPTION: 
A neoprene (black rubber) sleeve, or gasket, covered by a corrugated metal sleeve, or clamp band, with hose-
type clamps on each end.
PVC slip fitting.
FITTINGS
Insert fitting.

164 PART V
USE: 
Connecting hubless or No-Hub® cast iron pipe sections and fittings. 
Also cast iron to plastic.
USE TIPS: 
Clamp nuts can be tightened down with a small wrench, 
screwdriver, a 5/16-inch nut driver, or a special tool called a 
T-handle, or No-Hub® torque wrench. The T-handle contains  
an internal mechanism that prevents overtightening and speeds 
the job.
Flare Fitting
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
S.A.E. flare.
DESCRIPTION: 
Similar to a compression fitting (above) but with an end that is expanded, or flared, to fit against the beveled 
end of the fitting.
USE: 
Used usually with flexible copper pipe, mostly for refrigeration and oil heating systems and small appliance 
lines. Similar to sweat-soldered fittings but installed without using a torch, which can be important in areas 
where fire would be a risk. Prohibited by some codes.
USE TIPS: 
Leave flare fittings to professionals. Any plumbing repairs or installations you make won’t require flare 
fittings, and if they’re needed for refrigeration/heating equipment, that’s strictly professional territory.
Adapter
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Transition fitting.
Hubless fitting.
3" no-hub 
neoprene 
coupling

CHAPTER 24 165
Dielectric union fitting.
FITTINGS
DESCRIPTION: 
Common term for virtually anything that helps connect two 
normally incompatible things—hoses to pipes, metal to plastic, 
MPT/FPT to NPT threads, or whatever. When describing fittings, 
though, it is a type of coupling or union with a different type of 
joining method on each end, e.g., thread x sweat, thread x slip, etc.
TYPES:
TRANSITION UNION ADAPTER: 
Special fitting designed to compensate for thermal differences in expansion and 
contraction between metal and plastic pipe.
DIELECTRIC ADAPTER: 
For connecting galvanized to copper.
USE:
TRANSITION UNION: 
Allows you to connect different kinds of pipe, such as plastic to galvanized, or copper to plastic, etc.
DIELECTRIC FITTING: 
Allows connecting dissimilar metals and prevents destructive galvanic or electrolytic action, a major cause 
of rust and corrosion. Typically used under faucets where copper pipe connects with galvanized. Suitable 
for both water supply and waste lines.
Flexible Coupling
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Fernco Coupling (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Length of soft plastic (elastomeric PVC or polyurethane) that slips over the outside ends of waste pipe and 
is secured by hose clamps. Heavier yet more flexible than hubless fittings (page 163). Comes in a variety of 
dimensions and shapes as a reducer coupling (page 171).
USE: 
Waste lines only, but fits over any kind of pipe. Especially useful where precise alignment is not  
possible, or where some flexibility is needed and where connecting two pipes of different diameters.  
A “forgiving” fitting.

166 PART V
ABOUT FITTING SHAPES & FORMS
These shapes, or forms, are made in all the various pipe materials, but regardless of the material, they 
resemble one another (each photo shows just a specific type and material). The nomenclature is the same.
Elbow
TYPES:
90° elbow
45° elbow
Drop-ear elbow
Side-outlet elbow
Sweep elbow
Street elbow
Closet bend
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Ell, L, S.O. ell (side-outlet ell).
NOTE: 
Similar to and easily confused with 
cast-iron fittings 1/4 bend (90°) and 
1/8 bend (45°).
DESCRIPTION: 
Simple fitting that makes a 
right-angle (90°) or 45° bend. 
May be threaded or unthreaded, 
or both. Also available in insert 
(barbed) fittings. Common 
specialty types include: 
DROP-EAR: 
Also known as drop 
ells, ears, or flanges, for 
attaching to a wall. 
SIDE-OUTLET: 
Essentially an elbow with 
an additional socket on one 
side. Useful in corners of 
construction or for making railings or fences.
PVC elbows (for drain-waste-vent runs; supply elbows shown on page 168).
Long sweep 
90° elbow
22 1/2° 
elbow
Closet 
bend
45° elbow
Street 
elbow
4 × 3 hub 
closet bend
Vent 
elbow
90° 
elbow

CHAPTER 24 167
FITTINGS
SWEEP: 
Similar to an elbow in that it consists of two openings at 90° or 45° to each other. Comes in “long” version as 
well as normal to create a longer curve to fit different situations and/or to create a gentler change in direction.  
If replacing an existing piece of plumbing, be sure to measure the sweep to see if it is “long” or normal.
STREET: 
90° or 45° elbow with a male outlet on one end and female socket on the other (or male/female threads 
for metal pipe). Joins pipes at corners with the male end going into a fitting or valve.
CLOSET BEND: 
Large elbow that connects the toilet flange (below the base of the toilet; see page 195) to the toilet waste pipe. 
USE: 
Joins pipes for corners at a 90° or 45° angle. Used on all types of plumbing runs: supply, waste, vent, 
irrigation, etc. 
Tee
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
T, T-fitting, straight tee, 
reducing tee, sanitary tee.
DESCRIPTION: 
Three openings, two in a 
line and one on the side, 
in a T shape. Straight 
tees have the same size 
openings; reducing tees 
have one opening of a 
different size. Sanitary 
tees, used in waste lines, 
have a curved branch 
that is slightly offset, for 
a cleanout plug, and a 
smooth inside. A cross is a 
T-fitting with four outlets 
forming a cross shape. 
Sanitary 
tee
Sanitary 
tee with 
additional 
side inlet
Double 
sanitary tee 
Vent 
tee
Low-heel 
sanitary tee
PVC tees (for drain-waste-vent runs; 
supply tees shown on page 166).

168 PART V
Elbows & Tees for Water Supply Pipes
Water supply fittings are available for copper (top), CPVC plastic (center), and PEX (bottom). Fittings for cop-
per and CPVC are available in many shapes, including unions (A), reducers (B), 90° elbows (C), reducing el-
bows (D), 45° elbows (E), tee fittings (F), drop-ear elbows (G), threaded adapters (H), and caps (I). Common 
PEX fittings (bottom) include unions (J), PEX-to-copper unions (K), 90° elbows (L), tee fittings (M), plugs (N), 
drop-ear elbows (O), and threaded adapters (P). Easy-to-install push-in fittings are also available.
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
N
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
I
F

CHAPTER 24 169
FITTINGS
USE: 
Connecting three pipes. Sanitary tees are for waste lines where lack of obstruction is important.
BUYING TIPS: 
When ordering a reducing tee, specify the lateral, or horizontal, dimensions first, followed by the vertical 
branch. Keep the letter T in mind. For example, 1 x 1 x 11/2 inches. Be sure to mention the use you have in 
mind, as there is some variety in sanitary tees.
Wye
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Y-fitting, Y brand, reducing Y.
DESCRIPTION: 
Similar to at tee but with the 
side outlet set at an angle to  
the line of the other two outlets. 
The side outlet can be the same 
size as the other two or, in  
the case of a reducing wye, can 
be smaller. 
USE:
Bringing together two pipes 
from similar directions; 
typically used for drain-waste-
vent lines. 
PVC wye fittings.
Wye with 
45° elbow 
(combo)
Wye 
fitting
Reducing 
wye fitting
Wye with 
cleanout 
plug

170 PART V
Plug
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Hex head plug, square head plug, round head plug, cleanout plug.
DESCRIPTION: 
A short, solid piece with male threads and a hexagonal, square, or round head. A cleanout plug has a square 
protrusion in the middle for a wrench to grab.
USE: 
Seals female ends of fittings or valves and the like. Cleanout plugs allow access into pipe for cleaning with a 
plumbing snake or sewer auger; commonly installed into a wye fitting (page 169). 
Nipple
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Close (if threads from each end of a straight nipple meet or almost meet in the middle), straight nipple.
DESCRIPTION: 
Any piece of pipe that is less than 12 inches and male threaded on both ends. Generally stocked in lengths 
from close (minimum) to 12 inches; lengths beyond this are usually considered cut pipe and are available in 
6-inch increments. Reducing nipple has a different diameter on each end.
USE: 
Links longer pipe sections where the final “fit” is being made, such as the span between two fittings in a  
run of pipe. Reducing nipple connects different sizes of pipe in place of a bushing (page 172) and coupling 
(page 171) combination. Provides a smoother, neater connection.
Cap
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
End, end cap.
DESCRIPTION: 
A short, closed end piece with a threaded or unthreaded (slip)  
female socket.
USE: 
Seals male end of pipe at the end of a run or when a fitting or valve has been removed.
Cap.

CHAPTER 24 171
Coupling, Reducing Coupling
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Straight coupling, reducing bell (reducing coupling), reducer (reducing coupling).
DESCRIPTION: 
Short length of pipe with slip sockets or female threads, generally no longer than 
the threaded area itself. Reducing couplings have two different-sized openings. 
An odd cousin is the extension coupling, which has female threads on one end and 
male on the other.
USE: 
Connects lengths of pipe that are not intended to be disconnected. A reducing 
coupling connects pipes of different diameters. Can also be used in combination 
with bushings (page 172) when there are large differences in pipe diameters. An 
extension coupling extends the length of a pipe just an inch or two, which is less 
than is possible with a regular coupling; this is commonly used with radiators 
after new, thicker floors have been installed.
BUYING TIPS: 
When buying a reducing coupling state the larger dimension—2 × 11/2 inches, etc. 
Dresser Coupling
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Mender coupler, slip fitting, “no-thread” fitting, mender dresser.
DESCRIPTION: 
A fitting with a short length of pipe or a nipple in the center and a compression fitting on each end.  
Available in copper, steel, and plastic.
USE: 
Slips onto unthreaded pipe ends to make a convenient connection, often used to cover a leaking section 
(after the pipe has been cut through) or where a very slight flexibility is needed.
USE TIPS: 
May be used on supply or waste lines. Helpful where threading is impossible, such as when replacing a 
damaged section.
FITTINGS
Reducing 
coupling.
Coupling.

172 PART V
Flange
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Floor flange.
DESCRIPTION: 
Round, female-threaded fitting that can take pipe up to 2 inches, surrounded by flat flange with holes that 
permit attaching to a floor or a wall with screws or bolts.
USE: 
Often a nonplumbing use, such as making a railing or table or other furniture. Pipe just screws into the flange 
and is relatively solid.
Hex Bushing, Flush Bushing
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Bushing.
DESCRIPTION: 
Short plug (threaded, with hexagonal top) or nipple (flush)-type piece 
with female threads inside.
USE: 
Joining pipe of dissimilar size. Bushings fit inside other fittings, 
especially couplings, and can be combined to reduce pipe as required.
Pipe Repair Coupling
DESCRIPTION: 
Short length of pipe with a push-in fitting (page 162) at each end. 
USE: 
Repairing burst or otherwise damaged water pipe where damaged area is no more than 2 inches long. After 
damaged area is cut out, coupling is slipped onto one pipe, and then slipped back to attach to the other pipe 
end, bridging the gap. Works on copper and CPVC water pipe. 
Hex bushing.

CHAPTER 24 173
Union
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Ground joint union.
DESCRIPTION: 
Splicing device with three threaded nuts. Its two halves are 
separated and screwed (metal pipe) or solvent-welded (plastic 
pipe) onto the ends of the pipes to be joined, then the larger, 
central hex nut is tightened down to join them.
USE: 
Connecting pipe sections of similar size that are expected to be 
disassembled or that are being fit into a position between two 
fixed pipes. Commonly used with gas piping, to allow for future 
disassembly, and with PVC piping for pools and spas, allowing 
the removal of inline heaters, filter or motor housings, etc. 
PVC Union.
FITTINGS

174
174
JOINT COMPOUNDS & SEALANTS
CHAPTER 25
Pipe Joint Compound
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Pipe dope, thread sealant. 
NOTE: 
Do not confuse with drywall joint 
compound (page 130), which is a 
totally different material. Different 
types of compound are available 
for pipes carrying oils  
and gases.
DESCRIPTION: 
Thick, oily paste applied to pipe 
threads before assembly. Sold in 
small tube and canisters; the  
latter usually include an 
applicator brush connected  
to the canister lid. 
USE: 
Helps prevent leaks and makes 
for easier disassembly; also helps 
prevent corrosion of exposed 
threads where the zinc coating 
has been removed during the 
threading process.
USE TIP: 
Use gloves—some kinds of pipe 
dopes are extremely difficult to 
clean off of hands. Apply liberally. 
Works well, but thread seal tape (page 175) is a neater and faster option for the same job.
Pipe joint compound (in use).

CHAPTER 25 175
Thread Seal Tape
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Pipe thread tape, pipe thread sealant tape, Teflon® 
tape (brand name).
DESCRIPTION: 
Thin, stretchy, white tape sold in rolls from 1/4 to  
3/4 inch wide and in various lengths. Most 
commonly called “Teflon tape” but is not made 
from the trademarked material Teflon®. Gas-rated 
or fuel-line versions (made with PTFE polymer) 
are designed for gas piping connections.  
USE: 
Applied to pipe threads before assembly; same as 
pipe joint compound (page 174). Standard version 
is not for use on gas pipes.
USE TIP: 
Try to keep the tape flat and smooth as you wrap it around the threads, always wrapping in the same 
direction as the nut or fitting will tighten onto the threads (this is usually clockwise when viewed  
from the end of the pipe, unless the treads are reverse threads). How much to wrap depends on  
the tape thickness and the threads; three to five wraps is common.
Epoxy Repair Putty
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Epoxy repair material, epoxy.
DESCRIPTION: 
Two-part putty material mixed together just before use. May be a long package resembling a candy bar, or a 
tube, or a small package resembling a packet of chewing gum. You break off as much as you need of this clay-
like substance and massage it a bit, mixing the two parts together.
USE: 
Repairs small leaks in drain pipes. Not recommended for repairs on water supply or other pressurized 
plumbing runs. 
Thread seal tape.

176 PART V
USE TIP: 
While epoxy cannot be depended on 100 percent to stop a leak, it may work for years. Some kinds work even 
when applied to a wet pipe.
Solder
DESCRIPTION: 
Soft, silver-colored wire sold on a 
small reel; 95-5 solder is the most 
common type, made of 95 percent 
tin and no lead.
USE: 
Used in sweat-soldering of copper 
pipe joints.
USE TIP: 
Parts to be soldered must be  
very clean.
BUYING TIPS: 
The old-fashioned kind with lead 
was outlawed nationally in 1986; 
use 95-5. If you can’t find 95-5  
at your hardware store, try a 
plumbing supply store.
Flux
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Soldering paste, solder flux.
DESCRIPTION: 
Jelly-like paste. Removes oxidation and other impurities from soldered joints in copper pipe and fittings.  
Sold in round tins and small plastic tubs.
USE: 
To ensure proper fusion of solder to copper sweat-solder joints.
Solder.

CHAPTER 25 177
USE TIP: 
Clean copper pipe and fittings with a copper fitting cleaning brush, a small tool with a wire handle and a 
cylindrical black-bristle brush on the end. A combination brush has 1/2- and 3/4-inch brushes on either end. 
Apply a thin coating of flux to the pipe and fitting with a flux brush, a small, metal-handled brush, about  
6 inches long, with short bristles.
BUYING TIPS: 
Use the noncorrosive type, sometimes called self-cleaning or nonacid type.
Plumber’s Putty
DESCRIPTION: 
Soft, tan-colored putty that can 
be rolled by hand into long ropes 
or beads of any diameter. Sold in 
small plastic tubs. 
USE: 
Applied to sink rims, drain plugs, 
and faucets before installation 
to ensure a watertight seal. 
Commonly used under the bases 
of faucets (when silicone caulk is 
not used) and around flanges of 
drain fittings. Easier to remove in 
the future than caulk. 
USE TIP: 
Remove all old putty before 
applying fresh material. Create 
an even, continuous seal around 
the item, in a similar manner to 
applying a bead of caulk. Excess 
putty will ooze out when the item 
is tightened into place; simply 
wipe off excess with a rag.
Plumber’s putty (in use).
JOINT COMPOUNDS & SEALANTS

178 PART V
Stem Packing
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Faucet packing, valve  
packing, packing, gasket rope, 
plumber’s twine.
DESCRIPTION: 
Graphite or Teflon®-
impregnated string.
USE: 
Wrapped around valve stems 
(typically under packing nuts) 
to prevent leaks.
USE TIP: 
If a slow leak at a handle stem cannot be stopped by tightening the nut, just back it off and add more 
packing—but first make sure the water is off!
Gasket
DESCRIPTION: 
A generic term for soft material that fits between two hard items in order to make a seal. It may be made of 
rubber, plastic, or strong paper and is shaped for each particular use.
USE: 
Seals joints in fittings, between parts of valves, and so on.
BUYING TIPS:
 Formed gaskets as well as sheets for making your own are available. In some low-pressure cases, you can 
form your own small gasket in between parts of leaking radiator valves and the like by using a liquid (sold in 
tubes) made for that purpose.
Stem packing.

CHAPTER 25 179
JOINT COMPOUNDS & SEALANTS
JOINT COMPOUNDS & SEALANTS
Oakum
DESCRIPTION: 
Short lengths of shredded rope or hemp fiber, sold dry or tarred (oiled). White oakum has a thin, woven 
coating and is impregnated with a type of cement powder.
USE: 
Originally used primarily for sealing old-fashioned hub-and-spigot cast iron waste pipe along with molten 
lead, but useful for packing any kind of large gap. For example, it could be stuffed into a crack and used as a 
base for caulking. White oakum, which has dry cement in it, swells when brought into contact with water. 
Interestingly, oakum and tar were the traditional materials used to caulk the planks of ancient ships’ hulls.
USE TIP: 
Wear gloves to avoid a nasty cleanup job.

180
180
FAUCETS & FAUCET PARTS
CHAPTER 26
ABOUT FAUCETS
Kitchen sink, laundry, and lavatory (bathroom) 
faucets come in a tremendous array of styles and 
colors. Some have two handles, some have one, and 
there are many different finish options—chrome, 
bronze, nickel, stainless steel, even bare copper. 
Most of these options are for aesthetics or 
usability, but if you’re buying a new faucet for an 
existing sink, you need one that fits the predrilled 
holes in the sink. Pay attention to the number 
of holes and the center-to-center, or “centers,” 
dimension—the distance between the center of one 
handle and the center of the other. Kitchen sinks 
usually have 8-inch centers but may be 6 inches. 
Lavatory faucets are usually 4 inches apart but can 
be 8 inches (sometimes called “widespread”). Wall-
mounted lavatory (bathroom) faucets are usually on 
41/4-inch centers but may be 6 inches. There are also 
single-hole faucets that mount into a single hole in the 
sink or countertop. 
If you’re repairing a faucet, always take the old 
parts into the store, or at least write down the brand 
and model name of the faucet. When disassembling 
a faucet, lay out the parts in the order and orientation 
(right side up) of their assembly. It’s all too easy to 
forget where and how all those foreign-looking parts 
go back together. 
Compression Faucet
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Basin faucet (lavatory).
DESCRIPTION: 
Typically older-style faucet that has a threaded stem 
(also called a spindle or valve) with a rubber washer on 
the end that presses against the faucet seat, a donut-
Compression faucet.
Top screw
Faucet base
Stem
Cap
Stem screw
Washer
Handle
O-ring

CHAPTER 26 181
shaped nut with a hexagonal hole in its center, where the 
water emerges from the supply pipe. The spindle may 
have an O-ring that prevents leaking around the handle. 
USE: 
Controls water flow into basins or sinks.
USE TIPS: 
Leaks at the spout are usually due to a worn washer 
or a pitted, corroded seat. Leaks around the base of 
the handle indicate a worn O-ring. Replace a stem 
if it sticks or has rough action due to corrosion. If 
washers wear out quickly, replace the seat, if possible. 
Remove the seat with a faucet seat wrench. If it’s not 
removable, smooth the seat with a faucet seat reamer. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Replacement stems may be sold as “hot” or “cold,” with 
threads corresponding to the way a handle is turned to 
open or close the faucet. Beveled washers are usually 
better for repair than flat ones, as they seal better if the 
seat is worn and pitted. Neoprene is better than rubber. 
Washerless Faucet
DESCRIPTION: 
Most faucets these days are washerless, which simply 
means they don’t have spindles or stems that move 
up and down to press a washer against a seat. Instead, 
washerless faucets have a cartridge with an internal 
spindle that rotates to open and close the water flow. 
USE: 
Controls water flow into sinks and basins; includes 
single- and double-handled models. 
USE TIPS: 
If a cartridge goes bad, you must replace the entire 
piece with an identical match. More commonly, leaks 
are due to a worn O-ring; bring the old O-ring to the 
store for an exact match (cheap repair!). 
Handle
Washerless faucet.
Stem screw
Retaining nut
Faucet
base
Cartridge
Setscrew

182 PART V
BUYING TIPS: 
Washerless faucets tend to have fewer leaks than 
compression faucets and are easier to repair when 
they do have problems. Some models require  
a special device to remove the cartridge. It is  
included in the package and should be saved for  
the next repair.
Ball Faucet
DESCRIPTION: 
Type of washerless faucet with a ball that fits into 
a faucet body that has three holes—a hot inlet, a 
cold inlet, and an outlet. Depending on the ball’s 
position, outlet water is hot, cold, or somewhere 
in between. Inlet holes are sealed with little rubber 
cups, called valve seats, pressed against the ball 
with tiny metal springs. 
USE: 
Controls water flow into sinks and basins; typically 
single-handled kitchen faucets. 
USE TIPS: 
If water drips from the spout, replace the valve seats 
and springs (sold in sets of two or more). If water 
leaks from the faucet base/base of spout, replace the 
O-rings around the faucet body. 
Aerator
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Spray diffuser.
DESCRIPTION: 
Small, barrel-like metal or plastic part that screws onto 
the end of a faucet spout with either inside or outside 
threads. Has a fine screen inside that diffuses the water 
and introduces air. Made in a variety of sizes and types.
Handle
Ball cap
Spout
Cam
Ball
Valve seats 
and springs
Faucet body 
and O-rings
Set screw
Ball faucet.
Outlet
Faucet base

CHAPTER 26 183
USE: 
Makes the stream of water coming from a faucet spout smooth and prevents 
splashing. Also controls flow of water. 
USE TIPS: 
Unscrew occasionally and clean debris from screen. If it doesn’t unscrew by 
hand, use tongue-and-groove pliers with a rag to protect the chrome finish of 
the aerator. Soak the aerator overnight in vinegar to dissolve mineral deposits. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Universal aerators are available that fit most faucets. Low-flow aerators reduce water use; they’re a good idea 
for bathrooms, where the water tends to be left running, but not so great in the kitchen, where high flow is 
desirable for filling pots and sink basins. 
Lavatory Faucet Handle
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Faucet handle.
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic or metal piece that attaches to faucet stem. Available in an almost infinite number of shapes and styles.
USE: 
To open and close faucet.
USE TIPS: 
On some handles, the screws that hold the handle on the stem are concealed under a decorative cap, often 
marked “Hot” or “Cold.” These must be pried up to gain access to the screws.
BUYING TIPS: 
For the best fit, buy a duplicate replacement handle. Failing this, buy a universal handle. Types with two 
setscrews are more secure but may still slip and damage the stem.
Bathtub & Shower Faucets
DESCRIPTION: 
A variety of types: three-valve faucets have hot- and cold-water faucets with another faucet in the middle for 
diverting water to the shower. Two-valve faucets have hot-and cold-water faucets with a lift-up device on the 
tub spout for diverting the water to the shower. Two-valve shower fittings have hot- and cold-water faucets 
Aerator.
FAUCETS & FAUCET PARTS

184 Part V
only. Two-valve tub fillers have 
faucets that fill the tub only. Single-
control faucets have one lever that 
controls the flow and mix of hot 
and cold water. 
The standard center-to-center 
measurement on tub faucets is 
8 inches, though 6- and 11-inch 
centers are also used. The center 
measurement on old-style, 
free-standing tubs with exposed 
plumbing is 31/2 inches. Tub 
faucets are available in chrome-
plated brass or plastic, pot metal, 
and plain plastic.
Two-handled washerless tub faucet.
Single-handle washerless tub faucet.
Water line to 
shower head
Cold 
water 
supply 
line
Hot 
water 
supply 
line
Bonnet 
nut
Cartridge
Gate 
diverter
Diverter 
lever
Escutcheon
Gate 
diverter
Hot 
water 
supply 
line
Water line to 
shower head
Built-in 
shutoff 
valves
Cold 
water 
supply 
line
Cartridge

CHAPTER 26 185
FAUCETS & FAUCET PARTS
FAUCETS & FAUCET PARTS
USE: 
Controlling water flow and temperature in a shower or bathtub.
USE TIPS: 
Older faucets are typically compression-style, while contemporary models typically have cartridges 
(washerless), as with today’s sink faucets. To remove the stem (on compression faucets) or cartridge (on 
washerless faucets) after the handle is removed, you may need to remove a bonnet nut with a deep-throat 
socket wrench.
BUYING TIPS: 
Replacement parts are the same as those for sink and lavatory faucets.
Sillcock
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Hose bib, spigot, male hose faucet, outdoor faucet.
DESCRIPTION: 
Outdoor faucet with a mounting flange for anchoring to an exterior wall and a male-threaded spout for 
connecting to hoses (a “plain” faucet has no threads). A frost-proof sillcock has a pipe that extends 18 inches 
or so into the house, ending with a valve where the water is shut off. The remaining water in the extension 
pipe runs out through the spout so there’s no water that can freeze at the exposed end of the faucet. 
USE: 
Exterior water supply, especially to hoses.
USE TIPS: 
Many sillcocks are connected to the water supply pipe with a threaded fitting and can be unscrewed for 
replacement. Frost-proof sillcocks are recommended in areas with freezing winters. These can be installed 
with compression fittings (page 161) or push-in fittings (page 162) if allowed by local code. Leaks can be 
repaired the same ways as with other faucets. 
Frost-proof sillcock.
Anti-siphon 
device
Stem 
seal
Line level 
indicates 
correct pitch
Shaft
Threaded 
adapter
Existing pipe to 
water supply
Compression 
fitting 

186
VALVES
CHAPTER 27
ABOUT VALVES
Valves, like faucets, control the flow of water or steam, but they are stronger and have more specialized 
characteristics than faucets. Valves and sillcocks are found on plumbing pipes; faucets are simply valves that 
are used on fixtures such as sinks. Valves are made in all the sizes and types that pipe is made and in most of 
those materials as well, although cast brass is most common. Installation types—the way in which the valve 
is joined to the pipe or fitting—include threaded, compression, solvent-weld, push-in, and sweat (soldered).
Water Supply Valve
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Shutoff valve, fixture shutoff valve, 
lavatory straight valve, cutoff valve, 
angle stop.
DESCRIPTION: 
A small globe-type valve (page 187), 
usually chrome-plated, made of 
metal or plastic. Can be 90° (angle 
stop) or straight.
USE: 
Controls water flow to the water 
supply tubes (page 158) connected 
to toilets, sinks, and other fixtures. 
Installed in accessible areas, such 
as inside sink cabinets and behind 
toilets, so they’re easy to reach for 
repairs to the fixtures. Saves you 
from having to shut off water to the 
entire building. 
USE TIPS: 
The handle has great leverage, 
making it all too easy to strip the 
plastic kind. Take care.
Water supply valve.
Handle 
screw
Handle
Packing 
nut
Packing 
washer
Packing 
ring
Stem 
washer
Stem 
screw
Spindle

CHAPTER 27 187
BUYING TIPS: 
Using metal-stemmed valves limits the risk of stripping. If a valve leaks, you may be able to fix it by replacing 
the packing and/or stem washer, but usually this isn’t worth the trouble—better to simply replace it. You 
have to shut off the building water in either case. 
Ball Valve
DESCRIPTION: 
Large lever controls an interior metal or plastic ball that covers 
or uncovers an opening for water.
USE: 
Controls water flow where quick action is a premium—one 
quick, easy twist of the lever and the valve is opened or closed. 
Commonly used for main shutoff valves on the incoming 
water supply to homes. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Best valve available—shuts water off quickly and it’s easy to 
see if valve is open or closed, unlike other valves.
Globe Valve
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Compression valve.
DESCRIPTION: 
Rounded body with a seat on its bottom 
against which a stem with a replaceable 
washer presses. Rounded body is what 
gives this valve its name. Comes in most 
pipe sizes. Also available with openings at 
right angles to change the direction of the 
flow 90°, known as an angle valve (regular 
is called straight). A connector globe valve 
has a union fitting on one side, which, like 
the gate valve (page 188), is handy for 
connecting to radiators. Sillcocks  
(page 185) are usually globe valves. 
Ball valve.
Globe valve.
Packing washer
Packing nut
Stem washer
Stem screw
Spindle
Packing 
nut
O-rings
Ball
Handle
Curved 
chamber

188 PART V
USE: 
Controls water or steam flow, especially suitable for high pressure and frequent use.
USE TIPS: 
Repair leaks around the handle by replacing the packing washer. If the valve does not stop water flow when 
closed, replace the stem washer. 
Gate Valve
DESCRIPTION: 
Faucet-like handle controlling a metal wedge that slides 
up and down into a seat. A connector gate valve has a 
union fitting on one side, handy when connecting to  
a radiator.
USE: 
Controls water flow where total, unimpeded opening is 
required, such as on a water main, and is recommended 
wherever a constant flow is expected.
USE TIPS: 
Usually best to keep completely, rather than 
partially, open or closed. Leaks from the stem often 
can be fixed (especially on radiators) by tightening 
the packing nut or else removing it and replacing the  
packing washer or, on older models, adding  
stem packing (page 178) underneath the nut. 
Drainable Valve
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Stop and waste valve, bleeder valve.
DESCRIPTION: 
Essentially a globe or gate valve with a drain opening.
USE: 
Draining pipe (on the non-pressure side) to prevent it from freezing in cold weather.
Gate valve.
Packing 
nut
Packing 
washer
Spindle
Gate

CHAPTER 27 189
Saddle Valve
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Tap-on fitting.
DESCRIPTION: 
Small water valve with a clamp assembly that fits 
over copper water supply piping. Once the clamp is 
installed and a water supply tube is connected to its 
outlet, the valve’s handle is turned to drive a hollow 
needle (like an oversize hypodermic needle) into the 
wall of the copper pipe, completing the tap. 
USE: 
Quickly tapping into existing water supply pipe to 
hook up refrigerator ice makers and similar low-
demand fixtures.
USE TIPS: 
Do not confuse saddle valves with water supply valves (page 186); they are not shutoff valves. Use only in 
easily accessible (and visible) locations. Saddle valves are prone to leaking, and you want to spot trouble as 
soon as possible. Do not install them inside wall, floor, or ceiling cavities. 
Check Valve
DESCRIPTION: 
Regular and swing type, some for installation on vertical lines. Handleless valve with loose flap inside that 
closes when water flows the “wrong” way and swings open when it flows properly, allowing water to flow in 
one direction only.
USE: 
To prevent backflow. Often used on vertical runs of piping that bring water from sump-pump basins to  
the outdoors. 
USE TIP: 
Models designed for use on vertical lines will not work if installed upside down; arrow on body denotes basic 
“open” direction.
Saddle valve.
VALVES

190
TOILET PARTS
CHAPTER 28
ABOUT TOILETS
A toilet works in a surprisingly simple way, relying solely on water pressure and gravity to operate. When 
you push the handle, a lever pulls a chain that lifts a rubber flap (called a flapper) or a tank ball off the flush 
valve, a big hole in the center of the tank. Water from the tank rushes down through the valve and into the 
bowl. From there, the water takes a few turns through a trap inside the base of the bowl, creating suction that 
increases the force of the flush and sends the water and waste on their way to the sewer pipe. 
While the basic process hasn’t changed much, most of a toilet’s parts have been refined and modified over 
the years. Today, new toilets use a fraction of the water that older models used, the old ballcock-style fill valve 
(the device that automatically refills the tank) and its coconut-shaped float have been replaced by a simpler 
plastic unit, and flappers have replaced tank balls. You can also retrofit an old toilet with a dual-flush device to 
dramatically reduce your household water use. 
Standard toilet parts—fill valves, flappers, and levers—are inexpensive and easy to install, so repairing old 
mechanisms is largely a thing of the past. Toilet tanks are generally quite standard, and most have the same 
holes for the fill valve, flush valve, and tank bolts and handle. So even if you have an older toilet, chances are 
you can find new parts at any hardware store or home center.  
Old-style toilet parts.
Ballcock  
(fill valve)
Refill  
tube
Overflow 
tube
Flush 
handle
Float  
arm
Lift 
rod
Float  
ball
Tank  
ball
Flush 
valve

CHAPTER 28 191
Fill Valve
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Often mistakenly called a 
“ballcock” after the older version of 
this part. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Automatic valve mechanism with 
a plastic tower that mounts into a  
hole in the bottom of the toilet tank 
and connects to the water supply tube 
coming from the water supply valve 
below the toilet (see photo, page 186). 
One common brand, Fluidmaster®, has a 
cylindrical float that surrounds the tower 
and moves up and down with the water 
level, while another common brand, Korky®, 
has a stationary box near the top, called a 
float chamber, with a small float inside. Both 
have valves at the top that shut off the water 
supply when the desired water level is reached 
and small tubing that diverts some water into the 
overflow tube (page 194).
USE: 
Controls water supply to refill the toilet tank. Activated by the change in water level. Standard modern 
replacement for traditional ballcock fill valves (page 192). 
USE TIPS: 
Follow directions carefully. Hand-tighten only, if possible, avoid using pliers, and do not overtighten—you 
might break the plastic or even the toilet tank. Carefully adjust so it works properly with desired water level. 
And don’t forget to flush after turning off the water supply (Reminder: Turn off the water first!). Have a sponge 
and bucket or kitchen storage box ready for collecting the water from the tank.
BUYING TIPS: 
Inexpensive and relatively easy to install, especially if your toilet supply line and tank are easily accessible. 
If you have more than a couple of toilets in your house, keep a spare around. Be warned: some toilet 
manufacturers use proprietary fill valves that do not have generic replacements.
Contemporary toilet parts.
Fill valve 
(with float)
Overflow 
tube
Flush 
handle
Flush 
valve
Refill 
tube
Flapper
Lift 
chain

192 PART V
Ballcock Repair Kit
DESCRIPTION: 
Repair for older ballcock fill valves, which typically have a diaphragm-type valve on top. Repair kits may 
contain replacement caps for the valve and replacement diaphragms (upper and lower). 
USE: 
Repairing ballcocks that leak into the tank and/or don’t fill properly. 
BUYING TIPS: 
You can still find these repair kits for ballcocks, as well as replacement float arms and float balls, but the fact 
is, a repair kit alone can cost as much as an entire new-style fill valve (typically under $10), which has its own 
float and no need for a float arm. 
Flapper
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Flapper valve.
DESCRIPTION: 
The trapdoor-like device that opens and closes 
over the flush valve in the bottom of the toilet 
tank. Standard version has a roughly round rubber 
flap with a raised center portion on the top and a protruding cone on the 
bottom. Ears extend from the back of the flap; these hook onto two tabs 
on the overflow tube or flush valve assembly. A chain extending from  
the toilet handle hooks onto the edge of the flap, opposite the ears; 
this lifts the flapper to initiate the flush.
USE: 
Controls water flow from bottom of tank. When it is lifted the 
tank water rushes out and flushing is started. Flappers are easy 
and effective replacements for old-style tank balls, which are 
prone to leaking over time. 
BUYING TIPS: 
“Universal” flappers are designed to fit most standard toilets, new and old. If you can’t find a good fit, bring 
the old flapper or tank ball to a well-stocked store or plumbing supply house for identification. 
Flapper.

CHAPTER 28 193
Toilet Flush Handle
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Toilet flush lever, toilet tank lever, toilet trip lever.
DESCRIPTION: 
Lever on front (or side) of tank. Usually supplied with the lever or arm attached. Available in plastic, 
chromed plastic, and various metals, including brass, bronze, nickel, and stainless steel. 
USE: 
Raises flapper (or tank ball, on older toilets) to initiate flush.
USE TIPS: 
Unlike most things, to remove the handle, unscrew in a clockwise direction. It is held on by a left-hand–
threaded nut. Be careful not to overtighten the nut and risk cracking the tank. 
Flush Valve & Repair Kit
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Flush valve seat, flush ball seat, tank outlet, seat.
DESCRIPTION: 
Flush valve is a large, round fitting at the bottom of the toilet tank, made of metal or plastic. Typically includes 
the overflow tube extending vertically from the valve. Valve assembly is secured with a large spud nut on the 
underside of the tank. Replacing the valve requires removing the tank and using a special wrench called a spud 
wrench or very large tongue-and-groove pliers. A flush valve repair kit contains a new plastic ring that fits inside 
the old flush valve so you don’t have to replace it. Ring is adhered to valve with self-adhesive backing or silicone 
caulk. Kit includes a new flapper sized for the repair ring. 
USE: 
Replacing or repairing old flush valves, which can corrode or develop mineral buildup over time and fail to 
seal properly with the flapper, leaking water into the bowl.  
BUYING TIPS: 
Repairing a valve is much easier than replacing one. The kits typically cost less than $10, so it’s at least worth a try. 
TOILET PARTS

194 PART V
Refill Tube
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Bowl refill tube.
DESCRIPTION: 
Small tube that slips over a nipple on the fill valve and connects to a clip on the top edge of the overflow tube. 
Contemporary versions typically made of vinyl; older models may be brass or aluminum.
USE: 
Fills bowl with water after flushing to keep sewer odors out.
BUYING TIPS: 
If you’re replacing a fill valve (page 191), the new unit will include a refill tube, but you can buy tubes 
separately. New tube typically includes a new plastic or metal clip for connecting to the overflow tube.
Overflow Tube
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic, copper, brass, or aluminum tube 1 or 11/8 inches in diameter that screws into flush valve (page 193).
BUYING TIPS: 
Packaged with flush valves or individually. Get the largest thickness (gauge) available, and avoid aluminum, 
which corrodes quickly.
Tank-to-Bowl Attachment Hardware
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Tank bolts, spud washer.
DESCRIPTION: 
Long brass bolts with large rubber washers 
and a bagel-sized, foam-rubber washer, 
sometimes called a spud washer. These items 
are usually available in small packages. 
Standard size for all brands.
USE: 
Anchoring the tank to the bowl on a standard 
two-piece toilet. The two brass bolts and 
washers go in small holes at the bottom of  
the tank and through holes in the platform  
Tank bolts (with 
washers and nuts) 
and spud washer.

CHAPTER 28 195
at the back of the bowl, and are secured under the platform with nuts. The spud washer fits around the bottom 
end of the flush valve (page 193) to create a seal between the tank and bowl. 
Closet Flange Bolt
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Closet bolt, toilet bolt, hold-down bolt.
DESCRIPTION: 
Long brass bolts with large heads that have two flat sides to keep 
the bolts from turning. The bolts are inserted heads-down into 
keyhole slots in the closet flange, the large, round, plastic fitting 
mounted to the floor at the top end of the toilet’s drain pipe. The 
closet bolts extend up through the hole at each side of the toilet 
bowl base and are secured with washers and nuts. A variation is 
the closet screw, which has wood-screw threads on one end for 
anchoring the toilet base to a wooden floor.
USE: 
Secures toilet base to closet flange or floor. 
Wax Ring
DESCRIPTION: 
Thick wax ring, typically with a plastic flange that extends down 
through the bottom of the ring. Designed to fit standard 3- and 
4-inch toilet drain openings. 
USE: 
Creates a watertight seal between the base of the toilet bowl and 
the closet flange at the top end of the toilet’s drain pipe. Used 
when installing new toilets or when an existing toilet has been removed for any reason. 
USE TIPS: 
Wax rings are not reusable and must be replaced any time the toilet base has been lifted up or repositioned. 
When installing a new ring you get only one chance to position the toilet; if you have to remove the toilet 
base after the wax ring is compressed, replace the ring. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Available in standard and double-height versions. There are also “no-wax” toilet seals sold as an alternative to 
traditional wax rings. Manufacturers claim no-mess convenience and a more universal fit when compared  
to conventional rings. 
Closet bolts.
Wax ring.
TOILET PARTS

PART VI
ELECTRICAL SUPPLIES 


198 PART VI
ABOUT ELECTRICAL & BUILDING CODES
The type of electrical product used and the way it is installed are governed by local building codes 
throughout the country. Most local codes are based on the National Electrical Code book (commonly 
known as the NEC), which is published by the National Fire Protection Association and updated every three 
years. Codes are enforceable laws that must be checked out before you make any major installations. Many 
codes prohibit the use of some of the items listed here, even though they are mostly standard equipment.  
See page 148 (intro to plumbing chapter) for more information on codes and permits. 
ABOUT HOUSEHOLD WIRING
Standard household wiring is rated for 120 volts, although this may be referred to as 110, 115, or 125 volts—
which for most replacement purposes means the same thing. Standard circuits—those used for lighting 
and regular receptacles (outlets) in living areas—are rated for 15 amps of current. Therefore, the most 
standard circuit is a 120-volt, 15-amp circuit. Receptacles in kitchens, garages, bathrooms, and utility areas 
are commonly rated for 120 volts and 20 amps to provide a little more power for the relatively high demands 
of appliances and tools. Circuits for high-voltage appliances, such as electric clothes dryers, ranges, and 
baseboard heaters, operate on 240 volts (also called 220, 230, or 250; again, same thing) and amperages of 
20 to 50 amps.
You need to understand these circuit basics when selecting switches, receptacles, wiring, and other devices, 
because all electrical equipment is rated for specific circuit voltage and amperage. Always use wiring and devices 
with the same ratings as the circuit they will be installed on. For example, use a 120-volt, 15-amp switch for a 
standard 15-amp circuit, and use a 120-volt, 20-amp receptacle only on a standard 20-amp circuit. 
You also need to know the type of wiring you have. If your house was built before the 1960s or after the 
1970s, chances are it has wiring made of solid copper, which is still the standard for new construction and 
remodeling. Devices for use with solid copper are labeled “COPPER” or “CU.” 
Some houses built in the 1960s and 1970s have solid aluminum or copper-coated (copper-clad) 
aluminum wiring. Aluminum wiring has been linked to numerous house fires and other electrical hazards, 
due to its high rate of expansion and contraction and to the presence of corrosion when it’s connected to 
electrical devices made for copper wiring. Both of these problems can cause the wiring to come loose from 
their connections. Aluminum wiring can be safe if it is connected to the proper type of devices. Devices 
labeled “CO/ALR” are intended for use with solid aluminum wiring. Those labeled “CU-CLAD ONLY” 
are intended for copper-coated aluminum. In any case, it’s a good idea to consult an electrician if you have 
aluminum wiring. 

 199
ABOUT POLARIZED PLUGS & GROUNDING
Polarized plugs have one wide blade (or prong) and one narrow blade and must be oriented correctly 
to fit into the wide and narrow slots in almost all receptacles. They’ve been around for about a century, 
although most of us consider them a “modern” annoyance. Polarization is a safety feature that prevents the 
“hot” wiring from crossing with the neutral wiring. The third blade, or prong—on a plug that has one—
is the ground prong. It provides a path for electricity to follow if something goes wrong, such as a wire 
coming loose and touching the metal side of an electrical box, creating a short circuit, or fault. 
All standard modern receptacles are polarized and include a grounding slot. Many, but not all,  
plugs include a ground prong. Appliances and devices with plugs that don’t have ground prongs are 
internally insulated and/or have insulating housings to protect you from a shock if there’s a short inside 
the appliance. 
Grounding is a safety system that connects each electrical device in a house to the main service panel 
(breaker box) and in turn to a ground rod (or other means) buried in the earth. In most cases, devices are 
grounded through the green-insulated or bare-copper ground wire in the circuit cable(s) connecting the 
device. Just because a receptacle has a ground slot doesn’t mean it’s properly grounded. If you’re replacing 
a receptacle, switch, light fixture, etc. and discover there is no ground wire in the circuit cable(s) inside 
the electrical box, that’s something you’ll have to address. The device will probably work fine without a 
ground, but it won’t be as safe or be up to code. 
Two-slot/two-prong polarized receptacle and plug.
Three-slot/three-prong grounded receptacle and plug.
Grounding 
prong

200
EXTENSION CORDS, PLUGS  
& POWER STRIPS
CHAPTER 29
Extension Cords
DESCRIPTION: 
Available in various lengths from 3 to 100 feet and in various colors; wire may be two-wire or the heavier 
three-wire grounded type (recommended). Extension cords are typically supplied with a female plug on 
one end and a male plug on the other. Latest innovations are a cord with three female receptacles and 
another with a receptacle box with six female receptacles and a built-in circuit breaker or ground-fault circuit-
interrupter (GFCI) device (page 218), sometimes called a portable outlet center.
USE: 
Provides power at a remote location.
USE TIPS: 
Extension cords are sized to handle a certain amount of current and should be matched to the device(s) they 
are powering. For example, household-type extension cords are suitable for lamps, fans, small electronics, 
and other low-demand devices. High-amperage appliances, such as portable heaters, can overheat lightweight 
cords and create a fire hazard. Heavy-duty, grounded cords are suitable for power tools and other high-
amperage devices. Check the amperage (amp) rating on the cord; this should be higher than the amp draw  
of all devices it is powering. Use only GFCI-protected cords for outdoor work. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Flat plug extension cords are ideal for plugging in behind furniture because the plug and cord install flush to 
the outlet and wall. Some types have swiveling plugs for positioning the cord wherever you want it. 
Standard Plug
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Replacement plug, electrical plug, grounding plug.
DESCRIPTION: 
Male plug with two or three prongs. Plugs may be of light or heavy construction, such as black rubber (for 
appliances) or light plastic in brown, black, and/or ivory. Side-outlet plugs have the wire coming out the side. 
Plugs for very light-duty cords may simply snap onto cords, making electrical contact with metal teeth that 
bite through the cord insulation. Better, heavier-duty plugs have screw terminals for connecting the bare-wire 
ends of the cord wires. Screw terminals are preferable in any case. 

USE: 
Replacing an old or damaged plug on an extension cord or 
appliance power cord. 
USE TIPS: 
Make sure the plug is the right type and suitably rated for the 
cord it will be installed on. For example, use only grounded 
plugs for a grounded (three-wire) extension cord. The amperage 
rating of the plug must meet or exceed the rating of the 
cord or appliance. Do not replace the plug on a high-voltage 
appliance cord, such as for a clothes dryer, electric range, or air 
conditioner; instead, replace the entire cord with an appliance 
power cord (below). 
Appliance Cord
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Appliance power cord, dryer 
pigtail, range pigtail.
DESCRIPTION: 
Insulated cord with male plug 
on one end and female plug or 
individual wire connectors on the 
other end. Each cord is for use 
with a specific appliance, such as 
a clothes dryer, electric range or 
cooktop, or air conditioner. 
USE: 
New or replacement power cord for a specific electrical appliance. New dryers and ranges typically are sold 
without power cords, which must be purchased separately. 
USE TIPS: 
Warning: Do not plug in an appliance cord before it is fully connected to the appliance! Dryer and range cords 
typically have loose wire ends that are live when the plug is inserted into the wall outlet. When live,  
the ends can deliver deadly current if they touch you and will result in a short circuit if they touch each other. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Dryer and range cords are similar but are not interchangeable; use the right type for your appliance. Dryer 
cords come in three-wire and four-wire versions; the former are found on older appliances and fit three-slot 
Replacement plug (disassembled).
Four-wire dryer cord.
CHAPTER 29 201

202 PART VI
dryer outlets, while four-wire are the new standard and are required by most codes for new appliances and 
installations. Make sure the cord carries the proper amperage and voltage ratings for your appliance. When in 
doubt, have an electrician or appliance technician install your cord. 
3-to-2 Adapter Plug
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Grounding adapter, plug adapter, cheater plug.
DESCRIPTION: 
Small, cube-shaped plastic or rubber plug with two prongs on one end 
and three openings in the other, with a small, U-shaped metal piece 
(lug) attached directly to the plug. Older models may have a 3-inch 
grounding wire (lead)—usually green in color—coming directly out of 
the middle, with the U-shaped lug on its end.
USE: 
Allows use of three-pronged (grounded) plug in a two-slot receptacle. 
USE TIPS: 
Note that while the adapter does the job of getting power to the cord, it seldom actually grounds the plug 
and cord, for several reasons. First, two-prong receptacles often are not grounded to begin with; using a 
“grounding plug” offers no grounding protection whatsoever. Second, for the ground lug to be effective it 
must be connected to the central screw on the receptacle, the one that secures the coverplate; most users fail 
to do this. Using the ground lug works only if the electrical box is metal (can’t be plastic, as most modern 
boxes are) and it is grounded through a means called bonding, which often is unreliable. Finally, even if 
the box is grounded this is a weak ground connection at best and therefore a poor method of grounding 
protection. Bottom line: use at your own risk. 
Power Strip
DESCRIPTION: 
Rectangular plastic strip containing multiple receptacles and a cord to plug into a nearby outlet. Available in 
a wide range of sizes and styles, some featuring just a few receptacles, others, more than a dozen. Cord length 
also varies, up to about 8 feet. Some models have built-in circuit breakers for overload protection, but this 
does not make the strip a surge protector (page 203). Many of today’s power strips include USB ports for 
charging computers and other electronics. Some have home automation (smart home) functions, such as 
timer control and remote operation through a phone.
3-to-2 adapter plug.

EXTENSION CORDS, PLUGS & POWER STRIPS
CHAPTER 29 203
USE: 
Multiplies the capacity of a single outlet at a convenient location. Helps manage multiple power cords neatly. 
USE TIP: 
Power strips with ON/OFF buttons allow you to control all devices plugged into the strip. This helps save 
energy with things such as phone and computer chargers and electronics with “standby” mode or power 
lights, all of which consume electricity even when they’re sitting unused. 
Surge Protector
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Surge suppressor. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Models for home use are 
essentially power strips (page 
202) with internal devices for 
surge protection. This means they 
help absorb spikes or surges in 
the electrical system caused by a 
nearby lighting strike or when the 
power comes back on after being 
shut down (as well as numerous 
other causes). 
USE: 
Powering and protecting sensitive—and expensive—electronic equipment, such as computers, TVs,  
audio/video equipment, etc. 
NOTE:
A surge protector must be plugged into a properly grounded outlet to offer surge protection; it’s best if the 
outlet has a true ground provided by a ground wire in the circuit cable. A GFCI outlet (page 218) that is not 
grounded offers ground-fault protection, but it is not a true ground and will not support surge protection. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Don’t assume a power strip offer surge protection just because it has a breaker or an ON/OFF switch. Surge 
suppression capability is rated in joules. For example, a surge protector rated for 1,000 joules can absorb 
surges totaling 1,000 joules. This may be in the form of 10 surges of 100 joules each or 1 surge of 1,000 
joules, or another combination. The surge protection effectively gets used up, so after it hits the 1,000-joules 
mark it no longer offers surge protection and should be replaced. How many joules you need depends on the 
equipment you’re protecting and the likelihood of surges in your home. 
Surge protector.

204 PART VI
Multiple-Outlet Taps & Adapters
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Multi-outlet, plug-in strip, plug-in outlet adapter, outlet 
tap, table tap, cube tap.
DESCRIPTION: 
One-piece plastic units in various sizes, shapes, and 
configurations, containing two to six sets of slots for 
plugs. Comes either with third grounding prong 
or not. Some multi-outlet adapters have a long 
machine screw for screwing into a duplex wall 
receptacle (replacing the outlet coverplate) for 
semi-permanent installation. 
USE: 
Plugs into any outlet to provide multiple 
receptacle capacity. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Choose only grounded taps and adapters, 
which work with three-prong (grounded)  
and two-prong (polarized) plugs. 
ABOUT SOCKET ADAPTERS
Socket adapters, sometimes called current taps, differ from the taps and adapters described above, in that 
they screw into sockets rather than plug into outlets. They also should be used sparingly and are generally 
intended for temporary use, although if used appropriately, they work as well as permanent products. 
However, these devices—and anything plugged into them—are not grounded. 
Lamp-holder is the industry term for a socket, the device that holds a light bulb (called a lamp in  
the industry), as well as for the basic porcelain or plastic light fixture that holds a single light bulb  
(see page 206). 
Five-outlet adapter.  

CHAPTER 29 205
EXTENSION CORDS, PLUGS & POWER STRIPS
Socket Adapter
TYPES: 
Socket-to-lamp-holder/outlet adapter
Lamp-holder-to-outlet adapter
Single-to-twin lamp-holder adapter
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
SOCKET-TO-LAMP-HOLDER/OUTLET ADAPTER: 
Round plastic device with light- bulb–like threads on each end (male on one, female on the other) and 
receptacle slots on each side. Some models have a pull chain or toggle switch that turns off the bulb but 
not the outlets. If it has no pull chain, it is called a keyless adapter. Provides two outlets wherever there’s a 
light socket, without sacrificing the bulb.
PLUG TO LAMP-HOLDER ADAPTER: 
Two-prong plug on one end, lamp-holder socket on the other.
SINGLE-TO-TWIN LAMP-HOLDER ADAPTER: 
Also called a twin light adapter. V-shaped device that holds two light bulbs at an angle to each other, with 
one threaded end that screws into a regular socket. Provides a double socket in the place of a single.
USE TIPS: 
Do not exceed the maximum wattage rating of the socket/light fixture with anything plugged into the 
adapter. Use LED light bulbs in the sockets to minimize the wattage used up by the lights. 
Socket-to-lamp- 
holder/outlet adapter.
Plug to lamp- 
holder adapter.
Single-to-twin 
lamp-holder adapter.

206
LAMP & LIGHT FIXTURE  
REPAIR PARTS
CHAPTER 30
Light Socket
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Incandescent lamp holder, light bulb socket.
DESCRIPTION: 
Cylindrical assembly consisting of a 
removable metal shell surrounding 
a threaded metal socket (where the 
light bulb screws in), and a plastic 
base that houses the switch (as 
applicable) and two screw 
terminals for the wiring 
connections. Some 
sockets don’t have a 
switch, because the 
fixture has a separate 
switch or is controlled 
by a wall switch. Some 
sockets have two wire leads extending from the socket base, rather than screw terminals.  
Sockets with terminals typically have one brass and one silver screw, for each electrical supply wire.
USE: 
Replacement socket for light fixtures of all descriptions. Light-bulb bases—and therefore socket sizes—have 
remained standard for many years; it’s easy to find a socket for almost any fixture, even if the part doesn’t 
exactly match the original. 
USE TIPS: 
Secure cord wires inside a socket with an Underwriter’s knot, whenever possible. Fixture and lamp cord is 
polarized: The wire with the ribbed or marked insulation is the neutral wire and connects to the silver screw 
terminal or white wire lead on the socket; the other wire is “hot” and connects to the brass terminal or black 
lead. Standard sockets are compatible with traditional incandescent light bulbs as well as energy-efficient 
(LED and compact fluorescent) bulbs. 
Light socket with 
screw terminals 
and switch.
Light socket with wire 
leads (no switch).

ABOUT LAMP PARTS
Lamps are almost infinitely repairable, regardless of their age or type. If you take apart a lamp (unplugged, 
of course), you’ll discover that the base is merely a hollow structure that holds a few simple electrical parts. 
Replacing any or all of those parts will get your old lamp working like new while looking like it always has.  
If you aren’t crazy with how it’s always looked, you can replace the shade—something you’re more likely to 
find at a lighting store than a hardware supplier. 
Harp 
Wire
Finial
Socket
Threaded rod
Coupling
Lock 
nut
Neck 
Assembly
CHAPTER 30 207
Lamp parts.

208 PART VI
Lamp Parts
PART:
Finial
Harp
Clip adapter
Socket
Threaded rod (also known as all-thread)
Coupling
Locknut
Reducing bushing
Wire (also known as lamp cord and flexible cord)
DESCRIPTION & USE:
FINIAL: 
Small, decorative cap with female threads in one end. Screws on to secure lampshade to top of harp.
HARP: 
Oblong-shaped wire frame with a connecting fitting at its bottom end. Holds the lampshade.
CLIP ADAPTER: 
Two oblong wire forms with stems in a metal piece that has a short threaded rod. Clips onto bulb and is 
used when a lamp has no harp to hold the lampshade.
SOCKET: 
Cylindrical part where the light bulb is screwed in. May or may not contain a switch. Lamp sockets are 
the same as other standard light fixture sockets. 
THREADED ROD: 
Hollow metal tube threaded on the outside along its entire length. Standard lamp rod has an outside 
diameter of 3/8 inch. Serves as the spine of the lamp. The lamp wire runs through it and many of the lamp 
parts are supported by it.
COUPLING:
Small, tube-like fitting threaded on the inside. Used for joining two lengths of threaded rod.

CHAPTER 30 209
LAMP & LIGHT FIXTURE REPAIR PARTS
LOCKNUT: 
Small, flat metal ring, sometimes with an opening and a slight spiral shape, sometimes hexagonal.  
Secures various parts to the threaded rod. 
REDUCING BUSHING: 
Small, round fitting threaded on the inside and outside. Reduces the inside diameter of rod from  
1/4 to 1/8 inch to change from one rod size to another.
WIRE: 
Lamp wire type is 18-2 SPT-1 and may be bought with or without a plug. Provides electrical power. 
Typically, the same cord runs from the plug and up through the lamp base and threaded rod and any 
extending arms (hollow, like the rod) and connects to the socket. If a lamp has multiple sockets, the cord 
wires may be connected to multiple wire leads inside the lamp base. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Lamp parts are sold in kits and as individual parts. Kits are often better for building new lamps or 
completely refurbishing old lamps, while individual parts can be more economical for repairs. Sockets 
may also be bought individually and can result in slight savings for repairs. Socket reducers that screw into  
a standard-size socket (called Edison, or E26, base) and permit use of bulbs with small candelabra bases 
are available.
Fluorescent Light Fixture Parts
DESCRIPTION: 
Replacement parts for utility-type fluorescent fixtures—the kind that take the long tube lamps (bulbs)—
include the starter (a small metal cylinder typically found on each side of the fixture housing on older 
fixtures); sockets (the tombstone-shaped fittings that receive the pins of the fluorescent lamps); and the 
ballast (a black metal box usually housed inside the fixture, behind a coverplate that also conceals the fixture 
wiring). The ballast lowers the incoming voltage for use in the fixture. Newer, rapid-start fixtures have a 
starter and ballast in one piece. 
USE: 
Replacing worn parts on fluorescent light fixtures. 
USE TIPS: 
If a lamp flickers and won’t go on all the way, or it won’t go on at all, the problem may be the lamp itself, the 
starter, or the ballast. Start by testing with a good lamp. Failing that, replace the starter (very inexpensive).  

210 PART VI
Diffuser
Sockets
Ballast
Coverplate
Pins
Fluorescent 
tubes
Fluorescent tube fixture.

CHAPTER 30 211
Starter.
If that doesn’t help, you may need 
to replace the ballast, but check 
the pricing on the part—often it 
makes more sense to replace the 
entire fixture. Ballasts that hum 
loudly or are leaking an oily black 
substance also need replacement. 
Replace a socket that is scorched, 
cracked, loose, or otherwise 
damaged—also an inexpensive 
fix. New parts must match those 
being replaced.
LAMP & LIGHT FIXTURE REPAIR PARTS

212
SWITCHES & RECEPTACLES
CHAPTER 31
ABOUT SWITCHES
Switches function by interrupting electrical flow. There are many types of switches, but most can be 
categorized as either those linked to the main house wiring or those that are used elsewhere, such as on cords 
of light fixtures and other electrical devices. When replacing switches, find a suitable match by looking at the 
number of terminals, the wiring type, and the amperage and voltage ratings. 
Standard Light Switches
TYPES:
Single-pole switch
Three-way switch
Four-way switch
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Ordinary wall-mounted switches for light 
fixtures, vent fans, ceiling fans, etc. May have a 
toggle lever or rocker-style control or special 
features such as illuminated toggle or rocker 
or night-light display. Typically 120 volts and 
either 15 or 20 amp. The difference in appearance 
and application among the three main types is 
evident in the number of screw terminals (where 
the wires are attached): 
SINGLE-POLE: 
Simplest switch style, with two brass screw 
terminals plus a ground screw. Those with 
toggle levers typically have ON/OFF markings. 
Used to control one or more fixtures from a 
single location. 
THREE-WAY: 
Contains two brass (typically) traveler terminals and one darker-colored common screw terminal, plus a 
ground screw. Toggle lever has no ON/OFF markings. Used for controlling one or more fixtures from 
two different locations, such as at the top and bottom of a staircase. 
Single-pole switch.
Note: Position 
of the screw 
terminals on the 
switch may vary, 
depending on 
manufacturer.
Grounding 
screw
Switch 
lever
Two screw 
terminals
Wire 
compatibility 
rating
Volatge 
rating

FOUR-WAY: 
Contains two Line 1 screw terminals and two Line 2 terminals, plus a ground screw. Toggle lever has no 
ON/OFF markings. Always installed between a pair of three-way switches, enabling control of fixtures 
from three locations. 
USE TIPS: 
Use screw terminals or push-in fittings (on the back side of switch) that include a screw for clamping  
down on each wire after it’s pushed in. Avoid using push-in fittings without clamps, which may not hold 
wiring securely. 
BUYING TIPS: 
It’s often worth it to pay an extra dollar or two to upgrade to a “preferred” or “premium” switch. The cheapest 
options feel flimsy and probably won’t last as long as the better models. 
Three-way switch.
Four-way switch.
Traveler screw 
terminals
Common screw 
terminal
Grounding  
screw  
terminal
Note: Position 
of the screw 
terminals on the 
switch may vary, 
depending on 
manufacturer.
Line 1 screw 
terminals
Line 2 screw 
terminals
CHAPTER 31 213

214 PART VI
Dimmer Switch
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Rheostat.
DESCRIPTION: 
Light switch with a boxy housing and (typically) 
three or more wire leads for connecting to 
household circuit wiring. Dimmer controls come 
in a variety of types and styles, such as dial, slider, 
rocker, and toggle. Some have a regular ON/OFF 
control switch and a small slider control on the 
side for setting the dimmer level. Most dimmers are 
single-pole switches (see page 212), but three-way 
versions are available. 
USE: 
Adjusting light levels on permanently installed light 
fixtures (not lamps and other portable devices). 
USE TIPS: 
Dimmer switch bodies produce some heat that must 
be dissipated. Do not crowd them in a small switch 
box or a box filled with wiring.
BUYING TIPS: 
Not all dimmers are compatible or fully functional with energy-efficient LED and CFL light bulbs. Nor 
are all LEDs and, especially, CFL bulbs, dimmable. For the best performance, choose a dimmer designed 
for the light bulb you will use. Most LEDs will work with conventional dimmers but may not offer full 
light adjustability (they may shut off a little early and start up a little late at the low end of the dimmer 
range, for example). CFLs often must be an expensive dimmable type to work with conventional dimmers.  
Slider-type dimmer switch.

CHAPTER 31 215
SWITCHES & RECEPTACLES
A
B
C
D
E
Specialty Switches
TYPES:
Double switch
Combination switch/receptacle
Pilot light switch
Timer switch
Motion-sensor switch
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
A. DOUBLE SWITCH:
Light switch with two switch controls, typically either toggle or rocker-
style. Used to control two different fixtures from a single location. 
B. COMBINATION SWITCH/RECEPTACLE: 
Single unit with a small toggle or rocker switch and a standard grounded 
(three-slot) receptacle. Used where receptacles are scarce or where you 
want to control a plugged-in device using a wall switch. Can be wired so 
the receptacle turns on and off with the switch or has power at all times. 
C. PILOT LIGHT SWITCH: 
Switch with a small light on its face that is illuminated at all times. Used  
in basements, garages, and similar areas to help you locate the switch in 
the dark. 
D. TIMER SWITCH: 
Includes timer control that turns fixture on/off at a preset interval. 
Available in a variety of types, including countdown (often used for 
bathroom vent fans; shuts off fan after a preset time), programmable 
(security lights, heating appliances), spring-wound (works like an 
old-fashioned kitchen timer), occupancy-sensor (turns on if it senses 
movement; turns off automatically), and daylight-sensor (turns on when 
ambient light gets low, or at sunset). 
E. OCCUPANCY-SENSOR SWITCH: 
Also called motion-sensor or motion-detector switch. Light switch that turns 
on automatically when you enter the room and will turn off after a preset 
period if the room is vacant or if there is no movement. Often used in 
public buildings, where people tend to leave the lights on; in garages and 
basements for convenience; and for security lighting. 

216 PART VI
Line Switch
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
In-line switch, feed-through switch, lamp  
cord switch. 
DESCRIPTION: 
Light-duty switch that installs onto an 
electrical cord. Standard type has a body 
consisting of two, separable plastic halves 
that have prongs inside that push through the 
wire’s insulation when the halves are screwed 
back together, making electrical contact. Most 
have a knurled wheel or a toggle for the switch 
control. Better versions often have larger plastic bodies and toggles. 
USE: 
On/off control of lamps and similar light-duty fixtures. 
USE TIPS: 
Line switches are suitable for lamps and other light-duty, plug-in fixtures and appliances. They should not be 
used on extension cords or any system that exceeds their voltage and amperage ratings. Standard lamp-cord 
versions are sized for 18-gauge lamp cord (page 222). Do not use a switch that does not fit properly over the 
cord; if the cord insulation is too thick, use a larger switch.  
Canopy Switch
DESCRIPTION: 
Small switch with quarter-sized, typically round, 
plastic body with rotary, toggle, push-button, or 
pull-chain switch extending from its center. Includes 
wire leads for connecting to fixture wiring. Often 
with a threaded post (surrounding switch lever or 
button) and nut for mounting switch into lamp bases 
or fixture housings. Versions for ceiling fans typically 
offer three-speed control.  
USE: 
On/off and speed control of lamps, ceiling fans, and 
similar light-duty fixtures. 
Canopy switch.
Line switch.

CHAPTER 31 217
ABOUT RECEPTACLES
Receptacles, commonly called outlets, come in a few different types. Whether you’re replacing old 
receptacles or adding receptacles to new circuits, it’s important to know which type is required for the 
application. Local code may specify AFCI receptacles (page 219) for most living areas, including hallways 
and kitchens, while GFCI receptacles (page 218) are almost certainly required for locations along kitchen 
countertops and in bathrooms, garages, and areas near sinks, as well as outdoors. 
Standard Receptacle
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Outlet (technically incorrect).
DESCRIPTION: 
Standard duplex receptacle has two sets of slots for grounded 
(three-prong) plugs. They have four screw terminals—two 
silver terminals for neutral wires and two brass terminals 
for “hot” wires—plus a ground screw. They also have metal 
connecting tabs between the terminals on each side; these can 
be removed for specific wiring configurations, such as wiring 
each half of the receptacle to its own circuit. (Technically,  
an “outlet” is just the point at which current is supplied,  
i.e., where the receptacle is installed.)
In addition to their stamped ratings, standard receptacles 
are identifiable by their appearance:
15-AMP
receptacles have two vertical slots and a ground slot in each plug set. 
20-AMP 
receptacles have a sideways T-shaped slot on the left and a vertical slot on the right, plus a ground slot. 
The special T-slot is compatible with 20-amp plugs, which have two straight blades perpendicular to each 
other (plus a ground prong). 
USE: 
Provides an electrical connection for power cords with plugs.
USE TIPS: 
Like switches, receptacles may have push-in fittings on the backs of the devices, in addition to screw terminals. Better 
models have screws that clamp down on the wires after they’re pushed in. Many experts recommend using only screw 
terminals or push-in fittings with clamping screw clamps—especially for receptacles, which suffer a lot of abuse from 
plugs going in and out. Push-in fittings without clamping screws are more prone to coming loose over time. 
15-amp duplex 
receptacle.
20-amp duplex 
receptacle.
SWITCHES & RECEPTACLES

218 PART VI
BUYING TIPS: 
Also like switches, it’s worth it to pay a little more for an upgraded receptacle. The cheapest options won’t last 
as long and are more likely to lose their grip on plugs over time.  
Appliance Receptacle
DESCRIPTION USE: 
Single-plug receptacle with three or four slots in various shapes and configurations for use with specific 
appliance plugs. Three types of appliance receptacles are common in households: 
20-AMP, 240-VOLT: 
One T-slot, one horizontal straight slot, and a ground slot. Typically used for room/portable  
air conditioners.
30-AMP, 120/240-VOLT: 
Two straight slots, one L-shaped slot, and a ground slot. Used for electric clothes dryers. Provides  
240-volt current for the dryer’s heating element and 120-volt current for timers, lights, electronics, etc. 
50-AMP, 120/240-VOLT: 
Three straight slots and a ground slot. Used for electric ranges. Provides 240-volt current for heating 
elements and 120-volt current for electronics, lights, etc.
Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter (GFCI) Receptacle 
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
GFI (incorrect).
DESCRIPTION: 
GFCI receptacle is a standard-voltage (120 volts) duplex 
receptacle with a flat face and two buttons on the front. It contains 
a sensor device and a circuit breaker that trips if the device senses a 
change in the electrical current (caused by a ground fault), shutting 
off the power to the receptacle. A ground fault might be caused by 
a tool or appliance with a loose wire or when electricity contacts 
water, such as when someone drops a hair dryer in the bathtub 
(extreme example). Pressing the TEST button on the front of the 
receptacle trips the breaker manually. Pressing the RESET button 
resets the breaker after a manual test or when the breaker trips on 
its own. Fancy circuitry aside, a GFCI receptacle works just like 
any other household receptacle. 
GFCI receptacle  
(20-amp version shown).

CHAPTER 31 219
USE: 
The GFCI’s job is to sense hazardous leakage of electricity instantaneously and shut off the circuit.  
It works far faster than a standard circuit breaker or fuse. A GFCI receptacle can be wired to offer its 
circuit-sensing protection at one receptacle only, or it can be wired to protect itself and every receptacle 
beyond it on the same circuit. In addition to GFCI receptacles, there are GFCI circuit breakers, which 
provide the same protection to all devices on a circuit. There are also GFCI extension cords for use 
outdoors or in wet areas. 
USE TIPS: 
GFCIs have been required by electrical codes for many years and should be used for receptacle locations 
along kitchen countertops and in bathrooms, around pools, in some garage areas, and any anywhere near a 
sink or other water source as well as any damp locations. They can replace any standard receptacle and offer 
protection from ground-fault hazards on grounded and ungrounded circuits. They do not provide a true 
ground on ungrounded circuits. 
Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter (AFCI) Receptacle 
DESCRIPTION:
Similar to a GFCI receptacle (page 218), an AFCI works like a 
standard receptacle but has internal circuitry that senses an arc 
fault. This might occur when a cord or circuit cable has damaged 
insulation, allowing electricity to jump across the wires or when 
a wire comes loose from a connection and the electricity jumps 
across the gap. Where a GFCI protects you from getting a shock 
when using the receptacle, an AFCI is like the police of your wiring 
and helps prevent fires and other hazards that can occur any time. 
Like GFCIs, AFCI receptacles have  TEST and RESET buttons for 
manually tripping and resetting the internal breaker.
USE: 
Standard receptacle use for most areas of the house where a GFCI 
receptacle is not used. AFCI protection is required by the National 
Electrical Code (NEC) for pretty much every area in the house 
except bathrooms, garages, and laundry rooms. In newer homes, 
the circuits in these areas have AFCI breakers, which protect the 
entire circuit. If you’re replacing old receptacles, it’s a good idea 
to use an AFCI receptacle at that location or to install an AFCI 
receptacle for the first outlet in the circuit, thereby protecting all 
the receptacles beyond it in the circuit. 
AFCI receptacle (with coverplate).
SWITCHES & RECEPTACLES

220
ELECTRICAL WIRE & CONNECTORS
ABOUT ELECTRICAL WIRE
Terminology for electrical wiring can be confusing to beginners, with good reason. “Wire” is popularly used 
to refer to anything from a thin metal strand of wire to an appliance cord to a heavy-duty circuit cable. In the 
trade, wire is the metal conductor only, the part that carries the electrical current. It may be solid metal or 
stranded. If it is covered in plastic insulation, it is called insulated wire. In the code books, wires are usually 
called conductors. 
Cable is a material made up of a collection of wires inside a protective cover of flexible plastic or metal. 
Cables may contain two or more insulated or bare-metal wires. Most of the electrical devices in a home are 
connected to the home’s service panel (breaker box) via cable, specifically nonmetallic (NM) cable, rather 
than individual wires. NM cable is hidden in wall, ceiling, and floor cavities to protect it from damage and 
keep it out of sight. When wiring is installed in exposed areas, individual wires or cable are often run through 
rigid metal or plastic conduit (see Chapter 34) for protection. 
Most wire, or conductors, in household wiring is made of copper. The size of the conductor is specified 
by a number relating to its gauge, or diameter, followed by “AWG,” for American Wire Gauge. Generally 
speaking, larger conductors have more capacity, meaning they can carry more electrical current without 
overheating than can smaller conductors. The higher the gauge number, the smaller the wire. Household 
wiring typically ranges from about 20 AWG at the small end to 6 AWG at the large end. Standard 120-volt 
circuit cable has 14 AWG wires for 15-amp service or 12 AWG wires for 12-amp service. “AWG” and “gauge” 
are often used interchangeably. 
NOTE: 
Always use the proper type and gauge of wire or cable for the circuit it will be installed on. 
Low-Voltage Wire
TYPES:
Bell, or doorbell, wire
Thermostat wire
Landscape lighting wire
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Insulated copper wire or cable for use with low-voltage household systems. 
BELL: 
Typically 20-gauge, with two insulated wires wound together. Rated for up to 30 volts. Used primarily for 
doorbells but also for some thermostats and low-voltage hobby work.
CHAPTER 32

THERMOSTAT: 
Typically 18-gauge. Cable 
containing five or more insulated 
wires. Used for thermostats.
LANDSCAPE LIGHTING WIRE: 
Cable containing two 12-gauge 
wires separated by insulation. 
Looks and feels similar to lamp 
cord. Rated for outdoor use and 
ground burial. Voltage ratings 
may be up to 150 volts, but this 
cable is intended for low-voltage 
landscape lighting only; do not 
use it for other purposes. 
USE TIPS: 
Wiring systems for doorbells, thermostats, and landscape lighting are low-voltage only after the transformer, 
a device that steps down the voltage from the standard household current of 120 volts to under 50 volts. The 
circuit wiring between the supply source and the transformer is standard voltage and calls for standard circuit 
wiring/cable, not low-voltage wiring. 
Telephone Cable
DESCRIPTION: 
Low-voltage cable containing four or eight insulated wires. Eight-wire cable, also called “four-pair,” has extra 
wires that are left unattached when connected to conventional phone jacks and plugs. The extras are there for 
future expansion. Sold in various lengths up to 25 feet with preattached phone-plug ends and in longer rolls 
without plug ends. 
USE: 
Connecting conventional 
telephones and jacks.  
USE TIPS: 
Phone wiring is low-voltage 
and safe to work on inside your house. To extend an existing phone line or add a new branch line, make the 
wiring connections following the color coding on existing devices. Your phone company may recommend 
four- or eight-wire cable for different applications, or you can just match what you already have. For internet 
connections, Cat 5 cable (page 222) is recommended over phone cable. 
Landscape 
lighting wire.
Bell wire.
Thermostat 
wire.
Telephone cable.
CHAPTER 32 221

222 PART VI
Category 5 (Cat 5) Cable
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Data cable.
DESCRIPTION: 
Low-voltage cable, similar to 
phone cable, containing eight 
insulated wires. Four of the 
wires are colored, and each is 
wrapped with a white wire. 
USE: 
Used everywhere for information and data networks. In a home, Cat 5 cable is recommended for hard-wired 
connections to computer modems and other devices for data (internet) service connection. It offers better 
transmission capacity and fidelity than standard phone cable.
Lamp Cord
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Lamp wire, zip cord.
DESCRIPTION: 
Insulated cable or cord containing two 18-gauge wires. Commonly sold in two types: SPT-1 has thinner 
insulation and is rated for 7 amps; SPT-2 has thicker insulation and is rated for 10 amps. 
USE: 
Power cords for lamps and other light fixtures. Commonly used for hanging fixtures. Also used for fans and 
similar low-demand appliances. 
USE TIPS: 
Cord plugs and line switches (page 216) are designed for either SPT-1 or SPT-2 lamp cord. A switch 
designed for SPT-1 cord won’t fit properly over SPT-2 cord, and vice versa. Always match the cord and 
switch (or other device) for a safe installation. 
Cat 5 cable.

CHAPTER 32 223
Nonmetallic (NM) Cable
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Romex® (brand name).
BX: 
Armored metallic cable, armored electrical cable, bushed armored cable, spiral armored cable.
ROMEX®: 
Nonmetallic sheathed cable, NM cable, loom wire.
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible cable with two or three insulated copper wires and a bare copper ground wire encased in a vinyl 
sheathing, often with a wrapping of paper inside. Printing on the sheathing indicates the cable type, the wire 
gauge, and the number of wires:
14/2 NM-B: 
Contains two insulated 14-gauge wires—one with black insulation and one with white—plus a bare 
ground wire. The ground isn’t counted in the numbering system. If the numbers are followed by “G,” 
“W/G,” or “w/grd,” this simply means “with a ground wire.” White sheathing. Rated for 15-amp 
household circuits. The “B” distinguishes today’s NM cable from an older version that has insulation with 
lower heat-resistance. 
14/2 NM-B: 
Contains three 14-gauge wires—black, white, and red—plus a ground. White sheathing. Used for 15-amp 
circuits requiring two “hot” wires (typically the black and red). 
NM cable (14/2 top; 12/2 bottom).
ELECTRICAL WIRE & CONNECTORS

224 PART VI
12/2 NM-B: 
Two 12-gauge wires plus ground. Yellow sheathing. Rated for 20-amp circuits. 
12/3 NM-B: 
Three 12-gauge wires plus ground. Yellow sheathing. Used for 20-amp circuits requiring two “hot” wires. 
In addition to standard NM cables, common specialty types include UF cable (similar to NM but with 
gray sheathing; rated for ground burial) and heavy cable with 10-, 8-, or 6-gauge wires, used for 240-volt 
household circuits and rated for 30, 40, and 55 amps, respectively. 
USE: 
The standard electrical cabling for interior wiring runs in households. Cable is run through framing cavities 
and secured to wood framing members with insulated cable staples (page 226). Ends of cables must be 
secured at each electrical box or fixture with an appropriate cable clamp. 
BUYING TIPS: 
Sold in precut lengths of 25 and 50 feet and in bulk (by the foot), cut to the length you require. Always buy 
pieces longer than you need so you don’t come up short. It is okay to splice cable lengths together, but this 
must be done inside a covered electrical box in an accessible location.
Metal Clad (MC) Cable
DESCRIPTION: 
Flexible metal cable consisting of three or four insulated wires, including an insulated ground wire, wrapped 
in paper and encased in galvanized-steel, spiral tubing. For standard 120-volt household circuits, the wiring is 
either 14-gauge (for 15-amp circuits) or 12-gauge (for 20-amp circuits). 
USE: 
Used in place of NM cable (page 223) when the cable will be exposed and thus needs the added protection 
of the metal casing. 
MC cable

CHAPTER 32 225
THHN/THWN Wire
DESCRIPTION: 
Individual insulated copper 
wire with a range of standard 
colors for identifying wires 
during installation and when 
making wiring connections. The 
wire’s names are abbreviations 
indicating the insulation type 
and performance ratings: T indicates thermoplastic insulation; H means heat-resistant (two Hs indicate high 
heat-resistance); W means the wire is suitable for wet locations; N means the wire is impervious to damage 
from oil and gas. Most common gauges are 14-gauge, for 15-amp circuits; and 12-gauge, for 20-amp circuits. 
Wires are sold individually, in bulk (by the foot) and long spools up to 500 feet. 
USE: 
Household wiring runs inside of conduit (see Chapter 34). 
Wire Connectors
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Wire-Nut® (brand name), twist-on wire 
connectors.
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic caps with threaded metal inserts 
for gripping the bare ends of copper 
wires. Various colors according to 
size. Size indicates how many and what gauge of wires can be safely secured with the connector. Refer to 
the manufacturer’s instructions, as color-size coding is different among brands. Push-in wire connectors are a 
relatively new variation on classic twist-on types. 
USE: 
Connects and insulates the bare-metal ends of wires. The standard—and proper—method for connecting 
wires, as opposed to the old standby, electrical tape, which alone does not create a suitable connection. Used 
inside electrical boxes, lighting fixtures, and other electrical housings. 
THHN/THWN wires.
ELECTRICAL WIRE & CONNECTORS
Wire connectors.

226 PART VI
USE TIPS: 
Many electricians like to twist the bare ends of wires together (using linesman’s pliers) before capping them 
with a wire connector. Alternatively, some wire connector manufacturers may specify inserting the straight 
ends of wires into the connector, without twisting. With either method, strip the same amount (about 1/2 to 
3/4 inch) of insulation from each wire before installing the connector, which should cover all of the bare wire 
when installed. (This does not apply to bare copper ground wire.) 
BUYING TIPS: 
Assortment packs of connectors are handy to have around the house because you run into all different wire 
types, sizes, and quantities with many electrical projects. 
Crimp Connectors
DESCRIPTION: 
Small metal wire connectors that are crimped 
(squeezed) onto the ends of light-gauge wires. 
Color-coded for wire gauge; coloring may vary 
by manufacturer. Connector end, or terminal, 
may be a ring, a fork-shaped spade terminal, or 
a slip-on female connector with or without an 
insulated cover. Installed onto wire ends with a 
crimping tool. 
USE: 
Connecting light-gauge wires. Commonly used with small motors 
and automotive wiring connections. Specific connector sizes must be used with specific wire sizes.
Cable Staples
DESCRIPTION: 
Small plastic clips with metal staples or nails. Better types 
have a molded U-shaped piece with one or more nails; 
cheaper versions may simply have a plastic strip covering the 
closed end of a large staple. Available in a range of styles for 
various cable shapes and sizes, including stackable versions 
that can hold multiple cables. 
USE: 
Securing insulated electrical cable (typically NM cable;  
see page 223) or insulated wire to wood framing and  
other supports. 
Cable staples.
Crimp connectors.

CHAPTER 33
ABOUT ELECTRICAL BOXES
All electrical wiring connections—including connections to receptacles, switches, and fixtures and wire-
to-wire connections—must be enclosed inside a noncombustible housing. This is the job of the electrical 
box (although some fixtures have their own boxes). Boxes anchor the incoming cables via cable clamps, and 
they provide means for mounting receptacles, switches, light fixtures, and other devices. They also protect 
combustibles (namely, wood framing and wall finishes) from live wires, in the event a wire comes loose, and 
they protect people and critters from touching live wiring. 
Boxes come in dozens of different shapes and sizes but can generally be broken down into boxes for walls, 
boxes for ceilings, and outdoor boxes. Standard box materials include plastic (PVC, fiberglass, or thermoset), 
galvanized steel, and aluminum. Plastic and metal boxes are interchangeable in many cases but not always. 
In older homes that don’t have ground wires in the circuit cables, metal boxes may be part of a grounding 
system that grounds the devices through the boxes and metal conduit. Installing a plastic box in this case 
disables the ground protection. Metal boxes also are used where strength is important, such as for hanging 
ceiling fans and heavy light fixtures. 
Metal boxes are made with open holes or holes plugged with easily removed knockouts that can be either 
pried out (if they have little slots for screwdrivers in them) or knocked out with a hammer. Knockouts are 
removed for installing cable clamps or fittings for conduit. Plastic boxes typically have integrated cable 
clamps, each consisting of a springy tab that covers a hole, creating a sort of one-way door. The cable is 
pushed through the hole and the tab grabs it tightly, preventing the cable from being pulled back out. Some 
metal boxes have internal clamps that are screwed down tight to the cable. 
NOTE: 
All cables and conduit must be securely clamped to electrical boxes. Never run a cable through a knockout 
hole without a clamp; if the cable is pulled or moves over time, it can be cut on the edge of the box, creating a 
serious shock or fire hazard. 
Standard Wall Boxes
TYPES:
Single-gang box
Double-gang box (also triple-gang and four-gang)
4-inch square box
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Plastic or metal boxes with a variety of interior capacity. Standard boxes may be called “new work” because 
they are installed while wall framing is exposed. Many have preattached nails or mounting brackets for 
installation. Size and shape generally are determined by the number of devices the box will contain: 
227
ELECTRICAL BOXES & CONDUIT

228 PART VI
SINGLE-GANG: 
Used for a single switch or receptacle. Comes in three sizes: 18, 20.4, and 22.5 cubic inches. Sometimes 
called a “gem box.” 
DOUBLE-, TRIPLE- AND FOUR-GANG: 
Used for two, three, or four switches or receptacles, respectively. 
4-INCH SQUARE: 
Sometimes called a “four-square.” Used for one or two switches or receptacles. If one, the box is fitted 
with an adapter cover (page 231) for mounting the device over the center of the box. Some electricians 
prefer these for single devices because they provide ample room for wiring. In some cases the wall will 
be too shallow to mount a single-gang box. Here, the shallower four-inch box can be used because it 
still has the cubic-inch capacity to accommodate the wires. May also be used on the ceiling. Also the 
most common box type for junctions (wire-to-wire connections); in this case, the box is fitted with a 
flat metal cover. 
Single-gang 
plastic box.
Double-gang plastic box 
(with mounting bracket).
Triple-gang 
plastic box.

CHAPTER 33 229
ELECTRICAL BOXES & CONDUIT
BUYING TIPS: 
Box size is important. The NEC and most local codes specify the gauge and number of cables that can exit 
a box of a given size. As a general rule, the device and all wiring should occupy no more than 75 percent of 
the box interior. Overcrowded boxes can overheat the wiring, and devices and wiring can be damaged when 
crammed into a box that’s too small. When in doubt, use a bigger box. 
Ceiling Box
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Fixture box.
DESCRIPTION: 
Plastic or metal box in two 
common shapes: round and 
octagonal (not a true octagon; 
more like a square with angled 
corners). Typically about  
4 inches in diameter and 2 1/8 
inches deep. Holes in the back 
of the box accept screws for 
mounting directly to wood 
framing. Alternatively, box 
may include metal brace bars 
for securing the box between 
neighboring ceiling joists or 
rafters (these come in a range of 
types and strengths). A shallow version of a ceiling box (about 11/2 inches deep), known as a “pancake box,”  
is used for surface mounting onto a ceiling for certain fixture types. 
USE: 
Mounting overhead and other fixtures and housing wiring connections. Typically installed horizontally  
(for ceiling fixtures) but can be mounted in a wall for wall-mounted fixtures, such as sconces.
USE TIPS: 
Use plastic boxes only for lightweight fixtures. Use metal boxes for heavier light fixtures and always for  
ceiling fans. Metal boxes are rated for the weight load they can bear. Make sure the box (and any brace bars,  
if applicable) are more than strong enough for your fan or fixture. 
Round plastic 
ceiling box.
Octagonal metal 
ceiling box.
Octagonal  
metal box  
(with brace bars).

230 PART VI
Remodeling Box
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Old work box, cut-in box, retrofit box,  
remodel box.
DESCRIPTION: 
Wall or ceiling boxes with special “ears” or tabs 
that secure the box to drywall or other wall or 
ceiling finish. Most commonly plastic but also 
available in metal. Sold in several standard box 
types, including single-, double-, triple-, and 
four-gang wall boxes and ceiling boxes (for 
lightweight fixtures only). 
USE: 
Adding new boxes after the ceiling or wall framing is covered, thus “remodeling.” Plastic boxes with ears are 
inserted into a hole cut into the drywall. When the screws are turned, the ears rotate and are pulled tightly to 
the backside of the drywall. 
Weatherproof Box
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Outdoor box, outside box.
DESCRIPTION: 
Heavy-duty rectangular, square, or 
round box with threaded holes in sides, 
rear, bottom, and/or top to accept 
correspondingly threaded conduit fittings 
or outdoor light fixtures. Includes threaded 
closure plugs for filling unused holes. 
Commonly aluminum or high-impact 
PVC. Can be fitted with a gasketed box 
cover to keep out moisture.
USE: 
Housing exterior switches and receptacles 
and for mounting fixtures. Typically surface-mounted to an exterior wall. 
Single-gang  
remodeling boxes.
Weatherproof 
fixture box (with 
closure plugs).
Weatherproof 
single-gang box.

chapter 33 231
Box Covers
DESCRIPTION: 
Rigid covers for electrical 
boxes for indoor or outdoor 
use. Metal or plastic in a variety 
of shapes—rectangular, square, 
octagonal, round—to fit over 
matching box shapes. May 
have cutouts for receptacles, 
switches, and other devices. 
Blank covers have no cutouts 
and are used for junction 
boxes. Weatherproof (outdoor) 
box covers have a neoprene 
gasket to create a watertight 
seal against the box. An adapter 
cover, also called a mud ring or 
plaster ring, is installed over 
a four-inch square box for 
mounting one or two devices; 
these have a raised flange 
around the cutout that matches 
the thickness of the drywall or 
other finish material. 
USE: 
Enclosing the front of electrical boxes with or without devices. 
USE TIPS: 
Today’s outdoor/weatherproof receptacle covers are much better than the old-style hinged caps that covered 
each half of the receptacle and offered no protection when the receptacle was being used. The new standard is 
the in-use or while-in-use cover, which has a plastic dome that covers the entire face of the receptacle and any 
cords that are plugged in. Rounded recesses in the bottom edge of the dome allow the cover to fit over the cords.
Plastic cover 
for duplex 
receptacle.
Plastic cover 
for single 
toggle switch.
Blank metal cover 
for 4" square box.
Single-gang metal 
adapter cover.
In-use receptacle 
cover.
electrical boxes & conduit

232 PART VI
Box Extender
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Goof ring.
DESCRIPTION: 
Square or rectangular sleeve that slips into an electrical box to 
effectively extend the sides of the box so it is flush with the wall or 
ceiling finish. Made of plastic or metal and comes in various sizes 
for different box designs. 
USE: 
Extending boxes that are set too deeply and providing solid 
mounting surface for receptacles, switches, and other devices. 
USE TIPS: 
Box extenders fix two common problems at once. When boxes are installed too deeply, they create a gap 
between the box cover and the edge of the box, so that the wall/ceiling finish becomes part of the box 
interior—a common code violation and fire hazard. This usually also means receptacles and switches aren’t 
mounted securely and are mostly held in place by the box cover screw. Goof rings typically can be installed 
without rewiring the device. 
Cable Clamps
NOT TO BE CONFUSED WITH: 
Cable clamps for wire rope/cable (page 63). 
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal or plastic fitting that slips over the end of NM cable 
(page 223) and is secured to the cable and a knockout hole 
in an electrical box. Metal clamps have a separate plate that 
is screwed tight onto the cable and a threaded end that is  
secured inside the electrical box with a locknut. Plastic 
snap-in, or push-in, connectors clamp onto the cable once 
they are snapped into the hole in the box. 
USE: 
Securely connecting NM cable to electrical boxes and fixture housings. 
Box extender.
Metal cable clamp 
(with locknut).

chapter 33 233
ABOUT CONDUIT
Electrical conduit is metal or plastic tubing used to house and protect wiring in exposed indoor locations, 
outdoors, and underground. It comes in a few different types, and you are required to use whatever the 
local electrical code specifies for a given application. Lengths of conduit are joined together and are 
connected to electrical boxes and fixtures with special fittings designed for the conduit material, size, and 
application. Conduit runs are secured to supporting structures with pipe straps, which are also specific to 
the conduit material. 
Metal Conduit
TYPES: 
Electrical Metallic Tubing (EMT)
Intermediate Metallic Conduit (IMC)
Rigid Metal Conduit (RMC)
Flexible Metal Conduit (FMC)
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
EMT: 
Also known as thin-wall conduit. 
Lightweight rigid steel pipe, 
typically 1/2-inch diameter but 
available up to 4 inches. Most 
common type of rigid conduit 
for residential work. Used in 
basements, garages, outbuildings, 
and in some exposed outdoor 
applications. Standard fittings are 
for interior use only. Rain-tight fittings are for damp locations. Not suitable for ground burial. 
IMT: 
Rigid metal conduit, thicker than EMT but lighter-weight than RMC. For indoor and outdoor applications. 
Typically used for residential projects only when code does not allow EMT but does not require RMC. 
RMC: 
Also known as heavy-wall conduit. Rigid steel pipe with threaded ends that require threaded fittings.  
Has thicker wall than IMT (and EMT). Commonly used to protect service entrance cables (electric 
utility lines) where they anchor to the house and run to the main service panel (breaker box).
RMC
IMC
EMT
FMC
electrical boxes & conduit

234 PART VI
FMC: 
Also called greenfield or “flex.” Flexible tubing with spiraled metal construction. Used indoors where rigid 
metal is difficult to install and/or rigidity is not required or flexibility is desirable (to deal with vibration, 
for example). Usually seen on hard-wired appliances, such as furnaces, hot water heaters, garbage 
disposers, and air conditioners. Suitable for dry locations only.  
Nonmetallic (Plastic) Conduit
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Rigid Nonmetallic Conduit (RNC), PVC conduit.
DESCRIPTION: 
Rigid PVC pipe similar to PVC plumbing pipe but 
designed specifically for electrical work (do not use 
PVC plumbing pipe for electrical applications). Has 
one belled (female) end for receiving straight (male) end of adjacent pipe. 
USE: 
Indoor and some outdoor applications, including ground burial. Conduit runs are glued together and to 
fittings with solvent cement (page 152). 
USE TIPS: 
PVC conduit is less expensive and easier to work with than rigid metal conduit, but it is not always allowed 
by code; confirm its suitability with the local building department. 
Conduit Fittings & Fasteners
DESCRIPTION & USE: 
Fittings come in a variety of styles for joining lengths of conduit, turning corners in conduit runs, providing 
access for pulling wires through conduit, and for connecting conduit to electrical boxes. Fasteners are simple 
metal or plastic devices for securing conduit to walls, ceilings, and other support structures. They may be 
U-shaped straps with one or two ears (with holes for screws) or a C-shaped clip with one screw or a circular 
band with a bolt and nut for tightening over the conduit. Common fittings include: 
COUPLING: 
Cylinder with two setscrews for joining to lengths conduit. 
ELBOW: 
Creates a 90° turn, like a plumbing elbow. A pull elbow has a cap over the bend that can be removed for 
pulling and feeding wires through the conduit. 
Nonmetallic conduit.

CHAPTER 33 235
CONDUIT BODY: 
Large fitting similar to 
a pull elbow but with a 
larger cavity for pulling 
or splicing wires. Several 
types, including LB (turns 
90° with outlet in back), 
LL/LR (90° with outlet  
to left/right), C (two 
outlets in straight line),  
and T (three outlets,  
two in straight line,  
one perpendicular to  
other two). 
RAIN-TIGHT FITTING: 
Compression fitting with 
rubber gaskets for joining 
conduit pieces or connecting to boxes, creating watertight seal for wet locations. 
Cable Raceway
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
Wire channel.
DESCRIPTION: 
Metal or plastic channel, typically with a square profile and a finished appearance. Usually includes two 
pieces: a flat mounting strip that is screwed to the wall or ceiling and a C-shaped channel that snaps onto 
the mounting strip. Sold with matching fittings for turning corners and splicing channel pieces together. 
Commonly used with surface-mount electrical boxes. 
USE: 
Concealing and protecting electrical cords, cables, or wiring on the surface of walls in the place of conduit. 
Enables house wiring, both permanent and temporary, to be installed without piercing walls. Metal versions 
are typically for surface-mounted wiring systems (appropriate for adding a receptacle or switch). Plastic 
versions may be suitable only for temporary wire management, primarily to conceal power cords and  
phone/data cable.
Two-hole 
conduit strap.
Coupling 
fitting.
Offset 
connector.
90° pull 
elbow.
LB fitting.
One-hole  
conduit strap.
ELECTRICAL BOXES & CONDUIT

236 
adhesives
 general, 68–71
 rooftop, 74–75
 for tile, 137–138
AFCI receptacles, 219
appliances
 cords for, 201–202
 receptacles for, 219
asphalt
 patch for, 73
 sealant, 73
bar stock, 49
bathtubs, 183–185 
See also fittings; pipes; plumbing
bolts and nuts
 about, 25
 adhesive for, 71
 bolt types, 25–29
 J-bolts, 29–30
 lubricants for loosening, 90–91
 nut types, 31–32
 screws vs., 16, 25
 sizing of, 25
 threaded nuts, 45
 threaded rods, 30
 threads on, 25
 toilet, 194–195
 U-bolts, 29–30
 washers for, 32
 See also screws
braces, 48
building codes, 148, 198
cabinet hinges, 53–54
cable
 about, 62
 breaking strength, 62
 cable fittings, 63
 metal clad (MC) cable, 224
 NM (nonmetallic) cable, 223–224
 use tips, 62
 See also chains; wire; wires, electrical
cable raceway, 235
cable staples, 226
carpet seam tape, 137
caulks, 71–72, 144–145
ceilings
 electrical boxes for, 229
 eye bolts/hooks, 41
 paint for, 104–105
 repair products for, 135
 screw eyes/hooks, 39–41
 spray texture, 135
chains
 about, 56
 connectors for, 60–61
 safety tips, 56
 types of, 56–60
 working load limit, 56
 See also cables
chicken wire, 64
concrete
 about repairing, 140
 caulk for, 144–145
 cement vs., 140
 concrete/cement patchers, 141–142
 mortar for, 140–141
 sealers for, 142–144
 stain for, 108
 types of, 140–141
conduit
 about, 233
 fasteners for, 234–235
 fittings for, 234–235
 types of, 233–234
connectors
 for chains, 60–61
 for wiring, 225–226
copper, pipes, 150–151
corrugated fasteners, 15
corrugated roofing, 80
cotter pins, 44
doors
 braces and plates, 48
 metal angles, 49
 screen frames/corners, 85
INDEX

 237
 screen materials, 82–83
 screen roller, 84
 screen spline, 83–84
 See also windows
drywall
 repair products, 130–135
 spray texture, 135
 See also ceilings; wall anchors; walls
electrical adapters, 204–205
electrical boxes
 about, 227
 box covers, 231
 box extenders, 232
 clamps for use with, 232
 materials for, 227
 safety and, 227
 types of, 227–230
electrical codes, 198
electrical plugs, 201–202
electrical sockets
 light sockets, 206
 socket adapters, 205
electrical supplies
 adapters, 204–205
 appliance cords, 201–202
 extension cords, 200
 household wiring basics, 198
 plugs, 201–202
 power strips, 202–204
 See also electrical switches; light fixtures; wires, 
electrical
electrical switches
 about, 212
 types of, 212–216
extension cords, 200
exterior paints
 about, 106
 primer, 103–104
 sheens, 106–107
exterior stains
 about, 106
 concrete stain, 108
 types of, 107–108
eye bolts/hooks, 41
fasteners
 corrugated fasteners, 15
 cotter pins, 44
 for electrical conduit, 234–235
 rivets, 44–45
 T-nuts, 45
 threaded nuts, 45
 turnbuckles, 47
 zip ties, 46
 See also nails; screws
faucets, 180–185
fencing
 poultry/chicken netting, 65
 welded wire fencing, 65
fiberglass-reinforced plastic (FRP), 81
fittings
 about, 160
 about threaded, 160
 bushings, 172
 cable, 63
 compounds/sealants for, 174–179
 couplings for, 171–172
 electrical conduit, 234–235
 flanges, 172
 repair couplings, 172
 shapes and forms for, 166–170
 types of pipe, 160–165
 unions, 173
 See also pipes
flexible gas hose, 158
flooring, vinyl, 136
 See also carpet; concrete; tile
fluorescent light fixtures, 209–211
foam backer rod, 145
foam insulation, 72–73
French cleat, 38
GFCI receptacles, 218–219
glues, 68–71
grease. See lubricants
grout, 138–139

238 
hanger bolts, 42
hardware cloth, 64
hasps, 54–55
hinges
 about, 51
 cabinet hinges, 53–54
 types of, 51–53
 See also hasps; latches
household wiring
 basics of, 198
 grounding and, 199
interior paints
 about, 102
 ceiling paint, 104
 primer, 103–104
 sheens for, 102–103
 texture paint, 105
 See also paint
interior stains, 112–114
J-bolts, 29–30
lacquer
 about, 118–119
 thinners, 123
lamps, 207–209, 222
latches, 55
light fixtures
 fluorescent fixtures, 209–211
 lamps, 207–209, 222
 light sockets, 206
line
 about, 86
 cleats for, 89
 clothesline, 88
 mason’s line, 87–88
 twine, 88
 See also rope
locks, lubricants for, 92
lubricants, 90–93
masonry
 caulk for, 144–145
 sealers for, 142–144
 stain for, 108
 See also concrete
metal angles, 49
metal framing channel, 50
metal primers, 109
metal sheet, 76–77
nails
 about, 10
 buying tips, 11
 cement-coated (CC) vs. bright, 10
 corrugated fasteners, 15
 sizing, 10
 tacks, 15
 types of, 11–15
 See also screws
nut types, 31–32
nuts and bolts. See bolts and nuts
oils. See lubricants
outlets. See receptacles
paint
 about, 100
 latex vs. alkyd, 100–101
 removers for, 124–125
 specialty, 109–111
 thinners for, 122–123
 VOCs (Volatile Organic Compounds) and, 101
 wall/ceiling texture, 135
 See also exterior paints’; interior paints
penetrating oil finishes, 119–120
permits, 148
PEX tubing, 153
picture-hanging hardware, 37–38
 French cleat, 38
pipes
 about, 149
 black iron, 154
 brass, 155
 cast iron, 155
 clamps/straps for, 159
 compounds/sealants for, 174–179
 copper, 150–151
 fitting types, 160–165
 flexible gas hose, 158
 galvanized steel, 154
 PE tubing, 156
 PEX tubing, 153

INDEX 239
 rigid plastic, 151–152
 sizing, 149
 solvent cement, 152
 tubular goods, 156–157
 water supply vs. waste, 149
 See also fittings; valves
plaster repair products, 132
plastic laminate, 80–81
plastic pipes
 about, 151–152
 compounds and sealants, 175–176
 fittings for, 163–173
 PE tubing, 156
 PEX tubing, 153
 solvent cement for, 152
plastic sheet, 77–78, 79
plates, 48
plumbing
 codes for, 149
 compounds/sealants for, 174–179
 water supply tubes, 157–158
 See also bathtubs; faucets; fittings; pipes; valves
plumbing codes, 148
polyurethane, 116–117
poultry netting, 65
receptacles
 about, 217
 types of, 217–219
rivets, 44–45
roll laminate, 81
roofing
 flashing for, 78–79
 flashing tape, 97
 roofing cements, 74–75
rope
 about, 86
 accessories for, 88–89
 breaking strength vs. working load, 86
 cleats for, 89
 materials for, 86–87
 See also line
safety
 chains and, 56
 electrical boxes and, 227
 paint removers/thinners, 122, 125
 rope and, 86
safety hasps, 55
sandpaper, 126–127
screens, window/door
 frames/corner for, 85
 materials for, 82–83
 screen spline, 83–84
 spline roller, 84
screw eyes/hooks, 39–41
screws
 about, 16
 bolts vs., 16, 25
 drive type, 17, 18
 gauge, 17
 gutter screw/bracket, 24
 head styles, 16, 17
 length of, 16
 material, 17
 threads of, 18, 25
 types of, 18–24
 use tips, 18
 washers for, 23
 See also bolts and nuts; nails
sealants
 blacktop, 73
 outdoor, 72
 plumbing, 174–179
sealers
 masonry, 142–144
 wood, 121
sheet metal, 76–77
sheeting
 metal, 76–77
 plastic, 77–78, 79
 roof flashing, 78–79
shelf supports, 42–43
shellac, 118
showers, 183–185
 See also fittings; pipes; plumbing
sillcocks, 185
spray foam insulation, 72–73
steel wool, 127
string. See line
surface wood finishes, 116–119
T-nuts, 45
tacks, 15

240 
tapes, 94–97, 131–132, 137
thinners
 about, 122
 types of, 122–123
threaded nuts, 45
threaded rods, 30
tile
 adhesive for, 137–138
 grout for, 138–139
toilets
 about, 190
 anatomy of, 190
 attachment hardware, 194–195
 parts of, 191–194
 repair kits, 192, 193
turnbuckles, 47
twine, 88
U-bolts, 29–30
valves
 about, 186
 types of, 186–189
varnish
 about, 117–118
 removers, 124–125
vinyl patching kit, 81
wall anchors, 33–36
walls
 fiberglass-reinforced plastic (FRP), 81
 metal framing channel, 50
 picture-hanging hardware, 37–38
 repair products for, 135
 shelf supports, 42–43
 wall anchors, 33–36
 See also concrete; drywall
washers
 bolt, 32
 screw, 23
water supply lines
 fittings for, 168
 tubes for, 157–158
 valves for, 186–187
windows
 braces and plates, 48
 screen frames/corners, 85
 screen materials, 82–83
 screen roller, 84
 screen spline, 83–84
 window shrink film, 79
 See also doors
wire
 about, 64
 hardware cloth, 64
 poultry/chicken netting, 65
 welded wire fencing, 65
 See also cable
wire rope. See cable
wires, electrical
 about, 220
 cable staples, 226
 connectors for, 225–226
 types of, 220–225
wood fillers/putty, 125–126
wood finishing
 about stains for, 115
 bleach, 115
 filler/patch, 121, 125–126
 penetrating oil finishes, 119–120
 sealer, 121
 stain remover, 114
 surface vs. penetrating finishes, 115
 surface wood finishes, 116–119
zip lines, 62
zip ties, 46


