
The Rhetoric of Videogames as 
Embodied Practice
This book offers scholars in game studies and rhetoric and composition a much 
needed theoretical lens for examining how habit, or hexis, creates a rhetorical 
force in games.
—Rebekah Shultz Colby, University of Denver
The Rhetoric of Videogames as Embodied Practice points us to a massive blind 
spot in the field of digital rhetoric—the mundane technologies that persuade us. 
The habits that emerge from our engagement with such technologies have not yet 
been a central concern to those studying rhetoric and digital games, and Holmes 
provides us with an impressive theoretical toolkit to remedy that problem.
—James Brown, Rutgers University-Camden
In The Rhetoric of Videogames as Embodied Practice, Holmes provides an im-
portant, even transcendent perspective about how fields such as rhetoric, com-
position, and writing studies might study videogames in ways that go beyond 
traditional approaches that have often limited how and what videogames are 
studied.
—Sean Morey, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
The Rhetoric of Videogames as Embodied Practice offers a critical reassess-
ment of embodiment and materiality in rhetorical considerations of videogames. 
Holmes argues that rhetorical and philosophical conceptions of “habit” offer a 
critical resource for describing the interplay between thinking (writing and rhet-
oric) and embodiment. The book demonstrates how Aristotle’s understanding 
of character (ethos), habit (hexis), and nature (phusis) can productively connect 
rhetoric to what Holmes calls “procedural habits”: the ways in which rheto-
ric emerges from its interactions with the dynamic accumulation of conscious 
and nonconscious embodied experiences that consequently give rise to mean-
ing, procedural subjectivity, control, and communicative agency both in digital 
game design discourse and the activity of play.
Steve Holmes is an Assistant Professor of Writing and Rhetoric at George ­Mason 
University, USA. He has published several articles videogames, software code, 
rhetorical theory, and digital rhetoric. Recent projects include a co-authored 
book Rhetoric, Technology, and the Virtues (with Jared S. Colton) and an ed-
ited collection entitled Re-Programmable Rhetoric: Critical Making Theories 
and Methods in Digital Rhetoric and Composition.

Routledge Studies in Rhetoric and Communication
For a full list of titles in this series, please visit www.routledge.com.
	26	 Sexual Rhetorics
Methods, Identities, Publics
Edited by Jonathan Alexander and Jacqueline Rhodes
	27	 Rhetorical Delivery and Digital Technologies
Networks, Affect, Electracy
Sean Morey
	28	 Rhetorics of Names and Naming
Edited by Star Medzerian Vanguri
	29	 Vernacular Christian Rhetoric and Civil Discourse
The Religious Creativity of Evangelical Student Writers
Jeffrey M. Ringer
	30	 The Aboutness of Writing Center Talk
A Corpus-Driven and Discourse Analysis
Jo Mackiewicz
	31	 Rhetorical Realism
Rhetoric, Ethics, and the Ontology of Things
Scot Barnett
	32	 American Political Discourse on China
Michelle Murray Yang
	33	 Professional Communication and Network Interaction
A Rhetorical and Ethical Approach
Heidi A. McKee and James E. Porter
	34	 The Rhetoric of Videogames as Embodied Practice
Procedural Habits
Steve Holmes

The Rhetoric of Videogames 
as Embodied Practice
Procedural Habits
Steve Holmes

First published 2018
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an 
informa business
© 2018 Taylor & Francis
The right of Steve Holmes to be identified as author of this  
work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 
77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be 
trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data has been applied for.
ISBN: 978-1-138-30327-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-73126-0 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabon
by codeMantra
Portions of Chapter 1 appeared in earlier versions in “Ethos, 
Hexis, and the Case for Persuasive Technology,” Enculturation 
23 (2016).
Portions of Chapter 5 appeared in earlier forms in “‘Can We 
Name The Tools?’ Ontologies of Code, Speculative Techné and 
Rhetorical Concealment,” Computational Culture 5 (2015).

List of Figures	
vii
Acknowledgments	
ix
	 	 Introduction	
1
Part 1
Theorizing Procedural Habits	
31
1	 	 Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames	
33
2	 	 From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits	
64
Part 2
Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently	
97
3	 	 Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory in 
First-Person Shooter Videogames	
99
4	 	 Gamification and Suggestion Technologies (Kairos) 
Beyond Critique	
136
5	 	 Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social 
Media Games	
167
6	 	 The Habits of Highly Unsuccessful Nonhuman 
Computational Actors	
200
7	 	 The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy	
229
	 	 Conclusion to Procedural Habits	
254
Index	
263
Contents

This page intentionally left blank 

I.1	
Screenshot from GluMobile’s social media game Kim 
Kardashian: Hollywood	
4
I.2	
Screenshot from Anna Anthropy’s Dys4ia	
7
1.1	 Screenshot of a live Walker Assault match (Imperial 
side) on the Ice Planet Hoth stage in the FPS game Star 
Wars: Battlefront	
39
1.2	 Screenshot of randomly spawning Hero icon in another 
Hoth Walker Assault Match in Battlefront	
40
2.1	 Screenshot of “Raik” (Jan Rune Holmevik’s WoW 
avatar) in a Venture Guild Raid in 2011	
73
2.2	 Screenshot of Sim City’s main play interface	
88
3.1	 Screenshot of a live Counter-Strike: GO match	
104
3.2	 Screenshot from Mass Effect in which Commander 
Shephard (the protagonist) makes a narrative- 
altering decision	
104
3.3	 Screenshot from BioShock to illustrate Rapture’s visual style	 106
3.4	 Screenshots of weapon differences from Halo 2 and Halo 3	
112
3.5	 Screenshots of weapon differences from Halo 2 and Halo 3	
112
3.6	 Screenshot of live Call of Duty 5 match’s “Kill Streak” 
visual display	
114
3.7	 Screenshot of open-world patrolling in Destiny	
116
3.8	 Screenshot of a live Crucible PvP match in Capture 
mode in the Shores of Time stage	
118
4.1	 Screenshot from browser-based version of HabitRPG/
Habitica app	
141
5.1	 Screenshot from Farmville 2 on Facebook	
169
5.2	 Screenshot from Candy Crush Saga on Facebook	
174
5.3	 Screenshot of Hero customization gallery in Overwatch	
176
5.4	 Screenshot of main play interface in Game of  
Thrones: Ascent	
179
5.5	 Screenshot of multiple platforms in use in Game of 
Thrones: Ascent	
180
5.6	 Screenshot of Cow Clicker play interface on Facebook	
182
5.7	 Screenshot of FreeRice’s trivia interface in web browser	
188
List of Figures

viii  List of Figures
6.1	 Screenshot from FreeCiv’s main play interface	
203
7.1	
Screenshot of play interface for Madden 16 on Playstation 4	
233
7.2	 Screenshot of BEEFTANK customization from Jon 
Bois’s Breaking Madden Column	
234
7.3	 Personal photograph of a George Mason Writing and 
Rhetoric PhD student, Jacqueline Brown, setting up a 
Makey Makey asparagus piano experiment	
244
7.4	
Screenshots from Undertale that illustrate the main 
game interface and the Fight or Mercy game mechanic	
246
7.5	 Screenshots from Undertale that illustrate the main 
game interface and the Fight or Mercy game mechanic	
247

In writing a book about habit, I became keenly aware of the sorts of 
scholarly dispositions that such a project requires, and therefore I am 
all the more grateful to the various individuals who helped me cultivate 
these necessary habits. First and foremost, I am thankful to Scot Barnett 
and Jared S. Colton. In addition to providing detailed feedback through-
out all stages of the book drafting process, Scot has served as the great-
est academic mentor that anyone could have asked for, from his work as 
an involved reader on my doctoral dissertation to his continuing guid-
ance throughout the various stages of my academic career. While Jared 
also read through two early chapter drafts, his broader contributions to 
my scholarly habits were in his continual willingness to discuss, develop, 
and co-author a number of articles and a separate book on virtue ethics 
and rhetorical theory that have doubtlessly influenced the shape of my 
own thinking about this topic.
Along related lines, I am grateful to each of the anonymous review-
ers of this manuscript who took the time to offer detailed and helpful 
feedback. To the reviewer who gave me the advice about how to import 
Johnson-Eilola’s traditional/mundane division from hypertext to videog-
ames as a conceptual framework for the book, I offer a special “Thank 
you” for your thorough review of my first manuscript draft. The current 
version of Procedural Habits is all the better for it. I also extend my 
appreciation to the outstanding editorial team at Routledge, and, specif-
ically, series editor Felisa Salvago-Keyes for her guidance in navigating 
reviewer feedback in route to reaching the publication stage. Similarly, I 
thank Rachael Lussos for her exacting copyediting and feedback on the 
final revision stages of this manuscript.
A number of individuals also offered a great deal of implicit or indirect 
support for Procedural Habits, whether it was the willingness to discuss 
material rhetorics with a PhD student at conferences over a beer or the 
kindness to answer half-formed Facebook Private Messages and emails 
with questions about actor-network theory. This list also includes my 
appreciation for scholars in the field who worked through the early (and 
still, in many regards, ongoing) resistance to the nonhuman in rhetoric 
to the point where I could build directly upon their writings. In a notable 
Acknowledgments

x  Acknowledgments
example, Thomas Rickert’s footnote on “nudge” in Ambient Rhetoric 
that led me to discover BJ Fogg’s “persuasive technologies.” Special issue 
editors James J. Brown, Jr. and Annette Vee similarly provided me with 
the opportunity to develop my Computational Culture article on soft-
ware code, videogames, and object-oriented rhetoric—an article that 
became an early version of Chapter 5 in this book. Other helpful voices 
and conversations over the years came from Sean Morey, Lauren Mitch-
ell, Jimmy Butts, Steven B. Katz, Kevin Brock, Trish Fancher, Andrew 
Pilsch, Scott Sundvall, John Tinnell, Casey Boyle, Byron Hawk, Sergio 
Figueiredo, Diane Davis, Todd May, Collin Gifford Brooke, John Gal-
lagher, Nathaniel A. Rivers, Laurie Gries, Caddie Alford, and countless 
others. Along these lines, I also want to acknowledge the support of my 
Writing and Rhetoric colleagues at George Mason (Douglas A. Eyman, 
in particular) as well as my PhD students (“shout out” to the spring 2015 
Public Rhetorics seminar!) for their enthusiasm about material rhetorics 
as I worked through the theoretical ideas that eventually became Proce-
dural Habits.
Prior to my position at George Mason University, the encouragement 
of students and faculty members from the Clemson University RCID 
PhD Program, such as Cynthia Haynes (“Norandor”), Jan Rune Holme-
vik (“Raik”), and Victor J. Vitanza (“The Sophist,” and my dissertation 
chair) similarly helped to develop my dispositional orientation toward 
rhetorical theory and videogames. In their “Serious Games” colloquium, 
Cynthia and Jan first demonstrated to an otherwise clueless PhD student 
who just liked to play videogames that it was possible to write about 
them as well.
Finally, I thank my parents (John and Pat), and my siblings (Nate, 
Chris, and Emily). Among all the other amazing things you did to sup-
port me over the past eight years, I am most grateful for your collective 
hexis of patience while I was working on this book project as an assis-
tant professor during all past family vacations and holidays.

/* No one is born happy. */ 
 *happy = 0;
}
citizen_base_mood function, FreeCiv Ver. 1.8.9.
“Ethos comes, my friend, by practice year on year—and see: At last this 
thing we practice our own nature is”
Aristotle (quoting the poet Evenus), Nicomachean Ethics

This page intentionally left blank 

In Procedural Habits, I describe the ways in which “habit” functions as 
an important concept for understanding rhetoric and writing practices 
in contemporary videogames. My decision to focus on this particular 
term has to do with an undeniably positive development. By now, it is no 
longer necessary to begin a research study about videogames by stating 
something along the lines of “rhetoric and composition researchers have 
not examined videogames.” While it is true that videogames were not 
featured in many past major works in digital rhetoric, the last few years 
have seen a dramatic increase in the number of articles, conference pre-
sentations, journal special issues, and edited collections on this topic.1 
Consider the following examples:
• 
Jennifer deWinter, Daniel Griffin, Ken S. McAllister, Ryan M. Moeller, 
and Judd Ethan Ruggillist offer a wide range of pedagogical sug-
gestions for gaming-across-the-curriculum pedagogy, commenting 
­“students can read, analyze, and write about the medium; study game 
artifacts as material objects within a critical cultural pedagogy; de-
velop personalized game narratives with the help of computer game 
toolsets; write technical walk-throughs.”2
• 
Richard Colby describes how we can ask our students to draft tex-
tual proposals for new persuasive games or videogames that use Ian 
Bogost’s idea of “procedural rhetoric.” (i.e., a concept that describes 
how videogames can make effective arguments by modeling real-life 
interactive procedures)3
• 
Extending the ideas of Cynthia L. Selfe and Gail E. Hawisher’s 
foundational edited collection on non-digital gaming literacies in 
Gaming Lives,4 Rebekah Shultz Colby employs the massively multi-
player online role-playing game (MMORPG) The World of ­Warcraft 
(WoW) to help her students learn how to conduct field research in a 
videogame as well as perform written analyses of its various literacy 
forms, including gender.5
• 
John Alberti extends a number of previous calls in our field for writ-
ing teachers to use the social media gaming spaces that students are 
actually writing in as a bridge toward more formalized academic 
Introduction

2  Introduction
writing, arguing “the absorption, devotion, and even self-reflection 
engendered by a social networking site such as Facebook can be seen 
as useful and desirable when directed toward more officially sanc-
tioned forms of discursive activity.”6
• 
Matthew S.S. Johnson calls researchers’ attention to the ways in 
which “gamer-authors” use writing to engage one another in discus-
sion online beyond the immediate activity of play, often revising the 
texts that they create in order to recruit new members as a form of 
public writing.7
• 
Kevin Moberly argues that players’ forms of writing in the 
MMORPG WoW engage “social-political structures” that require 
a “critical, social-constructivist pedagogy that uses computer games 
to not only help students understand how reading and writing ‘plays 
out’ in the academic discourse communities in which they are in-
volved but to help them come to terms with how reading and writing 
‘plays out’ in the larger discourses of consumer culture.”8
• 
Drawing in part on James Paul Gee’s pedagogical understanding of 
gaming literacy from What Videogames Have to Teach Us About 
Learning and Literacy, “applying the fruitful principles of learning 
that good game designers have hit on, whether or not we use a game 
as a carrier of these principles,”9 Jonathan Alexander argues that 
writing teachers should envision complex computer games as central 
texts in the writing classroom. Alexander comments, “…games are 
also textually rich and require quite a bit of reading, writing, and 
critical thinking. Indeed, at the most basic level, gaming involves 
complex use of multiple modes of writing and a need to develop a 
sense of how text and visuals interact.”10
• 
While this term in no way characterizes all the various ways in 
which writing teachers have asked students to play or write in 
and about videogames,11 a number of composition scholars have 
also engaged “gamification” (or, the more generalized and often 
industry-­facing use of game mechanics and signifiers in non-game 
contexts) as a way to reimagine a writing class, such as offering 
badges or points to complete peer review for student writers in the 
classroom.12
This list confirms that rhetoric and composition scholars have offered 
many promising inroads for connecting our field’s teaching and re-
searcher interests to videogames and non-digital games alike. However, 
it is also possible to locate within this wide range of examples the con-
tinuation of a sort of analytical bias that has characterized our field’s 
engagements with other emergent mediums in the past.
Published in 1997, Johndan Johnson-Eilola’s Nostalgic Angels lo-
cated the origins of this bias in scholarly treatments of hypertext.13 
Rhetoric and composition researchers initially privileged literary, 

Introduction  3
creative, or theoretical hypertexts written by figures such as Michael 
Joyce, ­Adrienne Easen, or Stuart Malthroupe and ignored the rhetor-
ical function of pragmatic, commercialized, and functional hypertexts 
like WordPerfect’s online Help menu.14 Johnson-Eilola was in no way 
claiming that literary, creative, and theoretical hypertexts were unwor-
thy of study. Rather, his concern was that the unspoken preference for 
certain types of hypertexts revealed the existence of more entrenched 
disciplinary boundaries that actually prohibited the full consideration of 
hypertext as a rhetorical form. “In this mapping,” Johnson-Eilola main-
tains, “compositionists [continue to] think and work with ‘traditional’ 
texts (first-person essays, literature and literary criticism, argumentative 
papers, and the like), whereas other disciplines work with ‘mundane’ 
texts (online documentation, databases, and informal notes passed from 
person to person).”15 In response to this bias, he offered a compelling 
argument for rhetoric and composition researchers to broaden our con-
ceptions of what a hypertext could be, both by examining its mundane 
texts and by using this examination as means to reimagine digital writ-
ing practices.
If we compare Johnson-Eilola’s list of traditional texts to the schol-
arly examples that I cited in the opening paragraph of this book, it is 
not difficult to locate a familiar pattern. When we gamify our writing 
classrooms as a means of pursuing forms of traditional print-based writ-
ing, we ask students to compose personal narratives or argumentative 
essays about their play experiences, and we ourselves or our writing stu-
dents also draw on games studies criticism to produce written critiques 
of political economic structures that undergird play. By contrast, we find 
comparatively less scholarship that addresses the mundane ­elements of 
commercial videogames, such as interface design or technical descrip-
tions of game mechanics, algorithms, or software code as a form of 
rhetoric on par with the traditional texts that we continue to produce 
and value. While there are undoubtedly some exceptions within digital 
rhetoric scholarship more broadly speaking, these mundane elements of 
videogames tend to remain the disciplinary realm of professional game 
designers, computer scientists, or at most, technical communicators. 
Even within technical communication scholarship on videogames, there 
remains a clear preference for text and discourse. As a recent example, 
essays in the 2016 Technical Communication Quarterly special issue 
edited by Jennifer deWinter and Stephanie Vie explore game developer 
discourse, written online player reviews of videogames, informal player-­
generated online documentation about the best practices for destructive 
play in the popular sandbox videogame Minecraft, and finally, the dis-
course of professional game design textbooks.16
By contrast, one compelling reason to attend to the mundane elements 
of videogames is because of the term that I focus on in this book: habit. 
Many commercial videogame genres increasingly use sophisticated 

4  Introduction
interface design mechanisms to produce habits in ways that exceed a 
player’s conscious perception or creation of any textual or narrative con-
tent on the screen. As an example, consider the free-to-play social media 
game Kim Kardashian: Hollywood.17 At the start of Kim Kardashian, 
a player is required to tap a smartphone screen repeatedly to have a 
working-class female avatar fold clothes in a shift in a store clothing 
display. In a rags-to-riches tale, the savior Kim Kardashian soon appears 
to transport the player’s avatar to Hollywood in order to become a celeb-
rity. At the narrative level, games studies researcher Bea Malskey notes 
that some critics have complained that play in Kim Kardashian always 
occurs within the realm of a job (service-to-entertainment industry) that 
can abstract and mask the true frustrations and realities of women’s 
labor from representation (Figure I.1).18
Given the presence of these themes, I could easily imagine a typical 
classroom assignment in which an instructor assigns her students to play 
this social media game and, in turn, asks each student to write an essay 
that demystifies or critiques the underlying gendered representations.
However, producing a traditional text or examining the meaningful 
elements of the screen avoids addressing how Kim Kardashian employs 
sophisticated behavior-shaping game design elements to empty players’ 
wallets. Kim Kardashian fits into a game design category called a “time 
management game.” Its game mechanics are designed so that the time 
required to complete an in-game task exceeds a typical play session. 
Players are obligated to log in at prescheduled times to complete tasks, 
or players risk losing their previously incomplete tasks, which might 
require money to complete. Naturally, “microtransactions” (in-game 
Figure I.1  Screenshot from GluMobile’s social media game Kim Kardashian: 
Hollywood.

Introduction  5
purchase for real-world money) are available to speed along the process. 
Like many other social media games, Kim Kardashian enables a player’s 
rapid progression by, first, maximizing positive reinforcement and, sec-
ond, minimizing the effects of failure. Once a habit of repeated play has 
been cultivated, Kim Kardashian’s designers rely upon what behavioral 
psychologists call a “loss aversion principle.”19 The longer an individual 
keeps engaging in an activity, the more implicit pressure builds to con-
tinue the activity in order to avoid losing the amount of time and effort 
invested.
It is true that these sorts of mechanisms do not have a high rate of suc-
cess. For comparison, King Digital Entertainment estimates that 70% of 
its Candy Crush Saga players never purchase in-game aid.20 However, 
these mundane interface design elements nevertheless habituate players’ 
embodied practices in other ways as well. Because time management 
game mechanisms require players to continually log back in to complete 
tasks, these fragmentary and uncomplicated forms of play enabled by 
designers’ aims slowly become part of players’ daily habits. The French 
sociologist Pierre Bourdieu offers us one important term to describe 
these types of activities: habitus.21 While habitus is often interpreted via 
Bourdieu’s later work as a narrow alignment of habits of taste with eco-
nomic class, his earlier treatment more generally describes how we form 
any sort of semi-durable disposition through the nonconscious influence 
of various social, embodied, and material structures.22
As an illustration, feminist visual studies researcher Aubrey Anable 
draws a comparison between social media games like Diner Dash, a sim-
ilar rags-to-riches story, and television soap operas.23 Soap operas were 
geared toward women. Their structure promoted continuous engage-
ment without taxing attention to the point where a woman would ignore 
her baby or not be able to perform other household chores. By analogy, 
many social media games on mobile and social media are increasingly 
designed to habituate players of any gender to filling the empty spaces in 
their lives, such as riding the subway while commuting from work with-
out commanding their full attention. Examining the rhetorical situation 
of social media games like Kim Kardashian therefore requires acknowl-
edging the complex ways in which the games’ nonconscious in-game 
behavioral prompts become part of players’ daily habitus.
Addressing the alignment of interface design, game mechanics, and 
habit formation is important for our field because these elements are 
increasingly common in commercial videogame genres. In the pages that 
follow, I examine a number of complex habit-shaping mechanisms in 
other social media games like Candy Crush Saga,24 such as “coercive 
monetization techniques,” which induce cognitively stressful play mo-
ments to attempt to force players to purchase in-game aid after a habit of 
play has been carefully cultivated. Chapter 5 maps an entire videogame 
genre of gamified habit-shaping apps, like Fitbit and HabitRPG, which 

6  Introduction
are grounded in contemporary behavioral psychology research to pro-
duce habits of exercise, diet, and many others through game-like positive 
and negative behavioral reinforcement. While free-to-play social media 
games and gamified habit-forming apps may offer explicit examples of 
the effort to use game mechanics to produce habits, I also locate intricate 
habit-shaping mechanisms within more traditional videogame genres. 
For instance, Chapter 3 examines how popular first-person shooters, 
such as Call of Duty 5 or Destiny,25 increasingly utilize what games 
studies researcher James Ash calls “affective design” to amplify the sen-
sory reception of visual, tactile, or auditory stimuli in order to encourage 
repetitive play habits.26
As a starting point, my aim in Procedural Habits is to ask and answer 
a simple question: How and in what way should we consider these mun-
dane sorts of habit-shaping game mechanisms in heavily commercialized 
genres to be part of videogame rhetoric? As I demonstrate throughout 
this book, the answer to this question depends entirely on where our 
field (i.e., rhetoric and composition scholars) continues to draw both 
familiar and new boundaries between traditional and mundane texts 
in the context of videogames. As my examples of videogame rhetoric 
scholarship above indicate, some elements of the traditional/mundane 
bias that Johnson-Eilola describes for hypertext map perfectly onto our 
field’s engagement with videogames, such as the tendency to focus on text 
and language as an analytical object and teaching and research practice. 
Paralleling our preference for literary hypertexts two decades ago, our 
field’s approach to videogames is to a certain extent also marked by a 
default preference for serious, artistic, or indie videogames that explore 
progressive and sophisticated political claims and themes. We—and 
I count myself among this group—want our writing students to play vid-
eogames like independent designer Anna Anthropy’s Dys4ia,27 which 
offers a compelling interactive autobiography of her gender transition, or 
Upper One Games’ Never Alone,28 which is the first major videogame 
with a Native American protagonist (Figure I.2).
In one of my examples, Colby unsurprisingly asks his students to pro-
duce textual proposals for persuasive games, a genre of videogames that 
attempts to change players’ minds about political issues. By contrast, 
we will not find much in current rhetoric and composition scholarship 
calling for students to design textual proposals for free-to-play social 
media games like Kim Kardashian or Candy Crush Saga on Facebook. 
In fact, game designer discourses frequently figure free-to-play social 
media games as “mindless clicker games” to highlight their status as in-
ferior or inauthentic species of videogames. In most social media games, 
players do not have to solve complex in-game puzzles; players merely 
click a button to set a simulated process into motion. Within these 
spaces, many of us might be inclined to study the forms of writing that 
student writers compose alongside play, or we might use these games to 

Introduction  7
connect to other classroom practices, but we will seldom invite students 
to consider these as on par with artistic, indie, or persuasive games. 
Other inferior genres of videogames, like “gamification,” are dismissed 
as ­“exploitationware”29 or “barely games”,30 because they lack conven-
tionally expressive features of more traditional videogames, which have 
complex in-game obstacles that requires hours of game play and, often, 
no small degree of skill to successfully navigate.
While I acknowledge throughout this book that we have good reasons 
to be wary of the rise of commercialized habit-shaping design mecha-
nisms in contemporary videogames, my concern is that the focus on cer-
tain types of videogames as authentic and inauthentic forms of rhetoric 
corresponds—pace Johnson-Eilola’s observations two decades ago—to 
a set of explicit or tacit assumptions about how videogame rhetoric func-
tions in the world; these are assumptions that our field would do well 
to question. As I demonstrate throughout Procedural Habits, at stake 
is not merely the need to pay more attention to mundane habit-shaping 
Figure I.2  Screenshot from Anna Anthropy’s Dys4ia.

8  Introduction
elements in commercialized genres, but also to realize the unspoken or 
implicit theoretical assumptions about rhetoric and writing that inform 
these sorts of traditional/mundane biases. As Chapter 1 explains, un-
dergirding many criticisms of commercialized habit-forming design ele-
ments or genres is a theoretical preference for cognitive forces or social 
contexts (expressive) over embodied and material ones (mundane). By 
expressive, I refer to two general theoretical understandings: first, ex-
pressive can mean an explicit or tacit reduction of what is rhetorically 
salient to the content that a player consciously receives, perceives, or 
creates during play while figuring the world of material and embodied 
rhetorical forces as non-rhetorical.31 Bogost’s “procedural rhetoric,”32 
one of the major rhetoric paradigms our field has drawn upon, is a clear 
example of this first trend. Bogost specifically claims that rhetoric must 
model a persuasive argument, but that trying to produce the desired atti-
tude or behavior shift through behavioral stimulation is non-rhetorical, 
manipulative, and coercive. When scholars from a variety of different 
disciplinary backgrounds respond to the presence of habit-shaping de-
sign elements in a wide variety of videogames, more often than not, their 
criticisms implicitly or explicitly seek to immunize videogame rhetoric 
from embodiment.
Secondly, and more commonly, expressive also typically means an 
acknowledgment that embodiment or materiality has some sort of in-
fluence on videogame rhetorics, but what is rhetorically salient is how 
embodiment or materiality functions as effects of signification, dis-
course, social-epistemic contexts, or linguistic forces. It is this second 
tendency that characterizes the vast majority of theories of rhetoric and 
writing that have been applied to videogames. For example, a great deal 
of rhetoric and writing scholarship on videogames stems from varia-
tions of epistemic rhetoric and discursive/social construction, including 
Ken S. McAllister’s “gamework”33 grounded in Kenneth Burke, Barry 
­Brummett, and (neo-Marxist) dialectics, and Christopher A. Paul’s an-
alytical concept of “wordplay.”34 Drawing on Kenneth Burke’s claim, 
“where there is meaning, there is persuasion,”35 Paul directly seeks to 
extend Bogost’s procedural rhetoric, by claiming that anything that 
is meaningful in a videogame—whether it makes a formal argument 
or not—is rhetorical. Under these expressive lenses, mundane design 
­elements and genres can certainly take on rhetorical significance; Paul 
specifically mentions free-to-play videogames as part of what can be 
rhetorical.36 However, procedural habits tend to have significance only 
insofar as they can be connected to symbolic action, language, and so-
cial construction. This second form of expressive theoretical preferences 
also parallels dominant trends in games studies scholarship from crit-
ical theory and cultural studies perspectives. Gamified habit-shaping 
apps are “bio-political” forces of neoliberal subjectification;37 videog-
ames in general “allegorize” strategies of (Foucaultian-Deleuzian) late 

Introduction  9
capitalist control societies;38 gamification is potentially “zombiefica-
tion”;39 and finally, repetitive resource-mining activities within the pop-
ular MMORPG WoW is a strategy of disguising work as play to mold 
capitalist subjectivities.40
Procedural Habits
To sum up, our field’s engagement with videogames is marked by a con-
tinuation of certain features of Johnson-Eilola’s diagnosis of traditional/
mundane bias for hypertext as well as a newer theoretical privileging 
grounded in an expressive/mundane split. Missing within these sorts 
of approaches is the desire to view these habit-shaping mechanisms as 
something that may actually be able to show us something new or dif-
ferent about videogame rhetoric. One simple way to highlight the need 
to view habits as more than a mere discursive signifier is to ask a ba-
sic question: Can a videogame form a habit even when a specific habit-­
shaping mechanism is absent?
To answer this question, let me offer two brief examples from one of 
the most well-known classic videogames: Tetris.41 While Tetris is an 
abstract puzzle game with no narrative content, Tetris can still be read 
epistemically for its content on the screen in Janet Murray’s suggestion 
that it allegorizes the following: 
…[the] perfect enactment of the overtasked lives of Americans in 
the 1990s—of the constant bombardment of tasks that demand 
our attention and that we must somehow fit into our overcrowded 
schedules and clear off our desks in order to make room for the next 
onslaught.42
Yet, Tetris also creates embodied affects beyond its designers’ conscious 
aims. On the one hand, researchers have recently concluded that playing 
Tetris for thirty minutes per day can reduce cravings to smoke ciga-
rettes.43 Such an affective relation was in no way part of the original 
game design. Consciously inculcating one habit (playing Tetris) can cre-
ate nonconscious habits (eroding the desire to smoke) beyond any argu-
mentative or epistemic aim of the videogame’s creators. On the other 
hand, at least since work of the psychologist Richard J. Haier in the 
1990s,44 we have known that first-time Tetris players benefit from an 
increased thickening of the cerebral cortex. More recently, the neurophi-
losopher Andy Clark examines the ways in which expert Tetris players 
externalize memory functions (“epistemic acts”) into the space of play 
itself.45 The players speed up their processing decisions by rotating zoids 
against the wall to ascertain the shape. Far from losing innate cognitive 
faculties, as Plato feared in his criticism of writing and memory stor-
age (hypomnesis), Clark argues that Tetris players “extend” their minds 

10  Introduction
into the machine to gain processing power as a form of skillful coping 
(i.e., habit formation) in a particular environment of play. For Clark, 
humans are “natural born cyborgs” whose ability to think and reason 
is profoundly interconnected with technologies, spaces, and modes of 
embodiment that surround us.46
These two examples signal the need to articulate a more complex 
role for habit in discussions of videogame rhetoric. Especially in the 
second example, habit’s role is not reducible to a specific design tech-
nique alone. Instead, habit comprises a more fundamental way in which 
a player’s embodied rhetorical agency emerges through a series of com-
plex feedback loops among mind, body, technology, and environment. 
­Fundamentally, these examples indicate that there are embodied habits 
that form in videogames regardless of whether a specific habit-shaping 
mechanism is present. In this regard, I have a final analogy to draw from 
our field’s previous engagements with hypertext. Scholars like ­Collin 
­Gifford Brooke remind us that hypertext as a medium foregrounds a 
more generalized poststructuralist reading practice of any text (e.g., 
“birth of the reader”/“death of the author”) because its mode of interac-
tion requires reader-centered hyperlink navigation.47 By analogy, I sug-
gest that these explicit habit-forming design elements in contemporary 
videogames foreground what is only ever a generalized mode of rhetor-
ical embodiment produced through repetition for reading the rhetoric 
of any videogame. As a result, one method of overcoming the reemer-
gence of the expressive/mundane bias is thereby to see in the rise of these 
mundane habit-shaping design elements and genres of commercialized 
videogames an invitation to more radically reimagine what videogame 
rhetoric means through habit.48
To accomplish this end, this book traces an idea that I call “proce-
dural habits”: the specific forms of rhetoric that emerge from dynamic 
and locally situated repetitions of social, behavioral, and material habits 
that give rise to meaning and communicative agency in the activities of 
videogame design, play, and writing about play. I argue that habit for-
mation is a necessary consideration for videogame rhetoric regardless 
of whether a given videogame minimizes or foregrounds entirely its ef-
forts to shape habits. Some procedural habits will be a result of design-
ers’ instrumental aims, and others will be formed by players’ conscious 
and nonconscious forms of creative adaptation within spaces of play. 
­Importantly, this view of habit as a fundamental way in which rhetorical 
beings take shape in the world helps us to begin to address commercial-
ized and mundane forms of habit production in interface design as an 
important form of digital rhetoric in itself, beyond a discursive effect or 
a non-rhetorical form of manipulation. If we start theorizing videogame 
rhetorics through procedural habits, I contend that we will be able to 
start appreciating how these mundane design elements and genres can 
serve as important sites of rhetorical negotiation and transformation, 

Introduction  11
even in traditional videogame genres. Furthermore, these considerations 
do not require that we set aside political relations and issues within the 
rhetoric of videogames. Rather, these considerations help us better un-
derstand how these issues emerge because of the ways in which rhetorical 
bodies can contract and maintain a wide variety of habits through play.
Mechanistic Habits Versus Non-Mechanistic Habits
To clarify one aspect at the outset, readers will not once encounter 
the claim in Procedural Habits that we should invert the expressive/
mundane bias and that commercialized habit-shaping mechanisms or 
gamified habit-shaping interfaces are the most important factor in vid-
eogame rhetoric. A number of rhetoric and writing scholars have cited 
games studies researcher Miguel Sicart’s criticism of a paradigm called 
“proceduralism,”49 which reduces meaning in a videogame to a design-
er’s instrumental aims and the game mechanics while ignoring entirely 
how players’ creative negotiations also shape meaning during play (as 
Moberly observed in WoW in one of my opening examples). Rather, 
it is my claim that players’ creative interactions, such as the forms of 
writing that occur during or surrounding play (i.e., in player wikis as 
public writing, as Johnson observed), are shaped more profoundly by 
procedural habits and, in turn, offer a fundamentally different picture 
of rhetoric than the ones that we have applied to videogames thus far. To 
realize this different point of emphasis, it is helpful to offer a brief over-
view of how habits are typically defined and theorized. While I do not 
want to get too far into my argument in the introduction to this book, it 
is helpful to offer this context from the beginning, since the view of habit 
that I propose is not a common one, even outside the immediate context 
of videogame rhetoric scholarship.
On the surface, the claim that habits are important to any form of 
rhetoric—videogame, digital, or otherwise—hardly seems like a ground-
breaking one. I suspect that few experienced writing teachers would 
disagree that good pedagogy involves the formation of various habits, 
such as Nancy Sommers’s pioneering argument that editing should be 
taught as an ongoing mode (i.e., a habit) of revision rather than a post-­
inventional form of proofreading.50 Many of us spend a great deal of our 
teaching lives attempting to correct bad habits in student writers, like 
poor punctuation or failing to shape language for a particular audience, 
while attempting to promote good habits like transference. However, 
despite the fact that we intuitively grasp its importance, our field does 
not offer much in the way of explicit discussion of habit’s relationship to 
rhetoric and writing processes or digital technologies.
When pressed for a definition of habit, Claire Carlisle, one of the few 
contemporary philosophers of habit, suggests that many of us would 
offer something along the lines of “a settled disposition or tendency to 

12  Introduction
act in a particular way, acquired through repetition of the action in ques-
tion.”51 While this basic definition seems to capture many of the general 
features that we associate with a habit, it does not actually explain how 
habit relates to cognition. Is the cultivation of a habitual disposition to 
act or think in a similar manner when confronted with a particular set 
of environmental cues equivalent to the cognitive reception or creation 
of rhetorical meaning in a videogame or an act of writing? Furthermore, 
and with respect to Carlisle’s definition, does it matter which agent 
­(human or nonhuman) inspires the mode of repetition? For example, 
I can consciously choose to practice scales on the piano each day to gain 
fluency. Yet, is this willfully acquired habit different from how environ-
mental forces prompt me to contract certain habits, such as how my 
home office chair habituates me to contract a particular posture? It is 
imperative to develop answers to these questions, particularly because, 
despite its importance to everyday life, habit’s role is not often aligned 
with creative thought or rhetorical subjectivity.
Mechanistic Habits
In the Western rhetorical and philosophical tradition, there are two primary 
ways in which habits are defined that are relevant to my argument in this 
book: mechanistic and non-mechanistic.52 One perception of habit is what 
I call “mechanistic,” a term that I adapt from the negative metaphor em-
ployed by the German enlightenment philosopher Immanuel Kant. To em-
ploy a bit of Kant’s dense philosophical terminology, habits are inherently 
negative obstacles that form part of our self-­incurred tutelage and therefore 
interfere with our ability to achieve intellectual freedom. Briefly summa-
rized, Kant argues that habit ­(Gewohnheit, ­Angewohnheit) could only be: 
…[a] physical inner necessitation to continue behaving in the same 
way we have behaved because it detracts from our freedom of mind; 
moreover, it leads to thoughtless repetition of the same action (me-
chanical uniformity) and so become ridiculous … as a rule, all hab-
its are objectionable.53
Kantian habits designate the absence of thought and attention. By defi-
nition, habits are non-rational and non-logical and form part of our 
self-incurred tutelage. According to Catherine Malabou’s summary, 
Kant sees “in habit the epistemology of inauthenticity, a simulacrum 
of being, an imitation of virtue … habit is the disease of repetition that 
threatens the freshness of thought and stifles the voice … of the categor-
ical imperative.”54 The transcendental cogito or our synthetic a priori 
reason pre-exists the habit.
To offer a simpler summary, the mechanistic conception holds that 
habits can influence humans, but the only positive or good habits are 

Introduction  13
those that remain external from creative or rational thought. For most 
mechanistic conceptions of habit, the cogito’s ideal function is to mini-
mize or, in Kant’s case, eliminate habit’s influence on thinking in order 
to preserve the full range of cognitive thought and a de facto mind-body 
dualism. Or, perhaps more accurately stated, habit’s role in relationship 
to thinking is simply not as important as the autonomous functioning of 
the cogito or the inner rational working of the mind. Common phrases 
such as “she’s driving [a car] on autopilot” conjure up a fear of the mech-
anistic power of habit to substitute itself for our conscious reflection or 
attention. Calling an acquaintance a “creature of habit,” for example, is 
seldom a phrase that is intended as a compliment.
Outside the realm of videogame rhetoric, I suspect that a great deal 
of rhetoric and writing scholarship would lend its support to a de facto 
mechanistic position even if the term “habit” is not specifically invoked. 
Indeed, following the lead of Peter Elbow and Donald Murray, many 
expressivists in composition studies would surely balk at the exclusive 
use of templates to guide the invention process in writing, such as those 
featured in Gerald Graff, Cathy Birkenstein, and Russel Durst’s They 
Say/I Say textbook.55 Rhetorical history also offers us many good rea-
sons to be wary of any alignment between rhetoric and the mechanistic 
character of habit. In the Gorgias, Plato at one point draws a dismissive 
analogy between rhetoric and the way in which a baker makes bread 
through the rote habit of following the same recipe each time. Jenny 
­Edbauer Rice offers an apt appraisal of Plato’s purpose: “If rhetoric is 
mechanical, then it could not be considered an ethical practice, insofar 
as it relies upon habit versus true judgment or wisdom.”56 Plato and Kant 
are by no means isolated examples among philosophers in the Western 
tradition who hold a negative view of habit. As far back as fifth century 
BCE, we find a precedent for this opposition between thinking and habit 
in Parmenides’s fifth century BC warning, “let not habit do violence to 
you in the empirical way of exercising an unseeing eye and a noisy ear 
and tongue.”57 More recently, the past few centuries have seen countless 
manifestations of Marcel Proust’s description of habit as a “heavy cur-
tain” over thought.58
As a result, for researchers who are interested in videogames, mech-
anistic habits might be said to lie in the non-rhetorical domain of a 
player’s hand-eye coordination that enables him or her to efficiently nav-
igate a virtual world like Second Life. My routine of playing a single 
20-­minute game of the popular basketball simulation game NBA2K16 
on my ­PlayStation 4 console each time that I need to take mental break 
from writing could be a habit. Many of us would intuitively agree that 
habits of muscle memory or sensory-motor coordination may enable 
our writing students to type their essays on a laptop keyboard without 
pausing to locate each letter key. However, habit certainly would not 
readily be said to characterize these students’ creative rhetorical actions 

14  Introduction
as writers. At most, many of us might locate habit’s role in the uncon-
scious or recalcitrant ideological formations of patriarchy reproduced in 
videogames like the hypersexualized body of Lara Croft in the popular 
Tomb Raider videogame franchise that such students’ critical analyses 
might be designed to critique. The epistemic action of Tetris players or 
Tetris’s emergent property of curbing the impulse to smoke are simply 
not part of creative rhetorical invention except as a passive backdrop. 
To work with mind/body separations or social contexts/discourse is 
all too often to relegate any discussion of habit’s role in rhetoric to a 
de facto mechanism. Thus, thinking about mechanistic habits helps to 
demonstrate the ongoing relevance of Jay Timothy Dolmage’s claim in 
Disability Rhetorics that “we have erected a rhetorical tradition that … 
valorizes the split between the mental and the physical,”59 thereby ig-
noring how “[t]he body is rhetorical—it communicates and thinks.”60
Non-Mechanistic Habits
Although the mechanistic view of habit as an inherently negative ob-
stacle to thought is pervasive throughout scholarly and non-expert dis-
course, it is only one way to theorize habit’s role in cognition. Following 
from M.R. Wright’s translation of a line from Empedocles, “When men 
change their hexein, they change their thought,” alternative approaches 
within and alongside the rhetorical tradition offer habit a fundamental 
role in cognition and human activity.61 Aristotle, who references this 
line from Empedocles in the Nicomachean Ethics, argues that hexis is 
our crucial second nature that forms an embodied ethical disposition to 
guide phronesis across contingent rhetorical situations. I call these alter-
native approaches “non-mechanistic,” because they describe how habits 
operate as generative, creative, or even existential forces that shape a 
great extent of who we are as beings who act in the world.
Centuries after Aristotle, the eighteenth-century French philoso-
pher Felix Ravaisson opened his seminal essay, “Of Habit,” by citing 
­Aristotle’s and then declaring that habit was nothing more and nothing 
less than a “law of being.”62 While Ravaisson’s work was only ­recently 
translated into English, his work exercises an influence on many ma-
jor twentieth-century non-mechanistic treatments of habit, such as 
Merleau-­Ponty, Heidegger, Bergson, and Deleuze. For Henri Bergson, 
true creativity—a habit-free manner of thinking or acting in the world—
occurred very rarely, even in an artist’s or creative writer’s life. Similarly, 
for the American pragmatist philosopher William James, humans are lit-
tle more than “bundles” of habits. Across these various and by no means 
equivalent non-mechanistic approaches, a common thesis emerges: with-
out the ability of habit to organize fluency of movement, acting, and 
thinking within our various environments of dwelling, humans would 
be incapable of any intentional cognitive or embodied activity at all. 

Introduction  15
Under non-mechanistic approaches, habits do not constrain individu-
als’ thoughts or actions. Instead, habits form the fundamental embodied 
ground for rhetorical beings to act in the world.
I offer this brief contrast between mechanistic and non-mechanistic 
approaches to habit because the latter are not common in rhetoric and 
composition studies. As a case in point, Aristotle’s term hexis—state, 
disposition, bodily comportment, our habituated “second nature” that 
guides ethical reasoning—enjoys little scholarly currency at present in 
comparison to other Greek terms that have been applied or updated 
to digital rhetoric and writing practices.63 Even among theorists who 
have more recently explored embodied or material rhetorics, “habit” is 
not a term that has commanded any attention. It is not only rhetoric 
and composition studies that avoid a non-mechanistic view of habit. 
A ­History of Habit, the first comprehensive edited collection on habit 
in the Western philosophical tradition, was published in only 2013. In 
the ­“Introduction,” editors Tom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson con-
firm that mechanistic defaults have been the dominant trend: “[T]he 
explanatory power of habit is immense. And yet, with some exceptions 
its ontological constitution is rarely investigated, or it is overshadowed 
by its physical description.”64 Despite the fact that most major Western 
philosophers and literary figures have offered a strong opinion on the 
role of habit, habit as a theoretical concept has yet to command any 
great attention from twentieth-century scholars until very recently.
Why are non-mechanistic views of habit largely ignored? While 
­Chapters 1 and 2 argue this point in detail, one major reason lies in the 
reduction of embodiment or materiality to discourse, which I identify 
at the roots of the expressive/mundane bias. For example, the feminist 
theorist Elizabeth Grosz links the oversight of habit as a creative force 
for acting in environments to the epistemic and discursive roots of much 
of twentieth-­century critical theory—exactly the theoretical paradigms 
we find in play in a great deal of rhetoric and composition scholarship. 
Summarizing the overlapping elements of Ravaisson’s, Bergson’s, and 
Deleuze’s respective work on habit, Grosz argues:
Habit is a concept that has been difficult to address for much of 
what passes as postmodernism, for it grounds us firmly in a pre-­
representational real, a real made up of forces that stimulate and trans-
form living beings through their ability to accommodate routines, 
activities, projects that the emergence of life amidst the real requires.65
Non-mechanistic approaches to habit do not allow thought to unmoor 
itself in transcendence or the free play of signifiers. Rather, these ap-
proaches ask instead how thought, rhetoric, and writing are possible 
at all without the ability of habit to create duration, stability, and rep-
etition in cultural practices, texts, and communication patterns amid 

16  Introduction
an otherwise anonymous flux of Becoming. Where rhetorical materi-
alism, especially in videogame rhetorics, often means human-centered 
or ­discursively oriented, I will demonstrate that habit shifts rhetorical 
embodiment and materialism more toward the agency of the environ-
ments as well.
Rather than focus primarily on how social discourses organize players’ 
subjectivities through the ideologies that inform videogame design, pro-
cedural habits points us toward how videogames shape habits, like the 
epistemic action of expert Tetris players. Procedural habits as a concept 
aims to align rhetorical interests in videogames alongside existing work 
on vitalism,66 ecocomposition,67 ecology,68 iconographic circulation,69 
and ambient theories of rhetorical materialism.70 We see that even as 
habit tends toward semi-durable patterns of repetition, habit remains 
specific to the particular and localized configurations of actors within 
players’ ecologies of play. Echoing interests of a growing number of rhet-
oric and composition scholars in Bruno Latour’s actor-network theory 
and Jane Bennett’s new materialist thought, procedural habits requires 
that we understand how a videogame can simultaneously shape a habit 
according to a narrow means-end designers’ goal and create emergent 
and expected effects and affects, like Tetris curbing smoking. Therefore, 
we must trace and map the networks that habit-shaping efforts compose 
rather than assume that our discussion of procedural habits is attribut-
able to some prior totalizing theoretical construct.
Furthermore, while my primary inroad to habit will be through 
­Aristotle and twentieth-century theorists of habit, it is worth noting 
that we can find related precedents within the rhetorical tradition. For 
instance, Hawhee notes a point of taxonomical crossover in classical 
Greek examples, such as the gymnasidion, which described both em-
bodied activity (exercise) and certain rudimentary rhetorical exercises.71 
The gymnasidion eventually became a training handbook known as the 
progymnasmata. Rhetoric students would begin by learning and com-
posing fables (the first step in the sequence) and build their way ­toward 
the imitation and composition of more complex rhetorical genres, 
such as themes or encomiums.72 Throughout the scaffolding of the 
­progymnasmata, rhetoric students worked through cycles of repetitions 
­(imitation, memorization) to inform derivative but new compositions. 
Here, habits did not produce the human equivalents of rhetorical algo-
rithms but rather sought to produce a rhetor who possessed the tools 
to speak persuasively on any topic. Simply put, to raise the question of 
habit and rhetoric—digital or otherwise—is hardly a groundbreaking 
claim even if contemporary researchers have yet to take up this specific 
term (or virtue ethics/dispositional ethics) in great detail.
To return to my definition then, this book explores a non-mechanistic 
approach to habit as the basis for what I call procedural habits: essen-
tial and unavoidable embodied processes of repetition through which 

Introduction  17
rhetorical selves emerge, form, and change through the various habits 
that inform the design and play of videogames. In contrast to prevailing 
approaches to videogame rhetoric, the type of embodiment designated 
by procedural habits is not reducible to cognitive/embodied divisions. 
When we talk about traditional texts in videogames, it will be proce-
dural habits that influence how players create and receive rhetorical 
meaning through their creation and reception. When we find ourselves 
with the desire to critique commercial habit-shaping apps or gamifica-
tion as neoliberal tools of oppression, we must continually make sure 
that our theoretical assumptions about rhetoric do not re-bracket hab-
it’s role in favor of a rational or linguistic subject or a social context 
unmoored from the active co-constitution of embodiment and material 
contexts. Rather, I demonstrate that procedural habits constitute rhetor-
ical ­beings’ pre-reflective anchor to the social and physical realities that 
produce play experiences. Procedural habits form the link that bridges 
the complex and co-constitutive relations between mind and body, na-
ture and culture, human and nonhuman, and organic and inorganic. 
They are what enable rhetorical beings to create and act within the var-
ious gaming assemblages that we dwell within, while also inserting ac-
tual traces of these assemblages into how we constitute our rhetorical 
selves in order to act and communicate in the world around us.
Procedural habits, I suggest, is a concept that allows us not to set 
aside traditional texts or expressive forms of rhetoric, but to use mun-
dane texts to recast how traditional texts and expressive forms function 
rhetorically. Importantly, my goal is not to recapture a sort of utilitar-
ian approach to interface design or related mundane elements. Rather, 
by using some of these theoretical conceptions of hexis, habit, habitus, 
and other non-mechanistic approaches to habit, I aim to demonstrate 
that rhetoric and composition scholars can and should examine how 
these mundane design elements or videogame genres function to produce 
rhetorical habits. One primary reason for undertaking this task in our 
field once more stems from one of Johnson-Eilola’s justifications from 
Nostalgic Angels. “Those ‘other’ [mundane] texts,” he writes, “the ones 
we allow to pass without critical attention because we think they are 
purely functional or lacking in imagination, may in fact be our ways of 
leveraging broad social changes.”73 If we are able to theorize that habit 
in videogame rhetorics is something other than mindless mechanism or 
an object of critique, that habit is a site of transformation or generative 
rhetorical practices, then we are actually free to question if a free-to-play 
social media game might not be more successful in promoting certain 
dispositional forms than logical, narrative, or linguistic arguments in 
traditional videogames.
Alongside my primary aim of contributing to the emerging conver-
sation about videogames in rhetorical studies, I believe that Procedural 
Habits offers insight for some of the broader ways in which rhetoric 

18  Introduction
and habit function through any medium—digital or non-digital. As 
­Aristotle’s early treatment of hexis confirms, habit formation in rhetoric 
is certainly not limited to the domain of habit-shaping algorithms in 
videogames. For example, children have to be trained to sit still to learn 
how to read and write. Neither process is innate; instead, each involves 
the cultivation of multiple forms of habituated repetition. ­American 
(able-bodied) readers must learn how to sit still while developing de-
tailed eye and bodily movements in relationship to a set of standardized 
reading practices (left to right; top to bottom). Furthermore, all writ-
ers, regardless of their cultural backgrounds, learn these habits within 
particular ambient environments (“Equipment—in accordance with its 
­equipmentality—­always is in terms of its belonging to other equipment: 
ink-stand, pen, ink, paper, blotting pad, table, lamp, furniture, win-
dows, doors, room”)74 in order to read a text, process its information, 
and, in turn, hold a given thought in place so that it can be developed 
and expressed in some form (notes, sentences, fragments, Tweets, full-
length essays). For these reasons, exploring habit’s role in one particular 
medium (videogames) can also generate new insights for the broader 
ways in which rhetoric and composition scholars understand the in-
terconnected roles of embodiment and materiality in other rhetorical 
mediums.
Scope of the Book and Chapter Outline
Procedural Habits comprises two parts: Part 1 (Theorizing Procedural 
Habits) and Part 2 (Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently). Part 1 
(Chapters 1 and 2) provides a theoretical introduction to the idea of 
procedural habits by establishing how mechanistic and non-­mechanistic 
views of habit function in the context of the expressive/mundane bias 
within rhetoric and composition scholarship on videogames. Part 2 
(Chapters 3–7) offers case studies of mundane design elements and 
genres designed to illustrate how procedural habits can recast some of 
the analytical terms and applications of videogames.
In Chapter 1, I offer a summary of how mechanism informs the ex-
pressive/mundane bias in past and present videogame rhetoric scholar-
ship. To make the turn toward procedural habits, I begin by considering 
how the neglect of the work of computer scientist BJ Fogg and the idea 
of a “persuasive technology” is symptomatic of the expressive/mundane 
bias. Fogg is unique among digital rhetoricians in that he unequivocally 
states his desire to extend rhetoric’s historic focus on verbal or textual 
argumentation to produce an emotional response or conscious change 
in belief to also include forms of nonconscious behavioral ­reinforcement 
monitored by computational algorithms and real-time feedback. Fogg’s 
thinking is particularly useful because he functions as what I  call a 
“limit case” for teasing out the status of habit in a given theory of digital 

Introduction  19
rhetoric. Although we see that our field has good reason to question ele-
ments of Fogg’s work, his insistence that habits are part of digital rhetoric 
illustrates that many of our discursively oriented and social-constructive 
theories of rhetoric have difficulty in discussing procedural habits as 
actual embodied and material forces that shape bodies and minds in 
nonconscious ways. Thus, Fogg offers rhetoric and composition schol-
ars a starting place for theorizing rhetoric and habit in the context of 
videogames’ mundane design elements as well as an analytical lens for 
identifying how complex interface design mechanisms in contemporary 
videogames produce procedural habits.
In Chapter 2, I suggest that the proper response to the specter of be-
havior change and rhetoric in videogames is not critique, avoidance, or 
rejection but rather to extend Fogg’s thinking to encompass a more com-
plex role in all forms of videogame rhetoric. Here, I offer a framework 
for a non-mechanistic conception of procedural habits in Aristotle’s 
­discussions of ethos (habituation) and hexis (bodily comportment, state, 
disposition). Ethos and hexis describe how conscious and nonconscious 
forms of embodied repetition produce the creative (non-mechanistic) 
ways in which rhetoric beings communicate and write in videogames. 
I use ­Aristotle alongside his eighteenth-century commentator, ­Ravaisson, 
as a lens to demonstrate how procedural habits requires us to fundamen-
tally rethink the forms of materiality that influence, from a discursive 
rhetorical materialism toward a vibrant world of nonhuman agents seen 
in Bennett’s new materialist philosophy.
In Part 2, I turn to case studies to illustrate various aspects of how  
habit-shaping design elements and genres function within the broader 
terrain of procedural habits in contemporary videogames. In Chapter 3, 
I start with the traditional commercial videogame genre, which, in many 
ways, launched videogames into popularity: first-person shooters. While 
many of us might be tempted to look at the narrative or symbolic 
­elements, procedural habits directs us toward a novel mundane habit-­
shaping ­element: affective design, or an attempt to create ­pleasurable 
habits of play with creative nonconscious forms of positive reinforce-
ment across multiple sensory inputs (auditory, tactile, visual, etc.). Here, 
I suggest that we cannot read affective design just in functional terms, 
but must instead examine the deeper and more complex forms of rhetori-
cal embodiments that affective design produces. In ­particular, I ­focus on 
how the canon of memory is produced through affective design by speak-
ing to a more fundamental role for what Bergon called ­“habit-memory” 
in first-person shooters.
Chapter 4 explores a genre of videogames that some game designers 
do not even consider to be authentic videogames: gamified habit-shaping 
apps. In this chapter, I perform a traditional texts approach to gami-
fied habit-shaping apps to interrogate some of the expressive/mundane 
consequences of the common critical theory paradigms that our field, 

20  Introduction
and games studies more broadly, employs to view videogame rhetoric. 
I argue that the mundane habit-shaping elements of these apps can be 
read as objects of critique through Foucaultian bio-power, using Fogg’s 
work as a lens to connect these apps to broader social-political inter-
ests in computationally monitored habit formation, like Tim O’Reilly’s 
­utopian ­“algorithmic regulation” or Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein’s 
“nudge.” However, my larger goal in performing this reading is to sug-
gest how social-epistemic variants of critique convert procedural hab-
its into a prior totalizing theoretical construct (bio-power) while other 
theoretical paradigms like Latour’s actor-network theory can instead 
help us to trace a videogame’s actual empirical relations. Rather than 
figuring gamified habit-shaping apps solely as objects of bio-power, we 
can also ask if these apps create at times positive or productive effects 
in the world. To demonstrate this point, I offer a close reading of proce-
dural habits in the gamified habit-shaping app, Time to Eat, designed to 
use behavioral reinforcement to help children eat a healthier breakfast 
through the lens of actor-network theory (ANT). Through this example, 
I confirm it is important to view procedural habits through the lens of 
the full range of human and nonhuman relations that compose rhetor-
ical reality in order to avoid the expressive/mundane binary and allow 
procedural habits to emerge as actual embodied and material forces in 
the world.
In Chapter 5, I turn to the “mindless clicker” genre of social media 
games as a case study. Once again, Fogg’s work helps us to locate and de-
scribe several novel mundane habit-shaping elements like coercive mon-
etization techniques in Candy Crush Saga. However, I also suggest that 
we can nevertheless conceive of this mundane genre as an overlooked op-
portunity for rhetorical invention. I suggest that Cow Clicker, Bogost’s 
satirical videogame that mocks social media games while simultaneously 
functioning as one, offers us what Gregory Ulmer calls a “heuretic” strat-
egy of invention for persuading through multimodal invention beyond 
critique. In part, I treat Bogost’s discussion of Cow Clicker as a heuretic 
manifesto to consider a wider variety of gamified and social-media game 
like apps like FreeRice and Trash Tycoon that work not to model but 
to produce ethical habits through Aristotle’s end goal for ethical habits 
(hexis), which is eudaimonia (flourishing, happiness).
In Chapter 6, my case study explores one extremely mundane element 
of videogames rhetoric: software code. I offer a close reading of proce-
dural habits in the opensource videogame FreeCiv’s software code, while 
teasing out how rhetoric and composition scholars and software studies 
scholars alike utilize the expressive/mundane binary even when they seek 
to describe this mundane element. By contrast, I suggest that procedural 
habits requires us to cultivate (via Bennett’s new materialist philosophy) 
a hexis of enchantment to allow code to participate as an agent in shap-
ing our procedural habits as well forming its own autonomous designs. 

Introduction  21
In closing, I make a more direct comparison between procedural habits 
and overlapping work in rhetoric and composition studies on nonhuman 
agency and software, such as James J. Brown Jr.’s Ethical Programs.75
Finally, Chapter 7 examines some pedagogical implications of proce-
dural habits. I examine how inviting student writers to play with mod-
ding the procedural and material inputs of videogames through Makey 
Makey devices (reprogrammable circuit boards) can inform public rhet-
oric and writing pedagogy. The Makey Makey allows critical makers 
to plug in physical objects to a computer to make a material argument 
through a videogame’s interface in itself. Drawing on SB Nation colum-
nist Jon Bois’s Breaking Madden weblog series about satirical epideictic 
mods of the NFL football simulation game, I suggest that modifying a 
videogame’s digital and physical interface helps teach student writers 
about how procedural habits shape who they are as players and writers.
Notes
	 1	 In examples such as Welch, Zappen, Losh, or Rice’s Digital Detroit, videog-
ames tend to serve as passing examples rather than central themes. See also 
Collin Gifford Brooke, Lingua Fracta (New York: Hampton, 2009), 134.
	 2	 Jennifer deWinter, Daniel Griffin, Ken S. McAllister, Ryan M. Moeller,  
and Judd Ethan Ruggill, “Computer Games Across the Curriculum:  
A Critical Review of an Emerging Techno-Pedagogy,” Currents in Electronic  
Literacy (2010), http://currents.cwrl.utexas.edu/2010/dewinter_et_al_ 
computer-games-across-the-curriculum
	 3	 Richard Colby, “Writing and Assessing Procedural Rhetoric in Student- 
produced Video Games,” Computers and Composition 31 (2014): 43–45.
	 4	 Cynthia L. Selfe and Gail E. Hawisher, ed., Gaming Lives in the Twenty-­
First Century: Literate Connections (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
	 5	 Colby, Rebekah Shultz. “Gender and Gaming in a First-Year Writing Class,” 
in Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: Reshaping Theory 
and Practice of Writing, ed. Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 123–138.
	 6	 John Alberti, “The Game of Facebook and the End(s) of Writing Pedagogy,” 
in Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: Reshaping Theory 
and Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, 
and Rebekah Schultz Colby, (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 9.
	 7	 Matthew S.S. Johnson, “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces,” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 271.
	 8	 Kevin Moberly, “Composition, Computer Games, and the Absence of Writing,” 
Computers and Composition 25 (2008): 285.
	 9	 James Paul Gee, “Learning by Design: Good Videogames as Learning 
Machines,” E-Learning 2, no. 1 (2005): 16.
	10	 Jonathan Alexander, “Gaming, Student Literacies, and the Composition 
Classroom: Some Possibilities for Transformation,” College Composition 
and Communication 61, no. 1 (Sept. 2009): 36.
	11	 As a point of clarification, many pedagogical uses of videogames or gam-
ing in general by rhetoric and composition scholars have little to do with 
gamification per se. Gamification does not have to be specifically pedagog-
ical (Delta’s Frequent Flyer program, for example) and nor are all forms 

22  Introduction
of gamification commensurate with Gee’s specific use of gaming literacies 
as a way to reimagine education. Gaming literacies and rhetorics can in-
volve many more expressive forms of cognitive interaction and development 
beyond the sorts of externalized positive and negative reinforcement that 
characterizes a great deal of gamification even if one of the goals of this 
book is to re-cast the terms through which cognition and behavior change 
are currently understood.
	12	 Justin Hodgson, “Developing and Extending Gaming Pedagogy: Designing 
a Course as Game, in Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: 
Reshaping Theory and Practice of Writing, ed. Richard Colby, Matthew S. 
S. Johnson, and Rebekah Schultz Colby (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2013), 45–62.
	13	 Johndan Johnson-Eilola, Nostalgic Angels: Rearticulating Hypertext Writing, 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 1997). I am entirely indebted to 
the anonymous reviewer of my book manuscript who suggested this organiza-
tional framework as a better inroad to this topic for rhetoric and composition 
scholarship.
	14	 Ibid., 3.
	15	 Ibid., 5.
	16	 Jennifer deWinter and Stephanie Vie. “Games in Technical Communica-
tion,” Technical Communication Quarterly 25, no. 3 (2016): 151–210.
	17	 Kim Kardashian: Hollywood (2014; San Francisco, CA: Glu Mobile, 2015), 
iOS videogame.
	18	 Bea Malskey, “Managing Hearts with Kim and Flo,” The New Inquiry, July 20, 
2015, http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/managing-hearts-with-kim-and-flo/
	19	 “Game Mechanics: Loss Aversion,” iGamify, 2013, www.igamify.com/category/
toolkit-gamification-game-mechanics-loss-aversion-design-game-mechanics
	20	 Ramin Shokrizade, “The Top F2P Monetization Tricks,” Gamasutra, 
Jun. 26, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.gamasutra.com/blogs/Ramin 
Shokrizade/20130626/194933/The_Top_F2P_Monetization_Tricks.php
	21	 Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984), 165–170.
	22	Bourdieu specifically attributes his preference for the term “habitus” to avoid 
confusion with the pervasive mechanistic conceptions of habit employed 
by twentieth-century sociologists. For Bourdieu, habits are in the realm of 
Aristotle’s phronesis and intelligence rather than stimulus-response affects 
or “simple” behaviors or instincts. Like Ravaisson, Bergson, and Deleuze, 
Bourdieu’s habitus is non-Cartesian because it is a pre-reflective or pre-­
conceptual embodied mastery with respect to action. Echoing Aristotle’s no-
tion of hexis, which Bourdieu picks up from Marcel Mauss, Bourdieu writes, 
“The word disposition seems particularly suited to express what is covered 
by the concept of habitus (defined as a system of dispositions). It expresses 
first the result of an organizing action, with a meaning close to that of words 
such as structure; it also designates a way of being, a habitual state (espe-
cially of the body) and, in particular, a predisposition, tendency, propensity 
or inclination” (this quote from Bourdieu is found in Nick ­Crossley, “Pierre 
Bourdieu’s Habitus,” in A History of Habit: From ­Aristotle to ­Bourdieu, 
ed. Thomas Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson (New York: Lexington Books, 
2013), 293. 
	23	 Nicholas Fortugno, Diner Dash (2009; San Fransisco, CA: PlayFirst, Aug. 
11, 2015, 1.13.1), iOS Videogame.
	24	 Candy Crush Saga (London: King Digital Entertainment, 2012), videogame.
	25	Call of Duty 5: World At War (Infinity Ward; Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 
2008). Destiny (Bellueve, WA: Bungie and Activision, 2014), videogame.

Introduction  23
	26	 James Ash, “Technologies of Captivation: Videogames and the Attunement 
of Affect.” Body & Society 19, no. 1 (2013): 28.
	27	 Anna Anthropy, Dys4ia (2012; Glenside, Penn.: Newsgrounds, 2017), vid-
eogame, https://jayisgames.com/games/dys4ia/
	28	 Never Alone (Anchorage, AK: Upper One Games, Nov. 18, 2014), videogame.
	29	 Ian Bogost, “Gamification is Bullshit,” The Atlantic, Aug. 9, 2011, www.the 
atlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/08/gamification-is-bullshit/243338/
	30	 Russell Davies, “Playful” (presentation, This is Playful, London, UK, October 
31, 2009), http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2009/11/playful.html
	31	 Also known as the “Cartesian-esque” in games studies. See Eugenie Shinkle, 
“Corporealist Ergo Sum: Affective Response in Digital Games,” in Digital 
Gameplay: Essays on the Nexus of Game and Gamer, ed. Nate Garrelts 
(New York: McFarland, 2005), 24.
	32	 Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2007), ix.
	33	 Ken S. McAllister, Game Work: Language, Power, and Computer Game 
Culture (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 2004).
	34	Christopher A. Paul, Wordplay and the Discourse of Videogames: Analyzing 
Words, Design, and Play (New York: Routledge, 2013), 7.
	35	 Kenneth Burke, Rhetoric of Motives (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1968), 173.
	36	 Paul, Wordplay, 8.
	37	 Patrick Jagoda, “On Gamification and Other Forms of Play,” Boundary 2 40, 
no. 2 (2013): 116.
	38	 Alexander R. Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization. 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006); McKenzie Wark Gamer Theory (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2007).
	39	 Steven Conway. “Zombification? Gamification, Motivation, and the User.” 
Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 6, no. 2 (2014): 132.
	40	David Golumbia, “Games without Play,” New Literary History 40, no. 1 
(Winter 2009): 179–204.
	41	 Alexey Pajitno, Tetris (Honolulu, HI: The Tetris Company, 1984), videogame.
	42	 Janet H. Murray, Hamlet on the Holodeck (New York: Free, 1997), 143–144.
	43	 Jessica Skorka-Brown, Jackie Andrade, and Jon May, “Playing Tetris ­Reduces 
the Strength, Frequency, and Vividness of Naturally Occuring Cravings,” 
­Appetite 76, no. 1 (May 2014): 161–165.
	44	Richard J. Haier, Benjamin V. Siegel Jr., Andrew MacLachlan, Eric Soder-
ling, Stephen Lottenberg, and Monte S. Buchsbaum, “Regional Glucose 
Metabolic Changes After Learning a Complex Visuospatial/Motor Taks: 
A Positron Emission Tomographic Study,” Brain Research 570 (1992): 134.
	45	 Andy Clark, Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive 
Extension (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 70–73.
	46	Andy Clark, Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the Future 
of Human Intelligence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 6.
	47	 Collin Gifford Brooke, Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media 
(New York: Hampton, 2009), 69.
	48	 To be sure, McAllister mentions the role of “physiological affect” in Game 
Work; however, echoing the expressive/mundane bias, he does not seek to 
use the production of physiological affect to rethink what videogame rhet-
orics mean through embodiment in a more complete sense. See McAllister, 
Game Work, 52.
	49	 Miguel Sicart, “Against Procedurality,” Games Studies: The International 
Journal of Computer Game Studies 11, no. 3 (Dec. 2011), http://game-
studies.org/1103/articles/sicart_ap.

24  Introduction
	50	 Nancy Sommers, “Revision Strategies of Student Writers and Experienced 
Adult Writers,” College Composition and Communication 31, no. 4 (1980): 
378–388.
	51	 Claire Carlisle, On Habit, (New York: Routledge, 2014), 5.
	52	 For accuracy’s sake, many philosophers combine different aspects of these 
two opposing concepts. See Ibid., 1–15.
	53	 Immanuel Kant, Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View, ed. Robert B. 
Louden and Manfed Kuehn (1798; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006), 39, 42.
	54	 Catherine Malabou, Preface to Of Habit, by Felix Ravaisson, trans. by 
Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclaire (London: Continuum, 2008), vii.
	55	 Gerald Graff, Cathy Birkenstein, and Russel Durst, They Say, I Say (New York: 
WW Norton, 2006).
	56	 Jenny Edbauer Rice, “Rhetoric’s Mechanics: Retooling the Equipment of 
Writing Production,” College Composition and Communication 60, no. 
2 (2008): 367. See also James J. Brown Jr., Ethical Programs: Hospitality 
and the Rhetorics of Software (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
2015). I also acknowledge that readings of Plato’s view on rhetoric have been 
productively complicated by several recent rereadings of his dialogues See, 
for example, James L. Kasteley, The Rhetoric of Plato’s Republic: Democ-
racy and the Philosophical Problem of Persuasion (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2015). 
	57	 Parmenides, The Fragments of Parmenides, ed. A.H. Coxon (Assen/
Maastricht: Van Gorcum, 1986), 58.
	58	 Marcel Proust, “The Captive/The Fugitive,” In Search of Lost Time Vol. 5 
(New York: Modern Library, 2003), 621.
	59	 Jay Timothy Dolmage, Disability Rhetoric (Syracuse: Syracuse University 
Press, 2014), 70.
	60	 Ibid., 289.
	61	 M.R. Wright, Empedocles: The Extant Fragments (New York: Hackett 
­Publishing Company, 1995), 235, quoted in Debra Hawhee, Bodily Arts: 
Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece (Austin: University of Texas, 
2004), 58.
	62	 Felix Ravaisson, Of Habit, trans. Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclar (New 
York: Continuum, 2008), 25.
	63	 For one notable exception, see John Duffy, “Ethical Dispositions: A Dis-
course for Rhetoric and Composition,” JAC 34, no. 1–2 (2014): 209–237.
	64	Tom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson, “Introduction,” in A History of 
Habit: From Aristotle to Bourdieu, ed. Tom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson 
(New York: Lexington Books, 2013), 3.
	65	 Elizabeth A. Grosz, “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us,” 
Body & Society 19 (2013): 218.
	66	 Byron Hawk, A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies 
of Complexity (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007).
	67	 Christian R. Weisser and Sidney I. Dobrin, ed., Ecocomposition: Theoretical 
and Pedagogical Approaches (New York: SUNY Press, 2012).
	68	 Marilyn Cooper, “Rhetorical Agency as Emergent and Enacted,” CCC 62, 
no. 3 (Feb. 2011): 420–449; Jenny Edbauer, “Unframing Models of Public 
Deliberation: From Rhetorical Situation to Rhetorical Ecologies,” RSQ 35, 
no. 4 (2005): 5–24.
	69	 Laurie Gries, Still Life With Rhetoric (Logan: Utah State University Press, 
2015).
	70	 Thomas Rickert, Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2013).

Introduction  25
	71	 Hawhee, Bodily Arts, 37.
	72	 Gideon O. Burton, “Progynmasmata,” Silva Rhetoricae, accessed May 15, 
2017. http://rhetoric.byu.edu/Pedagogy/Progymnasmata/Progymnasmata.htm.
	73	 Johnson-Eilola, Nostalgic Angels, 6.
	74	 Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson (New York: Harper, 2008), 97.
	75	 Brown Jr., Ethical Programs.
Bibliography
Anthropy, Anna. Dys4ia. 2012. Glenside, PA: Newsgrounds, 2017. Videogame. 
https://jayisgames.com/games/dys4ia/.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by Joe Sachs. New York: Focus Phil-
osophical Library, 2002.
Ash, James “Technologies of Captivation: Videogames and the Attunement of 
Affect.” Body & Society 19, no. 1 (2013): 27–51.
Alberti, John. “The Game of Facebook and the End(s) of Writing Pedagogy.” In 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby, 9–24. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Anable, Aubrey. “Casual Games, Time Management, and the Work of Affect.” 
Ada: A Journal of Feminist Game Studies. 2 (2013). http://adanewmedia.
org/2013/06/issue2-anable/.
Alexander, Jonathan. “Gaming, Student Literacies, and the Composition Class-
room: Some Possibilities for Transformation.” College Composition and 
Communication 61, no. 1 (Sept. 2009): 35–63.
Bogost, Ian. Cow Clicker. 2010. Videogame. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://
cowclicker.com/.
———. “Gamification is Bullshit.” The Atlantic. Aug. 9, 2011. www.theatlantic.
com/technology/archive/2011/08/gamification-is-bullshit/243338/.
———. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT, 2007.
Bois, Jon. Breaking Madden. SB Nation. 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.
sbnation.com/breaking-madden
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984.
Brooke, Collin Gifford. Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media. New 
York: Hampton, 2009.
Brown, James J. Ethical Programs: Hospitality and the Rhetorics of Software. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015.
Burke, Kenneth. Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1968.
Burton, Gideon O. “Progynmasmata.” Silva Rhetoricae. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://rhetoric.byu.edu/Pedagogy/Progymnasmata/Progymnasmata.htm.
Call of Duty 5: World At War. Infinity Ward. Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 2008.
Candy Crush Saga. King Digital Entertainment, 2012. iOS Videogame.
Carlisle, Claire. On Habit. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Clark, Andy. Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the Future of 
Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.

26  Introduction
———. Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Colby, Rebekah Shultz. “Gender and Gaming in a First-Year Writing Class.” In 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby, 123–138. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Colby, Richard. “Writing and Assessing Procedural Rhetoric in Student-produced 
Video Games.” Computers and Composition 31 (2014): 43–52.
Conway, Steven. “Zombification? Gamification, Motivation, and the User.” 
Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 6, no. 2 (2014): 129–141.
Cooper, Marilyn. “Rhetorical Agency as Emergent and Enacted.” CCC 62, no. 
3 (Feb. 2011): 420–449.
Crossley, Nick “Pierre Bourdieu’s Habitus.” In A History of Habit: From Aristotle 
to Bourdieu. Edited by Tom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson, 291–308. New 
York: Lexington Books, 2013.
Davies, Russell. “Playful.” Presentation at This is Playful, London, UK, ­October  
31, 2009. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/ 
2009/11/playful.html.
Destiny. Bellueve, WA: Bungie and Activision, 2014. Videogame.
deWinter, Jennifer, Daniel Griffin, Ken S. McAllister, Ryan M. Moeller, and 
Judd Ethan Ruggill. “Computer Games Across the Curriculum: A Critical 
Review of an Emerging Techno-Pedagogy.” Currents in Electronic Liter-
acy (2010). Accessed May 15, 2017. http://currents.cwrl.utexas.edu/2010/
dewinter_et_al_computer-games-across-the-curriculum.
deWinter, Jennifer, and Stephanie Vie. “Games in Technical Communication.” 
Technical Communication Quarterly 25, no. 3 (2016): 151–210.
Dolmage, Jay Timothy. Disability Rhetoric. Syracuse: Syracuse University 
Press, 2014.
Duffy, John. “Ethical Dispositions: A Discourse for Rhetoric and Composi-
tion.” JAC 34, no. 1–2 (2014): 209–237.
Edbauer, Jenny. “Unframing Models of Public Deliberation: From Rhetorical 
Situation to Rhetorical Ecologies.” RSQ 35, no. 4 (2005): 5–24.
Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
Fortugno, Nicholas. Diner Dash. 2009. San Francisco, CA: PlayFirst, Aug. 11, 
2015 (1.13.1). iOS Videogame.
Free Rice. United Nations World Food Programme. 2007. Videogame. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://freerice.com.
Galloway, Alexander R. Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006.
“Game Mechanics: Loss Aversion.” iGamify, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017.  
www.igamify.com/category/toolkit-gamification-game-mechanics-loss-aversion- 
design-game-mechanics
Gee, James Paul. “Learning by Design: Good Videogames as Learning Machines.” 
E-Learning 2, no. 1 (2005): 5–16.
Golumbia, David. “Games without Play.” New Literary History 40, no. 1 
(Winter 2009): 179–204.
Graff, Gerald, Cathy Birkenstein, and Russel Durst. They Say, I Say. New York: 
WW Norton, 2006.

Introduction  27
Gries, Laurie. Still Life with Rhetoric. Logan: Utah State University Press, 2015.
Grosz, Elizabeth A. “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us.” Body & 
Society 19 (2013): 217–239.
Haier, Richard J., Benjamin V. Siegel Jr., Andrew MacLachlan, Eric Soderling, 
Stephen Lottenberg, and Monte S. Buchsbaum. “Regional Glucose Metabolic 
Changes After Learning a Complex Visuospatial/Motor Taks: A Positron 
Emission Tomographic Study.” Brain Research 570 (1992): 134–143.
Hawhee, Debra. Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece. Austin: 
University of Texas, 2004.
Hawk, Byron. A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies of 
Complexity. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by John Macquarrie and Ed-
ward Robinson. New York: Harper, 2008.
Hodgson, Justin. “Developing and Extending Gaming Pedagogy: Designing a 
Course as Game.” In Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games: Re-
shaping Theory and Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew 
S. S. Johnson, and Rebekah Schultz Colby, 45–62. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2013.
Jagoda, Patrick. “On Gamification and Other Forms of Play.” Boundary 2 40, 
no. 2 (2013): 115–147.
Johnson, Matthew S.S. “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces.” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan. Nostalgic Angels: Rearticulating Hypertext Writing. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 1997.
Kant, Immanuel. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. Edited by 
Robert B. Louden and Manfed Kuehn. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006 (1798).
Kasteley, James L. The Rhetoric of Plato’s Republic: Democracy and the Philo-
sophical Problem of Persuasion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood. 2014. San Francisco, CA: Glu Mobile, 2015 
(3.3.0). iOS Videogame.
Malabou, Catherine. Preface to Of Habit, by Felix Ravaisson. Translated by 
Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclaire, i–xi. London: Continuum, 2008.
Malskey, Bea. “Managing Hearts with Kim and Flo.” The New Inquiry. 
July 20, 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/
managing-hearts-with-kim-and-flo/.
McAllister, Ken S. Game Work: Language, Power, and Computer Game Culture. 
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 2004.
Moberly, Kevin. “Composition, Computer Games, and the Absence of Writing.” 
Computers and Composition 25 (2008):284–299.
Murray, Janet H. Hamlet on the Holodeck. New York: Free, 1997.
NBA2K16. 2K Sports. Novato, CA, 2016. Console (PS4) Videogame.
Never Alone. Anchorage, AK: Upper One Games, Nov. 18, 2014. Videogame.
O’Reilly, Tim. “Open Data and Algorithmic Regulation.” Beyond Trans-
parency. Edited by Brett Goldstein and Lauren Dyson. Code for America 
Press, 2013.
Pajitno, Alexey. Tetris. Honoulu, HI: The Tetris Company. 1984. Videogame.
Parmenides. The Fragments of Parmenides. Edited by A.H. Coxon. Assen/
Maastricht: Van Gorcum, 1986.

28  Introduction
Paul, Christopher A. “Process, Paratexts, and Texts: Rhetorical Analysis in Vir-
tual Worlds.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 3, no. 1 (2010). Accessed 
May 15, 2017. https://journals.tdl.org/jvwr/index.php/jvwr/article/view/804.
———. Wordplay and the Discourse of Videogames: Analyzing Words, Design, 
and Play. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Plato. “Gorgias.” Plato: Complete Works. Ed. John M. Cooper. Translated by 
Donald J. Zeyl, 791–869. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997.
Pollak, J.P., Geri Gay, Sahara Byrne, Emily Wagner, Daniela Retelny, and Lee 
Humphreys. “It’s Time to Eat.” Pervasive Computing, IEEE. 9.3 (2010): 21–27.
Proust, Marcel. “The Captive/The Fugitive.” In Search of Lost Time. Vol. 5. 
New York: Modern Library, 2003.
Ravaisson, Felix. Of Habit. Translated by Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclar. 
New York: Continuum, 2008.
Rice, Jeff. Digital Detroit. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2014.
Rice, Jenny Edbauer. “Rhetoric's Mechanics: Retooling the Equipment of Writ-
ing Production.” College Composition and Communication 60, no. 2 (2008): 
366–387.
Rickert, Thomas. Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2013.
Rosedale, Philip. Second Life. San Francisco, CA: Linden Lab, 2003. Videogame.
Selfe, Cynthia L. and Gail E. Hawisher, editors. Gaming Lives in the Twenty-­
First Century: Literate Connections. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Shokrizade, Ramin. “The Top F2P Monetization Tricks.” Gamasutra. June 
26, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/Ramin 
Shokrizade/20130626/194933/The_Top_F2P_Monetization_Tricks.php.
Shinkle, Eugenie. “Corporealist Ergo Sum: Affective Response in Digital 
Games.” In Digital Gameplay: Essays on the Nexus of Game and Gamer, 
edited by Nate Garrelts, 21–35. New York: McFarland, 2005.
Sicart, Miguel. “Against Procedurality.” Games Studies: The International 
Journal of Computer Game Studies 11, no. 3 (Dec. 2011). Accessed May 15, 
2017. http://gamestudies.org/1103/articles/sicart_ap.
Skorka-Brown, Jessica, Jackie Andrade, and Jon May. “Playing Tetris Reduces 
the Strength, Frequency, and Vividness of Naturally Occuring Cravings.” 
Appetite 76, no. 1 (May 2014): 161–165.
Sommers, Nancy. “Revision Strategies of Student Writers and Experienced 
Adult Writers” College Composition and Communication 31, no. 4 (1980): 
378–388.
Sparrow, Tom and Adam Hutchinson. “Introduction.” In A History of Habit: 
From Aristotle to Bourdieu, edited by Thom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson, 
1–16. New York: Lexington Books, 2013.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. Nudge: Improving Decisions about 
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
Trash Tycoon. Manhattan, NY: Guerilla Apps, 2011. Social Media Videogame.
Ulmer, Gregory. Heuretics: The logic of invention. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1994.
Unold, Peter, Claus Leth Gregersen and Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg. FreeCiv. Aarhus, 
Den., 1995. Videogame.
Wark, McKenzie. Gamer Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2007.

Introduction  29
Weisser, Christian R., and Sidney I. Dobrin, editors. Ecocomposition: Theoretical 
and Pedagogical Approaches. New York: SUNY Press, 2012.
Welch, Kathleen. Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New 
Literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Wright, M.R. Empedocles: The Extant Fragments. New York: Hackett Publishing 
Company, 1995.
Zappen, James P. “Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory.” Technical 
Communication Quarterly 14, no. 3 (2005): 319–325.

This page intentionally left blank 

Part 1
Theorizing Procedural 
Habits

This page intentionally left blank 

The first two chapters of this book (Part 1) offer an introduction to the 
concept of procedural habits, while the remaining chapters (Part 2) apply 
this concept to case studies centered on habit-shaping elements of con-
temporary videogames. In Chapter 1, I begin my efforts to define proce-
dural habits by considering the neglected work of the only contemporary 
digital rhetoric researcher who takes behavior change in mundane and 
commercialized interface design elements as a serious and important 
rhetorical force: computer scientist BJ Fogg and the idea of “persuasive 
technologies.”1 At first glance, this choice, particularly in the context 
of videogame rhetorics, makes little intuitive sense for several reasons. 
While James P. Zappen’s pioneering essay, “Digital ­Rhetoric: Toward 
an Integrated Theory,” mentions Fogg as a foundational figure in digital 
rhetoric alongside Barbara Warnick and Elizabeth Losh, few in our field 
have engaged his claim that algorithmically prompted behavior change 
is rhetorical.2 Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice, Douglas A. 
Eyman’s exhaustive catalogue of past and current work in digital rhet-
oric, does not offer so much as a footnote to Fogg’s book Persuasive 
Technology.3
This oversight is worth exploring given the growing number of game 
and interface designers who have engaged (and criticized) Fogg’s think-
ing. The idea of persuasive technologies has even generated derivative 
concepts such as “prescriptive persuasion” across computer science, 
mobile media, and game design journals. Fogg currently sponsors an 
international conference on persuasive technologies with published con-
ference proceedings and offers annual designer boot camps. Notable 
boot camp attendees include founders of popular social media interfaces 
such as Instagram, LikeALittle, and Friend.ly.4
As I will acknowledge in my discussion of his work in the first section 
of this chapter, there are good reasons why Fogg’s work is not considered 
beyond our field’s tendency to neglect interface design and computer sci-
ence as part of rhetoric. He does himself few favors by failing to engage 
with rhetoric and composition scholarship or even rhetorical history, and 
furthermore, he largely fails to justify or explain why behavior change 
should be a form of rhetoric in the first place. Along different lines, most 
1	
Persuasive Technologies in 
the Rhetoric of Videogames

34  Theorizing Procedural Habits
games studies scholars would not view Fogg as a legitimate contributor, 
if for no other reason than the fact that his work is aimed primarily at 
non-videogame technologies. In Persuasive Technology, Fogg features a 
brief discussion of an education game HIV Roulette, which I will dis-
cuss in detail below, but he remains concerned primarily with helping 
companies such as Amazon.com utilize persuasive technologies in their 
interface design to stimulate customers to make additional purchases at 
nonconscious levels. If we were to use persuasive technology as a lens 
for videogame rhetoric, instead of addressing the meaningful narra-
tive, visual, or interactive elements on the screen, Fogg’s work would 
address the ways in which players’ habits of play are shaped through a 
designer-driven, non-symbolic, and nonconscious realm of behavioral 
affectivity.
At a very basic level, I suggest here, and throughout this book, that a 
literal use of Fogg’s work offers a great deal of descriptive value, as the 
implicit use of Fogg’s behavior change heuristics (The Behavior Wizard) 
can be found in habit-shaping mechanisms in a wide variety of con-
temporary videogames. While it is easy to locate explicit habit-­shaping 
mechanisms in free-to-play social media games, Fogg’s work also alerts 
us to the presence of basic habit-shaping mechanisms in more conven-
tional videogames, such as the first-person shooter videogame Star Wars: 
Battlefront,5 which does not have habit-production as an explicit design 
theme in the same sense as Candy Crush Saga (CCS).
My suggestion is that Fogg’s important—albeit unintentional—­
contribution to rhetoric and composition studies lies in the fact that he 
usefully functions as a limit case for rhetorical conceptions of videog-
ames. Not only does he require us to acknowledge the mundane habit-­
shaping design elements of videogames, but Fogg also provokes us to 
wrestle with the degrees to which our field remains entrenched in cer-
tain expressive rhetorical paradigms—all elements that procedural hab-
its seeks to call into question by locating rhetoric with non-mechanistic 
forms of repetition.
As a case in point, the preference for traditional texts and expres-
sive rhetorics makes it difficult for our field to grant habit a similarly 
productive role in rhetoric by engaging two of the most dominant par-
adigms of videogame rhetoric to date: Ian Bogost’s procedural rheto-
ric and social-­epistemic rhetoric. The latter category includes seminal 
work on the rhetoric of videogames by Ken S. McAllister, Christopher 
A. Paul, and Gerald A. Voorhees, who are more in dialogue with games 
studies and communication scholarship, as well as work in rhetoric and 
composition studies that is social-epistemic in all but name. In my read-
ing, procedural and social epistemic rhetoric correspond respectively to 
expressive definitions of rhetorics through what Richard Lanham calls 
the “weak” and “strong” defenses of rhetoric. In the second section of 
this chapter, I locate how the weak defense that undergirds procedural 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  35
rhetoric specifically figures habits as a priori coercive or manipulative 
through a Platonic conception of the self (pre-fixed, rational). This is a 
view that I find Bogost and other game designers using to unequivocally 
reject Fogg’s persuasive technologies. I specifically discuss a persuasive 
game, Barter, which was designed as an app to encourage Britons to 
spend locally, in order to demonstrate how a cognitive/embodied split 
carries a number of consequences for how we theorize videogame rheto-
ric in operation through the weak defense.
In the third section, working through a particular version of the strong 
defense, I demonstrate that the use of social-epistemic rhetoric rejects 
a rational Cartesian-subject to locate rhetoric in social contexts rather 
than rational subjects. These approaches do in fact allow us to include 
mundane design elements or commercialized videogame texts as rhe-
torically expressive. However, social-epistemic approaches to rhetoric 
nevertheless retain mechanism by default since these specific invocations 
of the strong defense turn upon a dualist nature/culture split. As a result, 
any discussion of procedural habits will tend toward a discursive object 
or an effect of signification rather than encourage us to examine proce-
dural habits as non-purely-discursive or social physiological forces that 
produce and shape rhetorical beings in a more fundamental and creative 
sense. In this regard, Lanham’s strong and weak defense enables me to 
identify how the theoretical underpinnings of procedural and epistemic 
rhetoric fail to adequately theorize habit’s role in videogame rhetoric 
beyond mechanism.
In the fourth section of this chapter, I introduce two of the theoretical 
paradigms that I use throughout Procedural Habits to highlight some 
of the limitations of the strong and weak defense of rhetoric: Latour’s 
actor-network theory and Bennett’s new materialist thinking. While the 
strong defense locates rhetoric in social contexts separated from embod-
ied and material networks, both thinkers—from related but different 
orientations—help us to see that the “social” has always been produced 
by the interconnected agencies of human and nonhuman actors. In part, 
I use these related but distinct theoretical frameworks to reiterate that 
Fogg’s primary usefulness is as a limit case for videogame rhetoric. He 
forces us to recognize our field’s preferences for traditional texts and 
expressive rhetorical forms by claiming that habit formation through 
mundane interface design elements should be “expressive” (i.e., rhetor-
ical) in itself and not just expressive when it is an effect of discourse. 
However, this claim does not mean that we can or should accept all 
elements of Fogg’s thinking. While my subsequent chapters will demon-
strate that his work functions quite well as a descriptive tool for locating 
and examining habit-shaping interface design elements in videogames, 
it is necessary to expand his conception of rhetoric and habit. Neverthe-
less, I suggest that despite these and other problems that I will discuss 
below, Fogg importantly offers us a starting place for using mundane 

36  Theorizing Procedural Habits
habit-shaping elements to re-envision what videogame rhetoric means 
through developing—­and not avoiding—alternative views of habit’s role 
in rhetoric. In the end, Fogg’s largest problem is that he simply fails to 
use his insight that habit can be part of digital rhetoric to reach a richer 
or more complex view of how habits more broadly function in constitu-
tion of digital rhetoric, which is why in Chapter 2 I argue it necessary to 
articulate the idea of procedural habits.
Examining Fogg’s Persuasive Technologies  
as a Form of Videogame Rhetoric
Given the comparative lack of attention to persuasive technology in rhe-
torical studies, a brief introduction to how Fogg’s thinking can be applied 
to videogames is useful. Fogg coined the term “captology,” a portman-
teau for “computers as persuasive technologies” in his doctoral thesis.6 
Later in Persuasive Technology, Fogg fully defines persuasive technol-
ogy “as any interactive computing system designed to change people’s 
attitudes or behaviors.”7 Despite this relatively simple and expansive 
definition, unpacking Fogg’s understanding of rhetoric requires no small 
degree of effort for the reader. His nearly 300-page book ­contains only 
a half-page sidebar on the history of rhetoric,8 and it demonstrates no 
engagement with twentieth-century rhetorical studies.9 Fogg’s novelty 
lies in his unexplained leap from a philosophical view of rhetoric to-
ward nonconscious behavioral reinforcement. It is not Kenneth Burke 
or Lloyd Bitzer, but social and behavioral psychologists who, he main-
tains, have continued to advance the “formal study of persuasion” in the 
twentieth-century.10
Fogg is very straightforward in his belief that persuasive technologies 
are a central part of the legacy of updating “behaviorism,” ­“instrumental 
learning,” or operant conditioning popularized by B.F. Skinner’s classi-
cal conditioning.11 As an example, Fogg references one of his students’ 
projects called the “Telecycle,” in which a user pedals a computer-­
monitored exercise bike connected to a blurry television screen.12 When 
a user reached a target speed on the exercise bike, the screen shifted to a 
clear resolution. Receiving a clearer picture was the stimulus to produce 
the desired behavior change. While the Telecyle invokes brainwashing 
scenes from Stanley Kubrick’s film A Clockwork Orange, Fogg claims 
that his use of behaviorism broadly encompasses any general use of em-
ploying positive or negative reinforcements to shape complex behaviors 
or to increase instances of a behavior. He cites basic feedback loop activ-
ities designed to provide positive reinforcement, such as a business send-
ing a “thank you” note to a customer in the hope of having the customer 
repeat the behavior in the future.13
Fogg’s uniqueness as a digital rhetoric researcher lies in his insistence 
that habit production is the single most important factor of rhetoric. 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  37
For example, in any persuasive technology, kairos, or the “opportune 
moment,” can take the form of a “suggestion technology,” wherein a 
computational actor prompts a behavioral trigger at the opportune mo-
ment.14 The successful realization of kairos must take into account a 
user’s embodied position within spaces of habitual use and how a rhetor 
can take advantage of these existing habits in order to influence behav-
ior. Indeed, Fogg goes so far as to claim that real-time monitoring ­offers 
kairotic advantages over human interlocutors. If a smoker is trying to 
quit smoking cigarettes, Fogg maintains that an interactive program 
can better track successes and failures with respect to broader demo-
graphics of the smoker’s age and cultural background to generate in-
teractive scenarios or appropriate encouragement that could then help 
the smoker quit more easily than with a traditional approach, such as 
weekly meetings with a medical professional. Computers are also more 
persistent than human rhetors. A human may read negative facial or 
bodily language and abandon a given line of argumentation, while Fogg 
claims that a computer will unfailingly send the same alert prompt to 
quit smoking regardless of the given mental state of the user. Eventually, 
Fogg maintains, “People get tired of saying no; everyone has a moment 
of weakness when it’s easier to comply than to resist.”15
One of Fogg’s other intriguing contributions lies in his willingness to 
develop computer-specific techne for rhetoricians who are interested in 
behavior change through interface design. Persuasive Technology con-
sists of countless taxonomies for classifying various behavior change 
techne in the “Fogg Behavior Model,” through master categories of 
Surveillance, Self-Monitoring, Tailoring, Tunneling, Reduction, and 
Conditioning.16 He further systemizes these categories on the ­Stanford 
Persuasive Technology Lab’s (PTL’s) website. The “Fogg Behavior 
Grid,” for example, also offers fifteen concrete strategies for identifying 
the type of behavior to change (“do new behavior”; “decrease behav-
ior intensity”) to help designers match target behaviors with solutions.17 
Each behavior point has its own unique psychology principle behind it. 
The PTL’s heuristics function like the digital equivalent of how one might 
teach rhetors classical rhetorical figures, such as synecdoche or litotes, 
while substituting “behavior change” for “argumentation” or “poetic 
effect.” In a related sense, the Behavior Grid is the digital design equiv-
alent of the medieval progymnasmata—literally “before ­exercises”—
which he seeks to use to prepare digital rhetors for behavioral training 
through interface design rather than speech making.
To offer one example, Fogg advises a designer to use BlueDot Behavior 
to persuade a user to perform an existing or familiar habit one time.18 To 
revisit Fogg’s Amazon.com book prompt feature, buying a book online 
is a clear example of BlueDotBehavior because users already know how 
to purchase books. Using the Fogg Behavior Model, Fogg argues that 
BlueDot Behavior requires three elements: (1) a trigger: a prompt to do 

38  Theorizing Procedural Habits
the behavior, such as links in an email (“click here”); (2) motivation: 
three core motivators include belonging (acceptance/rejection), sensation 
(pleasure/pain), and anticipation (hope/fear); and finally, (3) ability: the 
required action for the trigger must be an action that a user is already 
capable of examining.19 A user’s motivation and ability must precede the 
trigger. By contrast, BlackPath Behavior promises to stop a behavior like 
smoking a single time by removing the trigger, reducing the ability to 
perform the behavior, or by employing “de-motivators,” like pain or so-
cial rejection.20 To clarify a potential source of concern, he intends pains 
as a de-motivator along the lines of using visual scare tactics in adver-
tising. When I was teaching English one summer in Thailand in 2006, 
I observed that warning labels on Thai cigarette packages—­unlike those 
in the United States—displayed real-life photos of surgically removed 
blackened lungs to depict the bodily impact of smoking. The visual re-
alism arguably causes pain or, more accurately, distress for a viewer in 
Fogg’s sense.
Analyzing Videogames as Persuasive Technologies
How then would Fogg’s thinking apply to the rhetorical analysis of a 
videogame? It is true that his subject matter in Persuasive Technologies 
is not videogames, but he does offer a few discussion points. He fea-
tures HIV Roulette, an education videogame that specifically tries to 
convince players to use protection during sexual intercourse. Fogg ar-
gues that HIV Roulette, like any videogame, functions like a persuasive 
technology: “Computer games may be the purest example of technology 
using operant conditioning. They are effective platforms for adminis-
tering reinforcements and punishments, with a bit of narrative and plot 
layered over the top.”21 While, of course, many in our field will readily 
observe that there is more to videogame rhetoric than just the player’s 
interactions with the game mechanics (as will a number of games studies 
scholars who have engaged behaviorism in the past),22 Fogg is not in-
correct to observe that this medium is inseparable from some degree of 
behavioral reinforcement. At a bare bones level, we know we are playing 
a videogame because the videogame offers us some degree of computa-
tionally monitored behavioral feedback in response to our various inter-
active inputs.
While Fogg does not examine any other contemporary videogames, 
my belief is that the closest analogies to what he is thinking about would 
be found in contemporary habit-shaping design elements or genres. In 
the “Introduction” to Procedural Habits, I discuss the social media 
game Kim Kardashian: Hollywood. When this game and other free-
to-play social media games allow for rapid progress and positive re-
inforcement at first to create a sustained play habit, they are utilizing 
Foggian forms of rhetoric. Even videogames without habit shaping as 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  39
the primary design goal utilize Foggian elements. To offer a personal 
example, since its release in November 2015, I have been playing quite 
a bit of Electronic Arts DICE’s Star Wars: Battlefront. Battlefront is a 
first-person shooter videogame grounded in various Star Wars franchise 
plot and character worlds. Beyond a handful of very limited single- or 
co-opt player versus environment modes, most of the gameplay consists 
of online multiplayer player-versus-player (PvP) encounters, including 
the very popular Walker Assault match. Walker Assault is staged on one 
of Battlefront’s many iconic battlefields, like the ice planet Hoth from 
the film The Empire Strikes Back (Figure 1.1).
Walker Assault features massive 40-player PvP battles in which Rebel 
forces defend two radio uplink zones in each of three sequential stages. 
Every  45 seconds, a secured uplink grants the Rebel players an additional 
Y-wing bomber to make an attack run to bomb the AT-AT ­Walkers’ de-
fense shields. The attack run occurs during the end of each stage, when 
the Walkers become vulnerable to player fire. In turn, ­Imperial storm 
troopers attempt to deactivate the uplinks to minimize the number of 
Y-wing bombers in order to allow the AT-AT Walkers to retain enough 
overall shield percentage to survive and destroy the escaping Rebel trans-
port ships at the end of the third and final stage.
To illustrate Fogg’s thinking, it is important to note that Battlefront 
is not a videogame that has habit as a specific persuasive object the same 
way that a time management game design mechanism in Kim Kardashian 
attempts to compel players to spend money to purchase in-game aid at 
cognitively stressful moments. Nevertheless, the game does in fact utilize 
some Foggian design elements. While all players begin a Walker Assault 
Figure 1.1  Screenshot of a live Walker Assault match (Imperial side) on the Ice 
Planet Hoth stage in the FPS game Star Wars: Battlefront.

40  Theorizing Procedural Habits
match as either a generic—but customizable—rebel fighter or imperial 
storm trooper, one of the reasons that Walker Assault is so popular is 
that it offers players the chance to collect randomly dropped hero tokens 
to control a limited number of powerful heroes (only one per side at a 
time), such as Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Darth Vader, or Boba Fett. 
Players can also find similarly restricted tokens to pilot X-Wing fighters 
or, on the imperial side, even the gigantic Walkers themselves. While 
the rules for randomly spawning Hero tokens are difficult to pin down, 
these tokens are often found near the front lines of the harder-to-attack 
enemy zone of the two uplink zones for a given part of the three-stage 
Walker Assault battle (Figure 1.2).
Battlefront’s designers offer the attacking side positive behavioral 
reinforcement to leave the easier of the two enemy zones, rather than 
just hold the easier zone for the entire stage (which, in turn, poten-
tially allows the opposing side an actual opportunity to reactivate its 
lost uplink). However, this form of behavioral positive reinforcement is 
not based upon the actual appearance of the Hero token (stimulus) but 
on the potential that they could be encountered. Simply put, attacking 
players who never leave the easy zone have an extremely low chance of 
encountering a hero icon.
This game mechanism in Battlefront is easily analyzed through the 
lens of Foggian rhetoric. Following one of the few explicit comments 
about videogames in Persuasive Technology, “The bottom line is that 
game designers seek to change people’s behaviors” by motivating them to 
continue playing, Fogg describes how “unpredictable outcomes” ­relate 
to a form of behavioral reinforcement.23 While he acknowledges that a 
Figure 1.2  Screenshot of randomly spawning Hero icon in another Hoth Walker 
Assault Match in Battlefront.

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  41
strict behaviorist account of persuasive technologies would seek to offer 
positive reinforcement once the desired behavior had been produced, he 
also notes that an unpredictable reward schedule can also create a habit. 
Fogg offers the example of the website TreeLoot.com, in which users 
are able to click on a tree.24 Users receive feedback each time they click, 
being told either to click again or that a user has earned some “Banana 
Bucks.” In this regard, it behaves, Fogg tells us, like a “slot machine.” 
Suffice to say, Fogg’s work directs us to think first and foremost about 
how any videogame uses interface design elements not just to create 
meaning but to shape players’ habituated modes of encounter with a 
videogame.
The Weak Defense of Procedural Rhetoric
My subsequent case studies in Part 2 (Chapters 3–7) will draw exten-
sively upon Fogg’s framework to identify different habit-shaping inter-
face design mechanisms that range from encompassing entire videogame 
genres to merely background forces like in Battlefront. The question 
I want to turn to at this point is how our field should interpret his think-
ing. Suffice to say, Fogg would locate rhetoric within any positive and 
negative behavioral reinforcement mechanisms within a videogame. He 
is not primarily interested in how videogames can produce arguments, 
artistic representations, political ideologies, rich narrative architectures, 
complex visual forms, or other any other element of play except insofar 
as these elements would relate to habit production.
Let’s start with the problems of what he is proposing. As intriguing 
and creative as applications of Fogg’s heuristics might be, the simple and 
unavoidable fact remains that he fails to explain how rhetoric is different 
from operant conditioning or, more accurately, how our assumptions 
about rhetoric should change if computationally prompted positive and 
negative reinforcement are rhetorical. He boasts on the PTL website, 
“[D]aily habits are the most powerful of all behaviors… We know what 
it takes to create a habit—in yourself, a customer, your dog.”25 When 
rhetoric produces identical forms of persuasion in humans and animals, 
Burke might suggest that Fogg is importing the terms of “non-symbolic 
motion” (matter, physiology) to describe the world of “symbolic action” 
(rhetoric), wherein rhetoric was little more than an electrical stimulus 
applied to one of “B. F. Skinner’s operationally conditioned pigeons.”26 
Indeed, our field has already engaged and criticized behavioral rhetorics 
in the past. For example, Karlyn Kohrs Campbell has offered a lengthy 
catalogue of objections by rhetoricians to behaviorism, which range 
from the dehumanization of the audience to the loss of any recognition 
of the force of interpersonal cooperative symbolic action.27
This failure to situate rhetoric vis-à-vis behaviorism is just one of nu-
merous questions that a Foggian rhetorical paradigm raises. Fogg also 

42  Theorizing Procedural Habits
tends to rely upon a number of unsubstantiated appeals to research evi-
dence from behavioral economics, sociology, and psychology to support 
the effectiveness of his behavioral prompts without detailed discussions 
or qualifications. In one part of his book, he justifies a behavioral trigger 
by claiming that individuals will change their minds when presented 
with the truth that corrects an error in belief or judgment in a persua-
sive technology.28 While possibly true in some circumstances, current 
research does not support this assertion without qualification. Brandon 
Nyhan and Jason Reifler have conducted several studies that measured 
the effectiveness of presenting individuals with facts regarding inaccu-
rate beliefs over side effects of vaccination.29 While accurate information 
reduced the occurrence of misperceptions in participants, the overall be-
havioral outcomes nevertheless confirmed participants’ renewed com-
mitments to anti-vaccination beliefs. Similarly, the progressive education 
theorist Alfie Kohn has pointed to evidence that challenges the ability 
of positive and negative reward systems to create long-term habits.30 
Kohn cites a broad range of empirical studies to maintain that relying 
upon external computational forms of motivation actually de-motivates 
individuals’ abilities to form habits in the long run. As perhaps a case 
in point, one April 2016 literature review of 95 studies across differ-
ent journals that mentioned the word “persuasive technology” showed 
54.7% that reported “positive results” with 37.9% reporting “partially 
positive results.”31
Despite these problems, my relatively simple contention is that Fogg’s 
work productively casts into relief some of the expressive biases that 
closely accompany a preference for traditional over mundane texts. To 
demonstrate this claim, I will examine how two major paradigms of vid-
eogame rhetoric—procedural rhetoric and social-epistemic rhetoric—­
have difficulty in addressing habit beyond mechanism, a limitation that 
I tease out through Lanham’s discussion of the weak and strong defenses 
of rhetoric.
Procedural Rhetoric and the Weak Defense
In the “Introduction” to Procedural Habits, I noted that the mechanis-
tic approach to habit finds its warrants in Immanuel Kant’s argument 
that habit was only an inherent obstacle to thought. In its most general 
formulation, the mechanistic conception of habit externalizes habit’s 
role from cognition and presupposes that a mind best operates freed 
from the influences of habit, embodiment, and materiality. A mecha-
nistic conception of habit can be directly found in Bogost’s procedural 
rhetoric. Defined in Persuasive Games, Bogost’s concept of procedural 
rhetoric constitutes one of the major contributions to the rhetoric of 
gaming and digital rhetoric since Brian Sutton-Smith’s The Ambiguity 
of Play.32 Citing Kenneth Burke as a source of inspiration, Sutton-Smith 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  43
traces out how play is defined or valued by various cultural institutions 
and discourses, but he does not define how play-in-itself can be rhetor-
ical. In response, Bogost subsequently defines “persuasive games” as a 
genre of videogames that use procedural rhetoric—“the practice of using 
processes persuasively”—to mount an effective persuasive claim to pro-
duce a change in belief or emotion in an audience by modeling real-life 
processes.33
Persuasive Games is significant in at least three ways. First, Bogost of-
fers a rhetorical methodology for examining videogames that, in a sense, 
avoids the exhausted “narratology” versus “ludology” debate in games 
studies, where critics have to choose between, respectively, narrative or 
game mechanics as the location of meaning. By contrast, Bogost argues 
that both elements work in combination to produce persuasive effects. 
­Secondly, procedural rhetoric enables videogames to function as an im-
portant deliberative medium for civic engagement. As the videogame equiv-
alents of political cartoons, “newsgames,” like designer Gonzalo Frasca’s 
­September 12 as well as many videogames listed at persuasivegame.­com 
like Airport Security,34,35 can be circulated across social media and reach 
wider audiences than political cartoons in newspapers. Thirdly, Bogost 
concretizes an otherwise intuitive connection between videogames and a 
series of feedback-based techniques of persuasion.36
While Bogost’s work is well-known in our field, it is also arguably one 
of the primary—if not exclusive—lenses through which games studies 
researchers, computer scientists, and professional game designers have 
approached rhetoric in the context of videogames. As a result, Bogost’s 
rejection of Fogg in his discussion of procedural rhetoric is particularly 
important to bear in mind because it begins to highlight a fundamental 
tension between persuasion (expressive) and behavior change (mundane) 
that we will encounter in numerous efforts to criticize not only Fogg 
but also the general idea that habit formation in videogames is rhetori-
cal. Bogost draws a firm line in the sand between behavior change and 
rhetoric, claiming, “Perhaps [persuasive technologies] offer valid ways 
of using technology to alter behavior. But not one of them deploys rhet-
oric. Instead, all of Fogg’s techniques use technology to alter actions or 
beliefs without engaging users in a discourse about the behavior itself or 
the logics that would recommend such actions or beliefs.”37 Persuasive 
technologies exhibit what Bogost calls “low process intensity” in terms 
of stimulating decision-making and choice, by attempting to persuade 
through habit formation independent of modeling interactive real-life 
systems (“high process intensity”) in a persuasive videogame.38 Thus, he 
concludes, a persuasive technology should be more accurately described 
as a “manipulation technology.”39
Here, we see the significance of connecting the preference for cer-
tain types of videogames—expressive videogames that make argu-
ments about political topics—to underlying theoretical assumptions. 

44  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Bogost’s criticism of Fogg constitutes what I view as a medium-specific 
version of what Lanham dubbed the “weak defense” of rhetoric and 
establishes an explicit split for videogame rhetorics between expressive 
­(rhetorical videogames) and mundane (persuasive technologies). The 
weak and strong defenses are two common answers to what Lanham 
calls the “Q ­Question,” in honor of Quintilian, who infamously asked 
and avoided answering the following question: “Is the Perfect Orator … 
a good man as well as a good orator?”40 In essence, the Q Question asks 
us to interrogate whether training in rhetoric leads to the production of 
virtue. The weak defense views rhetoric as style and therefore capable 
of untruth and duplicity when measured against an unchanging logi-
cal approach to reality.41 The weak defense stems from Plato, ­Isocrates, 
Quintilian, and most humanists: good people use good rhetoric for 
good causes while the bad kind of rhetoric is employed in bad causes.42 
­Unsurprisingly, rhetoric is historically negated or reduced through the 
weak defense.
In Bogost’s criticism of Fogg, I cannot help but hear the voice of ­Plato’s 
Socrates in “The Gorgias” attempting to distinguish “bad rhetoric” 
from “good rhetoric.” Bogost—like Fogg—is interested in how algorith-
mically derived feedback loops can be persuasive. However, ­Bogost is 
adamant that only certain types of feedback loops—those that model 
­arguments to the mind and not apply them to the body—are non-­
coercive. As Scott Consigny summarizes, rhetorical theorists “from 
Socrates to the present have distinguished good rhetoric, an attempt to 
disclose and communicate the truth in unbiased, reasoned speech from 
bad rhetoric, the use of weighted language and specious argumenta-
tion to conceal facts and bolster one’s cause.”43 In his desire to avoid 
habit (persuasive ­technologies) as coercive, dissimulative, or untruthful, 
­Bogost presupposes that a arhetorical realm—the Platonic ideal form 
of the persuasive game—­exists apart from how persuasion is locally 
manifested through its spatial, cultural, embodied, and technological 
contexts in game design. In turn, Bogost seems to posit an eidetic form 
of videogame rhetoric: the persuasive game as logos or “procedural en-
thymeme.”44 By contrast, persuasive technologies are akin to an “adul-
terated wine,” to invoke ­Aristotle’s description of bad rhetoric.45 For 
Bogost, it is not the outcome of the rhetorical act that it is important 
but the fact that the player is able to develop self-consciousness about 
the effects of his or her own play in relationship to broader cultural is-
sues and “not just instrumental contrivances.”46 In Kant’s terms, Bogost 
wants to help a player maintain rational autonomy to reflect in response 
to rhetorical demonstration through videogames and, in turn, to enable 
him or her to make up his or her own mind free from rhetorical coercion. 
As a result, any account of procedural habits from the perspective of the 
weak defense of procedural rhetoric is going to fall into the realm of the 
non-rhetorical and the coercive.

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  45
Procedural Rhetoric in Barter
To be sure, Bogost is not alone in this opinion. Some of the related 
consequences for rigidly opposing procedural rhetoric against persua-
sive technologies can be clearly seen in how a team of persuasive game 
designers—­Bran Knowles, Benjamin Wohl, Paul Coulton, and Mark 
Lochrie working at Lancaster University in the United Kingdom—­
implicitly drew upon the weak defense to justify immunizing their per-
suasive game, Barter, from Foggian rhetoric.47 Echoing the criticism of 
other game designers, Knowles et al. complain that the computing com-
munity has tended to avoid addressing whether Fogg’s persuasive tech-
nologies or the use of behavior change as rhetoric is “manipulative.”48 
By contrast, Knowles et al. foreground procedural rhetoric in their ex-
planation of Barter, which they designed in response to a clear rhetorical 
exigency: the death of town centers in the United Kingdom.
Not unlike the situation with Walmart in the rural United States, dis-
count prices from UK mega-retail outlets and the convenience of online 
shopping have resulted in a situation where money is shifting away from 
local communities with negative consequences for local entrepreneurs. 
To combat this trend, Knowles et al. take the specific site of Lancaster, 
England, in which some city planners had experimented with local 
­currencies that could be spent outside the community. Knowles et al. 
explicitly channel Bogost in claiming that local currencies fail because:
…local currencies have no inherent rhetorical potential. In other 
words, there is no dialectic element in the currency itself that can 
demonstrate to individuals who are not sold on the genius of local 
spending why it will help revive their community.49
Here, Knowles et al. double down on the weak defense of persuasive 
games in arguing for the inherent superior form of persuasion in interac-
tive dialogical modeling over any other rhetorical forms.
In response, Knowles et al. created Barter as a mobile media app 
that works to encourage members of the community to spend locally. 
­Participating individuals use electronic cards at a mobile terminal to re-
cord customer-to-business and business-to-business transactions. Thus, 
­Barter offers a dynamic map (an extra “information layer”) of where 
money is spent by local consumers as well as the ways in which local 
citizens funnel money to big box stores.50 Echoing Bogost, Knowles 
et al. believe that the interactive logos—empirical evidence or facts of 
­Lancaster citizens’ actual spending habits—is a superior manner of per-
suasion. For Knowles et al., rhetoric is desirable because it can help shift 
attitudes or beliefs; however, rhetoric is only good if Barter can “reveal” 
the ideologies (processes) that “drive social, political, or culture behav-
ior” (i.e., critique) so that they can be reflected upon without coercion.

46  Theorizing Procedural Habits
To make my point of analysis in the weak defense of rhetoric clear, 
I am in no way questioning Bogost’s excellent contributions to videogame 
rhetoric or the purpose of designing persuasive games. My larger goal is 
instead to highlight Thomas Rickert’s observation that “every theory of 
rhetoric implicitly or explicitly organizes and invokes a theory of mate-
riality and the human relation to it” in the context of videogame rheto-
ric.51 By analogy, the weak defense signals that emotions, embodiment, 
and materiality will have no important role in the rhetorical situation 
beyond coercion. Thus, Knowles et al.’s decision to follow Bogost and 
bracket the role of embodiment and materiality is grounded in a partic-
ular ontological assumption about their audience. They presuppose that 
a rational consumer simply does not have enough information available 
about his or her “bad” (unthinking, mechanistic) habits of consumption 
and that if he or she only had access to the correct information, then he 
or she would spend differently. This claim is a classical liberal economic 
assumption coupled with what Sharon Crowley and Debra Hawhee call 
a “just the facts, please” approach to truth in their Ancient Rhetorics for 
Contemporary Students textbook.52 In this approach, an objective real-
ity exists and can be transmitted through language or, in this example, 
videogames with minimal rhetorical contamination.
The Strong Defense and Nature/Culture Mechanism
While procedural rhetoric offers a significant contribution to our field, 
Bogost’s actual understanding of rhetoric—beyond his cognitive/embod-
ied separation—is limited to an instrumental production of an effec-
tive argument—and only an argument—to produce change in emotion 
or belief. Cognitive argumentative appeals are rhetorically expressive 
(as are traditional texts like persuasive games), and embodied non-­
argumentative appeals are not. While Bogost’s work usefully extends 
beyond videogames to include general ways of “making arguments with 
computational systems and for unpacking computational arguments 
others have created,” he also draws a clear distinction between rhetori-
cal and non-rhetorical videogames.53 “Video games,” Bogost maintains, 
“have the power to make arguments, to persuade, to express ideas. But 
they do not do so inevitably.”54 He claims that many educational train-
ing games, such as Driver’s Education simulators, or similar “serious 
games” are not persuasive but instructional, because they do not make 
an argumentative claim.55 As subsequent rhetoric and composition 
scholars have established, Bogost simply does not address or focus on 
how we might account for players’ independent rhetorical activities that 
occur during play or in the texts produced about play.
This limitation undergirds the second major paradigm that rhetoric 
and composition scholars have used to discuss videogame rhetorics: 
variations of epistemic and social-epistemic rhetoric. In Wordplay, Paul 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  47
invokes Burke’s definition of rhetoric—“Wherever there is persuasion, 
there is rhetoric. And wherever there is ‘meaning’ there is persuasion”—
to directly position epistemic rhetoric against procedural rhetoric’s strict 
alignment of rhetoric with argumentation.56 By contrast, Paul maintains:
…all games are persuasive, whether the persuasion is to buy the 
game, level in a certain way, follow a given narrative, buy extra 
goods in a ‘free-to-play’ game, absorb the capitalist lessons of 
­Animal Crossing or the political messages in Tax Invaders.57
Rhetoricians will readily recognize Paul’s thinking as the “Big R” or 
“epistemic rhetoric” paradigm.58 Although variations of epistemic rhet-
oric differ after Robert E. Scott’s seminal treatment, a general thesis 
common to many accounts is that the contingent effects of language 
games and arbitrary symbolic systems mediate any attempt to ground 
a representation of reality independent of discourse.59 Under epistemic 
rhetoric, “Everything,” Edward Schiappa claims, “or virtually every-
thing, can be described as ‘rhetorical’”.60 This epistemic warrant and 
focus on discourse can be found widely throughout other approaches to 
the rhetoric of videogames, both within communication scholarship as 
well rhetoric and composition studies.
It is hardly surprising that a tendency to focus on traditional texts over 
habit-shaping interface design elements finds common ground in Paul’s 
epistemic approach. His theoretical project of “wordplay,” for example, 
characterizes many of the primary ways in which rhetoric and writing 
scholars have engaged videogames by examining rhetorical meaning in 
“the words within and surrounding video games, the design of games 
and society, and the practices of play in games.”61 While he does ac-
knowledge the importance of space, such as playing arcade games in 
public versus private consoles at home,62 Paul primarily locates rhetoric 
in the intersubjective social contexts and discourses that surround the 
play and design of videogames, virtual worlds, and social media games. 
When scholars like Matthew S. S. Johnson seek to examine how gamers 
produce forms of public writing in online spaces about play,63 these 
scholarly pursuits lie within a similar set of intersubjective assumptions 
about how rhetoric is created.
One primary consequence for this epistemic shift is not just that it 
helps us claim any symbolic part of videogame rhetoric as meaningful. 
McAllister’s prior notion of “gamework” helps to explain the political 
implications of grounding the strong defense in epistemology. Published 
in 2004, McAllister’s scholarship actually anticipates Paul’s idea of 
wordplay by a few years. McAllister employs a combination of Marxist 
historical materialism, Burke’s notion of agency, and Barry Brummett’s 
taxonomy of meaning-making to analyze videogames through Douglas 
Kellner’s “multiperspectival” approach to meaning: “the perspectives of 

48  Theorizing Procedural Habits
political economy and production, text analysis and audience reception 
[by] delineating the multiplicity of subject positions, or perspectives, 
through which audiences appropriate culture.”64 McAllister locates 
the production and reception of videogames within a historical dia-
lectic to produce “gamework”: the “medium through which values are 
­articulated and reproduced,” at the level of individual players’ dialectical 
struggles within play spaces as well as those that structure collective de-
sign and play practices.65 To help explore gamework, McAllister defines 
the concept of a “grammar of gamework” by riffing off of Burke’s pen-
tad. McAllister’s grammar is composed of ratios of agents, functions, 
influences, manifestations, and transformative locales.66 It is:
…a description of how meaning may be made and managed spe-
cifically by those who design, market, and play computer games, 
and … simultaneously [offer] a way for computer game scholars to 
talk about the processes and techniques involved in this meaning-­
making process.67
There are no ideologically “neutral” representations in videogames from 
this perspective. A visual depiction of Tomb Raider Lara Croft’s body 
is only ever a contingent product of hegemonic reproductions of gen-
der. Videogames become another site for variations of ideology critique, 
hearkening back to older precedents, such as James Berlin’s efforts to 
direct his first-year writing students to de-bunk male/female or worker/
capitalist binaries in falsely naturalized representations contained in a 
mainstream news article about the state of rural farm life in the state of 
New York.68 Thus, in our field’s terms, a good majority of games stud-
ies scholarship is working through a similar—if implicit—orientation 
toward social constructivism and contingency. We see this when, for 
example, Lisa Nakamura links the disfigured Horde side and the white 
Anglo-Saxon Alliance sides in WoW to a continuation of a racialized or 
postcolonial logic69 and when Mia Consalvo demonstrates how earlier 
versions of the videogame, The Sims, did not allow same-sex couples to 
spawn naturally.70 Examining the role of cultural difference in avatar 
customization in the Final Fantasy series, Gerald A. Voorhees declares 
in a similar vein to Schiappa’s definition, “When every representation is 
in some way ideological it is not possible to speak about representation 
without considering it rhetorical.”71
The Strong Defense: Rejecting Rationalism  
but Retaining Dualism
To be clear, my goal in this chapter is not to offer a comprehensive lit-
erature review of rhetoric and composition scholarship as it relates to 
videogames (although my endnotes in this chapter will point interested 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  49
readers toward a more comprehensive documentation) or of games stud-
ies scholarship that works with critical theory and cultural studies. My 
“Introduction” already listed a number of examples of rhetoric and 
composition scholarship that focused on text-based writing practices 
(expressive/­mundane) as well as various “social-constructivist” forms 
of public writing by videogame players. Neither do I intend, as I will 
make clear throughout Procedural Habits, to set aside the need to find 
political representations in videogames—including their mundane habit-­
shaping elements. Rather, echoing Rickert’s observation about rhetorical 
theories and materiality, I want to identify how an explicit or implicit 
preference for language, social construction, and epistemology makes 
it difficult to treat habit as a rhetorical force in the way that Fogg in-
sists. The problem with epistemic accounts is that they tend to turn on 
an ontological division between social/cultural forces and embodiment/
materiality.
Unsurprisingly, it is Lanham’s counterpart to the weak defense, the 
strong defense of rhetoric, which clearly confirms this distinction. The 
strong defense coincided with rhetoric’s rise to disciplinary prominence 
in the twentieth-century, emerged to counter the sort of rational cogni-
tive subject presupposed by persuasive game designers’ implicit reliance 
on the weak defense. The strong defense holds that rhetoric is epistemic, 
creative, and “determinative” and refuses to establish logic as prior to 
rhetoric.72 Rhetoric creates knowledge rather than conceals, dissim-
ulates, or styles a non-rhetorical logical reality.73 It is absolutely true 
in this regard that epistemic rhetoric avoids a strict Cartesian-dualist 
account.74 Yet, Paul Lynch and Nathaniel Rivers remind us that since 
Lanham argues that social dramas are “all man-made,”75 rhetoric tends 
to remain a “human and discursive affair.”76 One clear consequence of 
locating rhetoric in this split lies in the tendency to reduce embodied or 
rhetorical forces to discourse. In contrasting his own brand of social-­
epistemic rhetoric with postmodernist and poststructuralist literary crit-
icism, Berlin offers a fairly representative move. While he claims that 
he does not want to avoid addressing the “force of the material,” he de-
clares “Only through language do we know and act upon the conditions 
of our experience.”77 Similar to Berlin’s acknowledgment, McAllister’s 
gamework affirms that videogames possess a “psychophysiological 
force.”78 Videogames can create embodied affects that “cause players 
to sweat, to go without food or using the toilet, to get violently angry or 
frustrated, to enable the release of stress,”79 which, he contends, can be 
exploited by developers and advertisers and linked to human-centered 
political economic ideologies. For McAllister, embodiment gains rhe-
torical meaning primarily through the dialectic, “an existential condi-
tion in which struggle and change are the only constants and to which 
all materiality is ­subject.”80 He later writes, “When games are given 
meaning (and also make it) through tactile and psychological prompts, 

50  Theorizing Procedural Habits
they necessarily manifest traces of the dialectical struggles to which 
they are connected.”81 If habit has a role in rhetoric for McAllister’s 
gamework, then it will be primarily in the ways in which habit can be 
connected to a product of a larger human-centered project of capitalist 
commodification.82
It is for these reasons that I believe that variations of epistemic rhetoric 
as well as the de facto focus on language, discourse, and signification 
still retain a mechanistic view of habit—not as an expression of mind-
body dualism, but more in the sense of reducing or bracketing what is 
rhetorically expressive in videogames to discourse or social construction. 
Daniel J. Royer observes that a great deal of epistemic rhetoric, which 
is in part the principle paradigm through which we use to arrive at the 
conclusion that reality is produced rather than reflected by language, is 
indebted to anti-realism. In a notable example, Kant’s a priori synthetic 
reason held that the objects in the world conform to the individual mind 
rather than the other way around.83 Epistemic rhetoric, which informs 
the anti-realist thesis that language and social contexts construct reality, 
rests upon anti-realism, or the general claim that even if there were a 
reality independent of the mind (as Kant’s noumena acknowledged), our 
knowledge of it is invariably mediated through language. In as far as 
­language—philosophical or scientific—cannot give us access to an ob-
jective reality, rhetoric under anti-realism can successfully claim its sta-
tus as knowledge-producing art. Under this framework, to declare that 
an object exists can only ever seem like a useless invocation of naïve re-
alism, because an object amounts to a surface effect of something more 
fundamental—any mechanism through which beings are made mani-
fest to the human (signifiers, power, social forces, cognitive processes). 
Hence, any question of what exists in epistemic rhetoric becomes what 
exists for humans.
It is in the bracketing of materiality within videogame rhetoric and the 
focus on social-epistemic forces where I see the importance of connect-
ing theoretical assumptions about rhetoric to what counts as rhetorically 
expressive in the context of videogame rhetoric. Indeed, this issue with 
materiality is not just specific to videogame rhetoric scholarship, but the 
issue also exists more broadly within rhetoric and composition studies as 
a whole. Consider Jack Selzer’s summary of this legacy:
In history, textualized accounts of historical events have come to 
count as much as the historical events themselves; in anthropology 
and sociology, cultures have been understood as intangible webs of 
discourse more than as aggregates of people and things, the sub-
stance of tangible realities; in studies of gender and ethnicity, the 
emphasis has been on constructions of identity through language 
and other symbol systems; in science, biology and chemistry and 
physics are now understood as collections of texts as much as they 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  51
are efforts to engage and describe the physical world through dis-
crete material practices. Things in themselves, consequently, are 
sometimes being reduced to a function of language: genes, genders, 
jeans, and genetics have all been reconceived recently through the 
prism of language. Words have been mattering more than matter.84
We can clearly add videogames to this list in which forms of writing or 
symbolic action matter more than the sorts of physiological effects the 
videogames produce or the mundane habit-shaping elements that pro-
duce them.
The Turn Toward the Materiality of Rhetoric
It is for this reason why rhetoricians in recent years have begun to ex-
plore material rhetorics away from these sorts of orientations, by point-
ing instead toward a world where embodiment and materiality play a 
role. Consider, for example, the work of actor-network theorist Bruno 
Latour, to whom a growing number in our field have turned to rethink 
rhetoric’s materiality beyond discourse. In direct relationship to how on-
tological approaches to habit reject Kant’s mechanistic reduction, Latour 
argues in We Have Never Been Modern that the “Modern Constitution” 
specifically challenges the Cartesian-Kantian split between active minds 
and passive objects.85 Echoing my criticism of the strong defense of rhet-
oric, ANT researcher Ignacio Farias comments, “[If] the construction 
of reality is mostly understood in epistemological terms, the materials 
and intermediaries involved in the construction are deprived of any 
active role.”86 By contrast, ANT follows Michel Callon’s principle of 
general symmetry, in which each sphere—human and nonhuman, cul-
ture and nature—compose one another through their material forms of 
relationality.
It is because Latour features the role of “things” that researchers in 
our field have drawn upon his work and the work of other theorists 
affiliated with the “nonhuman turn” to examine how rhetoric and writ-
ing practices are shaped by materiality and embodiment in ways that 
exceed human control or knowledge. By now, a number of rhetoricians 
have explored technology, space and place, embodiment, and nature 
(ecocomposition) with a goal of not merely grafting these interests into 
traditional rhetorical focuses, but in suggesting that rhetoric and writing 
processes are more fundamentally entangled with nonhuman agencies 
and these, in turn, shape how we teach and theorize writing. In examin-
ing, for example, how the slogan “Keep Austin Weird” morphed from an 
anti-big-box store slogan on t-shirts and bookmarks to a television com-
mercial slogan by Cingular Wireless, Jenny Edbauer notes how material 
and spatial forms of affect structure how rhetoric circulates through 
ecological forces. “Writing,” she argues:

52  Theorizing Procedural Habits
…is more than a matter of discrete elements (audience, a writer, text, 
tools, ideas) in static relation with one another (a writer types her 
ideas into a computer for an audience who reads the text). Rather, 
writing is distributed across a range of processes and encounters: the 
event of using a keyboard, the encounter of a writing body within a 
space of dis/comfort, the events of writing in an apathetic/energetic/
distant/close group.87
Her work joins previous work by Nedra Reynolds in Geographies of 
Writing88 as well as Paul Prior and Jody Shipka in their use of cultural-­
activity theory to examine how writers use “environment structuring 
and selecting procedures” to maintain focus or, in their example of an 
anthropologist who uses his laundry’s timer buzz, to structure writing.89
To offer another example in passing, a number in our field have also 
been drawn to new materialism in the work of the political philosopher 
Jane Bennett, in her book Vibrant Matter. Bennett identifies one issue 
with the typical project of ideological critique seen in a great deal of 
videogame rhetoric scholarship. She positions her thinking against the 
“historical materialists” of the previous theoretical generation, such as 
Hegel, Marx, and Adorno. Bennett notes:
…that most popular of practices in critical theory, should be used 
sparingly and with caution, because demystification presumes that 
at the heart of any event or process lies a human agency that has 
illicitly been projected into things. This hermeneutics of suspicion 
calls for theorists to be on high alert for signs of the secret truth 
(a human will-to-power) below the false appearance of nonhuman 
agency.90
While in Chapters 4 and 5 I offer a more specific engagement with 
how many of these Latourian and new materialist approaches respec-
tively change the purpose of critique, suffice to say that what Bennett 
is talking about is what is behind McAllister’s gamework, Paul’s word 
play, Mobery’s social-constructivist pedagogy, or any approach that 
views videogames’ forms of embodiment and materiality as stemming 
from a previously settled human-centered theoretical paradigm divorced 
from a complex account for material and embodied contexts. Such is not 
to say that capitalist motives are not important to observe (and Bennett 
is certainly not a fan of capitalism), but her larger point is that there are 
more forms of material agency at play within political reality than these 
human-centered paradigms acknowledge.
To demonstrate this point, Bennett’s new materialist thinking turns 
to theorists who are interested in the vitality of matter, starting from 
­Democritus and Epicurus up through Spinoza and, more recently, Deleuze 
and Guattari, who feature heavily in her thinking. Taken together, these 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  53
thinkers help to inform her understanding of thing theory as the ways 
in which things are “entwined” with human subjectivity.91 For Bennett, 
things do not just serve as constraints to action. A vital materialism 
goes beyond observing that human beings cannot fly because of the way 
our bodies are shaped in relationship to the earth’s gravity. Rather, she 
claims that an inherent vitality acts on the world and can engage in dy-
namic relations that aid and frustrate human intentionality. She writes:
By ‘vitality’ I mean the capacity of things—edibles, commodities, 
storms, metals—not only to impede or block the will and designs 
of humans but also to act as quasi agents or forces with trajectories, 
propensities, or tendencies of their own.92
As an illustrative context, Bennett invokes Deleuze’s concept of assem-
blage to argue that natural environments (physis) are not fixed or static 
but actively composed by the activities of various human and nonhuman 
actors: “Assemblages are ad hoc groupings of diverse elements, of vi-
brant matter of all sorts. Assemblages are living, throbbing confedera-
tions that are able to function despite the persistent presence of energies 
that confound them from within.”93
Conclusion
I will have more to say about Latour and Bennett respectively through-
out Procedural Habits. My primary aim in introducing their work here 
is to gesture toward why I believe Fogg’s work is so important to con-
sider as a limit case for rhetorical conceptions of videogames. When 
Fogg is talking about habits, he is talking about actual non-discursive 
forces that produce effects in digital interfaces. Let me re-visit Grosz’s 
quotation once more from the “Introduction” to Procedural Habits. 
­Regardless of our definition, she states:
Habit is a concept that has been difficult to address for much of 
what passes as postmodernism, for it grounds us firmly in a pre-­
representational real, a real made up of forces that stimulate and 
transform living beings through their ability to accommodate rou-
tines, activities, projects that the emergence of life amidst the real 
requires.94
Simply put, habit, as our “second nature” that emerges through our par-
ticular and non-innate embodied repetitions with vibrant ecologies of 
play and diverse networks of nonhuman agencies, presupposes an orien-
tation to materiality similar to what Latour or Bennnett describe. These 
approaches in the context of the strong and weak defense (and, by ex-
tension, what constitutes an “expressive” form of rhetoric) demonstrate 

54  Theorizing Procedural Habits
that what is at stake is not merely “adding” something like procedural 
habits and mundane habit-shaping elements to the rhetorical situation, 
but more radically recasting the expressive/mundane divide to account 
for some of these recent theoretical interests in materiality and embod-
iment. To do so, however, means to theorize and articulate videogame 
rhetoric and habit production as something that is not entirely controlled 
by human agents or social contexts but rather as something that more 
fundamentally is structured by an alternative understanding of how em-
bodiment and materiality work in the rhetorical situation.
While he is not thinking ontologically, it is clear from Latour and 
other rhetoricians’ work in these areas, that the key to taking Fogg’s at-
tention to mundane habit-shaping elements seriously as rhetorical actors 
lies in better understanding how habit relates to materiality, embodi-
ment, and actor-networks—exactly my goals in Chapter 2. Outside of 
a direct engagement with videogames, our field also has some previous 
models of digital rhetoric that address these factors, including Brooke’s 
argument that new media rhetoric researchers need to examine a user’s 
actual “ecology of practice” in a new media interface rather than limit 
their analyses to the procedures of use dictated by designers.95 It is clear 
that these approaches intuitively grasp the fact that users’ or players’ in-
dividual or collective habits of use or play dynamically shape the rhetor-
ical content of videogames or digital interfaces more broadly. However, 
with respect to the ways in which the weak and strong defenses of rhet-
oric can bracket habit’s role, it is critical to clarify what it would mean 
to call these player-driven processes the result of a habit as opposed to 
an intentional designer-driven rhetorical action or socially constructed 
form of rhetorical interaction.
Notes
	 1	 B.J. Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We 
Think and Do (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003).
	 2	 James P. Zappen, “Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory,” Techni-
cal Communication Quarterly 14, no. 3 (2005): 320.
	 3	 Douglas Eyman,  Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 2015).
	 4	 Ryan Wynia, “Behavior Design Bootcamp with Dr. Fogg,” Technori, Oct. 26,  
2012, accessed on May 15, 2017, http://technori.com/2012/10/2612-behavior- 
design-bootcamp/.
	 5	 Star Wars: Battlefront (Redwood City, CA: Electronic Arts, 2015), videogame.
	 6	 Fogg, Persuasive Technology, x.
	 7	 Ibid., 1.
	 8	 Ibid., 24.
	 9	 He tellingly cites a single essay by Karen Schriver. For Schriver, rhetoric 
exists primarily in the arrangement, style (font choice), or form of the doc-
ument but does not extend to encompass the creation of a document’s ratio-
nal, argumentative, or logical content. Karen Schriver, “Document Design 

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  55
from 1980 to 1989. Technical Report No. 39,” Technical Communication 
36, no. 4 (1990): 316–333.
	10	 Fogg, Persuasive, 24; Ibid., 21.
	11	 Ibid., 49.
	12	 Ibid., 49–50.
	13	 Ibid., 50.
	14	 Ibid., 41–43.
	15	 Ibid., 7.
	16	 Ibid., 32.
	17	 “Behavior Design,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed 
May 15, 2017, http://captology.stanford.edu/projects/behaviordesign.html.
	18	 “Behavior Wizard,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed 
May 15, 2017, http://captology.stanford.edu/projects/behavior-wizard-2.html.
	19	 “BlueDot Behaviors,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed  
May 15, 2017, www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/bluedot- 
behaviors-preview/.
	20	 “Blackdot Behaviors,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed  
May 15, 2017. www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/blackdot- 
behaviors-preview/.
	21	 Fogg, Persuasive Technology, 51.
	22	To be sure, behaviorism versus “cognitivism” remains a subject that contem-
porary games studies scholars have been interested in as well, particularly 
researchers and designers who are interested in education games. Debates 
occur over the use of external positive and negative reinforcement to produce 
superficial forms of learning, such as memorization (behaviorism), in com-
parison to the forms of deeper metacognitive learning (cognitivism) through 
more expressive or creative games. For example, consider any iteration of 
the popular math learning game, Math Blaster, in which players learn alge-
bra through repetition and immediate rewards after each correct response. 
By contrast, consider Markuss Piersson’s sandbox game Minecraft, which 
can be played by children of a similar age as those who are learning basic 
algebra. Minecraft offers players a 3D, fully manipulable world in which 
virtually any procedurally generated element (trees, sheep, minerals) can be 
mined into basic building block elements in order to build more complex in-
game elements (fire, weapons, forges) or, more basically, to create any possi-
ble sort of construction that a player can imagine. ­Procedurally, ­Minecraft 
teaches players lessons of the more cognitive or expressive sort, while Math 
Blaster limits learning to a superficial form of memorization without the 
ability to develop the former’s deeper creative knowledges. I have more to 
say about this distinction, but it is worth observing that even when some 
researchers have sought to overcome the limitations of early behaviorists, 
like Skinner (who argued that our entire lives could be reduced to stimulus-­
response explanations), even more nuanced approaches to behaviorism still 
tend to be figured as manipulative. Nevertheless, behaviorism remains an 
object of discussion, whether it is arguing against the use of fixed reinforce-
ment schedules in game design (i.e., when an organism comes to expect a re-
ward in relationship to a certain stimulus, it decreases activity until it knows 
that the stimulus will occur again) or fixed variable rewards (i.e., players 
can never entirely predict when a reward will occur or, similar to the World 
of Warcraft’s random loot spawning mechanism, never be sure what the 
quality or who the actual recipient will be). Markus Piersson, Minecraft, 
(Mojang, March 2009), videogame; see also Michael Filsecker and Judith 
Bundegens-Kosten, “Behaviorism, Constructivism, and Communities of 

56  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Practice: How Pedagogic Theories Help Us Understand Game-Based Lan-
guage and Learning,” in Digital Games in Language Learning and Teach-
ing, ed. Hayo Rienders (New York: Palgrave Macmillin, 2010), 50–69.
	23	 Fogg, Persuasive Technology, 51.
	24	 Ibid., 51.
	25	“Behavior Design,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed 
May 15, 2017, http://captology.stanford.edu/projects/behaviordesign.html.
	26	 Kenneth Burke, “(Nonsymbolic) Motion/ (Symbolic) Action,” Critical Inquiry 
4, no. 4 (1978), 809.
	27	 Skinner’s classical conditioning has been called into question by cognitive 
psychologists (Chomsky), who have questioned whether lab work performed 
on animals could be extended to humans. Echoing Burke’s conceptualiza-
tion of terministic screens, Campbell rightly worries that grounding rhetoric 
in a series of behavioral stimuli explained by the field of psychology will 
cause rhetoric to lose any epistemic and therefore disciplinary power. Karlyn 
Kohrs Cambell, “The Ontological Foundations of Rhetorical Theory,” Phi-
losophy and Rhetoric 3, no. 2 (Spring, 1970): 97–108.
	28	 Fogg, Persuasive Technology, 36.
	29	 Brandon Nyhan, Jason Reifler, Sean Richey, and Gary L. Fre, “Effective 
Messages in Vaccine Promotion: A Randomized Trial,” Pediatrics 133, no. 
4 (Apr. 2014): 1–8.
	30	 While I largely agree with Kohn, I am wary of the fact that his division 
between seduction and “force” parallels that between rhetoric versus phi-
losophy. Alfie Kohn, Unconditional Parenting: Moving from Rewards and 
Punishments to Love and Reason (New York: Atria Books, 2005).
	31	 Juho Hamari, Jonna Koivisto, and Tuomas Pakkanen, “Do Persuasive Tech-
nologies Persuade? A Review of Empirical Studies” in Persuasive Technol-
ogy 9th International Conference Proceedings, Padua, Italy, May 21–23, 
2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8462 (2014), 118.
	32	 Brian Sutton-Smith, The Ambiguity of Play (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1997).
	33	 Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames 
­(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2007), 28.
	34	Gonzalo Frasca, September 12 (Uruguay: Powerful Robot Games, 2003), 
videogame.
	35	 Airport Security (The Arcade Wire: Persuasive Games.org, 2006), videogame. 
	36	 Jeff Pruchnic, Rhetoric and Ethics in the Cybernetic Age: The Transhuman 
Condition (New York: Routledge, 2014), 183 n.6.
	37	 Bogost, Persuasive Games, 60–61.
	38	 Ibid., 61–62. As it turns out, this division between logical or cognitive 
demonstration (good rhetoric) and embodied ‘suasion (bad rhetoric) is actu-
ally quite central to Bogost’s influential corpus of research on videogames, 
including his polemical rejection of gamification as an inferior species of 
the Genus persuasive games. Bogost’s subsequent definition of “performa-
tive gameplay” offers a similar binary between emotions/­embodiment and 
cognition; Ian, Bogost, How to Do Things with Videogames ­(Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011). Elsewhere, he distinguishes be-
tween the Wii Fit (clearly non-rhetorical) and the alternative reality game 
World Without Oil (rhetorical) on the grounds that the first is muscu-
lar and the second social and cognitive (“Funemployed ­Playborers”); Ian 
­Bogost, “Funemployed Playborers,” DIS, 2015, accessed May 15, 2017, 
http://dismagazine.com/disillusioned/discussion-disillusioned/70440/
ian-bogost-funemployed-playborers/

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  57
	39	 Bogost, Persuasive Games, 62.
	40	Richard A. Lanham, The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the 
Arts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 155.
	41	 Ibid., 156.
	42	 Ibid., 155.
	43	 Scot Consigny, “Rhetorical Concealment,” Rhetoric 78. Proceedings of 
Theory of Rhetoric: An Interdisciplinary Conference, ed. Robert L. Brown, 
Jr. and Martin J. Steinmann (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Center 
for Advanced Studies in Language, Style, and Literary Theory, 1979), 35.
	44	Bogost, Persuasive Games, 43, 45.
	45	 Aristotle, On Rhetoric: Toward a Theory of Civic Discourse, trans. George 
Kennedy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), III.2.4. 1404e.
	46	Bogost, “Funemployed Playborers.”
	47	 Bran Knowles, Benjamin Wohl, Paul Coulton, and Mark Lochrie, Barter 
(University of Lancaster, 2014), videogame.
	48	 Bran Knowles, Benjamin Wohl, Paul Coulton, and Mark Lochrie. “‘Con-
vince Us’: An Argument for the Morality of Persuasion.” CSCW Workshop 
Proceedings. 9 (2014): 2.
	49	 Ibid., 2.
	50	 Ibid., 2.
	51	 Thomas Rickert, Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2013), 153.
	52	 Sharon Crowley and Debra Hawhee, Ancient Rhetorics for Contemporary 
Students (Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1999), 17.
	53	 Bogost, Persuasive Games, 3.
	54	 Ian Bogost, “The Rhetoric of Video Games,” in The Ecology of Games: 
Connecting Youth, Games, and Learning, ed. Katie Salen (Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press, 2008), 137.
	55	 Bogost, Persuasive Games, 54–58.
	56	 Kenneth Burke, Rhetoric of Motives (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1968), 173.
	57	 Christopher A. Paul, “Process, Paratexts, and Texts: Rhetorical Analysis in 
Virtual Worlds,” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 3, no. 1 (2010): 8.
	58	 See Alan G. Gross, “What If We’re Not Producing Knowledge? ­Critical 
­Reflections on the Rhetorical Criticism of Science,” in Rhetorical ­Hermeneutics, 
ed. Alan G. Gross and William M. Keith (New York: SUNY Press, 1996); 
­Gaonkar, Dilip Parameshwar, “The Idea of Rhetoric in the Rhetoric of ­Science,” 
Rhetorical Hermeneutics, ed. Alan G. Gross and ­William M. Keith (New York: 
SUNY Press, 1996).
	59	 Robert L. Scott, “On Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic,” Central States Speech 
Journal 18, no. 1 (1967): 13; Richard A. Cherwitz and Darwin, Thomas J., 
“Why the ‘Epistemic’ in Epistemic Rhetoric? The Paradox of Rhetoric as 
Performance,” Text and Performance Quarterly 15 (1995): 192.
	60	 Edward Schiappa, “Second Thoughts on the Critiques of Big Rhetoric,” Phi-
losophy and Rhetoric 34, no. 3 (2001): 260.
	61	 Christopher A. Paul, Wordplay and the Discourse of Videogames: Analyz-
ing Words, Design, and Play (New York: Routledge, 2013), 2.
	62	 Ibid., 68–83.
	63	 Matthew S.S. Johnson, “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces,” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
	64	Douglas Kellner, “Critical Theory and British Cultural Studies: The Missed 
Articulation,” in Cultural Methodologies, ed. Jim McGuigan (London: Sage, 
1997), 25 quoted in Ken S. McAllister, Game Work: Language, Power, and 

58  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Computer Game Culture (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 2004), 3. 
McAllister and Moeller’s special issue of Work and Days on videogames also 
contains multiple essays that take a similar orientation toward capitalism 
and videogames.
	65	 McAllister, Game Work, 26.
	66	 Ibid., 44.
	67	 Ibid., 43. See also Ken S. McAllister and Ryan Moeller, editors, Capitalizing 
on Play: The Politics of Computer Gaming in Works and Days, 43/44. 22 
(2004).
	68	 James A. Berlin, “Poststructuralism, Cultural Studies, and the Composi-
tion Classroom: Postmodern Theory in Practice,” Rhetoric Review 11, no. 1 
­(Autumn, 1992): 28.
	69	 Lisa Nakamura, “Don’t Hate the Player, Hate the Game: The Racialization 
of Labor in the World of Warcraft,” Critical Studies in Media Communica-
tion 26, no. 2 (Jun. 2009): 128–144.
	70	 Mia Consalvo, “Hot Dates and Fairy-Tale Romances: Studying Sexuality in 
Video games,” in The Video Game Theory Reader, ed. Mark J.P. Wolf and 
Bernard Perron (New York: Routledge, 2003), 171–194.
	71	 Gerald A. Voorhees, “The Character of Difference: Procedurality, Rhetoric, 
and Roleplaying Games,” Game Studies 9, no. 2 (2009), accessed May 15, 
2017. http://gamestudies.org/0902/articles/Voorhees
	72	 Lanhan, Electronic Word, 156. Bogost is not alone in this regard. Gee’s reply 
to games studies researcher Jonne Arjoranta’s effort to raise the issue of em-
bodied cognition and videogames as part of procedural literacy is telling. Gee 
admits that he is much more interested in how “gamers can project their own 
goals and values” in a game rather than in Arjoranta’s exploration of how 
the game, controller, screen, or environmental situatedness might project its 
own relations and forces onto the player’s body and mind. James Paul Gee, 
“Discussant’s Reply,” First Person Scholar, March 5, 2014, accessed May 
15, 2017, www.firstpersonscholar.com/games-and-embodied-cognition/.
	73	 To be fair to Lanham’s rich and complex discussion of the strong defense, 
what I am diagnosing here are specific articulations of the strong defense as 
it has been applied to videogames. The weak and strong defenses function 
more like ratios to help us classify different approaches to rhetoric. ­Lanham, 
certainly, was a reader of McLuhan and was in no way presupposing a 
strict Cartesian subject. In fact, neither are proponents of social-epistemic 
rhetoric. 
	74	 As an example, consider Voorhees’s Burkean analysis of Japanese designer 
Hironobu Sakaguchi’s Final Fantasy series: “Firmly grounded in the lessons 
of Marx and Freud, I reject Cartesian constructions of the subject/player 
as the coherent and self-sovereign arbiter of his or her own experience.” 
Gerald A. Voorhees, Game Studies, http://gamestudies.org/0902/articles/
Voorhees.
	75	 Lanham, Electronic Word, 156 quoted in Paul Lynch and Nathaniel A. 
­Rivers, “Introduction: Do You Believe in Rhetoric and Composition?” in 
Thinking with Bruno Latour in Rhetoric and Composition, ed. Paul Lynch 
and Nathaniel Rivers (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2016), 3.
	76	 Ibid., 3.
	77	Berlin, “Poststructuralism,” 21.
	78	 McAllister, Game Work, 14–18. See also Dave Jones, “Accounting for Af-
fective Response in Videogames,” presentation at SIGDOC’09, Bloomington, 
Indiana, October 5–7, 2009.
	79	 Ibid., 52.
	80	 Ibid., 29.

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  59
	81	 Ibid., 134.
	82	 For example, consider Darin Payne’s analysis of Lionhead Studios videog-
ame Black and White. The latter offers an ideological reinforcement of the 
West’s neo-colonialist nation-building practices, as the player controls a god 
who takes over numerous island villages. Payne cites embodiment as part 
of rhetoric, but his later references to Berlin’s social-epistemic rhetoric ef-
fectively limits the former to “discourses and more broadly defined textual 
practices and material signifiers [which] are always-already situated in and 
contributive to a social order, even when they appear on their surface to be 
apolitical or benign.” It will be the discursive value assigned to particular 
habits of play in which rhetorical analysts attempt to locate covert work-
ings of power to expose underlying social hegemonies. Darin Payne, “The 
­Production and Consumption of a Nation-Building Ideology: Contemporary 
Rhetoric and Normative Entertainment in Black and White.” Works and 
Days 43/44, no. 22 (2004): 120, 125.
	83	 In Kant’s third critique (judgment), a subject’s apprehension is essential to 
give an object its reality for humans.
	84	Jack Selzer, “Habeas Corpus,” in Rhetorical Bodies, ed. Jack Selzer and 
Sharon Crowley (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1999), 4 quoted 
in Scot Barnett and Casey Boyle, “Introduction: Rhetorical Ontology, or, 
How to Do Things with Things,” in Rhetoric, Through Everyday Things, 
ed. Scot Barnett and Casey Boyle (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 
2016), 4–5.
	85	 Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans. Catherine Porter 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 67.
	86	 Ignacio Farias, “Introduction: Decentering the Object of Urban Studies,” 
in Urban Assemblages, ed. Ignacio Farias and Thomas Bender (New York: 
Routledge, 2012), 13.
	87	 Jenny Edbauer, “Unframing Models of Public Deliberation: From Rhetorical 
Situation to Rhetorical Ecologies,” RSQ 35, no. 4 (2005): 13.
	88	 Nedra Reynolds, Geographies of Writing: Inhabiting Places and Encountering 
Difference (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2004).
	89	 Paul Prior and Jody Shipka, “Chronotopic Lamination: Tracing the Con-
tours of Literate Activity Theory,” in Writing Selves/Writing Societies, ed. 
Charles Bazerman and David Russell (Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearing-
house, 2003), 180–182.
	90	Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010), xiv. 
	91	 Ibid., 16.
	92	 Ibid., vii.
	93	 Ibid., 22–23.
	94	 Elizabeth A. Grosz, “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us,” 
Body & Society 19 (2013): 218.
	95	 Collin Gifford Brooke, Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media 
(New York: Hampton, 2009), 49.
Bibliography
Airport Security. The Arcade Wire: Persuasive Games.org, 2006. Videogame.
Aristotle. On Rhetoric: Toward a Theory of Civic Discourse. Translated by 
George Kennedy. 2nd Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Barnett, Scot, and Casey Boyle. “Introduction: Rhetorical Ontology, or, How 
to Do Things with Things.” In Rhetoric, Through Everyday Things, edited 

60  Theorizing Procedural Habits
by Scot Barnett and Casey Boyle, 1–16. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama 
Press, 2016.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
“Behavior Design.” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015. Accessed May 
15, 2017. http://captology.stanford.edu/projects/behaviordesign.html
“Behavior Wizard.” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015. Accessed May 
15, 2017. http://captology.stanford.edu/projects/behavior-wizard-2.html
Berlin, James A. “Poststructuralism, Cultural Studies, and the Composition Class-
room: Postmodern Theory in Practice.” Rhetoric Review 11, no. 1 (Autumn, 
1992): 16–33.
———. Rhetoric and Reality: Writing Instruction in American Colleges, 1900–
1985. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1987.
“Blackdot Behaviors.” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015. Accessed  
May 15, 2017. www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/blackdot- 
behaviors-preview/
“BlueDot Behaviors.” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015. Accessed  
May 15, 2017, www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/bluedot- 
behaviors-preview/
Bogost, Ian. “Funemployed Playborers.” DIS. 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://dismagazine.com/disillusioned/discussion-disillusioned/70440/
ian-bogost-funemployed-playborers/
———. How to Do Things with Videogames. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2011.
———. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT, 2007.
———. “The Rhetoric of Video Games.” In The Ecology of Games: Connecting 
Youth, Games, and Learning, edited by Katie Salen, 117–140. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, 2008.
Brooke, Collin Gifford. Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media. 
New York: Hampton, 2009.
Burke, Kenneth. “(Nonsymbolic) Motion/(Symbolic) Action.” Critical Inquiry 
4, no. 4 (1978): 809–838.
———. Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1968.
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs. “The Ontological Foundations of Rhetorical Theory.” 
Philosophy and Rhetoric 3, no. 2 (Spring, 1970): 97–108.
Cherwitz, Richard A., and Darwin, Thomas J. “Why the ‘Epistemic’ in Epistemic 
Rhetoric? The Paradox of Rhetoric as Performance.” Text and Performance 
Quarterly 15 (1995): 189–205.
Consalvo, Mia. “Hot Dates and Fairy-Tale Romances: Studying Sexuality in 
Video games.” In The Video Game Theory Reader, edited by Mark J.P. Wolf 
and Bernard Perron, 171–194. New York: Routledge, 2003.
Consigny, Scot. “Rhetorical Concealment.” In Rhetoric 78. Proceedings of 
Theory of Rhetoric: An Interdisciplinary Conference, edited by Robert L. 
Brown, Jr., and Martin J. Steinmann J, 35–43. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Center for Advanced Studies in Language, Style, and Literary 
Theory, 1979.
Crowley, Sharon, and Debra Hawhee. Ancient Rhetorics for Contemporary 
Students. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1999.

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  61
Edbauer, Jenny. “Unframing Models of Public Deliberation: From Rhetorical 
Situation to Rhetorical Ecologies.” RSQ 35, no. 4 (2005): 5–24.
Eyman, Douglas. Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 2015.
Farias, Ignacio. “Introduction: Decentering the Object of Urban Studies.” In 
Urban Assemblages, edited by Ignacio Farias and Thomas Bender, 1–24. 
New York: Routledge, 2012.
Filsecker, Michael, and Judith Bundegens-Kosten. “Behaviorism, Constructivism, 
and Communities of Practice: How Pedagogic Theories Help Us Understand 
Game-Based Language and Learning.” In Digital Games in Language Learn-
ing and Teaching, ed. Hayo Rienders, 50–69. New York: Palgrave Macmillin, 
2010.
Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
Fogg, B. J., and Dean Eckles, editors. Mobile Persuasion: 20 Perspectives on 
the Future of Behavior Change. Stanford: Stanford Captology Media, 2007.
Frasca, Gonzalo. September 12. Uruguay: Powerful Robot Games, 2003. 
Videogame.
Gaonkar, Dilip Parameshwar. “The Idea of Rhetoric in the Rhetoric of Sci-
ence.” In Rhetorical Hermeneutics, edited by Alan G. Gross and William M. 
Keith, 25–88. New York: SUNY Press, 1996.
Gee, James Paul. “Discussant’s Reply.” First Person Scholar. March 5, 2014.  
Accessed May 15, 2017. www.firstpersonscholar.com/games-and-embodied- 
cognition/
Gross, Alan G. “What If We’re Not Producing Knowledge? Critical Reflections 
on the Rhetorical Criticism of Science.” In Rhetorical Hermeneutics, edited 
by Alan G. Gross and William M. Keith, 138–155. New York: SUNY Press, 
1996.
Grosz, Elizabeth A. “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us.” Body & 
Society 19 (2013): 217–239.
Hawhee, Debra. Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece. Austin: 
University of Texas, 2004.
Hamari, Juho, Jonna Koivisto, and Tuomas Pakkanen. “Do Persuasive Tech-
nologies Persuade? A Review of Empirical Studies.” Persuasive Technology 
9th International Conference Proceedings, Padua, Italy (May 21–23, 2014), 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8462 (2014), 118.
Johnson, Matthew S.S. “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces.” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
Jones, Dave. “Accounting for Affective Response in Videogames.” Presentation 
at SIGDOC’09. Bloomington, Indiana. October 5–7, 2009.
Kellner, Douglas. “Critical Theory and British Cultural Studies: The Missed 
Articulation.” In Cultural Methodologies,  edited by Jim McGuigan, 12–41. 
London: Sage, 1997.
Kohn, Alfie. Unconditional Parenting: Moving from Rewards and Punishments 
to Love and Reason. New York: Atria Books, 2005.
Knowles, Bran, Benjamin Wohl, Paul Coulton, and Mark Lochrie. Barter. 
Lancaster: University of Lancaster, 2014. Videogame.
———. “‘Convince Us’: An Argument for the Morality of Persuasion.” CSCW 
Workshop Proceedings 9 (2014): 1–5.

62  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Lanham, Richard A. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the 
Arts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Latour, Bruno. The Pasteurization of France. Translated by Alan Sheridan and 
John Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
———. We Have Never Been Modern. Translated by Catherine Porter. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1993.
Losh, Elizabeth M. Virtualpolitik: An Electronic History of Government 
­Media-making in a Time of War, Scandal, Disaster, Miscommunication, and 
Mistakes. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2009.
Lynch, Paul, and Nathaniel A. Rivers. “Introduction: Do You Believe in 
­Rhetoric and Composition?” In Thinking with Bruno Latour in Rhetoric and 
Composition, edited by Paul Lynch and Nathaniel Rivers, 1–22. Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois University Press, 2016.
McAllister, Ken S. Game Work: Language, Power, and Computer Game Culture. 
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 2004.
McAllister, Ken S. and Ryan Moeller, editors. Capitalizing on Play: The Politics 
of Computer Gaming in Works and Days. 43/44. 22 (2004).
Nakamura, Lisa. “Don’t Hate the Player, Hate the Game: The Racialization of 
Labor in the World of Warcraft.” Critical Studies in Media Communication 
26, no. 2 (Jun. 2009): 128–144.
Nyhan, Brandon, Jason Reifler, Sean Richey, and Gary L. Fre. “Effective Mes-
sages in Vaccine Promotion: A Randomized Trial.” Pediatrics 133, no. 4 (Apr. 
2014): 1–8.
Payne, Darin. “The Production and Consumption of a Nation-Building Ide-
ology: Contemporary Rhetoric and Normative Entertainment in Black and 
White.” Works and Days 43/44, no. 22 (2004): 119–35
Paul, Christopher A. “Process, Paratexts, and Texts: Rhetorical Analysis in Virtual 
Worlds.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 3, no. 1 (2010): 4–17.
———. Wordplay and the Discourse of Videogames: Analyzing Words, Design, 
and Play. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Piersson, Markus. Minecraft. Mojang, March 2009. Videogame.
Prior, Paul, and Jody Shipka. “Chronotopic Lamination: Tracing the Contours 
of Literate Activity Theory.” In Writing Selves/Writing Societies, edited by 
Charles Bazerman and David Russell, 180–238. Fort Collins, CO: WAC 
Clearinghouse, 2003.
Pruchnic, Jeff. Rhetoric and Ethics in the Cybernetic Age: The Transhuman 
Condition. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Rickert, Thomas. Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2013.
Reynolds, Nedra. Geographies of Writing: Inhabiting Places and Encountering 
Difference. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2004.
Royer, Daniel J. “New Challenges to Epistemic Rhetoric.” Rhetoric Review 9, 
no. 2 (Spring 1991): 282–297.
Schiappa, Edward. “Second Thoughts on the Critiques of Big Rhetoric.” Philos-
ophy and Rhetoric 34, no. 3 (2001): 260–274.
Schriver, Karen. “Document Design from 1980 to 1989. Technical Report No. 
39.” Technical Communication 36, no. 4 (1990): 316–333.
Scott, Robert L. “On Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic.” Central States Speech 
Journal 18, no. 1 (1967): 8–17.

Persuasive Technologies in the Rhetoric of Videogames  63
Selzer, Jack. “Habeas Corpus.” In Rhetorical Bodies, edited by Jack Selzer and 
Sharon Crowley, 3–15. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1999.
Star Wars: Battlefront. Redwood City, CA: Electronic Arts, 2015. Videogame.
Sutton-Smith, Brian. The Ambiguity of Play. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1997.
Warnick, Barbara. “Rhetorical Criticism in New Media Environments.” 
RhetoricReview 20 (2001): 60–65.
Wynia, Ryan. “Behavior Design Bootcamp with Dr. Fogg.” Technori. Oct. 26,  
2012. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://technori.com/2012/10/2612-behavior- 
design-bootcamp/.
Voorhees, Gerald A. “The Character of Difference: Procedurality, Rhetoric, and 
Roleplaying Games.” Game Studies 9, no. 2 (2009). Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://gamestudies.org/0902/articles/voorhees.
———. “Discursive Games and Gamic Discourses.” Communication +1 1 
(Sept. 2012): 1–21.
———. “Identification or Desire?” First Person Scholar. May 28, 2014. ­Accessed 
May 15, 2017. www.firstpersonscholar.com/identification-or-desire/.
———. “I Play Therefore I Am: Sid Meier’s Civilization, Turn-Based Strategy 
Games and the Cogito.” Games and Culture 4, no. 3 (2009): 254–275.
Zappen, James P. “Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory.” Technical 
Communication Quarterly 14, no. 3 (2005): 319–325.

In the previous chapter, I laid out the argument that Fogg’s work is use-
ful as a limit case for videogame rhetoric by highlighting an extreme 
view of the importance of habits and what we would typically view as 
mundane interface design elements in videogames that produce them. 
I also indicated that the idea of a persuasive technology requires a more 
complex understanding of the relationship between habit and rhetoric to 
understand how habits function in rhetoric for players’ creative rhetori-
cal actions as well. It is therefore necessary to expand the idea of persua-
sive technologies in this chapter through what I am calling procedural 
habits. Where mechanism in videogame rhetoric circumscribes habit’s 
role in rhetoric to the weak defense (mind/body dualism) or the strong 
defense (culture/nature dualism), procedural habits expands these ac-
counts by exploring how non-mechanistic habits co-constitute the ways 
in which we think, reason, write, and communicate through the play 
and design of videogames, including the role of social, environmental, 
and material contexts that structure these activities. Procedural habits 
is what enables us to use the idea of a mundane habit-shaping design 
element—which Fogg’s work foregrounds—as a site through which to 
rethink the expressive/mundane boundaries to argue that mundane vid-
eogame design elements are equally as expressive rhetorical actors as 
traditional texts.
The first section of this chapter establishes a theoretical basis for 
procedural habits through one of the earliest non-mechanistic concep-
tions of habit: Aristotle’s concept of hexis. It is true that I could just 
as easily start with more recent theoretical work on habit, such as 
Catherine ­Malabou’s work on “plasticity.” Taken from the Greek verb 
plassein, plasticity denotes how bodies “take form (as in the plasticity 
of clay) and to give form (as in the plastic arts and plastic surgery).”1 
­Malabou argues that the plasticity of the body is not elastic (i.e., 
springing back to its original form) and fixed but malleable in relation-
ship to the environments that we form particular habits within. Even 
prior to Malabou, many twentieth-century continental theorists, such 
as Bergson, Bourdieu, or Deleuze, also offer similar non-mechanistic 
conceptions of habit that are not grounded in virtue ethics, as do the 
2	
From Persuasive Technologies 
to Procedural Habits

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  65
American pragmatist philosophers like John Dewey and William James. 
­Nevertheless, ­Aristotle remains an important starting place for proce-
dural habits. Far from departing from Aristotle’s discussion of hexis, 
the philosopher Claire Carlisle argues that twentieth- and twenty-­first 
century non-mechanistic treatments like plasticity “[have] much in 
­common with far older concepts of disposition, habit, and tendency, 
and even hexis itself.”2 Most—if not all—non-mechanistic theories of 
habit, Carlisle continues, “simply elaborate the Aristotelian thesis that 
moral virtue is ‘the child of habit [ethos]’, which ‘ends up as our [second] 
nature’ [physis].”3 While videogame rhetoric scholarship and, indeed, 
digital rhetoric frequently treat ethos as an artistic proof (pisteis), I high-
light how ­Aristotle also ­discusses ethos as an ongoing process of habit-
uation through a rhetor’s lifelong ­adaptation to his social and physical 
environments. As ­individuals mature, ethos forms into a hexis, which 
characterizes the achievement of a semi-­permanent and non-mechanistic 
second nature—a habit—that guides creative ethical conduct, rhetorical 
actions, and even thought itself.
In the second section of this chapter, I suggest that the basic theoretical 
framework of Aristotelian hexis is sufficient to illustrate several primary 
implications of procedural habits for videogame rhetoric, which the sub-
sequent case studies illustrate. First, and directly related to researchers’ 
conceptions of videogame rhetoric, procedural habits form regardless 
of whether a particular habit-shaping mechanism is present. The pres-
ence or absence of a habit-shaping mechanism does not allow us to avoid 
theorizing how expressive and mundane forms of rhetoric form habits 
(hexeis)—a point I demonstrate by considering how ethical dispositions 
can form through structural (Foggian) opportunities to behave charita-
bly while playing the MMORPG (Massively Multiplayer Online Role-­
Playing Game) WoW (World of Warcraft). Secondly, and following from 
the first point, procedural habits are non-discursive in nature, because 
they form in response to the agency of the environmental objects around 
us. I briefly feature Ravaisson’s Darwinian extension of ­Aristotle’s hexis 
to demonstrate that procedural habits differ from other forms of em-
bodiment because they are grounded in repetition and the creation of a 
semi-permanent (but changeable) form through the incorporation of a 
habit into a body by lessening our bodily attention to the strength of the 
original environmental trigger. I also examine some points of overlap and 
departure between procedural habits and rhetoricians’ current interests 
in the vibrancy of matter, such as Thomas Rickert’s discussion of “ambi-
ent rhetoric,” to clarify whether procedural habits are rhetorical.4
Thirdly, procedural habits are not (always) forms of mindless repeti-
tion; instead, repetition can serve as a sign of a player’s active refinement 
in a localized ecology of play even when performing what seems like re-
petitive embodied actions. To highlight this point, I offer a brief compar-
ison of the philosopher Richard Sennett’s discussion of the “craftsman” 

66  Theorizing Procedural Habits
in the context of examining the operation of a player’s hands on the 
keyboard while playing WoW. Fourthly, and finally, procedural habits 
shifts us from a primary orientation of critique to a mentality of trac-
ing how actual player habits form through play in ­actor-networks or 
assemblages. Echoing my reference at the end of the previous chapter 
to Latour’s ANT or Bennett’s new materialist challenges to the culture/
nature divide, we cannot study a procedural habit produced in a vid-
eogame in isolation from its entire assemblage, nor can we assume that 
a purely human or social motive for producing a procedural habit is 
the rhetorical prime mover. As a result, since procedural habits inform 
players’ dispositions, then it will also be within videogames’ mundane 
habit-shaping elements where we will find opportunities to intervene in 
procedural habits.
Ethos and Hexis as Rhetorical Habituation
While many other ancient Greek terms have been applied or updated 
for digital rhetoric, hexis has enjoyed no parallel renaissance in vid-
eogame rhetoric or digital rhetoric scholarship, even by scholars who 
have revisited ancient Greek thinkers like Isocrates5 or the sophists in 
this context.6 Hexis is also not a term widely encountered in contem-
porary rhetoric and composition research even within the—by now—­
considerable corpus of texts that focus on embodied rhetoric and writing 
practices. ­Nevertheless, it is within Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics 
where we can find one of the earliest and, in my belief, still highly rele-
vant treatments of how ethos shapes the hexeis to offer us a theoretical 
framework in which habits produce our rhetorical practices rather than 
stultify or oppose creative thinking and agency as Kantian mechanism 
holds. Working toward this understanding of hexis, however, first re-
quires a shift from prevailing conceptions among videogame and digital 
rhetoric scholars of ethos as an artistic proof to ethos as an ongoing form 
of character formation. This brief detour through ethos is in no way tan-
gential to my book’s arguments, because conceptions of ethos as artistic 
proof serve as further evidence of the extent to which our field imagines 
the rhetoric of videogames to turn on an expressive/mundane binary.
Among current uses in digital rhetoric scholarship, many of us are 
familiar with Aristotle’s ethos as a manufactured credibility, an instru-
mental artistic techne discussed in Aristotle’s Rhetoric.7 Elizabeth Losh 
offers two representative examples: how a web designer maintains the 
ethos—“the character or image of rhetorical credibility”—of a legisla-
tor’s website, and Tactical Iraqi, the US Marines’ educational training 
simulator that trains soldiers to put on different rhetorical personas in 
their day-to-day interactions with civilian populations.8 These concep-
tions are widely found within videogame rhetoric scholarship, particu-
larly among scholars who have engaged Bogost’s procedural rhetoric. 
For example, Michael A. Evans expands Bogost’s procedural rhetoric 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  67
through the idea of “procedural ethos,” thereby encouraging technical 
communication researchers to analyze usability in persuasive games by 
asking questions, such as:
Is a player convinced that the game play or simulation is a fair and 
just model of reality, that the real world works as represented in the 
procedural rhetoric of the game, and that the designers are present-
ing the whole truth with integrity (arête)?9
These are just some of many other examples of ethos as pisteis in past 
and contemporary digital rhetoric and writing scholarship.10
To be clear, this conception of ethos is accurate and useful for explor-
ing certain rhetorical elements of videogames. However, highlighting 
again my exigency for exploring procedural habits, it is critically import-
ant to connect a given conception of videogame rhetoric to its theoret-
ical underpinnings. In this case, viewing ethos only as an artistic proof 
avoids acknowledging its richer embodied and material connotations in 
a de facto expressive/mundane division. In one of the first essays in rhe-
torical tradition to raise this distinction, Thomas Corts via Liddell and 
Scott’s A Greek-English Lexicon suggests that English translations of 
ethos often conflate two related but distinct meanings: êthos ­(character) 
and ethos (habituation).11 Êthos is akin to a performance or a mask that 
a writer, designer, or player can put on or take off without altering the 
fundamental nature of the inventing subject. In her seminal discussion 
of how the internet impacts scholarly discussions of ethos, Carolyn R. 
Miller offers the classical example of Lysias the logographer’s use of 
ethopoeia to “create in a prepared speech an effective character for the 
accused, who would actually speak the words.”12 We see evidence of this 
tacit pre-fixed rhetorical subject beneath this conception in a response 
to Corts’s essay by George Yoos. The latter offers a tacit confirmation 
of the weak defense of rhetoric that supports this view, complaining 
­“Aristotle’s [emphasis on feigned êthos] invites pretense and dissem-
bling.”13 Not unlike Plato’s general distrust of sophistic rhetoric, Yoos 
is concerned that some essential part of the self will be concealed or 
masked and should instead be revealed through rhetorical production.14
By contrast, the past few decades have seen many researchers reclaim 
ethos in Corts’s second sense: as an ongoing mode of habituation that 
cultivates a dynamically emerging rhetorical self over the course of an 
individual’s life.15 Jodie A. Nicotra confirms that the lines between 
ethos and êthos were porous in many ancient Greek understandings. 
Nicotra revisits the entry from Liddell and Scott’s Lexicon that Corts 
cites to discover that êthos was also defined at times as “an accustomed 
place, haunts and abodes for animals.”16 As a prominent case in point, 
Aristotle’s conception of ethos stems in part from Homeric conceptions 
of ethea (plural of ethos), which characterizes the ways that animals or 
barbarians become habituated to certain repetitive practices of dwelling 

68  Theorizing Procedural Habits
that are specific to particular environments.17 Given this connection to 
habituation, Michael J. Hyde offers one of the first major arguments for 
rhetoricians to move beyond limiting ethos to the ordinary credibility 
or moral character of the speaker, and to theorize ethos as the ways in 
which rhetorical selves fluidly emerge through an ongoing process of 
social and discursive habituation. He declares:
Abiding by this more ‘primordial’ meaning of the term, one can 
understand the phrase ‘the ethos of rhetoric’ to refer to the way 
discourse is used to transform space and time into ‘dwelling place’ 
(ethos; pl. ethea) where people can deliberate about and ‘know to-
gether’ (con-scientia) some matter of interest. Such places define the 
grounds, the abodes or habitats, where a person’s ethics and moral 
character take form and develop.18
Rather than being entirely responsible for setting rhetoric into motion, 
Hyde concludes that rhetors are instead conditioned by how the spaces 
in which we engage in rhetorical activities are shaped by discourses 
that produce them.19 By extension, if our goal is to examine ethos in a 
videogame, then we also would be obliged to start examining how de-
signers’ and players’ rhetorical activities are produced by their dynamic 
relationship to a wide variety of ongoing social forces and contexts. A 
few digital rhetoricians have explored this side as well, such as Kristie 
S. Fleckenstein’s definition of “cyberethos,” which combines Aristotle’s 
ethos with Batesonian cybernetics.20
Hexis and Second Nature
While a productive starting place, Hyde’s approach to ethos still tends 
to ground rhetoric primarily in discourse.21 To actually view these sorts 
of rhetorical activities as stemming from habit requires examining how 
Aristotle’s notion of hexis, which emerges out of ethos, relies upon 
non-purely-discursive or social dispositions that form at the intersection 
between nature and culture to cultivate what he famously calls our “sec-
ond nature” in On Memory and Recollection. While Greek conceptions 
of “nature” include elements of what many of us mean by this term now, 
such as the undeveloped or uncultivated land that opposes developed 
city or urban space, Aristotle’s understanding of physis also refers to 
the development of “character” and “temperament” and, importantly, a 
capacity or potentiality for change in an identity that was by no means 
pre-fixed or established.22 The opening lines of the second book of the 
Nicomachean Ethics confirm this fact, stating:
Excellence of character results from habituation [ethos]—which is 
in fact the source of the name it has acquired [êthikê], the word for 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  69
“character-trait” [êthos] being a slight variation of that for “habitu-
ation” [ethos]. This makes it quite clear that none of the excellences 
of character [êthikê aretê] comes about in us by nature; for no natu-
ral way of being is changed through habituation [ethizetai].23
While Aristotle does place physis and ethos in succession, he also blurs 
the distinction, indicating how the close relationship between ethos and 
physis can seem. Quoting the poet Evenus, Aristotle writes, “[Ethos] 
comes, my friend, by practice year on year—and see: At last this thing we 
practice our own nature is.”24 For Aristotle, our “first” nature (imma-
ture beliefs, natural temperaments, biological characteristics) transform 
into a second nature (mature beliefs, virtues) through ethos. However, 
despite the fact that second nature corresponds to a maturation process, 
Aristotle also indicates that ethos cultivation will continue throughout 
the course of a citizen’s life.
Aristotle therefore calls the achievement of this semi-permanent state 
of mature ethical reasoning a hexis, a central distinguishing feature of 
his virtue ethics. In the context of her discussion of the use of classi-
cal rhetoric for theorizing emotion’s role in composition studies, Ellen 
Quandalh is correct in stating that the virtues are “characteristics of 
habits (hexeis) of feeling and action that develop through activities.”25 
However, her translation of Aristotle’s hexeis as “habits” requires a 
bit of qualification. The Latinization of hexis actually grants habit its 
post-Kantian mechanistic definition: a repeated observable behavior 
pattern that is ingrained and nearly permanent. Indeed, many past in-
terpretations of Aristotle similarly have viewed hexis through the lens 
of mechanism.26 Yet, in contrast to the notion of a “daily habit” in our 
contemporary sense, such as it is good to arrive to class on time (to 
be punctual), a hexis does not always mean that a specific behavior is 
­repeated when presented with a specific stimuli or trigger. Hexis de-
rives from the verb echein, which means “to have or possess.” While 
hexis is also translated as a “state,” “disposition,” or “mode of bodily 
­comportment,” it is almost better understood as an “active having”27 or 
a ­“dynamic equilibrium.”28 A hexis is what produces an ethical action, 
but it is not commensurate with the completed action. To determine if 
one acts virtuously does not actually come from the content of the act 
itself, but, Aristotle claims, from “how an agent holds himself when he 
acts” or “that according to which, with respect to emotions, ‘we are hav-
ing’ (echomen) either well or badly.”29 To paraphrase Socrates’s example 
in The Republic, it is a good ethical habit for individuals to return what 
they have borrowed, but a virtuous person should not return a borrowed 
weapon to a convicted murderer.
Highlighting the importance of habits per se, Aristotle wants to be 
sure that an ethical action results from a semi-permanent disposition—a 
habit—rather than a spontaneous impulse, which may or may not be 

70  Theorizing Procedural Habits
repeated in the future. The borrowed weapon illustration importantly 
confirms that hexis is not a list of rigid commandments to follow like the 
Christian catechism but a cultivated disposition that allows for varied 
responses to particular circumstances. In a particularly telling passage, 
Aristotle says of the hexeis that matters of ethical behavior:
…have as little fixity about them as questions of what is healthful; 
and if this is true of the general rule, it is still more true that its ap-
plication to particular problems admits of no precision. … agents 
are compelled at every step to think out for themselves what the 
circumstances demand.30
Individuals’ unique embodied and environmental circumstances deter-
mine the ethical value of activities according to the golden mean be-
tween excess and deficiency. For example, Aristotle discusses moral 
actions such as fear or confidence. Excessive confidence leads to rash-
ness or overconfidence, while deficiency produces cowardice. The mean 
is courage, which is applied correctly in the right place at the right time 
in the service of eudaimonia (flourishing; happiness)—a term I discuss 
in greater detail in Chapter 6. As a basic illustration, few would accuse 
a child of cowardice for fleeing from a small barking dog. However, 
we also would not give an adult a medal for courage for voluntarily 
standing in front of a herd of stampeding bulls. Rather, the appropriate 
response through the golden mean depends upon our unique configura-
tion of ethos and hexis in relationship to our specific social and physical 
environments.31
As a matter of accuracy, Aristotle does separate intellectual virtues, 
which are brought about by skillful and more cognitive forms of teach-
ing and instruction, from moral virtues (“whereas moral or ethical 
virtue is the product of habit [ethos]”).32 Yet, it is important to affirm 
that this distinction in Aristotle hardly presupposes the privilege of cog-
nitive training over embodied learning. Intellectual and moral ­virtues 
simply represent two different types of habits that we can acquire 
and not superior or inferior means of acquisition.33 Subsequent non-­
mechanistic theorists of habit will simply blur the lines between cogni-
tive and ­embodied habits, to declare, as Ravaisson does, that “Habit, in 
the widest sense, is a general and permanent way of being.”34 Indeed, 
some of the pre-­Platonic thinkers that Aristotle relies upon to inform his 
own thinking of hexis make this lack of an essential division apparent. 
Consider ­Aristotle’s citation of pre-Platonic thinkers’ use of hexis: “For 
­Empedocles says those who change their bodily conditions (hexin) deem 
to change their thought (phronesin).”35 The classicist M.R. Wright in-
terprets this line from Empedocles as “when men change their hexein, 
they change their thinking.”36 Examining Aristotle’s use of this phrase 
in the context of other sophists’ use of physical training as an important 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  71
part of rhetorical pedagogy, Debra Hawhee takes Wright’s translation 
a step further to suggest, “Hexis equals thought. Thought does not 
just happen within the body, it happens as the body.”37 The key shift 
from ­mechanism to hexis lies in the fact that repetition for Aristotle—­
functional, behavior-shaping mechanisms—is not a mechanistic obsta-
cle to thought. Rather, bodily repetition is the condition under which 
thought takes shape through the achievement of a hexis to govern any 
technai, from building a ship to rhetoric.
Procedural Habits versus Persuasive Technologies: 
Four Implications
This cursory—and by no means comprehensive—overview of hexis is 
helpful to establish a theoretical precedent in the rhetorical tradition for 
the idea that I develop throughout this book. If extended to character-
ize the rhetoric of videogames, hexis demonstrates that procedural hab-
its are not mechanistic obstacles to thought alone. Rather, procedural 
habits are also fundamental non-mechanistic conditions of possibility 
to characterize the complex ways in which rhetorical beings—­designers 
and players—form mutable, but enduring dispositions in the world. 
While this shift from mechanistic to non-mechanistic habits may sound 
fairly simple, it actually carries quite far-reaching consequences in terms 
of rethinking the purpose of Fogg’s work for researchers in rhetoric and 
writing studies as well as more broadly in challenging the contemporary 
figuration of habit in the context of public discourses about videogames. 
In this section, I develop my reasons for making this claim by employing 
and extending Aristotle’s hexis to identify four major implications of 
procedural habits to help highlight how procedural habits differ from 
persuasive technologies.
First Implication: The Formation of Procedural Habits 
Does Not Depend on the Presence or Absence  
of a Habit-Shaping Mechanism
Since I claim in the previous chapter that procedural habits could help us 
rethink the value of Fogg’s work in the context of videogames, I want to 
use hexis to ask and answer a fairly basic question: if rhetorical beings 
form dispositions through habits, then can a persuasive technology pro-
duce a hexis? In turn, if the answer to this question is “Yes,” then should 
videogame designers strive to produce more mundane habit-shaping 
mechanisms, gamified Fitbits, and so on, as opposed to composing more 
expressive narratively rich videogames that make arguments? As I un-
derstand his work, Aristotle would not lend his support—at least not 
directly—to the claim that an attempt to change an individual’s disposi-
tion through a nonconscious form of positive and negative reinforcement 

72  Theorizing Procedural Habits
is a form of persuasion. To touch upon Socrates’s example once more, 
Aristotle does not want the same behavior, such as returning a borrowed 
weapon to a madman, to be repeated each time the same trigger (the 
madman) presents itself. Unlike Aristotle, Fogg is not ultimately inter-
ested in connecting our ability to contract habit—beyond a specific de-
sign object of a videogame or gamified app—to how this ability more 
fundamentally speaks of a deeper role for habit in thinking.
However, and this point is critically important to bear in mind, 
­Aristotle does not allow us to bracket or avoid habit-shaping mechanisms 
as an important method for shaping individuals’ dispositions, even if he 
will not directly support the claim that these mechanisms are rhetorical. 
In the Politics, for example, Aristotle offers praise for how the ­Spartans 
trained their young: “It is beneficial … to accustom ­(sunethizein) chil-
dren to the cold right from the time they are small, since this is very 
useful both from the point of view of health and from that of military 
affairs.”38 Aristotle also explores more cognitive or abstract forms of 
learning from parents that sound almost like variations of non-digital 
forms of persuasive technologies, wherein children learn delayed grati-
fication (e.g., “Don’t eat that dog food!”), how to weigh costs and bene-
fits, or likes and dislikes for certain virtues and vices.39 In his discussion 
about how we learn ethical principles (archai), ­Aristotle also claims that 
we use sensation, induction, and habituation as we “study” (theôrein).40 
These former elements work together to produce a form of embodied 
knowledge: “the knowledge that” (to hoti) as opposed to “the knowl-
edge why” (to dioti). Connecting back to hexis, to hoti is in a sense akin 
to the golden mean, because it tells individuals how to act with regard to 
what is pleasurable or repulsive. Once again, ­Aristotle’s thinking impor-
tantly confirms that non-consciously formed habits are not secondary or 
passive background forces in the act of cognition. Rather, these habits 
dynamically structure how we receive and communicate through our 
cultivated dispositions and the environments that we act within.
Let me offer a fairly literal illustration of Aristotle’s hexis in the 
context of a videogame, to demonstrate one way in which procedural 
habits can shift the points of critical emphasis for videogame rhetoric. 
When I was completing my PhD at Clemson University, I was an active 
participant in the Venture Guild in WoW run by two professors at my 
university, Cynthia Haynes and Jan Rune Holmevik. WoW is a fantasy 
MMORPG in which players make decisions about how to customize 
their avatars and character builds (healers, warriors, paladins), negotiate 
interpersonal forms of text- or speech-based interaction during multi-
player raids in dungeons that can takes hours to clear, and, especially, 
form alliances. Alongside these areas of research interest, we can cer-
tainly examine WoW’s various forms of writing, its technical manuals, 
and its forms of public writing in online spaces. As critical media stud-
ies theorists like Lisa Nakamura have observed, we can also connect 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  73
WoW to ideological formations like racism and imperialism. Alexander 
R. Galloway similarly complains about “gold farming” in WoW,41 for 
example, which is a postcolonial practice in which players in econom-
ically impoverished Asian countries use four computers with separate 
accounts simultaneously to do nothing but mine virtual gold all day in 
order to sell it online to wealthy players in (so-called) developed nations.
Yet, we can also examine how WoW shapes players’ hexeis.42 As an 
academic research guild, Venture Guild was composed of a number of 
professors and graduate students primarily in rhetoric and composition 
fields from around the country. While our guild had only 20–40 mem-
bers, let us imagine that we had hundreds of members (Figure 2.1).
Within this hypothetical example, let us say that Venture guild creates 
a social network page with each guild member’s favorite charity, along 
with a link where anyone can click and donate a certain number of dol-
lars on the individual’s behalf. Donors’ names would be listed in the 
guild homepage for positive reinforcement. Consider one player who is 
initially motivated by public popularity. This player donates for multiple 
guild members in hopes of receiving more invitations to raid with higher 
ranking players. First, these actions are motivated by selfish means-ends 
requirements. However, these habitual practices over time may make 
this player more open to the general activity of donating. Over time, this 
player finds himself or herself saying “yes” to donating to worthy causes 
in different social media settings. Perhaps this player eventually leaves 
Venture Guild and stops playing WoW altogether but retains this lifelong 
Figure 2.1  Screenshot of “Raik” (Jan Rune Holmevik’s WoW avatar) in a Venture 
Guild Raid in 2011.

74  Theorizing Procedural Habits
habit. For Aristotle, the original motivation (selfishness) is not important 
if it takes advantage of structural affordances to be charitable. Over 
time, this player has successfully cultivated the hexis of charity, which 
Thomas Aquinas later added to Aristotle’s original list of virtues, such 
as temperance, modesty, and several others.43
Now consider a different player in this Venture Guild scenario. Unlike 
the first player, this player does not have an initial motive of popularity 
with respect to the presence of a structural charity mechanism; rather, 
this player’s be all and end all for MMORPG socialization is to en-
gage in what I might call, after Robert Hariman, “indecorous speech.” 
­Decorum functions as built-in restraints to rhetoric that affirm com-
munity identity standards and behaviors in speech from Cicero to the 
present. Yet, this second player spends her time mocking, trolling, or 
sabotaging Venture Guild’s charity efforts, entirely ignoring the struc-
tural forms of positive reinforcement for charitable behavior. Prior to 
joining Venture Guild, this particular player had been invited by his or 
her partner to join a hard core guild with several self-professed “player 
killers.” While it has many meanings, this description of “player killer” 
emerges from a particular style of role-playing in MMORPGs, often in 
the context of apocalyptic or extinction videogames like Urban Dead, 
in which players control human avatars to fight monsters, such as zom-
bies, in realistic open-world contexts. In these sorts of games, monsters 
can be non-player characters (NPCs) controlled by the computer or 
actual players. While these types of videogames procedurally reward 
players who work together to fight monsters, player killers live for kill-
ing other players, a commitment that in real life has spawned entire 
dedicated ­online player communities, such as Pathetic Bill, Red Rum, 
and Philosophe Knights. This second Venture Guild player did not be-
gin playing videogames with a habitual disposition to introduce may-
hem in MMORPGs, but he or she soon began to emulate and cultivate 
this disposition over time within the hard core guild, which impacted 
his or her dispositional interactions with others in the Venture Guild. 
­Opportunities to participate in vice, along with other embodied, social, 
and ecological forces, helped to cultivate this hexis to the point where 
the Venture Guild’s structural affordance to engage in repetitive chari-
table behavior has little effect at all.
I have several points to raise about this example to highlight what it 
means to study procedural habits in videogame rhetoric alongside and 
yet distinct from a particular habit-shaping design mechanism. First, 
my hypothetical example is actually not that hypothetical in its conclu-
sions. In her pioneering ethnographic study of how WoW players build 
online communities, anthropologist Bonnie A. Nardi argues that while 
WoW can serve as a virtual “risk-free” space of experimentation, such 
as when players want to troll one another, the MMORPG is also a space 
through which the players that she observed were able to cultivate longer 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  75
lasting dispositions, such as “delighted care” and “genuine affection” 
for one another.44 Secondly, Venture Guild’s hypothetical charity dona-
tion structure is undeniably Foggian in nature. When Aristotle claims in 
the Nicomachean Ethics that a person without good friends will never 
achieve eudaimonia (happiness; flourishing), which is the highest end of 
the virtues, what he means is that someone without much social inter-
action will simply have fewer behavioral opportunities to practice being 
a good (or bad) friend and cultivate a hexis.45 We cannot by definition 
form a hexis of charity in WoW or in our daily lives without an opportu-
nity to behave charitably. Undoubtedly, complex systems of positive and 
negative reinforcement across cognitive, behavioral, social, temporal, 
spatial, and especially, technological assemblages are going to be part of 
how these hexeis form.
However, while Fogg directs us toward an isolated rhetorical situ-
ation created entirely by a designer to produce a particular habit in a 
user, hexis confirms that our procedural habits emerge more broadly 
in the various and myriad ways in which players negotiate a vari-
ety of repetitive behavior-shaping structures. The behavior shaping 
structures include the immediate and ongoing experiences of playing 
­videogames as well as the realm of non-videogame texts and practices 
that influence an individual’s disposition. For both hypothetical play-
ers, the rhetorical structure—the charity donation opportunity—is 
identical, and yet whether either player ultimately develops the hexis 
is not dependent upon only a single rhetorical input like the repetition 
elements of mining for gold. Thus, while we do not want to confuse 
the presence or absence of a habit-shaping mechanism with the need 
to consider the broader way in which habits form, we also cannot a 
priori discount how these functional elements operate alongside more 
expressive ones.
In avoiding a mechanistic conception of habit, Aristotle helps us to 
see that it is the achievement of a proper dispositional state—or habit in 
general—regardless of the medium that forms it that is important as a 
barometer for evaluating how rhetoric functions in videogames. As a re-
sult, procedural habits insists that we not only look at how designers or 
other rhetorical actors seek to shape habits, but that we also understand 
how these habit-shaping mechanisms encounter the broader terrain of 
dispositional formation procedures at play when players’ subjectivities 
form. Fogg’s mundane habit-shaping elements simply foreground this 
relationship to habit formation in ways that other elements of videog-
ames (and digital technologies more broadly) do not. WoW, for example, 
does not have habit production as its specific aim the way that a gami-
fied ­Fitbit does. By contrast, Aristotle shows us that procedural habits 
are—to invoke the poststructuralist idiom—“always already” part of 
the rhetorical situation of videogames. Habits everywhere are always 
potentially in formation and in change during play.

76  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Second Implication: Procedural Habits are Unique 
Non-Discursive Forms of Rhetorical Embodiment 
Produced Through Repetition
It is crucial to clarify how procedural habits differ from other forms of 
rhetorical embodiment and materiality. With my reference in the pre-
vious section to Hawhee’s Bodily Arts as a prime example, a growing 
number in rhetoric and composition studies have sought to engage the 
body as more than a passive or invisible container for the active mind as 
well as engaged central figures (Butler, Foucault) within the interdisci-
plinary field known as “body studies” more broadly speaking. Hawhee 
examines the ancient Greek idea of “phusiopoiesis” as what she calls an 
“art of Becoming” produced through the 3 R’s of sophistic pedagogy: 
response, repetition, and rhythm.46 Many sophists such as Isocrates 
argued that their students needed to acquire, in effect, second natures 
through gymnastics and bodily training. There are also currently a num-
ber of non-Cartesian approaches to rhetorical embodiment, space, and 
materiality in digital rhetoric, even if they have yet to be extended to 
videogames. In his Deleuzian approach to digital rhetoric and writing 
practices, Alex Reid argues that there are two virtuals in our field. We 
focus on the first virtual (the content on the screen), which we treat as 
immaterial or disembodied, while forgetting that interacting with dig-
ital content requires a second virtual of space of affects, embodiment, 
keyboards, controllers, and material interactivities that support the first 
virtual that we need to examine. “Such spaces are virtual,” he suggests, 
“in that they are undecided; they do not have a fixed, Cartesian identity. 
But they are also actual in that they have a physical, material existence. 
They simply cannot be fully described in Cartesian terms.”47 A number 
of scholars in digital rhetoric in the past few years have similarly drawn 
on canonical space and place theorists such as LeFevre, de Certeau, and 
affect theory to describe how spaces and environments structure bodies.
Procedural habits form through a similar non-Cartesian orientation, 
but with a particular emphasis on understanding repetition’s role in rhe-
torical embodiment. Procedural habits are a specific form of embodi-
ment grounded in repeated conscious and nonconscious activities across 
cognitive, non-cognitive, physical, and material environments. Some 
procedural habits are produced by human design and others by the 
structuring influence of the ecologies and environments around us. To 
understand how this claim relates to habit, it is necessary to examine the 
first major extension of Aristotle’s hexis in the history of western think-
ing, by the French philosopher Felix Ravaisson in his essay, “Of Habit,” 
which proved to influence many subsequent non-mechanistic theories of 
habit, such as Bergson.
Drawing on Darwin’s writings, Ravaisson initially extended Aristotle’s 
hexis from a virtuous state to an organism’s possibility of accomplishment 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  77
by freeing up conscious energy, which becomes possible when the organism 
develops nonconscious habits within embodied ecologies. One important 
feature of Ravaisson’s conception of habit comes from his elaboration of 
the “double law” of habit, which he expands from previous discussions 
by Maine de Biran, Joseph Butler, and Xavier Bichat. Specifically, he calls 
habit a “double law of the contrary influence of the duration of change.”48 
The “double law” indicates that conscious attention to external sources 
of sensation will be diminished through repetition as conscious attention 
gives way to the strengthening of internally generated actions. Through 
habit, he maintains, “prolonged or repeated movement becomes gradu-
ally easier, quicker and more assured.”49 Regardless of whether a habit 
is produced through a passively received impression (“merely suffers the 
change”), like adjusting one’s posture to a standing desk over time, or is 
actively cultivated, like practicing piano scales, habit invariably dimin-
ishes conscious attention and mutes sensation. Self-motivated repetitions 
gain ease and accuracy but also tend toward an unthinking mechanism. 
The unthinking mechanism becomes almost identical to a passively re-
ceived impression. Passively received impressions or sensations are acti-
vated and energized through habit by the same double law that requires 
intentionally repeated actions to become muted over time. According to 
Ravaisson, once the conscious mind no longer needs to participate fully in 
decision-making and habit takes over, routine actions can be stimulated 
non-consciously or involuntarily through cues from the environment as 
a supplement for instinct. It is for this reason that Raviasson calls habit 
our “unreflective spontaneity … [that] establishes itself … beneath the 
region of will, personality and consciousness.”50 In turn, the organismic 
energy-saving rewards gained from manifesting the habit encourage the 
body to retain a given habit (passive or active).
It is Ravaisson’s definition of habit that signals to us how far from social 
construction and social-epistemic forms of rhetoric procedural habits takes 
us. Furthermore, his work is useful because he confirms that mechanism 
does not disappear from habit in non-mechanistic approaches. In calling 
habit an unreflective spontaneity, Ravaisson directly acknowledges the 
validity of Kant’s fear of mechanism. Mechanistic forgetting and motives 
for action prompted by nonconscious forces are invariably part of habit’s 
ontological character. Yet, rather than viewing this as a negative obstacle, 
Ravaisson argues that mechanism produces a creative force in the world 
that enables us to act. Indeed, we need to lessen our conscious atten-
tion; otherwise, we would be unable to build new skills upon previously 
formed habits, like learning subject-­verb-object agreement in English, to 
form new ones, such as writing entire essays or books. An individual who 
could not form a habit would be not unlike Borges’s immortal character 
Funes who, unable to forget the particularity and uniqueness of each sen-
sory impression, could not see the similarity between a dog that he saw 
on his porch at 3:15 p.m. and the same dog at 3:17 p.m., because the sun’s 

78  Theorizing Procedural Habits
position and shadows had changed and the wind had shifted the dog’s 
fur. Funes, as a result, was “unable to think at all” as Borges describes. 
By analogy, habits, as I demonstrate in Chapter 4, have a clear link to the 
canon of memory and actually free us from have to relearn how to type 
on a keyboard each time we sit down to write.
Thus, Ravaisson suggests that mechanistic forgetting is not an obsta-
cle to thought and rhetorical agency, but rather habit’s condition of pos-
sibility. Yet, unlike Kant’s fear that habit is only mechanism, Ravaisson 
adds the following qualification:
Not only, then, do the movements that habit gradually remove from 
the will not leave the sphere of intelligence to pass into the grip of 
a blind mechanism, but they also do not withdraw from the same 
intelligent activity from which they were born.51
Here, both cognition and embodied activity exist in reciprocal feedback 
loops born of repetition in keeping with Aristotle’s previous treatment 
of hexis. A far cry from authorizing behavioral determinism, habit’s 
repetitive temporality for Ravaisson (as for Aristotle as well) is open-
ended. Habit is not deterministic in the sense that the present state of 
the organism tells us exactly what the future behavior will be. Rather, 
Ravaisson argues that the present habits of an organism at best establish 
regularities of behavior that simultaneously allow for the possibility of 
future repetition and change.
From this vantage point, non-mechanistic theories such as Aristotle’s 
hexis can be seen to confirm a radically different view of embodiment 
and materiality, in which embodiment and materiality are the products 
of the environments that constitute who we are. While Ravaisson is 
thinking primarily about human-initiated habit formation, subsequent 
non-mechanistic theorists would drop this requirement to examine how 
environments could produce nonconscious habits as well. The twentieth-­
century phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty, for example, did not 
believe that our habits depend upon conscious or willful intention. He 
questions, “Do we have to place at the origin of habit an act of the under-
standing which would organize its elements in order to withdraw itself 
later?”52 In turn, he suggests that the body itself “catches” and “com-
prehends” movement at levels of both cognitive (conscious) and motor 
(nonconscious) significance. In Gut Feminism, Elizabeth A. Wilsons simi-
larly points out that recent empirical studies have demonstrated a close 
link between physiology and habit. Drawing on Dewey, for whom habit 
was also a non-mechanistic process that constitutes who we are, Wilson 
observes that our digestive systems actually shape our dispositions for 
acting in the world, as, in turn, the former are shaped by our habits of 
dwelling in the world. She points to a 1990 study in which 44% of patients 
with gastrointestinal problems (abdominal pain, constipation) reported 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  79
a history of sexual abuse. It is not a stretch to declare that gut function-
ality expresses and conditions our predispositions to transact with the 
world in particular ways that contribute to a person’s style, manner, and 
even character of being (i.e., hexis).53 The way that abused bodies form 
within various environmental assemblages influences these actors’ abili-
ties to flourish and signal. We are marked by our repeated actions in our 
environments, as we, in turn, leave traces of our actions within them. 
The point of these theoretical illustrations through ­Ravaisson is that pro-
cedural habits in videogames are no different from other embodied and 
material processes in the world and, related to the previous implication 
of procedural habits, not just when an explicit habit-­shaping element is 
present. When we talk about procedural habits in videogames, we need 
to account for the entire ecological assemblage as well as the particular 
embodied forms of repetition that may or may not lead to the cultivation 
of a hexis—a semi-permanent state of reasoning.
Ravaisson opens his essay by describing habit as a “general and perma-
nent law of being.” If habits are so powerful they influence our thinking 
and actions in the world, are they then rhetorical? We could, for exam-
ple, follow Thomas Rickert in Ambient Rhetoric and declare that since 
material contexts produce and structure our ability to think and act in 
the world, then rhetoric exists in what Rickert calls a ­“pre-­symbolic re-
lation to the world.” He writes:
That is, rhetoric does not just treat with the way human beings gen-
erate and negotiate knowledge, but with the way that human beings 
are: the conceptions of being that they have and the concomitant 
ways in which they emerge in the world. … Rhetoric is an emergent 
result of environmentally situated and interactive engagements, red-
olent of a world that affects us, persuades us prior to symbolicity.54
While Rickert’s rich argument (grounded in Heidegger) is too complex for 
me to do it justice in a short summary, it is the structure with which he 
locates rhetoric that is important.55 If materiality or procedural habits or 
hexeis serve as the condition of possibility for how we think and act, then 
it is in these relations where rhetoric would lie, Rickert suggests. What we 
take (after the fact) to be intentional or instrumental actions by rhetors 
(e.g., writing a paper, screenshotting an in-game accomplishment and 
posting it to social media) is conditioned by our prior instantiation in var-
ious material assemblages. Yet, other rhetoricians acknowledge the role of 
similar ontological forces without necessarily calling them rhetorical. In 
Distant Publics, working through affect theory, Jenny Rice differentiates 
between ontological questioning and rhetorical engagement. She states:
We can affirm the ways that, ontologically speaking, we are thinking-­
feeling beings all the way down … [and] although we cannot change 

80  Theorizing Procedural Habits
the fact that human consciousness is as much emotional as it is ra-
tional, we can transform the ways we encounter and interact with 
others.56
As I read this statement, Rice is not specifically interested in arguing that 
ontological pre-symbolic relations are rhetorical. Rather, she acknowl-
edges that these forces structure who we are, while she articulates rhet-
oric as the ways in which we can transform others’ conceptions of these 
ontological ideas. My claim for procedural habits pursues something 
similar. I do not actually care where we locate rhetoric—in procedural 
habits, in persuasive technologies, or in persuasive games. My claim is 
rather that regardless of where we choose to locate rhetoric, it will be 
within our procedural habits where the effects of rhetorical transforma-
tions will take form over time.
Third Implication: Procedural Habits are Expressive Even 
When Actions are Repetitive
Ravaisson’s extension of Aristotle is important for another reason. If pro-
cedural habits are never fully mechanistic and never fully leave the sphere 
of will, then we have no good reason for policing the expressive/mundane 
binaries through cognitive/embodiment (the weak defense) or culture/
nature (the strong defense). Rather, procedural habits demonstrate that 
all forms of repetition are potentially expressive—even when they fail to 
manifest the desired behavior of a videogame or persuasive technology 
designer’s rhetorical aims. As I demonstrate in Chapter 3 in a discussion 
of contemporary first-person shooter videogames, where mindless repeti-
tion is taken as a symptom of a lack of expressive (or conversely, as David 
Golumbia argues, capitalist subject production and the conversion of play 
into work), Ravaisson confirms that repetition can be expressive. Above, 
I mentioned Nardi’s ethnographic study of players’ language use and com-
munity construction in WoW. While she does not use the term “rhetoric,” 
what is rhetorically salient for her are the forms of community building 
and linguistic self-fashioning that players manifest. By contrast, consider 
games studies scholar Rikke Toft Nørgård’s ethnographic description of 
the operation hands of an individual healer (a particular player build in 
WoW that specializes in healing) during a multiplayer “raid.” Raids oc-
cur in various “instances,” or restricted zones (i.e., limited to the groups 
of five players only) with lengthy obstacles of difficult bosses and sub-
bosses throughout various level-specific areas in the entire virtual world. 
Nørgård describes how a healer, who is tasked with keeping the other 
four members of the group alive, operates through skill:
The avatar is standing motionless as the gamer’s hands are rest-
ing on the keyboard and mouse while the raid group is planning 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  81
and aligning their corporeal interaction through communication 
[i.e., through online oral communication] before commencing the 
raid. After a while, he restlessly begins to make the avatar jump 
from side to side and dance in front of the other group members’ 
avatars. Several group members follow the example while waiting 
impatiently to plunge into the intense corporeal locomotion of the 
raid-instance. Finally, the raid leader calls the corporeal interaction: 
‘3-2-1-Go,’ and instantly the fingers of the gamer’s left hand begin 
to dance on the keyboard while his right hand skates with the mouse 
and clicks its buttons. Rhythmic waves of key taps and mouse clicks 
ascend as corporeally orchestrated music: ‘1-1-1-1-2-2-2-2-2-click-
click-click-click’. The gamer’s fingers dance around in a square on 
the left third of the keyboard—up and down, in and out, close to-
gether and spread out, like a spider in a death struggle or franti-
cally spinning a very complicated, chaotic web. It is as though life 
and death depend on the performance of the left hand dancing its 
distinctive ‘square-dance’ and the right hand riding the mouse and 
composing its ‘clickclickclick’-ing song. Not once do the gamer’s 
eyes leave the on-screen interaction as they intently monitor the 
other group members’ digital corporeality in the gamer’s attempt 
to, through intense corporeal interaction, keep the group members’ 
health bars up. Simultaneously, his hands incessantly weave digi-
tality and corporeality together as vision and digital interaction are 
created through corporeal locomotion. The gamer’s fingers dance 
between the WSAD keys and the spell keys littered around the left 
third of the keyboard while the on-screen digitality explodes into 
a myriad of text, bars, boxes, numbers, icons, dinging sounds and 
digital locomotion as the game reacts digitally to the gamers’ cor-
poreal interaction and the gamers react corporeally to the game’s 
digital interaction. This is craftsmanship at a high level: the gamers 
ceaselessly and competently fuse their corporeal digitality with their 
digital corporeality through letting their hands dance to the rhythm 
of the raid. Concurrently, they are acutely aware of the fact that if 
they miss a beat the group will probably wipe.57
Repeating actions—produced by habits—are a product of engaged ex-
pressiveness and not mindless mechanization. There is no mindless or 
inattentive subject here, even as this player’s ability to act with flexibility 
to the continuous stream of real-time player and computer stimuli is con-
ditioned by (likely) his previous habituated accumulation of experience. 
No healer who has not been properly habituated to WoW’s game me-
chanics can keep a raid group alive for very long. Yet, these accumulated 
habits allow flexible forms of interaction through repetition. Procedural 
habits in this example—even in what seems like the most mechanistic 
process of replaying the same raid or same level again, and again, and 

82  Theorizing Procedural Habits
again—constitute active and engaged forms of attunement to the tools 
that we use in both conscious and nonconscious ways.
How can this be the case? Let me draw an analogy to this impli-
cation of procedural habits from the philosopher Richard Sennett. His 
point of concern is reclassifying corporeal handicraft from what seems 
like mindless forms of repetition to meaningful, engaging, and even ex-
pressive modes of embodied repetition. He acknowledges that embodied 
technique “can seem soulless,” which, in the context of my argument, 
is yet another metaphor for a mechanistic conception of habit.58 Yet, 
Sennett counters, “That’s not how people whose hands become highly 
trained view technique. For them, technique will be intimately linked to 
expression.”59 While Sennett uses the example of learning to play the 
guitar, in WoW this same description applies:
We have trained our hands in repetition; we are alert rather than 
bored because we have developed the skill of anticipation. But equally, 
the person able to perform a duty again and again has acquired a tech-
nical skill, the rhythmic skill of a craftsman60
Even though he does not mention Aristotle, when Sennett declares, 
“there is nothing mindlessly mechanical about technique itself,” we can 
see the structure of hexis in operation.61 Gamers do not mindlessly re-
peat activities in videogames; they craft and are crafted by them through 
“repetition for its own sake: like a swimmer’s strokes, sheer movement 
repeated becomes a pleasure in itself … it is rhythm.”62 Tool use for 
the craftsman is more than just instrumental projection; tool use is a 
fundamental way that the self takes shape: “The craftsman represents 
the special human condition of being engaged” in practical (phronesis) 
rather than instrumental (mechanistic) ways.63 According to Sennett, 
active refinement enables the craftsman (or videogame player) to say, “‘I 
made this,’ ‘I am here, in this work.’”64
Overall, Sennett’s concern is how active refinement informs practi-
cal action rather than rote repetition. Craftsmanship through tools—
non-digital and digital—is not just a means to another end but a 
fundamental part of that end. Players do not just mindlessly repeat a 
habit; they actively—if not fully consciously—refine and update the 
habit across each unique gaming situation. These are not merely projec-
tions of body images or thinking, but rather bodily schemas in action. 
As a point of comparison, Richard Young famously argued that rhetoric 
as a techne is either an instrumental or knowable craft (or art or skill) 
or a non-logical, unplanned, or romantic knack. In A Counter-History, 
Byron Hawk (via Heidegger) reads Aristotle as supporting a vitalist or 
co-productive notion of techne, where techne, he writes, “is both a ratio-
nal, conscious capacity to produce and an intuitive, unconscious ability 
to make.”65 Echoing Sennett’s discussion of the craftsman, a procedural 
habit is not therefore a mechanistic means to a purely cognitive or social 
end or a mindless state of social withdrawal. Rather, a procedural habit 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  83
is an important part of the overall emergent end that forms individuals’ 
dispositions of play.
Following from Sennett’s discussion, whether an embodied action is 
repetitive has no bearing on whether it is expressive or whether it is good 
or bad in itself. We can absolutely differentiate ethical from unethical 
habits, however, as I demonstrate in Chapter 6. According to Aristotle, 
habits enable both virtue and vice. Indeed, as I articulate in Chapter 6, 
Aristotle’s eudaimonia, which is why one wishes to cultivate virtuous 
hexeis in the first place, carries that a clear non-utilitarian ethic as a vir-
tuous act can only have itself and nothing else as an end. Aristotle says 
that slaves should not even bother trying to achieve eudaimonia because 
their labor is always directed to the ends of others. If we wish to criti-
cize some play practices in WoW, for example, such as how goldfarming 
reduces play for some exploited Asian laborer-players to a means-ends 
postcolonial problem, then we certainly can and should discuss these el-
ements. However, my larger point in the context of this theoretical intro-
duction is that we simply cannot confuse the presence of a negative habit 
like goldfarming with a critical terministic screen that directs us away 
from theorizing habit’s fundamental role in videogame rhetoric. Indeed, 
our habits and dispositions are also not reducible to our repetitive habits 
of labor—a point implicitly made by other theoretical discussions, such 
as Michel de Certeau’s discussion of tactics of everyday resistance, such 
as when a factory worker takes home a lathe from work to make a piece 
of furniture for his or her own use.66 As a case in point, goldfarmers 
routinely hack WoW in tactical senses in order to automate their own 
labor practices. The website AH Playas, for example, promises members 
(who pay a small fee) a BOT farm that allows them to mine 2500 gold 
every hour.67 Once again, the single largest point I want to stress is that 
procedural habits are formed through multiple forces and not just sin-
gular ones, as Fogg’s thinking tends to presuppose. We cannot just see 
the presence of a repeated habit and assume—for better or worse—the 
underlying disposition.
Fourth Implication: Procedural Habits Re-Orient Us from 
Critique to Composition
This final point, for me, ties together my interests in procedural habits 
and challenging the nature/culture dichotomies and the privileges that 
our field tends to grant toward forms of writing and social contexts 
divorced from embodied or material ones. The privilege of traditional 
texts or the expressive/mundane binary forecloses in advance the types 
of habits that we are drawn to. For traditional texts, if there is no writing 
present, we are not interested; for procedural rhetoric, if there is no com-
putationally interactive modeled argument, then we are not interested; 
for social-epistemic rhetoric, we are interested in habits in as far as they 

84  Theorizing Procedural Habits
are produced by social contexts, epistemic forces, and discourse. For 
these latter approaches, we saw how in most epistemic approaches to 
rhetoric, critics move quickly to establish dialectics or power/knowledge 
at the roots of habit-shaping apps or social media games. We know what 
we are going to find. In Golumbia’s dismissal of WoW, the presence of 
mindless repetition as a game mechanic is a habit cultivated by capitalist 
forces of production. To be sure, embodiment can play a role. Bourdieu’s 
habitus can be read as “ideology in action” rather than the “false con-
sciousness” of Marx, as software studies theorist Wendy Chun notes in 
her study of neoliberal habits in new media. In Chapter 4, for example, 
I take a closer look at how Foucaultian paradigms can apply to gami-
fied habit-shaping apps to talk about how bodies are made productive 
through habits.
My other case studies will also offer specific engagement with schol-
arship from games studies and rhetoric and composition studies in re-
lationship to these themes. However, my more general purpose in this 
theoretical introduction is to offer a fourth implication: procedural hab-
its requires us to shift our political models of videogame rhetoric from 
social-epistemic critique to reflect on the fact that ideologies are produced 
and received through procedural habits. I have two related subclaims in 
this section to make this point. First, at issue is the matter of accuracy 
in terms of whether critique describes how rhetorical reality produces 
procedural habits, and secondly, it is a matter of whether the structure 
of critique is persuasive if our dispositions are produced through proce-
dural habits. On the first point, Chapter 5 in particular offers an engage-
ment with Rita Felska’s “postcritical reading,” in which she suggests via 
Latour that humanities scholars should avoid approaching texts with 
the eye toward critical demystification and, instead, proceed by trac-
ing the actual networks of influence and affect that videogames engage. 
Felski’s concern—which has special relevance for videogame rhetoric—
is that continually approaching videogames on the hunt for previously 
established totalizing forces (dialectics, power-knowledge, patriarchy) 
can cause us to miss other forms of affects, relations, and especially, 
networks of associations that a text (or a videogame) can produce. A bit 
generally stated, critique assumes some fixed force, while, as I gestured 
toward the end of Chapter 1, ANT argues that the social is always in 
a process of being composed through human and nonhuman agency. 
This first point questions if critique actually captures a realistic model of 
how rhetorical reality is composed. By contrast, ANT seeks to trace how 
unique and localized networks form to produce our procedural habits, 
refusing to let a prior explanation (bio-power, etc.) stand in for the act of 
describing. This claim is therefore related to accuracy about describing 
how various agencies function and form in the world.
To revisit my Venture guild example above, a clear case would be 
that in our hunt for “neoliberal” subject formations in WoW, such as 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  85
the reduction of habits to “mindless repetition,” we might miss the fact 
that positive behavioral traits—like those of caring and kindness that 
Nardi located—can also be produced. Furthermore, if positive behav-
ioral traits can be produced through habits, then, in turn, how does 
realization alter how we theorize the politics of videogames? Along these 
lines, there is the question of nonhuman agency raised by theorists like 
Latour and Bennett. Bennett argues, as I discuss in great detail in Chap-
ter 6 on my case study of code as a rhetorical actor, that just because the 
notorious company Enron FirstEnergy was a participant (“milking the 
grid without maintaining its infrastructure”) in the 2003 Great North 
American electrical grid collapse, we cannot assume in advance of trac-
ing the network what forms of agencies contributed to the entire event.68 
Agency is distributed throughout the assemblage, she claims, and “the 
most I can honestly affirm is that corporations are one of the sites at 
which human efforts at reform can be applied, that corporate regulation 
is one place where intentions might initiate a cascade of effects.”69 In-
deed, my case studies demonstrate how to trace the full range of effects 
that videogame rhetorics produce in order to realize that we might even 
be able to use persuasive technologies, gamification, and other mundane 
videogame design elements to produce better ethical forms of dwelling 
with one another.
The second subpoint of this implication about critique relates not to 
accuracy but to whether critique’s rhetorical structure is ultimately per-
suasive. While most forms of critique do not posit a rational subject, the 
form of demonstration (in writing) re-inscribes a traditional text focus. 
We ask students to analyze in writing videogames’ ideological underpin-
nings through philosophically inclined, linear cause and effect reason-
ing. However, critique, as a number of rhetoric and composition scholars 
have previously argued, is not always persuasive. Working from a simi-
lar belief that rhetoric is not disembodied, a number of rhetoricians have 
invoked the philosopher Peter Sloterdijk’s discussion of cynical reason-
ing,70 in which many leftist theorists had become masters of demysti-
fying capitalist practices but, cynically, unable to apply these insights 
to impact their own lives or local political situations. In the previous 
chapter, for example, I discuss Barter as an example of an attempt to use 
a persuasive game to teach British audiences about the virtues of local 
spending and to demystify the negative influence of spending money in 
multinational big box stores. We might play an American equivalent 
of Barter and end up agreeing with the videogames’ designers that it is 
better to spend locally, and yet many of us will continue to order books 
from Amazon.com regardless of how many persuasive games like Barter 
we play.
Employing a Lacanian-Lyotarian term, “libidinal investments,” 
Marshall Alcorn posits that the ways in which we form, in essence, hab-
its of consumption with respect to ideologies is not a total or complete 

86  Theorizing Procedural Habits
process—like a deposit of 20 dollars at the bank that we can withdraw 
in its same 20-dollar form—when a Socratic interlocutor employs pro-
cedural rhetoric to reform our judgments. Rather, because the ways in 
which we receive ideology is embodied, and indeed individuals form 
habits of shopping and rhetorical conduct alike, ideologies have a cer-
tain sticky effectiveness to them. Alcorn firmly declares, “We are moved 
by … libidinal attachment and loss … more than by rational arguments. 
What we are in discourse is not evenly spread across all examples of 
discourse.”71 As Jenny Rice paraphrases Alcorn’s comment, “in order to 
change people’s minds, you must also have an effect at an affective level, 
which is much more challenging.”72 Similar to my observations about 
the example of Barter, Rice offers an example of how this plays out 
in development rhetoric. Individuals may well realize that they should 
not shop at Walmart or multinational box stores and should support 
local businesses, but our patterns and habits of shopping are embodied. 
Some of these forms of habituation are not even reducible to adherence 
to an individual ideological belief. For example, rural Moses Lake, WA, 
a city near my hometown of Walla Walla, WA, tried to rebuild interest 
in supporting local business not by designing local currency or persua-
sive games, but by redesigning the streets and parking downtown. Poor 
development planning resulted in parking areas and traffic circles that 
were less accessible (and made it difficult for trucks to restock stores). 
The added hassle of trying to navigate tiny traffic circles likely increased 
the flow of traffic to big box stores, which are much more accessible.
One extremely valuable contribution of Rice’s work lies in calling 
writing teachers’ attention to the ways in which our framing of various 
political topics succeeds or fails in asking students to see themselves as 
affectively constructed beings. In the context of urban development rhet-
oric, Rice argues that the use of “victim” narratives, such as evil corpo-
rations who wage war on a helpless Mother Nature, may cause students 
to produce an emotional response (apathy, outrage) at a distant envi-
ronmental target for catharsis, thereby failing to connect environmen-
tal issues to their own daily lives. This framing leads to the production 
of what she calls the figure of “public exception,” when audiences feel 
as though they have participated politically by feeling an emotional re-
sponse rather than acknowledging how development and environmental 
issues always already structures their daily lives. It is important to high-
light that acknowledging the public figure of exception does not mean 
that teaching students about politics and ideological constructions of 
race, class, gender, and sexuality in videogames is a pointless endeavor. 
Rather, I read Rice as offering a more realistic assessment of the effec-
tiveness of certain forms of pedagogical framing. While Rice maintains 
that writing teachers “cannot teach feeling,” we can, she suggests, still 
“encourage new kinds of vernacular discursive habits that help to shape 
a different kind of public subject,” beyond an “exceptional one that 

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  87
exists at a distance from [development] crises” grounded in environmen-
tal relations to the (human) Other and (nonhuman) nature.73 The exact 
same situation applies to procedural habits in videogames with regard 
to critique. We can definitely try to shape or better appreciate efforts 
by activists, artists, and designers to attempt to shape different subjects 
who see their habits of daily life through play as something produced by 
a wide variety of factors both within and outside their control. Funda-
mentally, as I argue in Chapter 6, this process requires exploring videog-
ames’ procedural habits as forms of invention rather than just objects to 
analyze and criticize. I illustrate this claim through Ulmer’s rhetorical 
invention strategy of “heuretics,” which attends to how our political 
diagnosis can be encoded as rhetorically persuasive forms—forms that I 
suggest can include the efforts to shape habits through play.
Conclusion
To sum up, procedural habits are non-mechanistic habits. Rather than 
allowing rhetoric and composition scholars to explicitly or tacitly fig-
ure procedural habits as external from rhetoric, procedural habits in-
stead form the creative ground through which rhetorical beings generate 
and receive content during play. Procedural habits constitutes a radical 
re-orientation of the purposes of examining the rhetoric of videogames 
from the production of traditional texts toward the examination of mun-
dane habit-shaping elements. However, rather than invert the expressive/­
mundane bias, procedural habits uses the presence of the latter—­featured 
prominently in Fogg’s work—as a site through which to reimagine what 
videogame rhetoric can mean through procedural habits. For ­Aristotle, 
Ravaisson, and, indeed, a number of related non-mechanistic theorists 
that my case studies engage, it is habits that fundamentally shape who 
we are—both for virtue and for vice. Mundane design elements or genres 
of videogames can both serve as potential sites for rhetorical transforma-
tion as well as opportunities to rethink broadly what videogame rheto-
rics mean in the first place.
To clarify one potential source of confusion, my turn toward proce-
dural habits in no way means to suggest that using persuasive games or 
videogames as a way to re-orient attitudes toward eating or local spend-
ing is a fruitless endeavor. Indeed, I fully agree with persuasive game 
designers, like Bogost, or activist game designers, like Anna Anthropy, 
that helping to model systems as opposed to verbal or textual arguments 
may indeed better help citizens grasp the multiple relations of our em-
beddedness within social and political systems—a point ­McGonigal 
documents in positive player responses to serious games such as a World 
Without Oil.74 In fact, Levi Bryant, a Deleuzian philosopher of nonhu-
man agency, objects, and materiality, recently confirmed the abilities of 
videogames to bring about what McAllister calls metanoia (“a change 

88  Theorizing Procedural Habits
in mind”). Bryant states that it was not Socrates’s questioning that shook 
up Bryant’s recalcitrant cognitive habits, but rather, he states, “I was 
awoken from my dogmatic slumbers by, of all things—and I’m embar-
rassed to say—a computer game.”75 The videogame was SimCity, a pop-
ular simulation game in which a player watches a city evolve out of a 
combination of user guidance and autonomous algorithmic inputs like 
alien invasions (Figure 2.2).
In a clear nod for the role of affect and embodiment, Bryant declares:
What SimCity taught me is that the signifier, meaning, belief, and so 
on are not the sole agencies structuring social relations … to be sure, 
there are social relations here insofar as it is people that produce all 
these things … but the point is that the form the city takes is not … the 
result of a signifier, a text, a belief, or narrative alone. It is the result 
of the real properties of roads, power lines, pollution, and so on.76
Bryant understands that a videogames’ ability to simulate these multiple 
forms of material and social relations may indeed create empathy for 
these actual relations in a player’s daily life. To revisit my earlier exam-
ple, this type of videogame might be able to help city planners in Moses 
Lake realize that changing the spatial organization of their downtown 
to be more conducive to shaping parking or walking patterns might be 
Figure 2.2  Screenshot of Sim City’s main play interface.

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  89
worth exploring if the ethical purpose is for citizens to shop locally. 
However, the fact that individuals’ affect and attitude are actually habit-
uated (affected) through all of these social and material relations (streets, 
parking, accessibility) confirms that effective persuasion will also have 
to work at the actual physical and material relations and forms of affec-
tivity that produce our modes of embodied reasoning through our habits 
of dwelling that Sim City only models. Videogames, then, are not just 
artificial or risk-free places for players to participate in and then return 
unchanged to their offline or non-digital lives. Rather, videogames also 
constitute an actual embodied and material environment with unique 
involvements and concerns that require a more complicated account of 
the ways in which any computational medium creates embodied modes 
of thought (hexis).
Notes
	 1	 Catherine Malabou, What Should We Do with Our Brain? (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 2008), 5. For Malabou, plasticity serves as a de-
constructive différance grounded in matter to shift beyond Derrida’s focus 
on text and trace.
	 2	 Claire Carlisle, On Habit (New York: Routledge, 2014), 22.
	 3	 Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Joe Sachs (New York: Focus Philo-
sophical Library, 2002), II.I.vi.13 quoted in Claire Carlisle, On Habit, 103.
	 4	 Jan Rune Holmevik’s Inter/vention also successfully gestures toward a 
non-Cartesian rhetoric. He explores the “ludic transversal” of play through 
Gregory Ulmer’s electracy apparatus theory. While Inter/vention serves the 
important task of introducing games studies audiences to Ulmer’s work and 
does not offer engagement with rhetorical studies scholarship on videog-
ames, numerous rhetoricians’ prior work on Ulmer easily enable us to make 
these connections. Jan Holmevik, Inter/vention: Free Play in the Age of 
Electracy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012).
	 5	 Kathleen Welch, Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New 
Literacy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
	 6	 Michelle Ballif, “Writing the Third-Sophistic Cyborg: Periphrasis on an [In]
Tense Rhetoric.” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 28 (1998): 51–72.
	 7	 Aristotle, On Rhetoric: Toward a Theory of Civic Discourse, trans. George 
Kennedy. 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), I.2.2 1356a4.
	 8	 Elizabeth M. Losh, Virtualpolitik: An Electronic History of Government 
Media-making in a Time of War, Scandal, Disaster, Miscommunication, 
and Mistakes (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2009), 24, 117.
	 9	 Michael A. Evans, “Procedural Ethos: Confirming the Persuasive in Serious 
Games,” International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simu-
lations 3, no.4 (Oct.-Dec. 2011): 72.
	10	 Similar discussions of ethos in videogames be found in: Wendi Sierra 
and Doug Eyman, “‘I Rolled the Dice with Trade Chat and This is What 
I  Got.’ Demonstrating context-dependent credibility in virtual worlds,” 
in Online Credibility and Digital Ethos: Evaluating Computer-Mediated 
­Communication, ed. Shawn Apostel and Moe Folk (Hershey, PA: IGI Pub-
lishing, 2013), 332–352; Richard Colby, “Writing and Assessing Procedural 
Rhetoric in Student-produced Video Games,” Computers and Composition 

90  Theorizing Procedural Habits
31 (2014): 43–52; Jennifer L. Bay and Samantha Blackmon, “Inhabiting 
Professional Writing: Exploring Rhetoric, Play, and Community in ­Second 
Life,” in Computer Games and Technical Communication: Critical ­Methods 
and Applications, ed. Jennifer deWinter and Ryan M. Moeller (New York: 
Routledge, 2014), 211–232.
	11	 Thomas E. Corts, “Special Report: The Derivation of Ethos,” Speech Mono-
graphs 35 (1968): 201–202.
	12	 George A. Kennedy, The Art of Persuasion in Greece (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1963), 92, 136 quoted in Carolyn R. Miller, “Writing in a 
Culture of Simulation: Ethos Online.” In The Semiotics of Writing: Trans-
disciplinary Perspectives on the Technology of Writing, edited by Patrick 
Coppock (Turnhout: Brepols, 2001), 74.
	13	 George Yoos, “A Revision of the Concept of Ethical Appeal,” Philosophy 
and Rhetoric 12, no. 1 (Winter 1979): 42.
	14	 I am indebted to Jodie A. Nicotra’s dissertation for this observation. Jodie 
A. Nicotra, “The Force of Habit: Rhetoric, Repetition, and Identity From 
­Darwin to Drugs,” unpublished doctoral thesis (Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity, 2005), 11.
	15	 See Susan Jarratt and Nedra Reynolds, “The Splitting Image: Contemporary 
Feminisms and the Ethics of Ethos,” In Ethos: New Essays in Rhetorical 
and Critical Theory, ed. James S. Baumlin and Tita French Baumlin (Dallas, 
TX: SouthernMethodist University Press, 1994), 37–63.
	16	 H.G. Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon (Rev. H.S. Jones 
9th ed.; Oxford: 1940), 766.
	17	 Charles E. Scott, The Question of Ethics: Nietzsche, Foucault, Heidegger 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), 103. With respect to ethos, 
the philosopher Charles E. Scott notes that Aristotle’s conception of ethos 
as habituation derives from Homer. Homer differentiated the domesticated 
horse (êthos) versus a horse in the wild (ethea; multiple of ethos). Ethos is 
the animal’s particular and appropriate dwelling place that was quite hard 
to change once it was accustomed.
	18	 Michael J. Hyde, “Introduction,” in The Ethos of Rhetoric, ed. Michael J. 
Hyde (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2004), xiii.
	19	 Ibid., xiiv.
	20	 Kristie S. Fleckenstein, “Cybernetics, Ethos, and Ethics: The Plight of the 
Bread-and-Butter-Fly,” JAC 25, no. 2 (2005): 325.
	21	 Thomas Rickert, Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2013), 222.
	22	As Heidegger also convincingly argues in various writings, Aristotle’s physis 
means a great deal more than “environment” or “nature,” in the sense that 
most of us would conventionally oppose nature to culture. Rather, physis 
captures the ways in which all manners of beings emerge (presence) and take 
form in the world.
	23	 Aristotle, Nichomachean, II.I.i
	24	 Ibid., VII.X 1152a30-33. However, ethos for Aristotle is by no means com-
mensurate with physis. It is true that some character states, such as a lack 
of willpower or incontinence (akrasia), can be a result of either physis (nat-
ural temperament) or ethos. This distinction emerges in the difference be-
tween the intellectual virtues and the virtues of character. The former come 
through learning or teaching, while character tends to come about through 
ethos rather than nature. It is in this discussion of how ethos becomes like a 
“second nature” where Aristotle begins to offer us a clear non-mechanistic 
conception of habit. Ibid., II.I 1103a14-18.

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  91
	25	Ellen Quandahl, “A Feeling for Aristotle: Emotion in the Sphere of Ethics,” 
in A Way to Move: Rhetorics of Emotion and Composition Studies, ed. 
Dale Jacobs and Laura Micciche (London: Heinemann, 2003), 15.
	26	 Thornton C. Lockwood, “Habituation, Habit, and Character in Aristotle’s 
Nicomachean Ethics,” in A History of Habit: From Aristotle to Bourdieu, 
ed. Thom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson (New York: Lexington Books, 
2013), 19.
	27	 Catherine Malabou, Preface to Of Habit, by Felix Ravaisson, trans. Clare 
Carlisle and Mark Sinclaire (London: Continuum, 2008), xvi.
	28	 Lockwood, “Habituation,” 19.
	29	 Aristotle, Nicomachean, 1105a30-31,1105b25-26.
	30	 Ibid., II.ii.1104a4-10.
	31	 Hexis, he clarifies, is not a temporary feeling (diasthesis), like coldness or an-
ger, but a semi-permanent disposition. In this regard, Aristotle also does not 
follow his teacher Plato in viewing ethical knowledge in the moral virtues as 
a theoria (i.e., theoretical knowledge in science or metaphysics).
	32	 Ibid., II. 1103a.
	33	 Lockwood, “Habituation,” 21–22.
	34	Felix Ravaisson, Of Habit, trans. Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclar (New York: 
Continuum, 2008), 25.
	35	 Aristotle, Metaphysics, trans. Joe Sachs (New York: Green Lion Press, 
1999), 1009b.
	36	 M.R. Wright, Empedocles: The Extant Fragments (New York: Hackett Pub-
lishing Company, 1995), 235, quoted in Debra Hawhee, Bodily Arts: Rhetoric 
and Athletics in Ancient Greece (Austin: University of Texas, 2004), 58.
	37	 Debra Hawhee, Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece, 58. 
Hawhee also confirms that Aristotle is not alone among classical rhetoricians 
in articulating a primary role for embodiment in rhetoric. As an example, 
Hawhee points to a line from Democritus that “nature and instruction are 
similar; for instruction shapes the man, and in shaping, produces his nature 
psusiopoetics.” What Hawhee calls “phusiopoiesis” becomes akin to the 
“creation of a person’s nature” for many ancient Greek rhetors. Ibid., 93–96.
	38	 Aristotle, Politics, trans. Benjamin Jowett (New ed.; New York: Dover, 2000), 
7.17.1336a12–20.
	39	 Lockwood, “Habituation,” 21–22.
	40	Aristotle, Nicomachean, 1098b3–5.
	41	 Alexander R. Galloway, The Interface Effect (London: Polity, 2012), 142.
	42	 Among games studies scholars, Miguel Sicart is one of the few who has 
suggested renewing virtue ethics in the digital era. Players do not merely en-
gage in “risk free” experimentation in MMORPGs but produce “delighted 
care” and “genuine affection” from within these spaces, inflected differently 
through procedural mediation (50–51). See Miguel Sicart, “Game, Player, 
Ethics: A Virtue Ethics Approach to Computer Games,” International 
­Review of Information Ethics, 4 (2005): 14–18.
	43	 The full list includes courage, temperance, liberality, magnificence, magna-
nimity, proper ambition/pride, patience (good temper), truthfulness, witti-
ness, friendliness, modesty, and right indignation.
	44	Bonnie A. Nardi, My Life as a Night Elf Priest: An Anthropological Account 
of World of Warcraft (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2010), 50–51.
	45	 Aristotle, Nicomachean, 1099a31-b6.
	46	Hawhee, Bodily Arts, 135.
	47	 Alex Reid, The Two Virtuals (West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press, 2007), 99.
	48	 Ravaisson, Of Habit, 37.

92  Theorizing Procedural Habits
	49	 Ibid., 49.
	50	 Ibid., 53.
	51	 Ibid., 57.
	52	 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Donald Lan-
des (New York: Routledge, 2013), 165.
	53	 Elizabeth A. Wilson, Gut Feminism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2015), 264.
	54	 Rickert, Ambient, 34.
	55	 This argument comes by way of Diane Davis’s previous work on Levinas.
	56	 Jenny Rice, Distant Publics: Development Rhetoric and the Subject of Cri-
sis (Pittsburgh, : University of Pittsburgh Press, 2014), 58.
	57	 Rikke Toft Nørgård, “The Corporeal-Locomotive Craftsman: Gaming in 
World of Warcraft,” Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 3, no. 3 (2011): 
212.
	58	 Richard Sennett, The Craftsman (Cambridge, MA: Yale University Press, 
2008), 149.
	59	 Ibid., 149.
	60	 Ibid., 177.
	61	 Ibid., 9.
	62	 Ibid., 175.
	63	 Ibid., 20.
	64	Ibid., 130.
	65	 Byron Hawk, A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies 
of Complexity (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007), 168.
	66	 Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life (Berkeley: California Uni-
versity Press, 2011), 22.
	67	 AH Playas, “We’ll Show You How Players are Hitting the Gold Cap,” ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, www.ahplayas.com/
	68	 Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010), 37.
	69	 Ibid., 37.
	70	 Thomas Rickert, Acts of Enjoyment: Rhetoric, Zizek, and the Return of 
the Subject (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2007), 11–12; Diane. 
D. Davis, Breaking up (at) Totality: A Rhetoric of Laughter (Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois University Press, 2000), 48–56.
	71	 Marshall Alcorn Jr. Changing the Subject in English Class: Discourse and 
the Construction of Desires (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 
2002), 26.
	72	 Rice, Distant, 97.
	73	 Ibid., 98.
	74	 Jane McGonigal, Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How 
They Can Change the World (New York: Penguin, 2011), 312–313.
	75	 Levi R. Bryant, Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of Machines and Media 
(Edinburgh University Press, 2014), 4.
	76	 Ibid., 5.
Bibliography
AH Playas. “We’ll Show You How Players are Hitting the Gold Cap.” Accessed 
May 15, 2017. www.ahplayas.com/
Alcorn, Marshall, Jr. Changing the Subject in English Class: Discourse and the 
Construction of Desires. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2002.

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  93
Aristotle. On Memory and Reminiscence. Translated by J.I. Beare. Seattle: ­Amazon 
Digital Services, 2011.
———. Metaphysics. Translated by Joe Sachs. New York: Green Lion Press, 
1999.
———. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by Joe Sachs. New York: Focus 
Philosophical Library, 2002.
———. Politics. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. New ed. New York: Dover, 
2000.
———. On Rhetoric: Toward a Theory of Civic Discourse. Translated by 
George Kennedy. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Ballif, Michelle. “Writing the Third-Sophistic Cyborg: Periphrasis on an [In]
Tense Rhetoric.” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 28 (1998): 51–72.
Bay, Jennifer L., and Samantha Blackmon. “Inhabiting Professional Writing: 
Exploring Rhetoric, Play, and Community in Second Life.” In Computer 
Games and Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications, 
edited by Jennifer deWinter and Ryan M. Moeller, 211–232. New York: 
Routledge, 2014.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
Bryant, Levi R. Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of Machines and Media. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014.
Carlisle, Claire. On Habit. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Chilton, Tom, Jeffrey Kaplan, and Rob Pardo. The World of Warcraft. Irvine, 
CA: Blizzard Entertainment, 2004. Videogame.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2011.
Colby, Richard. “Writing and Assessing Procedural Rhetoric in Student-­
produced Video Games.” Computers and Composition 31 (2014): 43–52.
Corts, Thomas E. “Special Report: The Derivation of Ethos.” Speech Monographs 
35 (1968): 201–202.
Davis, Diane. D. Breaking up (at) Totality: A Rhetoric of Laughter. Carbon-
dale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2000.
———. Inessential Solidarity: Rhetoric and Foreigner Relations. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2010.
de Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: California University 
Press, 2011.
Eklund, Ken, Jane McGonigal, Dee Cook, Marie Lamb, Michelle Senderhauf, 
and Krystyn Wells. World Without Oil. San Fransciso, CA: ITVS and Inde-
pendent Lens, 2007. Alternate-Reality Game.
Evans, Michael A. “Procedural Ethos: Confirming the Persuasive in Serious 
Games.” International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simula-
tions 3, no.4 (Oct.-Dec. 2011): 70–80.
Felski, Rita. The Limits of Critique. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Fleckenstein, Kristie S. “Cybernetics, Ethos, and Ethics: The Plight of the Bread-
and-Butter-Fly.” JAC 25, no. 2 (2005): 323–246.
Galloway, Alexander R. The Interface Effect. London: Polity, 2012.
Golumbia, David. “Games without Play.” New Literary History 40, no. 1 (Winter 
2009): 179–204.

94  Theorizing Procedural Habits
Hariman, Robert. “Decorum, Power, and the Courtly Style.” Quarterly Journal 
of Speech 78, no. 2 (1992): 149–72.
Hawhee, Debra. Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece. Austin: 
University of Texas, 2004.
Hawk, Byron. A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies of 
Complexity. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007.
Holmevik, Jan. Inter/vention: Free Play in the Age of Electracy. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Hyde, Michael J. “Introduction.” In The Ethos of Rhetoric, edited by Michael J. 
Hyde, 1–19. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2004.
Jarratt, Susan C. and Nedra Reynolds. “The Splitting Image: Contemporary 
Feminisms and the Ethics of Ethos.” In Ethos: New Essays in Rhetorical and 
Critical Theory, edited by James S. Baumlin and Tita French Baumlin, 37–63. 
Dallas, TX: Southern Methodist University Press, 1994.
Kennedy, George A. The Art of Persuasion in Greece. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1963.
Liddell, H.G. and Robert Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon. Rev. H.S. Jones 9th 
ed. Oxford, 1940.
Lockwood, Thornton C. “Habituation, Habit, and Character in Aristotle’s 
Nicomachean Ethics.” In A History of Habit: From Aristotle to Bourdieu, 
edited by Thom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson, 19–37. New York: Lexing-
ton Books, 2013.
Losh, Elizabeth M. Virtualpolitik: An Electronic History of Government 
Media-­making in a Time of War, Scandal, Disaster, Miscommunication, and 
Mistakes. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2009.
Malabou, Catherine. Preface to Of Habit, by Felix Ravaisson. Translated by 
Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclaire, i–xi. London: Continuum, 2008.
———. What Should We Do with Our Brain? New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2008.
McGonigal, Jane. Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How 
They Can Change the World. New York: Penguin, 2011.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by Donald 
Landes. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Miller, Carolyn R. “Writing in a Culture of Simulation: Ethos Online.” In The 
Semiotics of Writing: Transdisciplinary Perspectives on the Technology of 
Writing, edited by Patrick Coppock, 253–279. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 
2001.
Nardi, Bonnie A. My Life as a Night Elf Priest: An Anthropological Account of 
World of Warcraft. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2010.
Nicotra, Jodie A. “The Force of Habit: Rhetoric, Repetition, and Identity From 
Darwin to Drugs.” Unpublished doctoral thesis. Pennsylvania State University, 
2005.
Nørgård, Rikke Toft. “The Corporeal-Locomotive Craftsman: Gaming in 
World of Warcraft.” Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 3, no. 3 (2011): 
201–128.
Porter, James I. “Introduction.” In Constructions of the Classical Body, edited 
by James I Porter, 1–18. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999.

From Persuasive Technologies to Procedural Habits  95
Quandahl, Ellen. “A Feeling for Aristotle: Emotion in the Sphere of Ethics.” In 
A Way to Move: Rhetorics of Emotion and Composition Studies, edited by 
Dale Jacobs and Laura Micciche, 11–22. London, UK: Heinemann, 2003.
Ravaisson, Felix. Of Habit. Translated by Clare Carlisle and Mark Sinclar. 
New York: Continuum, 2008.
Reid, Alex. The Two Virtuals. West Lafayette, IN: Parlor Press, 2007.
Rice, Jenny. Distant Publics: Development Rhetoric and the Subject of Crisis. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2014.
Rickert, Thomas. Acts of Enjoyment: Rhetoric, Zizek, and the Return of the 
Subject. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2007.
——.Ambient Rhetoric: The Attunements of Rhetorical Being. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh, 2013.
Scott, Charles E. The Question of Ethics: Nietzsche, Foucault, Heidegger. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Sennett, Richard. The Craftsman. Cambridge, MA: Yale University Press, 2008.
Sicart, Miguel. “Game, Player, Ethics: A Virtue Ethics Approach to Computer 
Games.” International Review of Information Ethics, 4 (2005): 14–18.
Sierra, Wendi and Doug Eyman, “ ‘I Rolled the Dice with Trade Chat and This is 
What I Got.’ Demonstrating context-dependent credibility in virtual worlds.” 
In Online Credibility and Digital Ethos: Evaluating Computer-­Mediated 
Communication, edited by Shawn Apostel and Moe Folk, 332–352. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Publishing, 2013.
Welch, Kathleen. Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New 
Literacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Wilson, Elizabeth A.  Gut Feminism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2015.
Wright, M.R. Empedocles: The Extant Fragments (New York: Hackett ­Publishing 
Company, 1995) in Debra Hawhee, Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in 
­Ancient Greece. Austin: University of Texas, 2004.
Wright, Will. Sim City. Redwood Shores, CA: Maxis, 1989. Videogame.
Yoos, George. “A Revision of the Concept of Ethical Appeal.” Philosophy and 
Rhetoric 12, no. 1 (Winter 1979): 41–58.

This page intentionally left blank 

Part 2
Thinking Persuasive 
Technologies Differently

This page intentionally left blank 

Where Part 1 of Procedural Habits employed Fogg’s persuasive tech-
nology as a starting place to elaborate several theoretical characteris-
tics of procedural habits in videogames, Part 2 turns to specific case 
studies. Each chapter in Part 2 explores a different habit-shaping design 
element in a contemporary commercialized videogame or, in the case 
of gamified habit-shaping apps in Chapter 5, an entire habit-shaping 
videogame genre. Across these case studies, I employ a combination of 
Fogg’s thinking to classify certain features of these habit-shaping design 
elements while using procedural habits to treat persuasive technologies 
as a window into a broader non-mechanistic role for habit in videogame 
rhetoric’s mundane texts.
My first case study explores procedural habits as a lens to examine 
the rhetoric of the videogame genre of the first-person shooter (FPS). 
As the genre name indicates, an FPS is characterized by an on-screen 
environment seen as if a player is looking through the eyes of an ava-
tar (“[the] recti-linear plane of Albertian perspective”) and a primary 
game mechanic of shooting enemies to overcome in-game obstacles.1 Al-
though it was not the first FPS game, researchers often credit Doom,2 a 
science-fiction horror-themed videogame, as the commercial archetype 
for the entire genre. In comparison to previous FPS games, Doom of-
fered (then) the best approximation of a 3D first-person perspective, to 
make a player feel as though he or she were moving the protagonist, an 
unnamed marine, through simulated objects with mass and depth, as he 
or she battled against the forces of Hell through nine levels. Beyond its 
single-player game mode versus the computer, Doom was also the first 
FPS game to integrate two multiplayer (“Cooperative”) modes, in which 
teams of two to four players could fight one another online. This com-
mercial blueprint resulted in over 15 million players by 1995, making it 
by far the most successful commercial videogame of the 1990s.
My choice to focus on FPS is due primarily to its popularity both as a 
commercial genre as well as an object of academic study. Scholars from 
games and media studies disciplines have “given FPS more attention 
than any single genre,” and for good reason.3 In the present, FPS also 
remains a driving force in the gaming industry. For example, the seventh 
3	
Affective Design and the 
Captivation of Memory 
in First-Person Shooter 
Videogames

100  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
title (BlackOps) in Activision’s popular military-themed FPS series, Call 
of Duty, made $650 million worldwide in its first five days of sales, 
and $1 billion in the first month alone.4 The six titles in Valve Corpo-
ration’s Counter-Strike franchise, another military-themed FPS videog-
ame, have sold over 50 million copies since the original Counter-Strike 
title was released in 2000.5 Valve’s most recent title, Counter-Strike: 
Global Operations (GO), is the second most popular game on the on-
line gaming platform Steam, with a peak of 954,000 and an average of 
over 500,000 daily players since 2012 (and, if combined with the most 
popular action fighting videogame on Steam, Dota 2, there are more 
daily players with these two games than the rest of the games on Steam 
combined). However, this popular combination of weapon firing and 
combat themes has made FPS a frequent public target by social crusad-
ers and policy advocates. As a great number of non-gamers historically 
view FPS as a cautionary synecdoche for the dangers of all videogames, 
it is often in the context of the popularity of commercialized violence in 
FPS where game designers—even those who do not make or value this 
genre—are forced to wage the battle for artistic or argumentative value 
of the entire medium. In recognition of these connotations, James Paul 
Gee’s classic book What Videogames Have to Teach Us About Learning 
and Literacy opens by stating, “I want to talk about video games—yes, 
even violent video games—and say some positive things about them.”6
In the first part of this chapter, I briefly describe past and current pri-
mary scholarly inroads for FPS in rhetoric and composition scholarship, 
including procedural rhetoric, Burkean rhetoric, and social-epistemic 
approaches, most of which retain the expressive/mundane theoretical di-
vision that I identify in Chapter 1. In the case of Burkean scholarship on 
FPS, for example, it is the social dramas of narrative (symbolic action) 
and not the realm of non-symbolic action that is rhetorically important 
to examine. The other major object of academic interest for FPS within 
and alongside rhetoric and composition scholarship has been ideology 
critique across themes such as race, class, gender, US imperialism (in 
the case of Call of Duty), and sexuality. Even the critical theory wing of 
games studies scholarship has been slower to examine FPS for embod-
iment. If procedural habits are included as part of videogame rhetoric, 
then it will likely be along the mechanistic lines of the critical media 
theorist David Golumbia’s complaint (discussed below) that FPS games 
lack rich forms of literary narrative (expressive) and reduce play to em-
bodied repetition (mundane) along the lines of how capitalism converts 
play into work.
By contrast, the second section of this chapter examines a primary 
reason why rhetoric and composition scholars need to consider the role 
of mundane habit-shaping elements in FPS games by discussing “affec-
tive design.” Coined by games studies researcher James Ash, affective 
design is “the process of attempting to indirectly generate particular 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  101
kinds of affects or responses through the material and aesthetic design of 
products in order to capture and hold users’ attention.”7 While previous 
critical affect theorists like Lauren Berlant and Brigid Featherstone have 
argued that affect and allure have always been part of capitalism, affec-
tive design refers to how FPS games utilize interface design to bombard 
players’ bodies with an intense sensory modulation of positive and nega-
tive reinforcements that quantify the players’ successes and failures. The 
new Foggian techne of affective design does not involve discursive fig-
ures such as metonymy or alliteration but game design techniques such 
as “amplification” that produce hyper-immersive or intense play spaces. 
I offer a specific reading of affective design mechanisms within Bungie 
and Activision’s FPS massively multiplayer online (MMO) Destiny, a 
science-fiction game grounded in the colonization of the solar system.
My initial aim in this chapter is to trace affective design as a Foggian 
design element at play beneath the expressive rhetorical realm in a tradi-
tional videogame genre. In other words, I want to demonstrate that there 
are indeed sophisticated habit-shaping design mechanisms in operation 
in some FPS games at nonconscious levels of habit formation. Building 
on this analysis, my third section argues for the use of procedural habits 
as a lens to connect this mundane design element toward habit’s broader 
role in videogame rhetoric. From the perspective of procedural habits, 
affective design should not be seen as strictly a literal or functional de-
sign element but instead as an important site through which players’ 
bodies are habituated in relationship to broader social and political con-
texts. To demonstrate this point, I examine the theoretical underpin-
nings of Ash’s thinking by exploring previous work on affect by space/
place theorist Nigel Thrift. Thrift contextualizes contemporary capital-
ist interests in creating what he calls a “certain anticipatory readiness 
about the world” (i.e., a habit) by seeking to create deeper product ties 
through affect. In a line of thinking that serves as an update to rhetoric 
and composition studies scholars’ previous work on affect and emotions, 
affect theory highlights how the production of procedural habits in FPS 
occurs because we are able to form deep non-mechanistic habits of cog-
nitive competency within our embodied ecologies of play. In turn, incor-
porating design elements to deepen these affective ties and speed up the 
frequency and amount of environmental positive and negative reinforce-
ment cues can produce a stronger dispositional motive to keep playing.
In the final section, I conclude by examining how affective design re-
lates to the sorts of political implications seen in the arguments of the-
orists like Thrift as well as contemporary philosophers of technology 
like Steven Shaviro and Bernard Stiegler. The primary inroad for theo-
rizing the politics of similar forms of affective design has been through 
what rhetoricians would identify as the canon of memory, in ideas like 
“post-cinematic affect” for Shaviro and “proletariatization of mem-
ory” for Stiegler. By extension, these ideas help us view techne, such as 

102  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
amplification in FPS, as a capitalist strategy to produce affectively intense 
spaces of play. The production of these spaces then causes a phenomenon 
in which players gain a great deal of embodied skill and competence 
but lose what the philosopher Henri Bergson, another non-mechanistic 
theorist of habit, called “recollective memory” (i.e., the ability to recall a 
discrete memory of an activity). Under affective design, there is no more 
memory storage palace, as the ancient rhetorical figure of memory held, 
but what Henri Bergson in another non-mechanistic theoretical concep-
tion called “habit memory.” Extending current scholarship on memory 
and technology in digital rhetoric (Brooke; Pruchnic and Lacey), habit 
memory describes how our forms of embodied repetition within our en-
vironments of play in an FPS game form part of our bodily memory—
the space that affect design seeks to intervene in.
Overall, this chapter’s case study is primarily illustrative. Affective de-
sign helps to signal that a mundane design element can exceed its means-
end function in a traditional videogame genre and become a part of how 
rhetorical habit memories form through play. In other words, a mundane 
design element—affective design—contains within it a space of quite 
sophisticated theoretical reflection to ground videogame rhetoric more 
broadly in procedural habits. In concluding this chapter, I suggest that 
one of the reasons to use Bergson (and other non-mechanistic theorists 
of habit through the book) is that he helps us to see that even when we 
want to be critical of affective design—as Ash and Thrift respectively 
are—discussing procedural habits nevertheless requires us to ground 
our response to affective design without re-bracketing procedural hab-
it’s role in rhetoric. Affective design and habit memory tease out where 
we might draw boundaries between expressive and mundane forms of 
procedural habits. Are procedural habits only expressive when they cor-
respond to a prior theoretical construct, such as capitalist neoliberalism 
in Shaviro and Stiegler’s case? Or, rather, echoing some of the theoretical 
framework for procedural habits in ANT or new materialist theories of 
nonhuman agency, do we argue that affective design can correspond to 
a form of rhetoric other than a narrow human-centered political instru-
mentality? I close this chapter by posing this tension as a bridge toward 
my more detailed efforts to rethink the relationship between critique and 
procedural habits in Chapter 5.
Traditional Texts and Epistemic Rhetoric in FPS
For readers unfamiliar with FPS, I offer a brief introduction to this genre 
alongside the demonstration of my claim that scholarship in rhetoric and 
composition studies largely focuses on expressive rhetorical elements. 
While I mentioned two characteristics of this genre above—first-­person 
perspective and game mechanics that employ various weapons (fists, gre-
nade launchers, pistols, etc.) to eliminate enemies—it is worth noting 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  103
that there are actually few definitions of what elements are essential to 
FPS, even within the growing body of scholarship in this area by games 
studies scholars.8 The reason that definitions are critically important is 
because non-gamers’ assumptions that players of FPS games “just shoot 
enemies” is hardly representative of the game play experience. In sup-
port of this point, games studies researcher David B. Nieborg offers one 
of the best definitions of the essential characteristics of FPS: “In FPS 
games, the player navigates through a virtual world from a first-person 
perspective and interacts in single- or multiplayer combat sequences with 
multiple enemies by using a range of weaponry in order to complete an 
objective.”9 Shooting is an activity that occurs within the context of 
active negotiation of complex labyrinths with obstacles, enemies, hidden 
items, and power ups. Most FPS games require players to balance sur-
vival and finite resource management; ammunition can be intentionally 
limited to force players to shoot accurately and think tactically, such 
as seeking cover at times to regenerate health or learning how to lure a 
single enemy at a time from a larger group to avoid being mobbed. An-
other common characteristic that Nieborg points to is a typical narrative 
structure. At the beginning of most FPS games, like Doom’s unnamed 
marine, Nieborg continues, “you find yourself, usually unintentionally, 
in a strange, hostile place, unarmed and vulnerable”10 (which, as an 
aside, is also a common narrative strategy in classical non-FPS games, 
like The Legend of Zelda or Super Mario Bros.).
However, even Nieborg’s commendable efforts to distill the genre into 
some basic characteristics fail to capture the wide range of theme and 
game mechanics in FPS. In terms of narrative worlds, some FPS games, 
like Call of Duty and Counter-Strike, graft onto real-world themes by 
using realistic depictions of characters, uniforms, situational contexts, 
and weapons specific to historical moments, like World War II or the 
American War on Terror, while others, like Doom or Destiny, operate 
in dystopian science-fiction universes (Figure 3.1).
In terms of game mechanics, not all FPS games even exclusively uti-
lize first-person perspective. Far Cry and Half-Life 2, for example, uti-
lize third-person perspective at various moments. Like Doom and Call 
of Duty, many FPS games offer a linear single-player mode with few 
or minimal side quests beyond the main plot line. However, other FPS 
games do not fit this mold entirely. In the Mass Effect series, which 
meets all of Nieborg’s criteria for an FPS game, a good amount of game 
play also involves complex and intricate dialogues with NPCs in a rich 
narrative universe—elements that Doom lacks entirely (Figure 3.2).
Players’ responses to NPC dialogue have a range of impacts on the 
outcome of the game, from improving the likelihood of gaining a given 
interlocutor as an ally (which can offer small perks later in the game) 
to dramatically impacting the overall outcome of the narrative, such as 
choosing which of a player’s allies will die in a major planetary fight and, 

104  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
in turn, close off the possibility of certain story lines from occurring. In-
deed, in their summary of different scholarly definitions of FPS, Gerald 
Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock suggest that some videogames 
that we typically classify as RPG, such as Skyrim V: Elder Scrolls, be-
cause of the videogames’ intricate ludic and mechanistic components, 
such as complex character generation, more involved narrative architec-
ture, leveling mechanics, and skill systems, nevertheless utilize an exclu-
sive first-person perspective.11 Arguably, Voorhees et al. speculate, the 
Figure 3.2  Screenshot from Mass Effect in which Commander Shephard (the 
protagonist) makes a narrative-altering decision.
Figure 3.1  Screenshot of a live Counter-Strike: GO match.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  105
shotguns and laser rifles of FPS are simply replaced in Skyrim V with 
spell casting, while retaining an identical shoot-to-overcome-obstacles 
mentality, especially in the boss dungeon areas.12
One reason for understanding the wide range of ludic themes and game 
mechanics in contemporary FPS is because it helps to begin to clarify the 
difficult process of beginning to understand how rhetoric and habit can 
be linked to examine FPS. Any discussion of these two terms in the con-
text of FPS has to mention perhaps the most widely known link between 
simulated violence and the production of violent dispositions in public 
discourses surrounding videogames. Following in the footsteps of Doom, 
as FPS started increasing in popularity, many American politicians, med-
ical groups, and family organizations began public awareness campaigns 
to add age restrictions to violent videogames or, in extreme cases, even 
suggest banning them entirely. Perusing websites of activist organizations 
like Families First, one seems to encounter citations of a wide number 
of empirical studies that claim to link playing violent videogames to the 
cultivation of violent real-life behavior. Even the more partisan American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) released a call as recently as July 2016 for 
stricter parental regulation of children’s exposure to violent media (es-
pecially videogames), claiming, “there is broad scientific consensus that 
virtual violence increases aggressive thoughts, feelings and behaviors.”13 
The problem with these assumptions is that there are no empirical studies 
that have established this link. Indeed, as numerous critics of the AAP’s 
press release have observed on gaming blogs, the cited study contains 
the sentence: “It is true that an experimental, real-world study that links 
virtual violence with real-world violence has not been conducted.”14 This 
statement is almost misleading. In fact, a number of studies have demon-
strated that this connection does not exist. In fact, one April 2015 British 
study of school children published in the Journal Psychology of Popular 
Media Culture confirmed that, rather than the content of videogames, 
the length of time spent playing videogames and, especially, the amount 
of time played alone was what ultimately impacted anti-social (aggres-
sive) behavior or likeliness to succeed in school.15
This approach—tracing the public discourse about habit or play—
constitutes one way to approach the rhetoric of FPS, following the focus 
of Sutton-Smith’s The Ambiguity of Play, on the discursive figurations 
of play. We can also use elements of procedural rhetoric to examine rhe-
torical structures in FPS. As an example, consider Bogost’s discussion 
of Grand Theft Auto-San Andreas,16 which is an open-world action-­
adventure game with third-person shooting elements (i.e., the player 
looks at the avatar’s entire body while shooting enemies instead of just 
through the avatar’s eyes). The single player story is centered on Carl 
“CJ” Johnson, who returns from Liberty City to his hometown of Los 
Santos after his mother’s murder. He has to fight corrupt police offi-
cers, establish old gang ties, and discover the culprit behind his mother’s 
murder. In San Andreas, CJ has to eat every so often in order to gain 

106  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
energy to stay alive. In a fairly subtle piece of social commentary, Bogost 
observes how this game does offer a handful of locations to stop and 
purchase a salad to eat, but fast food is much more ubiquitous in the 
virtual urban environment, which he takes as an implicit procedural ar-
gument about the obesity epidemic.17 Here, Bogost observes that many 
commercialized entertainment titles—unlike the explicitly persuasive 
game genre’s didactic purposes—often contain covert elements of pro-
cedural rhetoric. We can easily find similar procedural arguments with 
FPS games. For example, we could ask students to examine whether a 
military-themed FPS game grounded in the historical world of World 
War II, like Call of Duty 3,18 follows the Geneva Convention guidelines 
for treatment of non-military personnel and non-occupied buildings. Do 
the game mechanics allow the player to destroy non-military buildings? 
Are there warnings or significant in-game penalties for killing non-­
combatant NPCs, such as having to start an entire level over?
One of the most common approaches to FPS by scholars interested in 
rhetoric has been Burkean rhetoric.19 In contrast to public accusations 
that FPS cultivates violence, these approaches are useful to explore how 
videogames are capable of dealing with complex forms of rhetorical ad-
dress. For example, Jeoron Bourgonjon, Kris Rutten, Ronald Soetaert, 
and Martin Valcke employ Burke’s pentad to analyze Take-Two Interac-
tive Software’s BioShock title.20 BioShock, the first of three videogames in 
the series, simulates Ayn Rand’s Objectivist utopia from Atlas Shrugged to 
highlight what the game designers see as the various social, political, and 
economic contradictions inherent in her philosophy (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3  Screenshot from BioShock to illustrate Rapture’s visual style.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  107
This title offers unique critical engagement with themes as diverse as 
nationalism, religion, race, and utopian societies. In recognition of this 
fact, the YouTube channel 8-Bit Philosophy, which combines videogame 
characters and scenes with an audio voiceover to introduce non-expert 
audiences to great philosophers, such as Marx, Derrida, or Nietzsche, 
recently shifted its exclusive focus on writers to offer a video on “The 
Philosophy of BioShock.”21
Where there is meaning, there is persuasion, Burke tells us, and Bio-
Shock offers an excellent example of how FPS games can deal with 
complex political issues and themes like any other medium. In as far as 
dramatism (scene, act, agent, purpose, and agency) “enables us to see not 
only the grounds of these interpretations, but to enable alternative ones 
by forcing categorical expectations to shift and thus generate new ways 
of seeing,”22 Bourgenon et al. use pentadic analysis to talk about forms 
of writing and communication in the scene of BioShock’s developers in 
the videogame industry. Connecting to rhetoric and writing researchers’ 
interests in the texts that inform the design of videogames, Bourgenon 
et al. examine published online transcripts of what game designers de-
scribe as their motives to create a particular experience (act) along with 
the techniques that they use (agency). 23 The pentad can also read nar-
rative within the game structures of BioShock. For example, the protag-
onist Jack, who explores Rapture, the underwater city, is lead around 
by Atlas, who speaks to the player over the radio and leads him around 
from the beginning of the game. At one point, Atlas instructs Jack to 
harvest the Little Sisters, a group of orphans living in Rapture who pos-
sess ­“ADAM’”—a substance that enables Jack to gain superpowers if 
injected, by altering his genetic code. The Little Sisters, a community of 
orphaned little girls, are a source of ADAM. Each time the player meets 
a Little Sister, Jack is offered a choice to harvest or rescue. Upon the first 
encounter with a Little Sister in the game, a woman named Tenenbaum 
appears with a different story and, contra Atlas, urges Jack to rescue the 
Little Sisters rather than harvest them.
Burke’s thinking helps us to understand how rhetoric informs these 
moral dynamics. Tenenbaum’s argument, Bourgenon et al., argue, is 
based on Burke’s purpose-act ratio: players use a moral perspective—­
humanity—as their guide in making the decision to either harvest (i.e., 
kill) or rescue the little girl.24 Tenenbaum appears to be morally supe-
rior, and the game mechanics and visuals reinforce this idea. Because 
Tenenbaum is placed into the same room as the player, the player can 
watch Tenenbaum’s facial expressions, which is an experience that makes 
her story—procedurally speaking—more compelling than Atlas’s, who 
the player only encounters through the radio. The “innocence of child-
hood” is also an appeal to broader symbolic values, such as “children are 
priceless.” By comparison, when Atlas, who is helping guide the player 
through Rapture in hopes that Jack will rescue his captured family, 

108  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
urges Jack in this same scene to harvest the little girls for ADAM, Atlas 
utilizes a purpose-agency ratio of the “ends justify the means” and a 
scene-act ratio of “extreme life or death scenarios justify extreme acts.”
While debate exists about how Burke’s relationship to materiality can be 
read, suffice to say Bourgonjon et al. are interested in meaningful narrative 
rhetorics (symbolic action) and not how BioShock produces embodied hab-
its as a form of interaction (non-symbolic motion). Following my diagnosis 
of an ongoing division between expressive and mundane rhetorical theo-
ries in videogame rhetoric, embodiment’s role as part of rhetoric is simply 
not a significant consideration for their analysis. We find frequent mani-
festations of this division within other scholarly treatments of FPS, within 
what our field would call social-epistemic approaches to rhetoric, along 
the lines of Voorhees’s claim that “every representation is in some way 
ideological.” One of many examples, Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins’s 
seminal book From Barbie to Mortal Kombat offered a major diagnosis 
of the sexism of the videogame industry, which in many ways continues to 
be dominated by FPS, and especially sexualized representations of female 
bodies. For example, noted feminist videogame critic and YouTube vlogger 
Anita Sarkeesian complained about Overwatch’s initial female characters 
(especially Mercy) as reproducing patriarchal norms for beauty. Indeed, in 
acknowledgment of the legitimacy of these criticisms, Blizzard/Activision 
eventually released Zarya, a Russian soldier who is the “world’s strongest 
woman,” and in July 2016, released an older female character, Ana, who 
is the mother of one of the original characters (Pharah).
Other examples of the social-epistemic approach to rhetorical analyses 
of videogames include a number of essays in Gerald A. Voorhees, Joshua 
Call, and Katie Whitlock’s pioneering edited collection Guns, Grenades 
and Grunts.25 Voorhees’s essay in the collection, for example, traces links 
between military narratives and themes and the tacit advocacy for Ameri-
can military and foreign interests as a way to demonstrate how videogames 
function to reproduce larger ideological structures. A great deal of game 
and media studies scholarship offers any number of engagements with how 
the narrative and visual features of FPS games reproduce cultural studies 
topoi of race, class, gender, economics, and sexuality along the lines of Jessy 
Ohl and Aaron Ducan’s work on masculinity in the FPS game Hey Baby.26
Habit’s Mechanism in Contemporary FPS
While productive, these approaches do not tell us much about how FPS 
games produce embodied habits, let alone how habit might function as 
part of rhetoric. In a summative evaluation of the state of FPS scholar-
ship, games studies researcher Christopher Moore comments:
…games studies often privilege the importance of representation, 
focusing on visual perception and semiotic activity (with the occa-
sional regard to sound), but FPS players not only move and target, 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  109
they direct movement, monitor sounds, manage inputs, and they 
experience rapid changes between conditions of excitement, panic, 
elation, or disappointment.27
Furthermore, Moore says:
…the ideological operation involved in the production of meaning, 
from the content of the game to its role in the player’s larger world 
beyond the game, is extensive, but it does not exhaustively account 
for the full spectrum of the player’s experience.28
Moore confirms that there are in fact physiological forces at work in FPS 
that need to serve as a site of critical investigation. However, in support 
of my claim that our view of habit (mechanistic or non-mechanistic) is 
important, if we do not specifically try to theorize habit as a creative 
force, then mechanism will invariably end up being the default.
As a notable example of this potential, consider David Golumbia’s 
criticism of FPS on the grounds of reducing gameplay to embodied rep-
etition. Golumbia’s interest in videogames stems from a concern that 
while early videogames, like the most widely distributed Pong, resem-
bled its analog counterpart (table tennis), many contemporary videog-
ames, including FPS, fail to keep an analogue to non-videogame forms 
of play. As a result, contemporary videogames overwhelmingly disguise 
play as work, by failing to offer an actual space for imaginative activi-
ties or ludic fun. Golumbia argues that FPS games offer players limited 
choices (i.e., the player can only kill enemies). In FPS, “all actions in such 
a game are completely or almost completely scripted”.29
With respect to the varied terrain of FPS that I mentioned at the begin-
ning of the previous section in this chapter, it is not difficult to take issue 
with Golumbia’s broad-based generalizations. On the one hand, as I noted 
above, there is more to FPS than just shooting. In their seminal textbook, 
Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman use the idea of “core mechanisms” in 
game design to designate “the essential play activity that players perform 
again and again” as one distinguishing feature to characterize different 
videogame genres (e.g., FPS, RPG, social media clicker games, etc.).30 In 
the case of FPS games with minimal narrative architecture, like Doom, 
Golumbia’s comments might seem valid. However, other games studies 
scholars have argued that it is not shooting that is the primary core me-
chanic of FPS but visual and spatial navigation. After all, players do not 
just shoot from the same spot while standing still. They shoot while ac-
tively orienting themselves to the real-time unfolding obstacles, enemies, 
and spaces of play. On the other hand, and despite Golumbia’s assertion to 
the contrary, FPS games have varying degrees of narrative. He complains:
But what is missing in most FPS games is the rest of the material one 
finds in the typical narratives read by those who value literature, 

110  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
which is to say, the complex individual and relationship identifi-
cations that make literature not simply a sequence of events but a 
version of human engagement … Few people play computer games 
for their narrative richness or for their resemblance to the complex 
human events at the representation of which novels, films, and even 
television have always been adept.31
In this passage, he clearly ignores examples such as BioShock’s complex 
treatments of Ayn Rand’s philosophy.
These points aside, the reason Golumbia’s essay is worth mentioning 
in the context of my argument is because he reveals one of the needs to 
make sure that our theories of rhetoric avoid a mechanistic conception 
of habit. At the root of his frustration with FPS games is that they privi-
lege mundane forms of videogame interactivity over expressive ones like 
literary narrative. Unlike chess, a game of intellectual skill with rigid 
rules, FPS game players, he alleges, have almost no complex choices to 
make that demand concentration. Rather:
What demands concentration are the physical acts that make up the 
bulk of the gameplay; the player’s mind is either left to wander in 
the hypnotic state created by absorption into the game’s visual (and 
its sounds), or is intently absorbed in the sensations of playing them-
selves, whether visualized on screen or imagined.32
Using this division as a grounds to dismiss embodiment from thinking, 
simply because the medium foregrounds it in ways that other genres do 
not, parallels Bogost’s complaint about Foggian rhetoric: good (rhetori-
cal) games utilize cognitive demands, while bad (rhetorical) games adul-
terate the senses. Lacking any expressive role for habit, it is fairly easy 
for him to conclude that repetitive forms of embodiment form part of a 
neoliberal plot to colonize leisure time into work.
Thus, Golumbia offers rhetoric and composition scholars a caution-
ary tale, one that is important to bear in mind because he is not incor-
rect that one trend within FPS design—BioShock notwithstanding—has 
been away from creating rich narrative architectures. While Doom’s pro-
totype for FPS games released a single-player mode as the central feature 
with a small online multiplayer fight component, this trend has inverted 
in recent years for the most popular FPS games. The FPS Star Wars: 
Battlefront, which I mention as an example in Chapter 1, was released 
without a single-player narrative campaign and consists entirely of dif-
ferent multiplayer encounters. Beside a tutorial and two practice modes, 
Counter-Strike: GO offers only 6 v 6 PvP modes of Quick Play (play for 
XP, rewards, and fun) and Competitive (play for XP/Experience points, 
rewards, and rankings versus other players). Blizzard/Activision’s FPS 
Overwatch is identical, consisting entirely of short multiplayer battles. 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  111
Simply put, many popular FPS games now foreground embodiment in 
ways that more narratively driven FPS games like BioShock do not.
Echoing social-epistemic approaches to rhetoric above, we should, of 
course, avoid mistaking the game mechanics for the entirety of a FPS 
game’s rhetorical situation. Golumbia is clearly not thinking about forms 
of creative rhetorical activities that players bring to networked FPS 
games. For example, Counter-Strike: GO’s popularity is due to many 
reasons: designers’ constant updates to maintain competitive balance, 
the nature of online match structures (many rounds with the ability to 
purchase new resources in between rounds), and especially the rise in 
competitive e-Sports. However, one especially important reason is that 
players can use an online user-generated content feature (like map mak-
ers) to gain revenue by adding their creations to the game. For this reason, 
Keven Moberly and Ryan M. Moeller discuss how modding functions 
as an important form of creative rhetorical interaction (and, of course, 
we could cynically see a continuation of Golumbia’s complaint that for-
profit modding turns players into part-time employees for game design-
ers who invest unpaid creative energy with an uncertain expectation of 
reward).33 Furthermore, Steam links players’ viewing accounts in Twitch 
so players can earn rewards for watching other players livestream, and in 
turn, players use these rewards to purchase resources in Counter-Strike: 
GO—a Foggian behavioral reinforcement mechanism. Along these lines, 
it is actually more accurate to declare that game designers’ diminishing 
emphasis on narrative is a response to players’ preferences to shift the 
location of expressive rhetorical content from what game designers create 
toward what players’ creativity and social media networks can structure.
Affective Design in Contemporary FPS
Yet, rather than dismiss Golumbia’s reduction of the rhetorical situation 
to game mechanics, I want to look even more closely at how game me-
chanics in FPS games produce habits. While we do not want to accept 
the reduction of a player’s encounter with an FPS game to a mindless 
habit, it is not inaccurate to declare that contemporary FPS shooters 
are attempting to produce habits through game design mechanisms. In 
this section, I will describe how affective design is functionally used in 
contemporary FPS games such as Destiny, and in the following section, 
I will begin to unpack how Ash’s grounding in affect theory helps us 
reach a non-mechanistic understanding of affective design, to expand 
upon Golumbia’s mechanism or the implied mechanism of the expressive 
forms of rhetoric I identified in the previous section.
In the context of videogames, affective design refers to the ways in 
which designers attempt to incorporate more sensory stimulations during 
play (i.e., making more behavioral cues within an environment) in order 
to heighten physiological affect across the full spectrum of sensory inputs. 

112  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
It is not a term that describes rhetorical effects of narrative or symbolic 
action or on-screen ideological representations, but—if we were to call 
it a form of rhetoric—it would only seek to operate at Burke’s realm of 
non-symbolic motion. The simplest illustration of affective design can be 
seen in a comparison between older and newer FPS (Figures 3.4 and 3.5).
Figure 3.4  Screenshots of weapon differences from Halo 2 and Halo 3.
Figure 3.5  Screenshots of weapon differences from Halo 2 and Halo 3.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  113
In contrast to the clunky Buck Rogers-esque energy weapon in the 
FPS videogame Halo 2, which actually decreased many players’ desire to 
pick them up and use them, Halo 3 offered a new element.34 While the 
game mechanics remained fairly similar, the new highly stylized weap-
ons stimulated a greater range of tactile and sensory inputs to improve a 
consumer’s experience with a microlevel of affective enjoyment.
With respect to such small shifts, readers may be tempted to ask, “So 
what?” Just as an ancient Greek rhetor in the agora would be unwise to 
deprive herself of the delivery advantages of an excellent speaking voice by 
speaking in a monotone or mumbling or a document designer would be 
unwise to avoid the rule of thirds in assessing how to crop a photograph, 
a videogame designer can surely be forgiven for wishing to use visual rep-
resentations that are more appealing. While a weapon’s appearance may 
seem trivial, commercial FPS videogame designers gamble that adding mul-
tiple microlevels of affect will produce a greater emergent whole in terms of 
user experience than can be located in any individual analysis of its parts, 
thereby helping determine if a videogame will gain commercial popularity.
Making tiny details, such as score reinforcement, more prominent is 
part of what Ash calls a techne of “amplification,” through which de-
signers attempt to produce a state of embodied “captivation.”35 Am-
plification refers to constant sensory stimulation and positive/negative 
feedback to sustain a particular affective state of play for a given du-
ration of time. Our typical meaning of amplification is an increase or 
expansion, such as how an electric guitar player uses an amplifier to be 
heard from a greater distance. Mechanical engineers understand am-
plification as a signal’s change in amplitude. Amplifiers utilize transfer 
functions to take an input signal and shift to a different output signal. 
This distinction is important because the amplification of affect is not 
an increase in affect but a different way of modeling affect. In Ash’s 
thinking, it means the alteration of affective states and particularly, the 
attempt to maintain a positive or negative state for a sustained period of 
time in order to captivate players’ attention.
Another visual manifestation lies in a design shift in how positive rein-
forcement is given in contemporary FPS games. As a case in point, con-
sider the general game mechanic of “progression.” Completing actions 
(defeating enemies) results in game rewards (better equipment or abili-
ties). Experience is quantified in order to chart progression and attribute 
rewards. Most traditional videogames—like Super Mario Bros.—do of-
fer players a running coin counter (in tiny print at the top of the screen) 
but reserve overall affirmations of positive feedback for once a level 
has been cleared, with a distinct non-interactive screen that announces 
something like, “Level over. Congratulations.” (Figure 3.6).
What changes in affective design is that visual quantification is linked 
in real time to not only symbolic but also visceral experiences of achieve-
ment or failure. In Call of Duty 5, for example, a player might have to kill 
200 enemies to progress;36 the player receives real-time micro-feedback 

114  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
(“+10 kill rating”) to evaluate each kill, with more points awarded to 
headshots than bodyshots.
While older abstract games such as Tetris do offer immediate point 
feedback as a running total, the score fits into a tiny box that is not de-
signed to interfere with the player’s perception of the play environment. 
By contrast, in Call of Duty 5, the visual reinforcement for shooting 
other players is enhanced in comparison with normal play modes. In 
killing an opposing player, the following visual update is typical: “Kill 
+100; 1x Zone Control +50; Headshot +10; and a total +160.” Players 
also gain badges, such as “Marksman” for a difficult long-range kill; 
badges appear in the center of the display along with any crystals that 
a dead enemy drops. Simply put, affective design represents a rhetorical 
strategy to create as many forms of physiological and sensory positive 
and negative reinforcement as possible, to have the highest degree of 
opportunity for players to cultivate habits of play.
Affective Design in Destiny
Affective design is not limited to Call of Duty 5.37 As an example, I want 
to look at some of these similar features in a different FPS game, Des-
tiny.38 My choice is due primarily to Destiny’s popularity and novelty 
during the time I was drafting the bulk of this book manuscript. Since 
the release of Destiny in September 2014, it remains a fairly popular FPS 
game. Notably, it is the first videogame of its kind to foreground multi-
player co-operation as a core game mechanic for completing linear plot 
storylines. To complete levels that relate to progressing the narrative, 
Figure 3.6  Screenshot of live Call of Duty 5 match’s “Kill Streak” visual display.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  115
FPS games are typically single-player. If there is a multiplayer mode, 
then it is usually restricted to PvP fighting in separate online arenas that 
have no interaction with the single-play narrative world. Destiny does 
have these online PvP elements as well (The Crucible), but it uniquely 
forces players to work together to actually progress the narrative sto-
ryline. Unsurprisingly, Destiny also uses unique dimensions of affective 
design that reflect those found in other popular FPS games, such as the 
Call of Duty franchise. As a result, Destiny can offer us a representative 
example of how seven million players worldwide (as of July 2015) culti-
vate procedural habits through affective design.
Developed by Bungie and distributed by Activision, Destiny arrived as 
one of the most anticipated videogames of the year. Mixed reviews swiftly 
followed. Destiny’s plot is weak, as numerous online players’ forums have 
complained. It is advertised as a partial role-playing “mythic science-­
fiction” plotline. Humans had spread out from Earth and colonized the 
solar system. Following a Golden Age, there was a “Collapse” where unity 
and peace gave way to warring factions. Survivors on Earth were saved by 
a celestial body called “the Traveler” that hovers above Earth, providing 
the guardians with safety as they try to recolonize the solar system, which 
has been occupied by aliens (The Fallen, The Vex, and The Cabal). Each 
player plays a guardian who has to help restore the Traveler while destroy-
ing alien threats. The plot exists in short cut scenes that are often minimal-
ist and even confusing and have very little to do with the mechanics.
Destiny’s originality as a videogame lies in the fact that it is one of the 
first hybrid FPS games to exist in an MMO network as a centralized game 
mechanic. Destiny also seems to have an element of many other popu-
lar videogame genres: individual players share many parts of the various 
worlds with other players. While players can gain experience by working 
individually, the mechanics encourage multiplayer interaction. Destiny 
offers incentives to keep replaying raids to try for rare weapon drops, 
which offer considerable advantages during play. Players can select one of 
three major player classes (Titan, Defender, and Striker) to engage in role-­
playing. Destiny also offers “perk systems” for users to customize their 
avatars. The videogame offers player-versus-environment missions across 
three planets. Players can “solo” (i.e., play alone) or join three-person 
“Fireteams.” In patrol mode on a given planet, players can travel freely 
around the planet. Destiny also allows PvP combat in “The Crucible,” 
where players can fight one another individually or in teams (e.g., “Clash”; 
“Skirmish”). For those unfamiliar with this genre of videogame, other 
FPS games often emphasize one or two of these various elements, but no 
other current FPS game offers such a wide variety of play experiences.
In addition to its novel forms of game play, Destiny also offers a num-
ber of unique affective design elements. In Destiny’s patrol mode, play-
ers are free to wander around in a zone on a given planet in the solar 
system (Figure 3.7).

116  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
In other open-world games, such as Skyrim V: The Elder Scrolls, players 
have maps of the local spaces that they interact with as well as maps of the 
entire terrain. New tasks or missions are often highlighted on these maps. 
While it is not uncommon for random NPCs to approach a player with 
side quests, players more frequently have to find side quests in Skyrim V 
by taking initiative to engage random NPCs in dialogue. What changes in 
Destiny’s open-world patrol mode is the techne of amplification: the sheer 
speed with which the game prompts players to take on side quests. Ghost, 
my avatar’s bot companion, signals to my character the presence of daily 
quests from the moment I descend on a given planet (Earth, Moon, Venus, 
or Mars) and gain my bearings. Destiny players do not have to search for 
side quests for more than a few seconds. Once selected, pathways to quests 
are highlighted, and a numerical counter lets me know how close or far 
away different quests are. Even when I ignore a quest and simply fly my 
avatar’s hover bike around a given world, the prompts keep shifting. Im-
mersed within the game, I am surrounded, by various Foggian persuasive 
technologies as core game mechanics. Destiny reads my character’s inter-
action with the game space and offers me a steady stream of environmen-
tal cues to keep me continuously engaged. Destiny also seeks to create a 
temporal habit of continuous play by offering public Events (“Kill Target,” 
“Defend Warsat,” “Enemy Battle,” and so on) in open-world spaces that 
have a percentage change (65%, 80%, 95%) of spawning at various win-
dows.39 Players are encouraged to go to various locations at specific times 
to wait for the opportunity for these Events to appear. Indeed, numerous 
websites offer free Destiny Timer apps for mobile devices that help alert 
players to when windows for Events are likely to occur.
Figure 3.7  Screenshot of open-world patrolling in Destiny.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  117
The point of locating these sorts of affective design elements is not 
to suggest that other videogames do not offer similar elements or that 
videogame designers should stop employing these mechanisms. Indeed, 
offering fast routes to side quests is a smart and well-founded game 
mechanic to lengthen playing time, give players a break from the main 
quest, or offer the opportunity to develop specialized skills or earn 
points/currency to purchase specialized talents or weapons to make the 
main quests easier. My point is that, unlike other role-playing games, 
Destiny’s goal is to make an affective habit through constant charac-
ter leveling and maximizing positive reinforcement. Rather than have 
to recall locations on maps, players are quickly channeled from affec-
tive encounter to affective encounter. The goal is not to create spaces 
for players to explore or think but to expose players to a never-ending 
stream of physiological stimulation. Destiny’s overarching procedural 
message is that every second should be spent on improving (leveling) my 
character in some way. By design, it is not a space conducive to lengthy 
explorations or discoveries. Rather, Destiny seeks to channel all of the 
player’s efforts into constant progression and interactivity.
The game mechanics that structure Destiny’s Fireteam raids also re-
flect a techne of amplification. It is hardly a new claim that videogames 
in general operate through a balance of a player’s control and a player’s 
negotiation of contingent in-game obstacles. As Thomas Malaby puts 
it, players want to exist in games in effortless or seamless movement 
(“games are distinctive in their achievement of a generative balance be-
tween the open-endedness of contingencies and the reproducibility of 
conditions for action”) by solving in-game obstacles, such as enemies 
to shoot who impact this effortless state.40 Understanding exactly this 
principle, Destiny swiftly earned high praise from “hard core” gamers 
for its never-ending waves of enemies once a player leaves the open world 
to complete a dungeon, raid, or main quest. Having played all of the 
main raids from levels 1 to 30, I can affirm that Destiny is unique in 
that it never pauses to allow players to breathe or relax. Even if I solo 
a zone (i.e., play by myself without the recommended two player team-
mates), the pause button will not stop enemies from advancing. Destiny 
requires constant negotiation of multiple enemies of differing abilities 
and weaknesses. Perhaps more so than many of the FPS games I have 
played, Destiny also carefully regulates ammunition and weapon drops 
by enemies to force players to make split-second decisions about which 
guns to use on which enemies.
These sorts of multiplayer spaces in FPS games like Destiny are in-
creasingly supposed to produce what Ash calls “intense spaces,” another 
manifestation of affective design. Intense spaces are not deterministic but 
rather are designed to increase the likelihood of producing a heightened 
affective response between player and game. A designer can no more 
control all players’ individualized responses than a rhetor an audience’s 

118  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
actions following a speech. Nevertheless, the more a play space presents 
behavioral cues at fast speeds, the more it requires a player’s conscious 
attention to perform well, and the more our desire to form habits to ease 
the burden placed upon our conscious attention is used against us. Ash 
offers an example in Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare.41 The game offers 
sixteen different multiplayer maps, all of which can contain a number 
of architectural structures (stairways, corridors, rooftops) with different 
sizes to create unpredictable and complex forms of player interaction. 
In any given multiplayer space, players do not look at generic spaces or 
what they represent (farms, villages, urban environments, warehouse). 
Rather, and starting to highlight a connection to memory and embodi-
ment, players have to cultivate a habit of learning maps in relationship 
to the ability to perform certain in-game activities. In the map “Over-
grown,” for example, walls both block players’ abilities to fire upon 
one another and also allow for random contact, because opponents can 
bounce grenades off walls and into an attic section where players usu-
ally like to hide. The walls of “Overgrown” are designed to create very 
intense spaces of interaction.
Destiny’s multiplayer mode offers similar forms of amplification to 
produce intense spaces. Consider one Crucible Match in the “Shores of 
Time” (Maat Mons, Venus) zone. The space is small and designed to 
maximize player encounters. It is divided up into a labyrinth of walls 
from broken down or partially standing buildings, increasing the need 
to avoid moving in a straight line but forcing players to constantly nego-
tiate the terrain. The buildings have many tunnels where the bright light 
of the outside shifts to near pitch black (Figure 3.8).
Figure 3.8  Screenshot of a live Crucible PvP match in Capture mode in the 
Shores of Time stage.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  119
One mission is “Capture” and defend with a Fireteam (PvP); players 
must “capture zones, kill enemy players.” When a player scrolls over 
an enemy, despite the speed of the game, the player receives numerous 
visible data points on the screen, including the enemy’s player level and 
gamertag. While the small space guarantees that players will encoun-
ter one another, the audio commentator keeps offering encouragement 
(“capture and defend, Guardians”) as well as real-time updates about 
how a player’s team is performing, such as “Gained the lead” when a 
player’s team pulls ahead or “Area secure” if all enemies in a zone have 
been eliminated. Lest a player be tempted to stop and rest after clearing 
a zone, the game audio will invariably provide an update from some 
other area of the map, such as “Enemy captured zone C.”
From Affective Design to Procedural Habits
Is affective design a Foggian design strategy? Absolutely. Besides the fact 
that it follows his basic design structure—in which a mundane habit-­
shaping element seeks to produce nonconscious forms of positive and 
negative behavioral reinforcement—Fogg’s single citation in Persuasive 
Technologies to a twentieth-century rhetoric scholar is to a technical 
communication essay by Karen Schriver. Schriver’s essay describes 
how the use of style (spatial layout, font style) in document design is 
rhetorical. In Persuasive Technologies, Fogg classifies these stylistic 
embellishments as a form of what he calls “microsuasion.”42 While 
“macrosuasion” is the overall persuasive goal of a product, such as when 
the videogame HIV Roulette seeks to persuade teenagers to engage in 
safe sex,43 microsuasion refers to a scenario when “Some computing 
products, such as email programs or image manipulation software, 
do not have an overall intent to persuade, but they could incorporate 
smaller persuasive elements to achieve a different overall goal.”44 Fogg 
offers an example of the software Quicken, Intuit’s personal finance 
program, which offers users positive reinforcement (direct praise) for 
balancing their online check registry or other necessary but menial 
tasks. This connection for affective design might be better theorized 
through Lanham’s Economics of Attention. Lanham argued that the 
digital marked an era in which networked information makes “style” 
more important than “substance,” where a company’s ability to be able 
to call attention to products’ style becomes vastly more important than 
the products’ substance (logical appeals or use value).45 Similarly, affec-
tive design represents a way in which game designers can add more sty-
listic features to try to captivate players’ embodied attention in order to 
form a habit of play. Overall, it seems like affective design is a mundane 
habit-shaping design element at work beneath the screen in a traditional 
commercialized genre that does not have habit formation as its narrative 
or expressive goal.

120  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
However, while Fogg’s work offers a descriptive lens and an exi-
gency to pay attention to these types of design elements, my theoretical 
framework for procedural habits requires us to connect the presence of 
a habit-shaping design element toward a non-mechanistic view of habit 
production. Here, there are two contexts worth extending: first, the con-
nection between affect and habit production in general and, after this 
connection is established, between affect and the canon of memory. In 
other words, it is not enough to just observe that this design technique is 
attempting to produce a habit. Instead, we need to highlight what type 
of habituated body is produced and in turn connect this body type as a 
lens for thinking through broader political implications of procedural 
habits for FPS games.
While Ash does not unpack this context in great detail, affective de-
sign is grounded in affect theory. Rhetoric and writing scholars from 
a wide variety of disciplinary areas and research interests have previ-
ously engaged affect in rhetoric and writing studies in order to discuss 
how emotions, space, and place are interconnected with how we think 
and write. As a way to quickly introduce the theoretical concept of af-
fect, I have always found the philosopher Brian Massumi’s differentia-
tion of emotion and affect via Deleuze and Guattari to be instructive. 
­Emotions are subjective, personal, and knowable.46 By contrast, affect 
is “a prepersonal intensity corresponding to the passage from one ex-
periential state of the body to another and implying an augmentation 
or diminution in that body’s capacity to act.”47 A bit generally stated, 
affects are forces that work at nonconscious (“prepersonal”) levels of 
habituation. Habits are not positive or negative (good or bad) in them-
selves. Affect may lead us to vote for or against a particular political 
candidate in the same stroke that we may adjust our habitual manner of 
sitting to the particular configurations of the type of chair at the lecture 
podium in our classrooms.
As an embodied intensity, affect structures procedural habits of all 
kinds—and not just those that a game designer attempts to produce. 
To play a videogame is to be constantly conditioned through affect, 
from the ambient lighting in our living rooms or offices to the type of 
game controller or computer keyboards that subtly configure our bodily 
positions and gestures. Our eyes adjust to the particular screen sizes 
and resolutions that we habitually use to play videogames or the game 
mechanics within the genres of videogames that we play. For example, 
consider media studies theorist Jason Farman’s discussion of the idea of 
“implacement.”48 Working with a similar view of how embodiment and 
cognition form in relationship to one another (but from a framework 
grounded in Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Katherine Hayles), implace-
ment describes how our reception of digital meaning depends upon our 
actively cultivated embodied contexts of use. If we play the same FPS 
game on a mobile device in a crowded public space like the DC Metro 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  121
versus playing the same FPS videogame on our home PC in a silent of-
fice at home as a habitual practice, the embodied context is different. 
Regardless of whether we call these forces rhetoric per se or simply con-
ditions of possibility for rhetoric, affects and implacements are neverthe-
less important agentive forces in shaping how we create and respond to 
rhetorical meaning in videogames through the body.
While affect theorists do not always mention the term, “habit” shares 
a key role in helping us adapt to new affects. We may be more aware 
of certain forms of affectivity when we are first learning a new videog-
ame, for example. To revisit the double-law of habit that I discuss via 
Ravaisson in Chapter 2, procedural habits diminish or mute the inten-
sity with which humans experience external impulses to action. Any 
first-time players of a contemporary FPS game will feel overwhelmed 
at first, even if in-game tutorials are useful and instructive. With affec-
tive design in Destiny as a case in point, contemporary FPS games have 
come a long way since Duck Hunt on the NES, in which a player simply 
aims the plastic gun at the screen and clicks a single button to shoot 
at a duck. For example, the Counter-Strike: GO Wikia lists over 100 
keyboard combination commands that a brand new player must learn 
to play Counter-Strike: GO, including basic movements (left, right, up, 
down), complex movements (strafing, swimming up, swimming down), 
communication (group radio messages, standard radio messages, chat 
messages), and attacking (fire primary weapon, first secondary weapon, 
reload, weapons switch, drop current weapon).49 Furthermore, players 
also have to learn how to use these commands within rhythms of the 
game mechanics and, more importantly, in relationship to experienced 
players’ patterns and routines. A new player unfamiliar with FPS games 
will initially feel as if an FPS game like Destiny or Counter-Strike: GO 
is chaotic. He or she has yet to contract habits to help modulate these 
heightened forms of affect. The player is initially overwhelmed by the 
inability to productively order all of these sensory and cognitive affects. 
Over time, however, a new player will start to develop a basic rhythm for 
how to use these commands in relationship to various procedural oper-
ations. This feeling of basic competency is habit kicking in to modulate 
which affects we consciously allow or passively internalize to become 
a habit. If an emergent behavioral cue in a videogame causes frequent 
skillful responses, then the force of habit is what lessens the strength that 
a new behavioral cue tends to have in order to enable successful maneu-
vering in the space of play.
Unsurprisingly, affective design signals that videogame designers have 
also realized the extent to which habit plays a role in how we make 
various media practices into daily habits. While Ash coins the term “af-
fective design,” the framework he draws upon is grounded in the space/
place theorist Nigel Thrift’s work on affect and creativity (i.e., rhetori-
cal invention). For context, Thrift is well-known for his development of 

122  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
“nonrepresentational theory,” in which he urges his primary audience 
of geographers and space/place theorists not just to study cultural and 
semiotic representations of spaces but the actual embodied practices that 
occur within them. In this particular essay, Thrift is primarily interested 
in a shift in how capitalism’s managerial class has sought to start lever-
aging the mind’s nonconscious forms of creativity. His starting place 
is the idea “forethought” or “rather the possibilities of plumbing the 
non-cognitive realm and ‘fast’ thinking in general, a search typified by 
a book like Malcolm Gladwell’s recent business bestseller, Blink.”50 A 
growing number of the discourses of the managerial class have realized 
that consciousness is fragmentary and that a great deal of our thinking 
is produced by the non-cognitive relays with our environments. In other 
words, our technologies of play and tools provide an ambient back-
ground setting within which we can find meaning in experience.
Within this set of concerns, we find a link to non-mechanistic ap-
proaches to habit. In relying on what cognitive researcher Merlin Donald 
calls our “deep automaticities” (i.e., our habits), “we can achieve great 
things intellectually.”51 This line of thinking confirms that the majority 
of our affective attachments and even modes of reasoning are habitual 
and trained. Even skills such as reading, writing, or sitting in a university 
lecture hall are “second nature” in Aristotle’s sense. Thrift describes 
basic acquired and not innate skills: “The system of reading and writing 
trains people to apply a highly detailed set of eye and other corporeal 
movements to a set of systematic practices that allow the environment 
to act as a prosthetic for thinking (and allow resultant ideas to hold still 
long enough to be worked on and developed).”52 In turn, product design-
ers now understand that human attention is fragmented and distributed 
into the semi-durable patterns within which the environments around us 
are held in place. We live primarily within “systems and environments 
and sites that extend awareness, systems and environments and sites that 
are increasingly artificial and increasingly made up of commodities.”53 
Amazingly, Thrift confirms that it is not just rhetorical theorists and me-
dia studies scholars who are interested in claims, such as those by Andy 
Clark, that we have always been “natural born cyborgs” who exter-
nalize our thinking processes in the environments around us. Business 
discourses and marketers have picked up on these ideas as well.
In part, Thrift’s essay examines how business classes try to utilize 
these cognitive extensions to tap into employees’ nonconscious creative 
potential in order to extract more intellectual work (and surplus value) 
from them. However, the relevant part of his essay for affective design 
lies in his insights for how our daily habits of forming nonconscious 
affective ties relate to product design. To offer a point of contrast, older 
Mad Men-era paradigms of marketing (according to Thrift) tried to fo-
cus on bringing consumers’ desires into alignment with the brand iden-
tity of the product. However, if consumers’ desires are produced through 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  123
their daily habits, then a far easier way to sell products is not to change 
these desires but to design products in a way that heightens and mul-
tiplies the reception of these affective cues. Here, it is useful to quote 
Thrift at length:
It has become clear that affectively binding consumers through their 
own passions and enthusiasms sells more goods. Consumption is 
itself a series of affective fields and more and more of the industry 
that investigates consumer wants and desires is given over to iden-
tifying possible emotional pressure points. It has also led them to 
consider the design composition of things in more detail to see if it is 
possible to provide more in the way of momentary ‘thing power’, as 
well as the associated construction of circumstances rich enough in 
calculative prostheses to allow the neuro-aesthetic to function more 
forcefully, via the construction of a disposition that can produce a 
spatial appropriateness in the moment regularly and reproducibly, 
thereby not so much taming as harnessing chanciness to produce 
‘small miracles’. In other words, the aim is to produce a certain an-
ticipatory readiness about the world, a rapid perceptual style which 
can move easily between interchangeable opportunities, thus adding 
to the sum total of intellect that can be drawn on.54
This passage is a bit confusing taken out of context as it begins by dis-
cussing how products can be designed to intervene in the ways in which 
­humans—by (second) nature—form habits with our environments of 
play. The first part of this describes affective design as a generalized 
capitalist commodification strategy, which, as Ash argues, can be seen 
in contemporary FPS games. However, by the end of the passage, Thrift 
quickly shifts back toward concluding about the implications for how 
business managers are seeking to utilize these forces to produce an 
“anticipatory readiness about the world” in their employees’ habits of 
creativity. Both ideas hinge on this idea of thing power from Bennett’s 
Vibrant Matter. As I briefly mention in Chapter 1, Bennett’s new mate-
rialist philosophy is thinking about how the objects around us produce 
affects and agencies that structure our ability to move and interact with 
a space or a simulated space within a videogame (Thrift, however, as 
I will note later on, is using thing power in a slightly different sense from 
Bennett). In turn, affective design constitutes an attempt—in Thrift’s 
words—not to tame (i.e., determine) but to harness these prepersonal 
forces to produce deeper habits of consumption, in the case of videogame 
players, or creation, in the case of employee creativity. In both scenarios, 
affective design emerges out of a concern with attempting to appeal to 
registers of the sense that have been formerly neglected, “thus stimulat-
ing the emotions connected with things, and so generally producing more 
affective grip for those things.”55 Simply put, more engaging products 

124  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
produce more opportunities to cultivate player-consumer commitments. 
The more environmental behavioral cues a product can get a consumer 
or user to respond to, the more that the use has a chance to become a 
habit (so that thinking goes). I think the analogy to habit would be, if a 
product, once used, can start this habit-forming (affectively intense) ex-
perience to work as an “internalized regime” on as many physiological 
registers as possible, then the theory is that users/consumers will create 
a deeper habit of use than if they were to purchase a product that only 
appealed to, say, one sense to the detriment of others.
The Politics of Memory in Affective Design
Thrift helps me to link any discussion of procedural habits through af-
fective design to non-mechanistic orientations. Habits do not constrain 
players’ abilities to think in the world. Rather, habits shape players’ 
thought and, in turn, mundane FPS interface design mechanisms at-
tempt to produce habits of play to interact with players’ physiological 
states. In other words, affective design does indeed avoid a strict Kan-
tian mechanism. Ash and Thrift, respectively, describe how procedural 
habits of affect form productive subjects. However, it is not clear if this 
turn to procedural habits avoids the expressive/mundane boundary of 
critique. We can see this tension within how affective design links up to 
the canon of memory.
The relationship between modes of capitalist subject-formation and 
affective design is more clearly seen not in Thrift but in other contem-
porary theorists who have explored the relationship between technology 
and the capitation of attention through memory. For example, Ash in 
his discussion of affective design at one point references Steven Shaviro’s 
comment that “[d]igital technologies, together with neoliberal economic 
relations, have given birth to radically new ways of manufacturing and 
articulating lived experience.”56 Shaviro would incline us to view FPS 
games as:
…machines for generating affect, and for capitalizing upon and 
extracting value from, this affect. As such they are not ideologi-
cal structures, as an older sort of Marxist criticism would have it. 
Rather, they lie at the very heart of social production, circulation 
and distribution.57
While Ash does not make the connection, one of Shaviro’s related no-
tions of “post-cinematic affect” offers a more complete illustration of 
where theoretical ideas such as affective design are headed. Shaviro ex-
amines how Michael Bay’s Transformers series represents a trend (“neu-
rocinema”) in which some commercial films are manufactured in order 
to maximize an audience’s biological pleasure and pain cycles to the 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  125
detriment of editorial ingenuity, plot, and narrative coherency. Whereas 
commercial film editing historically functions in the “interpretive mode” 
(i.e., montage requires the viewer to compare two distinct series of an 
image), post-cinematics are marked by an “executive mode” where de-
mographic research and data collection through fMRI monitoring in 
viewing audiences is used to inform cuts that pace the film.58 Cuts in ac-
tion sequences within films such as the Bourne Identity or Transformers 
films do not relate to each other or to the action but simply operate in a 
way to suggest a sort of disorienting speed of disparate visual perspec-
tives. Regardless of the lack of enjoyment of the plot or acting, viewers 
leave the theater in a state of affective exhaustion.
FPS games similarly use affective design to produce a related form 
of embodied stimulation. Ash offers a qualitative research study about 
play subjects in multiplayer FPS games, in which players often report 
having little conscious memory of the experience.59 Players simply re-
member a sensation of bodily affect. Anecdotally, I agree that Destiny’s 
mechanics seek to produce a frenetic play state where completing the 
final boss stage in a given zone can often leave a player physiologically 
drained from a fifteen- to twenty-minute play session. Speed is certainly 
a part of creating affectively intense experiences beyond just Destiny. 
Counter-Strike: GO matches on Competitive mode, for instance, can 
last anywhere from twenty-five to ninety minutes with only short breaks 
in between each round, until one group wins sixteen matches. These 
spaces are intense enough that players might not even notice time pass-
ing because so much attention is commanded due to the pace of play. To 
be sure, playing an FPS game under conditions of affective design does 
not engage cardiovascular action on par with training for a marathon by 
running each day. However, being captivated and immersed in this sense 
nevertheless clearly shifts memory of the encounter from general recol-
lection to habit memory, which harnesses immanent images during play. 
Other players report that their play experiences were “like a blur.”60 
Players might not be physically exhausted, but the play experience never-
theless leaves them affectively drained. Perhaps a particular memory of 
a particularly spectacular shot or in-game accomplishment stands out, 
but players also report that they have difficulty in remembering specific 
sequences or actions that they engaged in to defeat the endless wave of 
enemies. If pleasurable, these affective procedural markers become part 
of what stimulates players to keep playing.
These attitudes about affect and technology functioning as a capitalist 
memory-altering strategy can be found elsewhere as well. In the same 
vein as Shaviro (and Golumbia), Bernard Stielger argues that contem-
porary capitalism employs a variety of “psycho-techniques” to mone-
tize audiences by blurring the lines between work and play. Videogames 
are part of what Stielger calls a “vast process of cognitive and affec-
tive proletarianization—and a vast process of the loss of knowledge(s): 

126  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
savoir-faire, savoir-vivre, theoretical knowledge, in the absence of which 
all savor is lost.”61 Seminal affect theorist Lawrence L. Grossberg sim-
ilarly argues that “affective relations can be disempowering … rending 
ideological and material realities behind a screen of passion.”62 Along 
the lines of Golumbia, games studies researcher Patrick Crogan fears 
that military games that encourage embodied actions of play without 
much critical thinking brackets players from self-reflection upon the 
ideological affects that their efforts play. In other words, the route from 
presumption that affective design modulates bodies in certain ways to 
shape procedural habits toward reducing these habits to an object of 
critical demystification is a short one. Here, procedural habits through 
affective design emerge as rhetorically salient in as far as they can be 
linked toward a prior totalizing construct like “neoliberalism.”
Conclusion
In Chapter 4, I address the limitations of the structure of critique, in 
which procedural habits like affective design only emerge if they cor-
respond to some hidden political relation for the critic to demystify. 
My more limited goal is to suggest that through the lens of procedural 
­habits—that habits have constituted who we are since hexis—there does 
not necessarily have to be anything suspicious about the mere attempt 
to forge a relationship between habit and memory in itself. For exam-
ple, the specter of memory “loss” in the face of an emergent technology 
should give rhetoric and writing scholars pause with respect to our field’s 
long history of responding to Plato. A bit of historical comparison to 
the canon of memory is useful as a point of comparison. In keeping 
with Socrates’s gentle chastisement of Phaedrus, for whom the memo-
rization of writing impoverished the inherent capacities of the human 
mind (natural) for reason, rhetorical conceptions of memory all too of-
ten function as a form of storage (artificial) and remain external from 
rhetorical invention. Indeed, this view is solidified by the unknown au-
thor of Rhetorica Ad Herenium, who popularized the “treasure-house” 
view of memory as accumulated thought, which served as “the guard-
ian of all parts of rhetoric.”63 Many of our scholarly and commonsense 
conceptions of memory retain a classical view of memory as a distinct 
or fixed space to deposit and withdraw memories, leaving the rational 
Cartesian subject unaltered. In assessing the rhetorical tradition’s typical 
approaches to memory, Collin Gifford Brooke summarizes, “Informa-
tion is either located here in one’s head or there in a book, a database, 
someone else.”64 Memory for many rhetoricians in Greco-Roman tradi-
tion was, as Trevor Hoag states, “where static topoi are housed in their 
corresponding loci.”65
Here, I will not attempt a comprehensive review of the history of mem-
ory in the rhetorical tradition as several excellent summaries already 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  127
exist, starting with Brooke’s chapter on memory in Lingua Fracta. 
­Intriguingly, however, the Greeks actually offered a more complicated 
view of rhetoric and memory, in which memory served as an interface 
between cultural exterior and human interior to influence how knowl-
edge and rhetoric could be brought about. Echoing previous work on 
memory and literacy by Walter J. Ong (via Havelock), the Greeks were 
among the first civilizations to store memory by placing complex ideas 
in an external medium (the agora) to undergo debate and deliberation. 
Rhetoric was key to this process because it required a strong memory 
and metalinguistic skill in comparison with the simpler linear myths 
of earlier oral Greek societies. Mundane activities such as memorizing 
tropes or figures were designed to mimic conventional logical or rhetor-
ical patterns of reason and communication. Memory and habit became 
akin to what Ong describes as “involution”: the way in which memory 
and cognition externalization in turn become “internalized” as parts of 
thought through our repeated practices of literacy.66 Far from an exter-
nalized storage, Jeffrey Pruchnic and Kim Lacey maintain that the use of 
involutionary memory to learn rhetorical patterns actually “had the ef-
fect of restructuring interior thought as a whole, as habituated practices 
of memory training and association became second if not “first” nature 
for practitioners.”67 In connecting Ong to the ancient Greeks, Pruchnic 
and Lacey affirm that habit is a central way in which memorization, 
and memory more broadly construed, informs thinking and reasoning 
through not a primordial but constitutive relation.
The historical comparison is useful because it demonstrates that there 
has always been a link between habit and memory (which scholars inter-
ested in chora have also been attuned to).68 Ong-ian approaches to mem-
ory move us firmly outside the Platonic attitude toward memory and 
writing. Citing Hayles’s “semiotics of virtuality,” Brooke similarly artic-
ulates that new media rhetoric does not externalize or spatialize memory 
but rather actively and yet contingently constructs a pattern that en-
ables thought.69 Echoing Ash’s idea of amplification, what has changed 
in FPS games is simply what is modulated. For example, ­Pruchnic and 
Lacey conclude that the rise of new media and ubiquitous internet in-
formation has shifted memory from its store house—the “content” of 
a given ­memory—to the “program” of memory: “the broad systems in 
which past experiences and associations are captured and/or strategi-
cally leveraged for persuasive effects.”70 Pruchnic and Lacey’s critical 
contribution lies in observing that rather than breaking with the early 
Greek treatments, the present use of memory programs (and, I would 
add, affective design) actually extends the latter. When individuals as-
sociate certain concepts or objects in memory—increasingly embodied 
actions and reactions in response to nonconscious forms of positive and 
negative reinforcement during play—these actually impact our modes of 
bodily comportment through affective tags. Destiny, for example, wants 

128  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
to tie a pleasurable form of affective habit formation across multiple 
senses, which will respond positively or negatively to players’ affective 
tags. Simply put, there is nothing inherently good or bad about the pres-
ence of a habit-shaping memory technology. Instead, we have to look 
at whatever behaviors are actually produced before concluding what to 
make of them.
The reason this connection to ancient memory and technology is rel-
evant is because it helps us to see that the observation that memory is 
produced differently through affect does not necessarily allow us to dis-
miss these forms of affect production as only a capitalist effect, which 
is the move that many scholars interested in the politics of videogames 
have made. The post-Aristotelian lineage of non-mechanistic approaches 
to habit have a precedent for this approach as well, in Bergson’s notion 
of “habit memory,” which he discusses in Matter and Memory. Unlike 
recollective memory which, when achieved, is fixed permanently in the 
mind (i.e., rendering repetition pointless), repetition is central to how 
habit memory forms through cumulative and repeated actions (“[it is] 
acquired through repetition of the same effort”).71 Indeed, while rec-
ollection is “entirely spontaneous,” habit memory requires continuous 
effort, and repetition eventually leads toward forming a second nature 
that is “stored up in a mechanism which is set in motion as a whole by 
an initial impulse, in a closed system of automatic movements which 
succeed each other in the same order.”72 Like Aristotle’s hexis, habit 
memory is an active having which contains its past in immanent form, 
while applying this active having toward future action in the immediate 
or near-term future. Similarly, habit memory exists in action. Its images 
cannot be fully represented: “it no longer represents our past to us; it 
acts.”73 While I do not have the space to go into Bergson’s entire philo-
sophical worldview, suffice to say that there need not be anything inher-
ently positive or negative in the attempt to condition memory through 
technologies of behavioral repetition in itself.
Along similar lines, while Ash cites scholars like Shaviro’s efforts to 
link the production of habit memory through affect to neoliberalism, he 
nevertheless offers a fairly honest assessment of affective design. “[Vid-
eogames],” he states at one point:
…have what Bennett terms a ‘thing power’ insofar as they contain a 
dynamic which exceeds both the players’ and designers’ intentions; 
players’ actions are not directly controlled by the designers, and de-
signers can never be sure about how the game will be taken up and 
played by the public.74
The fact that Thrift and Ash both mention Bennett is not a coincidence. 
While Thrift seems to take thing power as a site through which capitalist 
forces now seek to extract profit and sell commodities, thing power by 

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  129
definition, as Ash concedes, also means that agencies are distributed 
in ways that do not correspond entirely to a totalizing explanatory 
context like neoliberalism. One of the points of attributing agency to 
these actors for FPS games—looking at how technologies of memory 
socialize human rhetorical actions—is to remain open to the possibil-
ity that new affects emerge that do not correspond to narrow neolib-
eral agendas. The realm of affective design in FPS games means that 
ideological mechanisms function more like attractors within complex 
systems. These mechanisms channel, and players’ habits push back. 
And, as I hope to demonstrate in the next chapter, affective design 
seen through the lens of procedural habits points toward a different 
view of how reality is composed than just an object of critique. This 
shift in emphasis does not lose sight of political forces of mundane 
habit-shaping design elements in FPS games. Rather, procedural habits 
seeks to offer an alternative understanding of the operation of ideol-
ogy differently and, as the next Chapter demonstrates, even employ 
elements such as affective design to cultivate eudaimonic forms of ha-
bituation through play.
Notes
	 1	 Christopher Moore, “Invigorating Play: The Role of Affect in Online First 
Person Shooters,” in Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter 
Games, ed. Gerald Voorhees, et al. (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 
2012), 341.
	 2	 Jason O’Connell, Doom (Richardson, TX: iD Software, 1993), videogame.
	 3	 Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, “Introduction: Things that 
Go Boom!” in Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, 
ed. Gerald Voorhees, et al. (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2012), 2.
	 4	 Tim Cross, “All the World a Game,” The Economist, Dec. 10, 2011, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, www.economist.com/node/21541164
	 5	 Steamspy, “Counter-Strike,” (Bellueve, WA: Valve), accessed May 15, 2017, 
http://steamspy.com/search.php?s=counter-strike
	 6	 James Paul Gee, What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and 
Literacy (2nd ed; New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007), 1.
	 7	 James Ash, “Attention, Videogames, and the Rentitional Economies of Af-
fective Amplification,” Theory, Culture & Society 29, no. 6 (2012): 4.
	 8	 See Aki Jarvinen, “Anatomy of the FPS,” Journal of Game Studies 2, no. 
(July 2002), accessed May 15, 2017, www.gamestudies.org/0102/jarvinen/; 
Mark P. Wolf, “Battlezone and the Origins of First-Person Shooters,” in 
Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, ed. Gerald 
Voorhees et al. (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2012), 25–40.
	 9	 David B. Nieborg, “First Person Paradoxes–the Logic of War in Computer 
Games,” in Game Set and Match II: On Computer Games, Advanced 
­Geometries and Digital Technologies, ed. Kas Oosterhuis and Lukas ­Feireiss, 
107–115. Rotterdam: Episode Publishers, 2006.
	10	 Ibid., 92–93.
	11	 Voorhees et al., “Introduction,” 1–15.
	12	 Ibid., 12.

130  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
	13	 “Virtual Violence,” policy statement by the American Association of Pedat-
rics, July 2016, accessed May 16, 2017, http://pediatrics.aappublications.
org/content/early/2016/07/14/peds.2016-1298 quoted in D’Anastasio, Ce-
cillia, “Another Day, Another Alarmist Warning Against Violent Videog-
ames,” Kotaku, July 18, 2016, accessed May 17, 2017, http://kotaku.com/
another-day-another-alarmist-warning-against-violent-g-1783873959.
	14	 Ibid.
	15	 Andrew K. Przybylski, “Electronic Gaming and Psychosocial Adjustment,” 
Pediatrics 61 (2014): 1–7.
	16	 Grand Theft Auto San Andreas (New York: Rockstar Games, 2015), 
videogame.
	17	 Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT, 2007), 113.
	18	 Call of Duty 3 (Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 2006), videogame.
	19	 James W. Creel, “Failure is Not an Option: WWII, Video Games, and the 
War on Terror,” in The Game Culture Reader, ed. Jason C. Thompson and 
Marc Ouellette (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2013), 175–187. Creel 
analyzed Brothers in Arms: Hell’s Highway through Burke’s “frames of 
acceptance.”
	20	 Gary Schyman, BioShock (Novato, CA: Take 2 Interactive Games, 2007), 
videogame.
	21	 Wisecrak, “The Philosophy of BioShock,” Youtube, 13:52, Jul. 12, 2015, 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKf4MtZ4RQA.
	22	David Blakesley, The Elements of Dramatism (New York: Longman, 2002), 41.
	23	Jeroen Bourgonjon, Kris Rutten, Ronald Soetaert and Martin Valcke, “From 
Counter-Strike to Counter-Statement: Using Burke’s Pentad as a Tool for 
Analyzing Video Games,” Digital Creativity 22, no. 2 (2011): 95.
	24	 Ibid., 100.
	25	Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, editors, Guns, Grenades, 
and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games (New York: Bloomsbury Aca-
demic, 2012).
	26	 Jessy Ohl, and Aaron Duncan, “Taking Aim at Sexual Harassment: Femi-
nized Performances of Hegemonic Masculinity in the First-Person Shooter 
Hey Baby,” in Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, 
ed. Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock (New York: Blooms-
bury Academic, 2012), 319–340.
	27	 Moore, “Invigorating Play,” 342.
	28	 Ibid., 342.
	29	 David Golumbia, “Games without Play,” New Literary History 40, no. 1 
(Winter 2009): 185.
	30	 Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman, Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamen-
tals (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2003), 316.
	31	 Golumbia, “Games,” 186.
	32	 Ibid., 186.
	33	 Kevin Moberly and Ryan M. Moeller, “Working at Play: Modding, Rev-
elation, and Transformation in Technical Communication,” in Computer 
Games and Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications 
at the Intersection, (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2014), 189–207.
	34	Halo 3 (Bellueve, WA: Bungie, 2007), videogame.
	35	 Ash, “Captivation,” 30.
	36	 Call of Duty 5: World At War (Infinity Ward. Santa Monica, CA: Activi-
sion, 2008), videogame.
	37	 These could also be akin to what McAllister via Brummett calls “implicative 
forces” in Game Work. McAllister, Game Work, 79–80, 86–92.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  131
	38	 Destiny (Bellueve, WA: Bungie and Activision, 2014), videogame.
	39	 /u/lax20attack, “Destiny Public Events,” Destiny Public Events, accessed 
May 15, 2017, http://destinypublicevents.com/.
	40	Thomas Malaby, “Introduction: Control and Contingency Online,” First 
Monday 7 (2006), accessed May 15, 2017, http://firstmonday.org/issues/spe-
cial11_9/intro/index.html.
	41	 Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare (Infinity Ward; Santa Monica, CA: Activ-
ision, 2007), videogame.
	42	 B.J Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We 
Think and Do (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003), 17.
	43	 Ibid., 17.
	44	Ibid., 17.
	45	 Richard A. Lanham, The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in 
the Age of Information (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
	46	“Emotion is qualified intensity, the conventional, consensual point of in-
tensity into semantically and semiotically formed progressions, into narra-
tivizable action-reaction circuits, into function and meaning. It is intensity 
owned and recognized”; Brian Massumi, “The Autonomy of Affect,” Cul-
tural Critique 31 (Autumn 1995): 100.
	47	 Brian Massumi, “Notes on the Translation,” in A Thousand Plateaus by 
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari (London: Athlone Press, 1988), xvii.
	48	 Jason Farman, Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and Locative Me-
dia (New York: Routledge, 2012), 39–45.
	49	 “Counter-Strike: Global Offense,” Counter-Strike Wiki, accessed May 15,  
2017, http://counterstrike.wikia.com/wiki/Counter-Strike:_Global_Offensive.
	50	 Nigel Thrift, “Re-inventing Invention: New Tendencies in Capitalist Com-
modification.” Economy and Society 35, no. 2 (2006): 282.
	51	 Merlin Donald, A Mind So Rare: The Evoluation of Human Consciousness 
(New York: Norton, 2001), 25.
	52	 Thrift, “Re-inventing,” 285.
	53	 Ibid., 285.
	54	 Ibid., 287.
	55	 Ibid., 288.
	56	 Steven Shaviro, Post-Cinematic Affect (New York: O Books, John Hunt, 2010), 
2 quoted in James Ash, “Attention, Videogames, and the Rentitional Economies 
of Affective Amplification,” Theory, Culture & Society 29, no. 6 (2012): 4.
	57	 Shaviro, Ibid., 3, quoted in Ash, Ibid., 4.
	58	 Shavio, Ibid., 118.
	59	 Ash, “Captivation,” 43.
	60	 Ibid., 43.
	61	 Bernard Stiegler, For a New Critique of Political Economy (Cambridge: 
Polity, 2010), 30.
	62	 Lawrence Grossberg, “Is There a Fan in the House: The Affective Sensibility 
of Fandom.” in The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media, ed. 
Lisa A. Lewis (New York: Routledge, 1997), 87.
	63	 Rhetorica Ad Herenium, trans. Harry Caplan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1954), 205.
	64	Collin Gifford Brooke, Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media 
(New York: Hampton, 2009), 149.
	65	 Trevor Hoag, “Recalling Momento: On the Production of Memory Be-
coming a Rhetorical Problem (I),” Occupying Memory, Apr. 5, 2015, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, https://occupyingmemory.wordpress.com/2015/04/05/
recalling-memento-on-the-production-of-memory-becoming-a-rhetorical-­
problem-i/

132  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
	66	 Walter Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word (London 
and New York: 885 Methuen, 1982), 81.
	67	 Pruchnic, Jeff and Kim Lacey, “The Future of Forgetting: Rhetoric, Mem-
ory, Affect,” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 41, no. 5 (2011): 477.
	68	 This view of the relationship between rhetoric and memory also finds points 
of overlap with the idea of chora from Derrida’s reading of Plato’s “Ti-
maeus.” See Gregory Ulmer, Heuretics: The Logic of Invention (Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994).
	69	 Brook, Lingua, 144.
	70	 Pruchnic and Lacey, “The Future,” 475.
	71	 Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory, trans. NM Paul and WS Palmer 
(New York: Zone Books, 1988), 88.
	72	 Ibid., 68.
	73	 Ibid., 70.
	74	 Ash, “Attention,” 10.
Bibliography
Ash, James. “Attention, Videogames, and the Rentitional Economies of Affec-
tive Amplification.” Theory, Culture & Society 29, no. 6 (2012): 3–26.
———. “Technologies of Captivation: Videogames and the Attunement of 
­Affect.” Body & Society 19, no. 1 (2013): 27–51.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
Bergson, Henri. Matter and Memory. Translated by NM Paul and WS Palmer. 
New York: Zone Books, 1988.
Blakesley, David. The Elements of Dramatism. New York: Longman, 2002.
Bogost, Ian. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT, 2007.
Bourgonjon, Jeroen, Kris Rutten, Ronald Soetaert and Martin Valcke, “From 
Counter-Strike to Counter-Statement: Using Burke’s Pentad as a Tool for An-
alyzing Video Games.” Digital Creativity 22, no. 2 (2011): 91–102.
Brooke, Collin Gifford. Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media. 
New York: Hampton, 2009.
Call of Duty 3. Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 2006. Videogame.
Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare. Infinity Ward. Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 
2007. Videogame.
Call of Duty 5: World At War. Infinity Ward. Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 
2008. Videogame.
Call of Duty: BlackOps. Santa Monica, CA: Treyarch and Activision, 2010. 
Videogame.
Call, Joshua. “Bigger, Better, Stronger, Faster: Disposable Bodies and Cyborg 
Constructions.” In Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter 
Games, edited by Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, 133–152. 
Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2013.
Cassell, Justine, and Henry Jenkins. From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender 
and Computer Games. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Creel, James W. “Failure Is Not an Option: WWII, Video Games, and the War 
on Terror.” In The Game Culture Reader, edited by Jason C. Thompson and 
Marc Ouellette, 175–187. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2013.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  133
Cross, Tim. “All the World a Game.” The Economist. Dec. 10, 2011. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. www.economist.com/node/21541164
Counter-Strike: Global Offensive. Belleuve, WA: Valve Corporation, 2012. 
Videogame.
Crogan, Patrick. “Gametime: History, Narrative and Temporality in Combat 
Flight Simulator 2.” In The Video Game Theory Reader, edited by Mark J.P. 
Wolf and Bernard Perron, 275–302. New York: Routledge, 2003.
D’Anastasio, Cecillia. “Another Day, Another Alarmist Warning Against Violent 
Videogames.” Kotaku. July 18, 2016. Accessed May 17, 2017. http://kotaku.
com/another-day-another-alarmist-warning-against-violent-g-1783873959
———. “Zarya from Overwatch has Become a Gay Icon, Ironically.” Kotaku. 
Jun. 29, 2016. http://kotaku.com/zarya-from-overwatch-has-become-a-gay- 
icon-ironically-1782833947
Destiny. Bellueve, WA: Bungie and Activision, 2014. Videogame.
/u/lax20attack. “Destiny Public Events.” Destiny Public Events. Accessed May 
15, 2017. http://destinypublicevents.com/
Donald, Merlin. A Mind So Rare: The Evolution of Human Consciousness. 
New York: Norton, 2001.
Farman, Jason. Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and Locative Media. 
New York: Routledge, 2012.
Fremgen, Christopher. Public Events Timers for Destiny. DestinyPublicEvents.
com, 2016. Mobile App.
Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
Galloway, Alexander R. “Origins of the first-person shooter.” Gaming: Essays 
on algorithmic Culture (2006): 39–69.
Gee, James Paul. What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and 
Literacy. 2nd ed. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007 (2003).
Golumbia, David. “Games without Play.” New Literary History 40, no. 1 (Win-
ter 2009): 179–204.
Grand Theft Auto San Andreas. New York, NY: Rockstar Games, 2015. 
Videogame.
Grossberg, Lawrence. “Is There a Fan in the House: The Affective Sensibility of 
Fandom.” In The Adoring Audience: Fan Culture and Popular Media, edited 
by Lisa A. Lewis, 50–67. New York: Routledge, 1997.
Halo 3. Bellueve, WA: Bungie, 2007. Videogame.
Hoag, Trevor. “Recalling Momento: On the Production of Memory Becoming 
a Rhetorical Problem (I).” Occupying Memory. Apr. 5, 2015. Accessed May 
15, 2017. https://occupyingmemory.wordpress.com/2015/04/05/recalling-­
memento-on-the-production-of-memory-becoming-a-rhetorical-problem-i/
Jarvinen, Aki. “Anatomy of the FPS.” Journal of Game Studies 2, no. (July 
2002). Accessed May 15, 2017. www.gamestudies.org/0102/jarvinen/
Lanham, Richard A. The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the 
Age of Information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Malaby, Thomas. “Introduction: Control and Contingency Online.” First 
Monday 7 (2006). Accessed May 15, 2017. http://firstmonday.org/issues/spe-
cial11_9/intro/index.html
Massumi, Brian. “The Autonomy of Affect.” Cultural Critique 31 (Autumn 
1995): 83–109.

134  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
———. “Notes on the Translation.” In A Thousand Plateaus, edited by Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari, xvi–xviii. London: Athlone Press, 1988.
Miyamoto, Shigeru, Koji Kondo, Hiroshi Yamauchi, Takashi Tezuka. Super 
Mario Brothers. Kyoto, Japan: Nintendo, 1983.
Moberly, Kevin, and Ryan M. Moeller. “Working at Play: Modding, Revelation, 
and Transformation in Technical Communication.” In Computer Games 
and Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications at the 
­Intersection, edited by Jennifer de Winter and Ryan M. Moeller, 189–207. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2014.
Moore, Christopher. “Invigorating Play: The Role of Affect in Online First 
Person Shooters.” In Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter 
Games, edited by Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, 341–364. 
New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2012.
Nieborg, David B. “First Person Paradoxes–the Logic of War in Computer 
Games.” In Game Set and Match II: On Computer Games, Advanced Ge-
ometries and Digital Technologies, edited by Kas Oosterhuis and Lukas 
Feireiss,107–115. Rotterdam: Episode Publishers, 2006.
O’Connell, Jason. Doom. Richardson, TX: iD Software, 1993. Videogame.
Ohl, Jessy, and Aaron Duncan. “Taking Aim at Sexual Harassment: Feminized 
Performances of Hegemonic Masculinity in the First-Person Shooter Hey 
Baby.” In Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, edited 
by Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, 319–340. New York: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2012.
Ong, Walter. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London 
and New York: 885 Methuen, 1982.
Pajitno, Alexey. Tetris. The Tetris Company. 1984. Videogame.
Pruchnic, Jeff and Kim Lacey. “The Future of Forgetting: Rhetoric, Memory, 
Affect.” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 41, no. 5 (2011): 472–494.
Przybylski, Andrew K. “Electronic Gaming and Psychosocial Adjustment.” 
Pediatrics 61 (2014): 1–7.
Rhetorica Ad Herenium. Translated by Harry Caplan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1954.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2003.
Schyman, Gary. BioShock. Novato, CA: 2K Games, 2007. Videogame.
Schriver, Karen. “Document Design from 1980 to 1989. Technical Report 
No. 39.” Technical Communication. 36, no. 4 (1990): 316–333.
Shaviro, Steven. Post-Cinematic Affect. New York: O Books, John Hunt, 2010.
Skyrim V: The Elder Scrolls. Bethesda Game Studios. Nov. 11, 2011.
Steamspy. “Counter-Strike.” Bellueve, WA: Valve. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://steamspy.com/search.php?s=counter-strike
Stiegler, Bernard. For a New Critique of Political Economy. Cambridge: Polity, 
2010.
———. Taking Care of Youth and the Generations. Stanford: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
Sutton-Smith, Brian. The Ambiguity of Play. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1997.
Thrift, Nigel. “Lifeworld Inc.—And What to Do about It.” Environment and 
Planning D 29 (2011): 5–26.

Affective Design and the Captivation of Memory  135
———. “Re-inventing Invention: New Tendencies in Capitalist Commodifica-
tion.” Economy and Society 35, no. 2 (2006): 279–306.
Ulmer, Gregory. Heuretics: The Logic of Invention. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1994.
“Virtual Violence.” Policy statement by the American Association of Pedatrics. 
July 201. Accessed May 16, 2017, http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/ 
early/2016/07/14/peds.2016-1298.
Voorhees, Gerald, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, editors. Guns, Grenades, 
and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 
2012.
Voorhees, Gerald, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock. “Introduction: Things that 
Go Boom!” In Guns, Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, 
edited by Gerald Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, 1–24. New York: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2012.
Wisecrak. “The Philosophy of Bioshock.” Youtube, 13:52. Jul. 12, 2015. 
­Accessed May 15, 2017. www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKf4MtZ4RQA
Wolf, Mark P. “Battlezone and the Origins of First-Person Shooters.” In Guns, 
Grenades, and Grunts: First-Person Shooter Games, edited by Gerald 
­Voorhees, Josh Call, and Katie Whitlock, 25–40. New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2012.

In Chapter 3, I examine the use of affective design through new Fog-
gian techne, such as amplification in a traditional videogame genre of 
FPS games. Yet, as I note in examples such as BioShock and Destiny, 
many FPS games still retain many other conventional features, such as 
narrative, that are not entirely reducible to this game mechanistic’s influ-
ence. By comparison, this chapter’s case study explores an entire genre of 
commercial videogames that are constituted entirely by a designer’s ef-
forts to shape habits: gamified habit-shaping apps. In general, gamifica-
tion refers to the use of digital or non-digital traditional game signifiers 
(badges, points, levels, missions) in non-game contexts. Delta airline’s 
Frequent Flyer rewards program is an example of gamification. While 
many serious and persuasive game designers seek to use game mechanics 
as a means to explore a political or cultural problem in a new way, gam-
ification typically grafts game elements onto existing and well-defined 
real-world problems to try to motivate and reward activity. As a result, 
gamification, more so than any other gaming genre, takes behavioral 
reinforcement as its exclusive object of interest.
Since my focus in Procedural Habits is on videogames, I examine a 
particular digital subset of gamification that I define as “gamified per-
suasive technologies” (GPTs). GPTs are commercial and free apps that 
employ a Foggian combination of gamification, behavioral psychology, 
and algorithmic monitoring to produce specific habits in users, such 
as health (Fitbit),1 lifestyle (HabitRPG, Habitica),2 well-being (Super­
Better),3 beverage consumption (Vessyl),4 domestic behavior (Chore 
Wars),5 female fertility (Glow),6 and countless others. Notable exam-
ples include TaskRabbit,7 an online space where users can outsource 
errands such as grocery shopping to other users by naming a price. 
Traditional signifiers of videogames motivate its contributors’ partici-
pation through progress bars and leaderboards. Chore Wars similarly 
allows players to role-play as superheroes and collect points for com-
pleting undesirable household chores. When users check in frequently 
with their smartphones at participating restaurants, the now offline app 
Foursquare rewards users with the status of “mayor” and discounts on 
food purchases.8 Gabe Zichermann has been a leading industry presence 
4	
Gamification and 
Suggestion Technologies 
(Kairos) Beyond Critique

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  137
in arguing for gamification in business contexts, such as frequent flyer 
programs or M&M’s gamified campaign for its pretzel-flavored version 
of its popular candy.9
GPTs represent yet another case study through which clear divisions 
are drawn between expressive and mundane forms of rhetorics. GPTs 
constitute what the well-known industry writer Russell Davies calls 
“barely games,”10 because GPTs do not typically offer the sorts of im-
mersive or imaginative interactions for play that allow players to escape 
from real life. Running in GPTs, like Six to Start’s app Zombies, Run!, 
is simply the activity of running.11 In effect, the avatar of Zombies, Run! 
is the human user (i.e., the individual who downloads, installs, and uses 
the app) who acts in response to gamified prompts. Like many GPTs, 
Zombies, Run! provides a basic gamified system of positive and negative 
reinforcement to enable a user to develop a new exercise habit. The play-
er’s action in Zombies, Run! does not produce any comparatively mean-
ingful interaction with a complex game world mechanic or narrative. 
As a result, the work and repetition necessary to cultivate a habit easily 
can become disguised as play. Bogost, who is never afraid to criticize 
elements of the mainstream gaming industry, routinely dismisses gamifi-
cation as “exploitationware,” “snake oil,” and “bullshit” in comparison 
to the richer argumentative and expressive forms of meaning that vid-
eogames are capable of. Other traditional game designers and industry 
commentators are equally as hostile.
In the first section of this chapter, I demonstrate that GPTs offer an im-
portant case study for procedural habits because of this “barely games” 
attribution. In this scenario, GPTs are an ideal Foggian videogame genre 
that is routinely dismissed as an inauthentic videogame for its superficial 
use of game mechanics as well as its narrow for-profit agenda. Our field 
typically offers two prevailing approaches to gamification. First, we graft 
game mechanics onto individual writing assignments or entire classroom 
syllabi. We treat gamification as a neutral techne to produce student 
behavior modification, as do (implicitly) both defenders and critics of 
gamification among professional game designers. Secondly, the other 
typical approach—seen particularly among games studies scholars—is 
to reject the neutral techne view by drawing on Foucaultian or related 
theoretical frameworks to ground gamification as an object of bio-
power. ­Foucault’s archaeology, for example, enables researchers to ex-
amine how gamification functions as an organizing technique of power/
knowledge topoi across a heterogeneous cultural milieu. Here, as with 
the case of affective design and memory production in Chapter 3, proce-
dural habits are not negative but productive. In turn, these connections 
enable us to address procedural habits in GPTs as rhetorically expres-
sive, by examining the relationship between GPTs and broader societal 
control techniques, such as “algorithmic regulation” or state-sponsored 
“nudges,” which attempt to change citizens’ collective habits through 

138  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
nonconscious prompts without passing laws. On this last point, even 
if readers are still not tempted to treat him as a legitimate videogame 
rhetoric scholar, this section offers my most sustained demonstration 
that Foggian design elements can and should be read as part of a more 
complex way in which procedural habits are shaped beyond a designer’s 
instrumental aims.
This first section in many ways tells a familiar approach to videog-
ame rhetoric in a new context. Our field is well-acquainted with ar-
guments about how discourse shapes rhetorical selves and bodies, and, 
in turn, rhetoric and composition scholars are entirely used to using 
critical theory paradigms to demystify covert or hidden political log-
ics. Yet, in the second section, I argue that the Foucaultian language of 
bio-power—pervasive among games studies scholars and theoretically 
inclined rhetoric and composition scholarship on videogames—and 
the focus on how power makes productive bodies actually contain yet 
another manifestation of the expressive/mundane divide that it critical 
to understand. GPTs gain rhetorical salience only in so far as they can 
be connected to a previous totalizing view of power/knowledge. Here, 
I turn to literary theorist Rita Felski’s idea of “post-critical reading.”12 
While Foucaultians often claim that their work is anti-hermeneutic, she 
convincingly demonstrates that Foucaultians trade an older hermeneu-
tics of depth (i.e., Marxists and Freudians who locate hidden forces by 
digging into the hidden mechanisms of text) for a hermeneutics of trac-
ing surface effects of power. In the end, our object of interpretation in a 
text, or a videogame, becomes rhetorically expressive only insofar as it 
corresponds to an object of bio-power. In doing so, we potentially miss 
the broader networks of actors—human and nonhuman—that a text/
videogame can produce. By contrast, Felski turns to Latour’s ANT to 
define her own idea of postcriticism to suggest that one way to avoid 
critique is to “compose” (Latour’s term) and trace localized and particu-
lar networks of human and nonhuman agencies for a given text that we 
seek to interpret. ANT in particular allows each object—each GPT—to 
be read as an active mediator rather than a passive intermediary for a 
totalizing or previous theoretical explanation.
I acknowledge that this analysis may initially seem like an overly de-
tailed detour into some complex theoretical thickets. However, the rel-
evance lies in my exigency in Procedural Habits. That is, my goal is 
to demonstrate that our preference for traditional texts as well as vari-
ous manifestations of the expressive/mundane divide is best revealed by 
understanding why critique continues to bracket the forms of material 
affect—the forms necessary for procedural habits to function as actual 
embodied and material forces in rhetoric. These theoretical frameworks 
require us to connect each GPT to a prior hunt for an invisible quarry 
(bio-power, neoliberalism) while distracting us from considering if GPTs 
may actually create new and even positive rhetorical habits that do not 
correspond to these constructs in the first place. In the third section, 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  139
I offer a close reading of a GPT, Time to Eat, produced by a health 
science design team at Cornell University, to tease out how ANT can 
enable us to locate some new and unexpected uses of GPTs to intervene 
in eating and dieting choices. I will take up the designers’ particular 
attempt to employ Fogg’s idea of “kairos” as a suggestion technology in 
this context.
After describing Time to Eat, I draw an immediate point of compar-
ison between its assumptions and a discussion by the ANT theorist, 
Annemarie Mol. In her essay, “Obesity and Satisfaction,” she challenges 
the reliance of national dietary topoi on logical appeals (nutritional con-
tent; food pyramids; etc.). Mol argues that if indeed our desire for food is 
distributed into our habits of interaction in our localized environments, 
then we need to explore rather than reject mundane habit-­shaping genres 
and productive forms of behavioral reinforcement to shape dispositions 
through space, place, and environment. In part, Mol helps to demon-
strate that our only goal for approaching GPTs cannot merely be (es-
pecially human-centered) political critique. Instead, we can and should 
use the ability of GPTs to powerfully structure individuals’ dispositions 
as an occasion to inquire more deeply into the rhetorical nature of the 
human who is capable not necessarily of being persuaded to form a habit 
through a GPT but instead structured and affected by the increasing 
incorporation of gamified elements in society.
The Gamification and Critique of Procedural Habits
One of the pragmatic reasons why our methods of describing gamifica-
tion matters is because gamification is arguably a primary way in which 
pedagogically inclined rhetoric and composition researchers have ap-
proached videogames. The idea of using game semiotics for education 
predates computer games, with some of the first work in our field in Selfe 
and Selfe’s collection. Selfe and Selfe specifically cite Gee as the animat-
ing force for their edited collection. Gee employs videogame literacies 
to improve educational experiences by “applying the fruitful principles 
of learning that good game designers have hit on, whether or not we 
use a game as a carrier of these principles.”13 Following these conversa-
tions, a number of rhetoric and composition studies scholars, like ­Justin 
Hodgson,14 have proposed to gamify individual writing assignments 
or an entire syllabus for a writing class. For example, also drawing on 
Gee, Alexander suggests that writing students can benefit from playing 
videogames or games in general and writing literacy narratives about 
how their experiences with multimodal literacies differ from their ex-
periences with print literacies. In an observation that I do not mean as 
critical, these examples confirm once more a bias in our field toward 
traditional texts. In many of these cases, gamification is a mere means 
to another expressive or traditional end: the production of a print-based 
artifact. My larger point is simply that we have actually been slower as a 

140  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
field to call for use of gamification as a means to re-envision what writ-
ing means (as a ludic or procedural multimodal practice, for example) 
and, in turn, what it means to shape writing habits through rhetoric.
One way to begin addressing how gamification can re-orient rhetoric 
and composition studies lies in understanding what theoretical assump-
tions undergird its use in the composition classroom. As discussed by 
professional game designers, gamification in the sense that our field uses 
it is akin to what our field would call a neutral form—or an instrumental 
techne—used by a rhetor or teacher for a particular aim without con-
necting this means of production to social-political contexts. According 
to McGonigal, gamification is a basic design technique that asks players 
to interact with a voluntary obstacle as a means of exploring a real-world 
problem by using game mechanics.15 McGonigal convincingly argues 
that better game design offers an excellent resource to stimulate players’ 
motivation, curiosity, interest, or optimism in social and political issues. 
In its most distilled form, gamification takes game elements or features 
and applies them to non-game contexts for any number of purposes, 
including increasing workplace productivity, enhancing the learning of 
a novel, or encouraging patients to take their medicine each morning.
To be sure, while McGonigal is frequently cited as a proponent of gam-
ification, she has penned a number of criticisms as well, including her at-
tempt to articulate a “gameful” approach to design, as I will discuss later 
on this chapter. We can find less carefully qualified support in the business 
world in the work of leading proponent Gabe ­Zichermann’s various writ-
ings, webtexts, and industry workshops. Searching for “gamification” on 
Amazon.com reveals countless book titles that instruct businesses how to 
use gamification to sell more products or motivate employees. An office 
manager needs to increase employee productivity without raising salaries 
or offering more vacation time? Solution: provide badges and levels to 
incentivize his subordinates. Nevertheless, this superficial use of game 
mechanics in the service of stimulus response operant conditioning is 
what draws the ire of game designers and games studies scholars. For 
these and other reasons, Bogost calls gamification “bullshit.”16 Bogost 
bristles at the superficial appropriation of the medium’s signifiers while 
ignoring how game mechanics actually makes a videogame a videogame.
A growing number of GPTs such as HabitRPG/Habitica, Go Fucking 
Do It,17 and Ascent18 are relatively recent habit-specific examples that 
confirm the validity of Bogost’s criticism. HabitRPG’s motto is “Gamify 
your life,” while Go Fucking Do It offers a more extreme axiom of “If 
you fail, you pay.” In many ways, Go Fucking Do It is actually the ideal 
GPT for individuals who live in free market economies. If a user fails 
to shape appropriate individual habits of self-restraint (quitting coffee, 
planning for a dream vacation), he or she must donate money to a char-
ity. The game’s message is that behavior’s best motivator is monetary ex-
change value. By contrast, HabitRPG is more open-ended (Figure 4.1).

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  141
HabitRPG offers external computational monitoring to improve any 
number of life skills through the use of game mechanisms from role-­
playing games (“equipment,” “rewards,” and “leveling”). Unsurprisingly, 
many features of these particular GPTs’ design mechanisms are thoroughly 
Foggian. At one point, Fogg discusses what he calls the “Principle of Sur-
veillance,” or, how the application of computational surveillance to a user’s 
behavior increases the likelihood of desired outcome (which, of course, is 
old news to any readers familiar with ­Foucault’s Discipline and Punish).19
Furthermore, in keeping with Foggian rhetorics’ superficial citations 
of neuroscience and behavioral relationship, many GPTs frequently 
rely on flimsy appeals to empirical research to support their effective-
ness. Media studies researcher Anne Helen Peterson highlights a typical 
sleight of hand for many commercial behavioral tracking apps through 
her use of the Sleep Cycle app.20 Each morning, she wakes up and checks 
her sleep states in the app. The app assigns a sleep quality percentage. 
Sleep Cycle becomes a game. Its persuasive technology features compare 
her sleep habits to aggregated norms of other users and keeps prompting 
her to share her sleep scores through social media posts. In fact, ­Peterson 
even confesses to cheating the system at one point just so she can post 
an exceptionally high amount of sleep for one night (12 hours) and re-
ceive the epideictic satisfaction of praise from her social media chorus. 
However, the Sleep Cycle app is not even an accurate measure of quality 
of sleep. According to Peterson, the app employs motion during sleep 
as the prime evaluator of sleep quality, which is an imprecise measure-
ment. The app promises to reveal a user’s negative habits that prevent 
self-fulfilling sleep and to help the user produce better habits (i.e., reduce 
Figure 4.1  Screenshot from browser-based version of HabitRPG/Habitica app.

142  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
the influence of mechanistic habits) through algorithmic prompts; how-
ever, Sleep Cycle never fulfills this promise in a universal or complete 
sense. Habit-shaping apps like these are not much more than “snake 
oil,” another colorful term employed by Bogost to describe games like 
­HabitRPG. Even Fitbit’s pervasive “10,000 steps” mantra is argued by 
some to be a “pseudometric” that lacks any specific or substantial rela-
tionship to health and well-being in media research literature.21
Gamification as Bio-Political Object
Bogost’s criticisms in part help offer a transition toward the second com-
mon way that scholars more involved in games studies than in rhetoric 
and composition have approached gamification. While Bogost is suspi-
cious of the narrow corporatism as well as the implication that videog-
ames can be reduced to stimulus response, other games studies scholars 
have identified gamification as a product of contemporary capitalism 
that offers us the typical route toward defining procedural habits of 
GPTs that we would find in rhetoric and composition studies. A notable 
example can be found in the writing of games studies designer and re-
searcher Patrick Jagoda. With respect to the rise of gamification, Jagoda 
suggests, “In recent years, games have touched practically every aspect 
of contemporary life. Consumerism, crowdsourcing, and social media 
applications, in particular, have all increasingly taken on the structure 
and logic of games.”22 These types of connections do not accept gami-
fication as a neutral design technique or even a narrow for-profit instru-
ment. Rather, they begin to make connections between the particular 
historical and economic conditions that surround the emergence of gam-
ification as a way to order certain parts of society. Indeed, Jagoda argues 
that:
…a form that economic, social, and cultural life increasingly takes 
in the present … gamification … names a condition of seepage 
through which game mechanics and objectives come to constitute 
the work, leisure, thought patterns, affects, and social relations of 
the overdeveloped world.23
Again, the Foucaultian-sounding claim that discourse shapes productive 
subjects is a familiar one in rhetoric and composition studies.24 Other 
researchers, including Barbara A. Biesecker, Catherine Chaput, and 
­Jeffrey Pruchnic, have already begun to answer Ronald Walter Greene’s 
call for rhetoricians to explore the “immaterial value of communication” 
as a way to develop new tactics to map and challenge “the command 
logics of biopolitical capitalism,”25 and thus GPTs can constitute a new 
manifestation of bio-power for our field to examine. These types of ap-
proaches are used throughout videogame and rhetoric scholarship, such 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  143
as Andrew Baerg’s analysis of bio-power in the sport simulation game 
NBA2K12.26 In the present moment, GPTs are part of a general cultural 
shift toward relying on external computational algorithms, games, and 
game-like elements to shape or correct individual habits. Whereas previ-
ous generations of Marxist critics like Frederic Jameson viewed film as 
“allegories” for late capitalism, games studies scholars like Alexander 
Galloway and McKenzie Wark see a similar “allegorithmic” function 
for videogames. By analogy, this second approach to gamification as a 
capitalist mode of subject-making is a common way in which our field 
might seek to examine procedural habits in GPTs.
Since I am going to complicate the structure of critique in this theoret-
ical approach in the following section, I want to offer for an illustrative 
comparison what it means to read GPTs through these sorts of lenses. 
To offer an impossibly brief summary, biopower is a term that Foucault 
explores in his 1978–1979 lectures in relationship to the dominant neo-
liberal order. Neoliberalism endorses economic rationality to oppose 
irrational (non-market) state and social institutions. While Foucault’s 
previous work on discipline examined how a discrete space such as a 
hospital or prison surveilled individual bodies, biopower in the neolib-
eral age focuses on what he calls “governmentality.” Governmentality 
relies upon statistical averages (e.g., credit scores, student loan repay-
ment histories, driving records) to produce normative numbers for col-
lective security. In turn, governmentality constitutes a shift to a form of 
continuous surveillance that is distributed throughout society.27 Gilles 
Deleuze’s discussion of the society of control offers a useful description:
A control is not a discipline. In making freeways, for example, you 
don’t enclose people but instead multiply the means of control … 
people can drive infinitely and ‘freely’ without being at all confined 
yet while still being perfectly controlled.28
Even when individuals are not directly surveilled by an institution, gov-
ernmentality nevertheless exercises control over entire populations by 
converting behaviors to calculated risks. These risks correspond to secu-
rity practices that ensure the proper functioning of economic rationality.
One significant outcome of Foucault’s thinking lies in the idea that 
bio-power is not just limited to economic success or security laws. 
Rather, bio-power more radically structures our sense of self—what 
Foucault calls the “entrepreneurship of the self.”29 Bio-power takes the 
form of distinct but interpenetrating technologies that actually habituate 
our pre-conscious minds. It cultivates a “slower linguistic consciousness, 
which formulates the reasons for our actions, [and] claims intentionality 
after the fact.”30 This line of thinking is a continuation of Foucault’s 
famous observation that individuals cannot actually possess power and 
are instead produced by it. To offer an example, Jeremy Parker applies 

144  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Foucault’ insights to examine the Automated Targeted Screening (ATS) 
program. The ATS uses credit scores and financial history to determine 
the likelihood of whether a given individual citizen may become a ter-
rorist in the future. Parker summarizes, “This subject is that unity cre-
ated by the combination of one’s data-past and its relative difference 
and similarity to others’ data-past. In this way, each accrues their own 
homeland subjectivity.”31 Aggregated behavioral data and algorithms 
produce what Parker calls a “terrorist subject.” In turn, this terrorist 
subject authorizes certain new behaviors to ensure collective security 
(e.g., questioning by police, additional surveillance).
From this theoretical perspective, GPTs like HabitRPG can be seen 
to reflect the general rise in behavior tracking and self-­management 
through mobile media and computational devices. New Year’s Day 
2015 was widely heralded by internet news sites as the birth of the 
“Track-­Everything Revolution,” as Apple and many other major mobile 
app developers offered an unprecedented number of game-like habit-­
monitoring apps to aid Americans in the tradition of resolving to form 
new habits.32 This revolution might have been more aptly named the 
“Foggian Revolution.” In one example, the smart cup Vessyl tracks 
everything that a user drinks and provides persuasive prompts. In a 
literalization of Fogg’s Skinner-esque definition of rhetoric, software en-
trepreneur Maneesh Sethi, who was briefly (in)famous on social media 
for hiring an individual to slap him for wasting time at work, created 
the Pavlok wristband (after Pavlovian behaviorist psychology).33 Erasing 
Burke’s line between symbolic action and “B. F. Skinner’s operationally 
conditioned pigeons,”34 the Pavlok wristband administers a mild electri-
cal shock when the performed habit occurs.
Thus, one extremely important contribution of Fogg’s work lies in 
explaining how behavior change seen in a single GPT is also connected 
to this broader bio-political technique. Unsurprisingly, we can find spe-
cific invocations of Fogg’s work within this broader shift toward using 
algorithmic prompts to produce behaviors. As an example, consider that 
the emergent Foggian rhetorical paradigm of “prescriptive persuasion” 
among computer scientists and policy makers has become an increas-
ingly popular progressive design strategy along these lines. In the field 
of mobile health, a number of design researchers have sought to em-
ploy “persuasion, influence, nudge, and coercion” through mobile me-
dia apps in the service of forming a variety of habits related to physical 
activity, mental health, or diet.35 “Nudge” is a metaphor popularized by 
behavioral economists Richard Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein to describe 
the general goal of using real-time feedback or empirical data from be-
havioral tracking studies to shape collective habits.
In fact, the idea of persuasive technologies extends far beyond its 
specific system of citation within a group of game and app designers 
who are interested in mobile media and habit formation. Let me offer a 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  145
non-digital example. A recent book authored through a collaboration of 
United Kingdom sociologists entitled Changing Behaviors: The Rise of 
the Psychological State, discusses many Western governments’ attempts 
to procedurally nudge citizens through “irrational” default bias: an emo-
tional desire to take the path of least resistance (i.e., to accept pre-set 
algorithmic choices) because of our bad mechanistic habits of self (viii). 
If salt shakers are taken off restaurant tables, customers in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina have to go through the extra step of requesting a salt shaker 
from the waiter. The government then hopes to make diners more con-
scious of the fact that “adding salt to a meal is not a normal, or default, 
practice,” thereby “[m]aking people more conscious of their automatic 
behavioral responses to situations and resetting social norms.”36 The 
goal is no longer to make rational, logical, or rhetorical presentations of 
facts to change citizens’ minds as much as liberal democratic deliberative 
democracy presupposes. Rather, the goal is to preserve their individual 
freedom to salt food by adding procedural steps at the sites where habits 
of diet are nonconscious.
Echoing Foggian design heuristics, removing salt shakers is an ex-
ample of what Thaler and Sunstein would dub “hidden persuaders” or 
“choice architectures” that seek to persuade without making any spe-
cific symbolic claims or logical proposals. These systems function as in-
teractive enthymemes when the user’s self-consciousness about a given 
habit (salt) supplies the missing premise (too much salt adversely affects 
health) through a non-digital procedural stimuli designed to intervene in 
a nonconscious habit. Hidden persuaders shape collective habits across 
environments, architectures, document design, or national elections but 
without coercion or the use of law. Such influence also extends to the 
United States as well. The state of New York experimented with a similar 
effort regarding obesity.37 A consumer could still purchase and consume 
as much soda as he or she desired, but the size of containers was capped 
at a certain number of ounces. Free choice is ostensibly preserved in these 
instances, and the government nevertheless possesses tools of shaping 
collective behavior. The latter reason is why Thaler and ­Sunstein appeal 
to libertarians and many in the American political right. ­Unsurprisingly, 
immediate connections exist between Thaler and ­Sunstein’s nudge and 
Fogg’s persuasive technologies. To offer one example, the soda tax efforts 
are explained by the Fogg Behavior Grid’s ­BluePath Note.38 The goal in 
reducing soda bottle size is to take an existing habit (ability and desire 
to buy soda) and reduce the habit of consumption one time through a 
“de-motivator.” It is more difficult to manage and consume six small 
bottles of soda than one large 64-ounce cup.
With “nudge” as a case in point, Foggian rhetorics participate in 
a broader biopolitical trend toward “algorithmic regulation.” Tim 
O’Reilly usefully describes algorithmic regulation as the state or cor-
porate management of individual and collective behaviors through 

146  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
behavior tracking and persuasive technologies. Algorithmic regulation 
uses real-time measurement to determine whether certain outcomes are 
being achieved and, in turn, relies on algorithms (rules) to make adjust-
ments based upon the received data. Our habits are monitored, stored, 
and then used to inform policy decisions. Evgeney Morozov describes 
this state as, “Citizens tak[ing] on the role of information machines that 
feed the techno-bureaucratic complex with our data.”39 As a case in 
point, O’Reilly discusses algorithmic regulation in positive terms of im-
proving the efficiency of legal, economic, or political systems by using 
computers to better monitor actually existing behaviors and then to pro-
duce proportionate digital or non-digital nudges or prompts. It is not 
dialogue, debate, or reason that leads us to determine correct forms of 
legal practices but decisions made “objectively” through the data col-
lection of monitored behaviors.40 Algorithmic regulation signals the 
ways in which various institutions’ interest in collective health increas-
ingly views the mind and body as economic resources to be maximized 
through behavioral monitoring and positive and negative reinforcement. 
Rather than establish a simple opposition between “good” or “bad” sin-
gle habits, large-scale habits can be quantified through behavioral track-
ing and stimulated through persuasive algorithmic feedback loops. In 
turn, institutions can produce finely tuned gradations of psychological, 
biological, or economic affects designed to optimize a citizen worker’s 
body, mind, or decorous conduct in the polis. Behavior-tracking-as-GPT 
echoes Fogg’s boast on the Stanford PTL website about the equivalents 
of habits in humans and dogs by promising to reveal the authentic self’s 
actual (negative) behavioral patterns in order to offer an appropriate 
persuasive technology solution to develop a “positive” one.
Algorithmic regulation—collective and non-voluntary acts of 
gamification—­offer critical rhetoricians an important exigency to ex-
plore the ways in which lived experience resembles a rule-bound game 
with the activities of unknowing players producing real-time responses 
to fixed algorithmic pre-sets, like smart parking spaces in San Francisco 
that adjust the meter price based on the number of available spots.41 
Wark’s diagnosis in Gamer Theory remains one of the most significant 
efforts to think through this cultural shift through the lens of neolib-
eralism. As I note in Chapter 1, Wark unsurprisingly calls the current 
manifestation of globalized algorithmic surveillance and governing tech-
niques “gamespace.” Gamespace refers not only to the space within vid-
eogames but also to the cultural spaces in which games (agon) are played 
and produced. Games used to be played in discrete spaces, such as ten-
nis courts or Monopoly boards, but global communications networks 
have converted all of space and time to gamespace. Marshall McLuhan 
claimed decades ago that “the result of living inside of a proscenium arch 
of satellites is that the young now accept the public spaces of the earth as 
role-playing areas” (From Cliché, 10). The power of gamespace is that 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  147
it makes the world seem like “a matrix of endlessly varying games … 
all reducible to the same principles [of neoliberalism].”42 Reality and 
game have become a “seamless space in which gamers test their abilities 
within contrived scenarios,” from parking a car in the streets of San 
Francisco to applying for a home loan or wearing a Fitbit.43 Elements of 
persuasive technologies also extend beyond mobile and wearable media. 
As I note in Chapter 1, Amazon monitors the books that its users pur-
chase or browse. Amazon then employs algorithmic prompts to suggest 
related books based on other consumers’ aggregated habits. In what is 
hardly a coincidence, Amazon’s Recommend feature is one of Fogg’s key 
examples of a persuasive technology.
My analysis in this section just scratches the surface. For example, an-
other persuasive behavioral tracking technology, AppleHealth, makes us 
recall Sandra Lee Bartkey’s seminal observation that Foucault’s project 
needs to be extended to think through how patriarchy functions as dis-
ciplinary and, in turn, governmentality mechanisms.44 Just as the army 
attempts to produce docile and obedient bodies, patriarchy produces an 
analogous form of docile femininity. By extension, AppleHealth prom-
ises a “comprehensive” approach to health monitoring and behavioral 
correction prompted by a vast array of algorithmic nudges. Users can 
track microhabits such as electrodermal activity, heart rates, respiratory 
rate, calories, and even blood alcohol content.45 In a development that 
will not surprise any feminist technology scholars, AppleHealth ex-
cludes menstruation tracking through design omission. This omission is 
nothing short of ironic given the extent to which women’s bodies have 
been subject to monitoring and regulation throughout history. As cul-
tural studies researcher William Davies has observed in The Happiness 
Industry, there is a seeming return in the alignment of “well-being” and 
algorithmic regulation—a return to an eighteenth-century utilitarian de-
sire to use quantification to perfectly map human behavior.46 The sub-
title of the book Dataclysm, written by dating site OkCupid co-founder 
Christian Rudder,47 comprises a study of user behavior and has an un-
surprising subtitle: how we act when no one is watching. Algorithms 
promise to reveal the true self by mapping and tracing (rather than pro-
ducing) our behavioral habits. For these reasons, we find what seems 
like a great deal of evidence of Jagoda’s claim that certain features of 
gamification, and GPTs in particular, relate to bio-power.
Furthermore, we can read just about any videogame through this 
bio-political lens, not just GPTs. Players have started complaining about 
paying around $60.00, which is the industry standard cost of many ma-
jor commercial videogames for console systems like the PlayStation 4, 
if the game only contains about 10 hours of play through time with a 
linear, level-by-level approach. In response, there has been an undeni-
able shift within many commercially successful titles in the past few 
years toward sprawling open-world games (either FPS or RPG) like CD 

148  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Projekt Red’s action role-playing game The Witcher 3, which offers over 
100 hours of single-player gameplay. Rather than only following each 
sequential step in a main quest, The Witcher 3’s protagonist, Geralt of 
Rivia, explores an almost inexhaustible number of side quests in ex-
change for small amounts of coin or gear. If videogames function as 
what Wark calls “allegorithms” for algorithmic regulation, we could 
easily locate in this shift a bio-political allegorithm for the real-world 
“gig economy” characterized by companies like Uber and Lyft. The rise 
of the private contractor simply drifts through society from small task 
to small task without stable employment or collective bargaining power, 
similar to how Geralt completes a never-ending series of tiny gigs in the 
game world.
From Power-Knowledge to Habit-Knowledge
Thus far, this narrative about GPTs should seem fairly familiar to read-
ers acquainted with cultural studies and critical theory. It is in keep-
ing with the sorts of expressive theoretical rhetorics that our field has 
drawn upon and, indeed, might direct our writing students to employ 
in order to analyze the political ideology of videogames in an analytical 
essay. However, within this extension of Foggian design elements to bio-­
political habit production, it is possible to locate a fairly novel dimension 
of a preference for traditional texts and analytical critique over tracing 
the full range of actual behaviors enabled by GPTs. As productive as 
the argument via Foucault that GPTs’ rhetoricality is no longer a mat-
ter of “authentic” versus “inauthentic” videogames but one of charting 
how bio-power emerges across these heterogeneous cultural milieus, 
there remains a certain theoretical privilege at play that does not actu-
ally reach the view of materiality required for the non-mechanistic view 
of procedural habits that I am after. Indeed, there is something within 
the structure of critique—whether it is bio-power, Marxist dialectics, 
or queer and gender topoi—that negates the ability of procedural habits 
to form through GPTs as expressive except in so far as they emerge in 
relationship to a particular prior human-centered or discursive political 
heuristic.
To illustrate this set of concerns, I want to recast the ways in which 
we might approach the rhetoric of GPTs and procedural habits through 
Felski’s concept of postcritical reading in her book The Limits of Critique. 
While her object of interest is literary texts per se, her diagnosis of the 
problems of critique can easily apply to videogame rhetorics as well. The 
novelty and, I would suggest, interest for many rhetoric and composition 
scholars in her work lies in her observation about how critique func-
tions as a rhetorical disposition or style. It is a discourse that performs a 
certain attitude toward a text in which the literary (or rhetorical) critic 
approaches a text (or a videogame) with the goal of exposing its hidden 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  149
truths. Our field is well-acquainted with this approach, from Berlin’s 
Marxist social-epistemic critique to Cynthia Selfe and Richard Selfe’s 
location of Althusser subject interpellation in their canonical “Politics 
of the Interface” essay.48 The “desktop” as a visual metaphor for a PC’s 
graphic user interface, they argue, “hails” the user into a capitalist work 
mentality. Indeed, Felski argues that what constitutes critical reading 
across the humanities is what the French literary theorist Paul Ricoeur 
called a “hermeneutics of suspicion.” In the work of seminal figures like 
Marx, Freud, and Nietzsche, a hermeneutics of suspicion captures many 
general characteristics of critique: “[R]adicalism is not just a matter of 
action or argument but also one of interpretation. The task of the so-
cial critic is now to expose hidden truths and draw out unflattering and 
counterintuitive meanings that others fail to see,” in order to perform an 
iconoclastic smashing of idols against the forms of social complicity that 
a given text reveals.49
Obviously, critical theorists have engaged a different set of thinkers 
beyond Marx, Freud, and Nietzsche in the past few decades. Neverthe-
less, Felski insists that Ricoer’s description still describes the approach 
of a great deal of literary and critical theory in the present. With my 
analysis in the previous section in mind, think back to the terms that 
I mentioned, such as “gamespace,” “allegorithm,” and “bio-power,” or 
conversely, revisit the insights of the central texts on the rhetoric of vid-
eogames, like McAllister’s Game Work (dialectics) or Paul’s Wordplay. 
Critique has been an inseparable part of how we have imagined how 
videogames function as expressive rhetorical actors, by mirroring or 
producing differently some established set of social-political relations. 
In fact, given how easily Fogg’s work describes a host of interpenetrating 
cultural milieus, from commercial GPTs to state algorithmic regulation 
practices, it just seems naïve to argue that gamification could be any-
thing other than a link toward a covert project of a capitalist mode of 
subject-making.
As the title of her book confirms, Felski is interested in the limita-
tions of critique. One of her concerns is that critique has come to stand 
in for all forms of criticism. She is wary of a danger in assuming that 
what we seek to interpret is always constituted by a hidden meaning to 
tease out. In an earlier book,50 Felski offers a teaching anecdote: her 
undergraduate literature students were so resistant to patriarchy and the 
understanding that they needed to impose a correct feminist reading on 
a literary text that they missed an otherwise sophisticated engagement 
with gender in a novel like Henry James’s The Bostonians. We have 
seen similar lines of argument in our field, particularly from scholars we 
sometimes group with “postprocess” or “postpedagogy.” Through the 
lens of Paul Kameen’s vitalism, for example, Byron Hawk declares that 
Berlin’s social-epistemic heuristics “become law in the first-year com-
position classroom,”51 thereby blocking out the consideration of other 

150  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
forms of affect or relationality that do not correspond to the specific 
political ideology that we teach. The analogy for examining procedural 
habits in GPTs or any videogame is along similar lines. The danger in 
assuming that GPTs are an exclusive product of an invisible totalizing 
relation—power—is that we may miss other ways in which procedural 
habits shape players’ modes of being.
There are two parts of this complex argument that I want to address: 
how Foucault fits into critique and, in turn, how Felski desires to remedy 
the problems of critique. Felski offers two basic forms of the rhetorical style 
of critique used by a great deal of twentieth-century critical theory: depth 
and surface. Drawing on telling spatial metaphors, Marxists and Freudians 
“dig down” into the text by mistrusting its surface effects. By comparison, 
poststructuralists and new historicists “stand back” from the text by mis-
trusting what is naturalized. While these approaches do differ, both retain 
the hermeneutics of suspicion. Both encourage the critic to view any texts—
literary or videogame—as more than what it says and, therefore, reading 
becomes the act of “drawing out the nonobvious.”52 She elaborates:
[There are] two variants of critique: hermeneutics versus genealogy, 
depth versus surface, the pursuit of truth versus the interrogation 
of nature. In the first scheme, the critic strives to recover or retrieve 
something precious: interpretation pivots on a division between what 
is concealed and what is revealed. False gods are cast down in order 
to usher in a new regime of truths; critical doubt is deployed in the 
service of a final revelation. For a second group of critiques, this 
hermeneutics is not yet suspicious enough, thanks to its pesky attach-
ment to final vocabularies and ultimate truths. Their response is to 
sweep away the topology of depth, with its distinction between the 
truth and the false, reality and its concealment. There are no longer 
hidden layers to be peeled back, mysteries to be unveiled, or secrets 
to be salvaged. Instead, the object of analysis exists on a flat plane.53
It is this latter group that Foucault fits into but in a very nuanced way. For 
example, notable Foucaultian scholars like Paul Rabinow and ­Hubert 
Dreyfus have suggested that Foucault’s work is “anti-­hermeneutic,” be-
cause power is not controlled by a single individual or group. There is 
no secret cabal of capitalist overlords who are reading Fogg’s ­Persuasive 
Technologies in their monthly book club meetings and then imple-
menting these ideas to enslave the world as a unified project. Nor, in 
Foucault’s understanding, does power just negate individuals. Power is 
productive and manifests through the circulation of discourses and now 
videogames and GPTs. These discourses become decentralized, which 
is how GPTs can be read as part of algorithmic regulation. These forms 
of power do not obscure a hidden reality but rather bring into existence 
historically contingent forms of acting and being, such as gamification.

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  151
For this reason, Felski suggests that Foucault’s version of critique 
stresses the metaphor of surface over depth. Here, she echoes the ar-
guments of other Foucaultian commentators such as Jim Merod, who 
argues that Foucault is still working through critique and hermeneutics: 
“the repeated emphasis on power as an elusive interrelational phenome-
non, something that escapes detection but is prevalent and formative.”54 
By extension, what we examine in the rhetorical situation of procedural 
habits in GPTs is only ever an endless search for evidence of this single 
rhetorical actor. Foucault’s work in this regard takes on what Felski calls 
a “second order hermeneutics”—a critic stands back from a text to de-
naturalize its assumptions and position them within larger structures of 
power. In this approach, the critic’s “attention shifts from the ‘what’ to 
the ‘how’ of meaning, to the discursive conditions that allow a text to 
signify. Still, we remain committed to looking at undefined forces. Cri-
tique remains interpretation in structure.”55 Thus, even when Foucault 
allows us to talk about how GPTs organize actual embodied procedural 
habits, what is rhetorically salient remains wedded to a prior discursive 
condition or totalizing theoretical construct.
Felski’s intent in teasing out these two spatial metaphors for critique 
lies in the desire to advocate for a third style of reading—postcritical 
reading—that allows us to theorize the politics of a literary text (or 
videogame) while not proceeding through critique and demystification 
alone. It is the figure that Felski turns to in order to avoid these various 
spatial metaphors of depth or surface that will help me to ultimately 
recast procedural habits in the context of GPTs: Latour’s ANT. As I par-
tially gesture toward in Chapter 1, ANT does not work with a view of 
reality composed by a bounded totality governed by a predetermined 
set of structures and functions (bio-power, neoliberalism, Marxist dia-
lectics, etc.). As Latour argues throughout Reassembling the Social, the 
“social” does not exist. The social is characterized by the agencies and 
associations of human and nonhuman actors to compose singular and 
unique networks. For Latour, the social only exists through its enact-
ment as people and things temporarily come together and break apart, 
sometimes in expected ways. The social is not a static object to read but 
an actively emerging process to trace. Social explanations are what need 
explanation in the first place, because they do not exist. We do not use 
an individual text like a GPT to explain a text or a text to explain the 
social forces that produce it. Rather, Latour suggests that since humans 
and nonhumans shape these networks, everything is an actor—an ac-
tant. Anything can mediate anything else.
Viewing the social as a space constructed by the agencies of human and 
nonhuman actors is what enables us to grasp a picture of how procedural 
habits form through GPTs. Nonhuman actors can be microbes, paint-
ings, videogames, manuals, controllers, and electrical circuits. An actor 
is not defined by conscious intent but simply as something that makes a 

152  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
difference in composing the space of the social. To be clear, ­Latour is not 
advocating behavioral or technological determinism, because no single 
actor controls reality. Actors are not self-governing. Rather, “actors only 
become actors via their relations with other phenomena, as mediators 
and translators linked in extended constellations of cause and effect.”56 
A speed bump, to use one of Latour’s well-known examples, does not 
prevent speeding entirely, but it can in fact deter this behavior. Latour’s 
greater concern is simply that if we use a single cause (bio-power) to ex-
plain thousands of different effects (GPTs, algorithmic regulation, etc.), 
then we learn nothing new about the nature of these effects. Digging at 
that “all-too hasty but teachable version” of Bourdieu’s habitus as cri-
tique,57 Latour offers the example of the difference between silk and ny-
lon as fabrics. If we treat this economic relations as an allegory for habits 
or dispositions that correspond to upper and lower classes, we only reduce 
these phenomena to illustrations of a previously established scheme. We 
avoid examining the inexhaustible but real differences of shimmer, color, 
or feel that motivate attachments to one fabric versus another by various 
social actors. In summarizing this example, Felski counters (via Latour), 
“Silk and nylon … are not passive intermediaries but active mediators; 
they are not just channels for conveying predetermined meanings, but 
compose and configure these meanings in specific ways.”58
Felski’s use of Latour to describe what reading literature means gives us 
some idea of how we can use ANT to theorize procedural habits differ-
ently in GPTs. For Felski, using Latour means viewing a literary text not 
just as an object of critique or interpretation but also as something that 
creates affective relations in critics, readers, book publishers, the materials 
used to construct the text, and so on. She states, “Rather than looking 
behind the text—for its hidden causes, determining conditions, and nox-
ious motives—we might place ourselves in front of the text, reflecting on 
what it unfurls, calls forth, makes possible.”59 ­Postcritical reading helps 
to articulate “reading as a co-production between actors rather than an 
unrevealing of manifest meaning, a form of making rather than unmak-
ing.”60 ANT is what Latour calls at one point a ­“radical empiricism” that 
requires us to slow down, avoid imposing our prior theoretical frame-
works in advance, and try to attend as much as possible to the actual 
words, actor behaviors, and, especially, procedural habits of actors within 
our networks without converting these actors to an object of our prior the-
oretical interests. When we do this, we endeavor to avoid how Foucaultian 
criticism imagines the past (or the present) as a series of self-contained 
epistemes like “discipline” or “bio-power,” thereby “priming the critic to 
scrutinize the beliefs and attitudes of earlier times with cool-eyed neutral-
ity. Detachment gives way to implication and entanglement.”61
It is for this reason among many others that rhetoric and composition 
scholars have been increasingly drawn to Latour. To offer an example 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  153
more relevant to the teaching of writing, Jeff Rice employs ANT in 
the context of WPA assessment to demonstrate the shortcomings of 
an exclusive reliance on explanation. WPA assessment discourses priv-
ilege topoi such as “regular,” “systematic,” and “coherent.” Applying 
these topoi to a set of actor networks, such as Rice’s localized assem-
blage at the University of Kentucky, will not generate anything new 
in terms of description but instead produce (or fail to produce) the ef-
fects that the explanation presupposes. In analyzing texts such as a 
student ­YouTube composition, Rice recommends avoiding re-iterating 
topoi such as “YouTube writers address multiple audiences from friends 
to accidental readers.”62 He instead urges researchers to compose net-
works by describing the various empirical and nonconforming items 
and nonhuman actors that are connected or unconnected to a student’s 
specific rhetorical effects. “Extend. Remix. Juxtapose. Trace. Account. 
These are not,” Rice maintains, “the terms normally associated with 
writing assessment.”63 Even a handful of games studies scholars like 
T.L. Taylor have drawn upon Latour to examine how videogames are 
not just products of designers’ or players’ aims;64 instead, videogames 
are composed through the different networks of beta testers, player 
manuals, technical writers, marketing teams, coders, engineers, and 
commercial online distributors.
ANT importantly re-orients political approaches to texts and GPTs 
as well. A text is not just a reflection of an existing political context—a 
passive intermediary that we use to transmit the context to us. Rather, 
a text is an active mediator that creates its own political context. Felski 
summarizes: “Politics is no longer a matter of gesturing toward the 
hidden forces that explain everything; it is the process of tracing the 
interconnections, attachments, and conflicts among actors and medi-
ators as they come into view.”65 In his later writing, Latour invokes 
John Dewey’s idea of the problem of the publics. Rather than assuming 
that an object like a GPT corresponds to a self-contained bio-political 
episteme, Latour instead requires us to trace the actors that compose 
a public rather than assuming its character or nature in advance. “No 
public, no problem,” as Noortje Meras summarizes Dewey’s position. 
The invitation then, as I infer from these theoretical ideas is to view a 
GPT as a potential source of rhetorical knowledge rather than just a 
reflective object of existing knowledge—“one whose cognitive impact 
and implications are tied up with its affective reach.”66 “For scientific, 
political, and even moral reasons,” Latour admonishes, “it is crucial 
that enquirers do not in advance, and in place of the actors, define 
what sorts of building blocks the social world is made of.”67 We know 
what constitutes a political problem by GPTs once we trace the net-
works and see what actual affects and effects and procedural habits 
are produced.

154  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Time to Eat ANTs
This detailed comparison between Foucault and Latour via Felski is 
worthwhile because it allows us to examine GPTs with a fresh analytical 
gaze and therefore discuss the sorts of procedural habits that GPTs cre-
ate as actual singular actors in the world, rather than converting GPTs 
to passive mediators of critique or bio-power alone. We may continue to 
look down on figures like Fogg because of his naïve way of stating that 
persuasive technologies can “change your mind” and because he sim-
ply does not describe a richer relationship between habit and rhetoric. 
But is what he is getting at fundamentally different from Latour’s speed 
bump example? In our material turn as a field, in which edited collec-
tions like Paul Lynch and Nathaniel R. River’s Thinking With Bruno 
Latour In Rhetoric and Composition start paying attention to bricks, 
circuits, pavement, statues, and countless other actors, does Fogg’s work 
not take on a renewed sense of importance at least at a descriptive level? 
For example, marketing professors Bas Verplanken and Wendy Wood 
declare, “disrupting the environmental cues that trigger and maintain 
habit performance renders habits open to change.”68 These ontological 
properties of the human are why grocery stores often have to change 
their entire spatial arrangements in order to call our attention to new 
products (as opposed to simply adding them to new rows on existing 
shelves). Simply put, in as far as habits—our second nature—are shaped 
through human and nonhuman agencies, my suggestion is simply that 
certain parts of Fogg’s work and, by extension, GPTs should not be seen 
only as passive bio-political intermediaries. What if we follow Fogg’s 
unabashed enthusiasm and simply allowed GPTs through ANT an equal 
place in the rhetorical situation?
Felski asks a question that I would ask about how procedural habits 
form in GPTs: “What would it mean, then to acknowledge poems and 
paintings, fictional characters and narrative devices, as actors?”69 As 
an illustrative example, she mentions examining a text’s material af-
fordances. “Affordances” is a term that comes from psychologist James 
J. Gibson’s examination of how animals interact with environments. 
Objects in the world have different properties that enable certain ac-
tivities (i.e., engender to form certain habits) like a knee-high surface 
affords us the ability to sit down. Affordance is not subjective or objec-
tive but a relation that exists between things. Literary works like chairs 
and videogames “make available” certain options for moving through 
them. Whether a literary text is taken up with depends entirely upon the 
actual material and affective relations that it produces in critics, book 
clubs, newspaper review columns, and countless other actors. Thus, we 
can ask about GPTs, what affordances do they make possible that other 
videogames that do not have habit-formation as an exclusive end make 
possible?

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  155
To demonstrate an answer to this question, I want to use ANT to 
understand Fogg’s idea of kairos as a “suggestion technology” in the 
context of a GPT, Time to Eat (TTE), designed by JP Pollak, Geri Gay, 
Sahara Byrne, Emily Wagner, Daniela Retelny, and Lee Humphreys at 
Cornell University’s Food and Brand Lab to help children eat a healthy 
breakfast, by drawing directly on Fogg’s work.70 After describing how 
Fogg reconfigures kairos, I will use this revelation to pursue a larger 
point about procedural habits and the ways in which they operate as 
nonconscious and habitual forms of rhetoric. To do so, I examine Mol’s 
analysis of the failures of logical and cognitive forms of persuasion in 
dietary and nutritional guides. Mol actually invites us to look at what 
I view as Foggian design elements as part of how individuals learn (sec-
ond nature) how to like and dislike certain foods. In turn, this analysis, 
as I demonstrate in the final section, enables us to better appreciate how 
GPTs show us disembodied forms of rhetoric.
TTE persuades children to eat a healthy breakfast by caring for a 
virtual pet. The designers draw on the popularity of existing virtual-pet 
care games such as the Tamagotchi and Nintendogs. At the start of the 
game, players can choose to adopt a range of animals and inanimate 
objects, including dinosaurs, trees, penguins, robots, hippos, staplers, 
and dogs. The designers indicate that their persuasive choices were 
predicated upon psychological research and behavioral science. Players 
needed to pick and name their pets in order to allow them to feel a sense 
of control, attachment, and ownership.71 Despite relying on conven-
tional forms of pathos or emotional identification, the selection of the 
pet is where any conventional approaches to persuasion end. Specifically 
citing Fogg, the designers key in on how mobile phones by design have 
already habituated their users to receiving constant updates. TTE relies 
on this habituated practice to inform its rhetorical design. Upon starting 
the game, users receive healthy-eating reminders through push notifi-
cations or emails, such as “Good morning! Remember to eat breakfast 
today.”72 The timing of the messages is specific to the common daily 
habits of children. TTE sends reminders before and after school hours, 
with a particular emphasis on breakfast and snack time. TTE is specifi-
cally designed to be easily superimposed upon a user’s existing patterns 
of behavior.
TTE’s game-like mechanisms occur in the requirement for the user to 
take a photo of his or her meal and upload it through the game’s inter-
face. Certain behaviors, such as remembering to eat breakfast or eating 
healthy food, receive points. Missing breakfast, for example, causes a 
user to lose two points and results in push notifications or reminders to 
eat breakfast. Imagine that a child uploads a photograph of a doughnut. 
The game’s real-time response would be “Yesterday’s breakfast wasn’t 
great, and neither is today’s breakfast of doughnuts. Can you try some-
thing healthier tomorrow, like oatmeal with fruit?”73 The motivation 

156  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
to eat more healthfully lies in the child’s ability to emotionally identify 
with the pet, since the points awarded determine the emotional state of 
the pet. Indeed, the researchers found that the emotional attachment to 
the pet proved to be one of the most significant predictors of success in 
habit change. They cite evidence of children interacting with their pet 
directly through email, often treating it as a social being. Pollak et al. 
offer the anecdote of a participant who emailed the pet “thank u skittles, 
happy Monday!” after receiving the pet’s positive feedback.74 Designers 
reported a great deal of success, with 52% of app users choosing to eat 
healthier breakfasts, in comparison to 20% who did not use the app.75
In Pollak et al.’s Foggian reasoning, an audience’s habituated use of 
technologies is the critical element for establishing effective forms of per-
suasion. Rather than seeking to find a good argument to appeal to the 
mind’s symbolic capacities, GPTs indicate that a rhetor should instead 
locate the most opportunities for positive and negative reinforcement 
with regard to a target audience’s locally situated daily habits. TTE’s 
designers specifically take advantage of the fact that mobile phones have 
become such an ingrained part of the habits of many American chil-
dren’s daily lives. It is not just the content on the screen but the embodied 
and spatialized habits of users that serve as an effective precondition for 
persuasion. In a direct nod to Fogg, the researchers claim: “The fact that 
the pet ‘lives’ in the kids’ phones is important” with regard to how many 
millennials have developed the habit of sleeping with their phones.76 In 
fact, because the location of persuasion occurs in the habituated use of 
the mobile phone, Pollack et al. declare that mobile phones potentially 
offer a more effective form of persuasion than a televised pro-health ad 
at the level of repetition and reinforcement alone. Temporal factors also 
take on a renewed importance with respect to shaping a user’s habits. 
Through Fogg, the designers envision a rhetorical situation that is not a 
static or single manifestation of a persuasive activity, such as a televised 
presidential speech or a single play of a newsgame like September 12, but 
is instead a dynamic and evolving activity over a lengthy period of time.
Pollak et al. assume that habits of diet can be produced as much 
through nonconscious affect, embodiment, and spatial situatedness with 
regard to technology as through logic or reason. The player picks up 
the persuasive message like an algorithmic enthymeme: the behaviors 
that correspond to the procedural prompts and nudges of positive and 
negative reinforcement rely on the unstated premise that children should 
eat healthy breakfasts. Here, ANT’s perspective is useful to start to 
view GPTs as a potential and productive source of mediation into habit 
change through gamification. Similar to Knowles et al.’s goal in ­Barter 
(an example I discuss in Chapter 1, of presenting facts to persuade the 
disembodied cogito), obesity in public health awareness is often dis-
cussed through the topoi of “greed” and self-denial, an ontological 
belief in moderation that requires man’s rational faculties, cognition, 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  157
and will to take control as well as a confirmation of neoliberal rational 
individualism.77 Mol links this phenomenon to the foundations of nutri-
tion science in ascetic Christianity’s emphasis on frugality and economy, 
thereby historically linking obesity to moral failure. Pleasure was figured 
as a dangerous excess to be avoided. Pleasure was purely a bad habit, in 
Kant’s sense, to be overcome by a rational individual who needed to ex-
ercise some individual self-restraint. Habits are only negative and mech-
anistic obstacles to rational eating practices. Furthermore, although the 
discourses shift over time, with pre-war and war years focusing on terms 
like “enoughness” or “adequacy” and post-war on “abundance” and 
“excess,” moderation in nutrition science remained wedded to a utilitar-
ian maintenance of the body’s functional energy.78
Mol claims that reducing dieting and obesity to a cognitive matter 
of counting calories and moderation frames the body in negative terms 
while privileging the cogito. Deny what your body says—“It tricks you, 
it seeks pleasure.”79 As I note in Chapter 2, this definition puts rhetori-
cians again in the realm of an expressive/mundane division in the sense 
that the negative (emotional/female) body “tricks” the masculine (logi-
cally or dialogically inclined) mind. Like Kant’s fear of habits, our “bad 
habits” of diet simply need more revelation and accurate information in 
order for us to overcome our self-incurred forms of mechanistic habits. 
The cogito need a persuasive game and not a persuasive technology.
In a tacit argument for rhetoric’s embodied character, Mol counters 
that it is not the cogito’s fault that it fails to be persuaded to revise a 
habit in response to logical demonstration, because diets are embodied 
as well as cognitive. Mol points to a research study in which participants 
drink three different textures of chocolate—thickened milk, pudding, 
and milk—that all had the same calories per milliliter.80 Volunteers in-
variably drank less of the viscous fluid than the more liquid. The solid 
pudding fared the best in terms of encouraging the body to self-regulate: 
“[B]odies may stop eating and drinking, all by themselves, when their 
senses are satisfied.”81 Simply put, eating as a rhetorical practice stems 
from habituated modes of conduct within actual embodied and physical 
constraints. Actual properties of actual foods can be more or less con-
ducive to good eating habits than any amount of procedural, visual, or 
textual demonstration.
As a point of comparison, Mol advocates employing what I would 
view as a non-digital equivalent of a persuasive technology. She offers 
the example of young school children (five years old). She describes a 
situation in which a classroom contains a large bowl with raisins and 
the other with dried mangos. As part of the experiment, children tasted 
both raisins and mangos and reported that both tasted equally as good. 
All fruit was subsequently eaten. The next day, the teacher created a 
procedural rule for eating fruit: once the break began, students could eat 
mango at their own preference but could eat raisins only when a special 

158  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
signal was given later on. Amazingly, children overwhelmingly reported 
preferring raisins after a few days. Children would wait for the signal 
and consume all of the raisins, while mangos were often left in the bowl. 
Echoing Fogg’s use of behavioral economics, framing an eating prac-
tice as special increases its attractiveness. Yet, Mol is not advocating a 
behaviorist form of rhetoric like placing children in one of BF Skinner’s 
boxes. Rather, she highlights that for persuasion to be effective, it simply 
must do more than speak to the disembodied cogito of the videogame 
player.
Let me draw a point of comparison back to Mol’s illustration with the 
pudding. Bennett offers a similar example in Vibrant Matter of French 
fries that are served at fast food restaurants and contain “omega-3” 
fatty acids.” If consumed in French fries, these fatty acids add fat to 
our bodies, stunt our memories, and also improve human moods, which 
affects humans’ susceptibility to symbolic arguments.82 If eaten in wild 
salmon, however, omega-3 fatty acids produce affirmative mental and 
dietary effects. In a conclusion that sounds eerily like Aristotle’s hexis, 
she declares:
Food is an actant in an agentic assemblage that includes among its 
members my metabolism, cognition, and moral sensibility. Human 
intentionality is surely an important element of the public that is 
emerging around the idea of diet, obesity, and food security, but it is 
not the only actor or necessarily the key operator in it.83
It is this sort of realization that demonstrates for me the value of ANT in 
the context of videogame rhetoric. Habits constitute the space through 
which affects and environments leave traces within our bodies, a claim 
from the non-mechanistic tradition of habit from Aristotle and Ravais-
son, through more recent thinkers.
Conclusion
One clear implication of this analysis is that ANT refuses to view GPTs 
as inherently good or bad forms of digital rhetoric in advance. Rather, 
the success of GPTs—if you will—depends entirely upon the networks 
of associations that they are capable of actively participating in, which is 
also what we would say of a more conventionally expressive videogame 
as well. Fundamentally, then, we can also start to differentiate GPTs 
from one another by virtue of the actual relations that they produce or 
habits that they shape. For example, while the term “GPT” describes 
how a habit-shaping app is grafted onto real-world activities, not all 
forms of gamification follow this particular structure. Phylo (McGill) 
and FoldIt (University of Washington) are examples in which academic 
researchers have gamified pattern recognition sequences for genomic 

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  159
sequences to provide a source of external motivation to enable crowd-
sourced assistance in research. These latter examples—what games stud-
ies researcher Karen Schrier dubs “knowledge games,” as I discuss in 
Chapter 5—­nevertheless integrate an unknown real-world problem into 
the game to be collaboratively solved, while most GPTs simply add game 
elements to motivation behavior. In effect, these forms of repeated em-
bodied and cognitive activities through gamification can potentially—
albeit not exclusively—cultivate a broader procedural habit (a hexis) of 
creative and scientific inquiry.
Truthfully, any GPT or habit-shaping design element has the potential 
to function as an important rhetoric actor by participating in the shaping 
of what James J. Brown Jr. calls an “ethical program,” to think through 
the computational procedures of software and our own procedures in 
working within these spaces to develop programs of action to deal eth-
ically with them: “An ethical program, computational or otherwise, is 
a set of steps taken to address an ethical predicament.”84 Humans and 
nonhumans can both enact ethical programs in Brown Jr.’s thinking. 
Computers are constantly filtering out information and procedurally or-
ganizing our habits of interaction within digital spaces. If we were to 
lose the password to our university email accounts, then “the university 
server … examines the situation and determines the best course of action 
is to lock me out” as an ethical practice.85 Similar to ANT’s orientation, 
Brown Jr.’s discussion of an ethical program also views gamification 
as a legitimate rhetorical actor, based on how its actors use it within 
networks.
As an example of an ethical program, Brown Jr. offers the exam-
ple of MyBO, the main grassroots organizing website of (then) presi-
dential candidate Barack Obama’s election campaign. Brown Jr. notes 
that MyBO uses gamified points and metrics to provide incentives for 
volunteers. Brown Jr. writes, “Discussions of gamification are central 
to any discussion of ethical programs, since the use of procedures to 
manipulate an audience would certainly fall within the realm of both 
rhetoric and ethics.”86 The pressing issue, however, is not the question 
of coercion versus authentic rhetoric but the types of dispositions that 
are created. Here, Brown Jr. notes a critical point in support of my ar-
gument: “While critics of gamification would focus on whether MyBO 
used game features in meaningful ways, it seems clear that volunteers 
were motivated by these features and that the site felt like a game to 
those atop the leaderboard.”87 Here, users’ ecologies of practice—their 
actual behaviors beyond our literal reading of the intended use of the 
interface, to use Brooke’s phrase from Lingua Fracta—show that it will 
be a consideration of the entire assemblage that helps us understand how 
ethical programs and procedural habits form. I therefore find ANT’s 
orientation to be quite valuable, because it does not require us to accept 
all forms of gamification as good or bad. We can and should absolutely 

160  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
strive to support GPTs that work to shape good dispositions, and as I 
discuss in Chapter 6, procedural habits offers us some additional tools 
through which to make these sorts of distinctions.
Notes
	 1	 Fitbit Tracker, FitBit Incorporated, 2009, Wearable device.
	 2	 Habitica: Gamify Your Life (Santa Monica, CA: HabitRPG, Inc., 2017), 
mobile app.
	 3	 Jane McGonigal. SuperBetter (Berkeley, CA: SuperBetter, LLC, 2014), vid-
eogame (1.1.2).
	 4	 Mark One, Vessyl (Mark One, Inc. 2017), mobile app.
	 5	 Kevin Davis, Chore Wars (Kevan.org, 2007), mobile app.
	 6	 Glow (San Francisco, CA: Glow Inc., 2017), mobile app.
	 7	 TaskRabbit (TaskRabbit, Ver. 3.5. Jul. 28, 2015), mobile app.
	 8	 Foursquare, Foursquare Labs, Inc, 2009, app.
	 9	 I direct interested readers to the Gamification Corporation’s website (pro-
duced by Zimmerman) for a comprehensive introduction to this rise. See 
Gabe Zichermann, “Gamification,” Gamification Corporation, 2015, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, www.gamification.co
	10	 Russell Davies, “Playful,” presentation at This is Playful, London, UK, ­October 
31, 2009, http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2009/11/playful.html
	11	 Zombies, Run! London, UK: Six to Start, 2014. Mobile app.
	12	 It is surprising that Felski does not reference Gregory Ulmer’s essay, “The 
Object of Postcriticism” at any point in her book. As I make clear in Chap-
ter 6 on heuretics, Ulmer (along with other rhetoricians like Jeff Rice) has 
already explored a related idea.
	13	 James Paul Gee, “Learning by Design: Good Videogames as Learning 
­Machines,” E-Learning 2, no. 1 (2005): 5.
	14	 Justin Hodgson, “Developing and Extending Gaming Pedagogy: Designing 
a Course as Game,” in Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: 
Reshaping Theory and Practice of Writing, ed. Richard Colby, Matthew S. 
S. Johnson, and Rebekah Schultz Colby (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2013), 45–62.
	15	 Jane McGonigal, Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How 
They Can Change the World (New York: Penguin, 2011), 311.
	16	 Ian Bogost, “Gamification is Bullshit,” The Atlantic, Aug. 9, 2011, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017. www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/08/
gamification-is-bullshit/243338/
	17	 Go Fucking Do It! (Levels.io. 2014), videogame.
	18	 Ascent (Montebello Software, 2014), software.
	19	 B.J. Fogg, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We 
Think and Do (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003), 46, 256.
	20	 Anne Helen Peterson, “Big Mother is Watching You,” Buzzfeed, Jan. 1, 
2015, accessed May 15, 2017. https://newrepublic.com/article/115347/
parental-surveillance-creepy-new-ways-spy-your-kids
	21	 Eric Topol (health care industry expert) in discussion with Anne Helen 
­Peterson, 2015, quoted in Ibid.
	22	Patrick Jagoda, “On Gamification and Other Forms of Play,” Boundary 2 
40, no. 2 (2013): 113–114.
	23	Ibid., 116.
	24	 See Kevin Moberly, “Composition, Computer Games, and the Absence of 
Writing.” Computers and Composition 25 (2008): 284–299.

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  161
	25	Ronald Walter Greene, “Rhetoric and Capitalism: Rhetorical Agency as 
Communicative Labor,” Philosophy and Rhetoric 37, no. 4 (2004): 203.
	26	 Andrew Baerg, “Governmentality, Neoliberalism, and the Digital Game,” 
symploke 17, no. 1–2 (2009): 115–127.
	27	 Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population, tran. Graham Burchell, 
ed. Michel Senellart (New York: Palgrave, 2007), 20.
	28	 Gilles Deleuze, “Having an Idea in Cinema,” in Deleuze and Guattari: New 
Mappings in Politics, Philosophy and Culture, ed. Eleanor Kaufman and 
Kevin Jon Heller (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998), 18 
(translation modified by the author), quoted in Alexander R. ­Galloway, 
Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture, (Minneapolis: University of 
­Minnesota, 2006), 87–88.
	29	 Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics, trans. Graham Burchell, ed. Michel 
Senellart (New York: Palgrave, 2008), 118–121.
	30	 Teresa Brennan, The Transmission of Affect (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2004), 146.
	31	 Jeremy Parker, “Homeland Subjectivity: The Algorithmic Identity of Secu-
rity,” Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies 4, no. 2 (2007): 213.
	32	 Anne Helen Peterson, “Big Mother is Watching You,” Buzzfeed, Jan. 1, 
2015, accessed May 15, 2017, https://newrepublic.com/article/115347/
parental-surveillance-creepy-new-ways-spy-your-kids.
	33	 Scott Kirsner, “Can Pavlok’s Wristband Zap You Into Better Shape?” Boston.
com, Feb. 25, 2014, accessed May 15, 2017. www.boston.com/business/tech 
nology/innoeco/2014/02/can_pavloks_wristband_zap_you.html.
	34	Kenneth Burke, “(Nonsymbolic) Motion/ (Symbolic) Action,” Critical 
Inquiry 4, no. 4 (1978): 809.
	35	 Eric P.S. Baumer, Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E. Freeman, Phil Adams, Amy L. 
Gonzales, John Pollak, Daniela Retelny, Jeff Niederdeppe, Christine M. 
Olson, and Geri K. Gay. “Prescriptive Persuasion and Open-Ended Social 
Awareness: Expanding the Design Space of Mobile Health,” in Proceedings 
of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(ACM, 2012), 480.
	36	 Rhys Jones, Jessica Pykett, and Mark Whitehead, Changing Behaviours: On 
the Rise of the Psychological State (Cheltenham: Elgar, 2013).
	37	 Michael J. Grynbaum, “New York Soda Ban to Go Before State’s Top 
Court,” NY Times, Oct. 17, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.nytimes.
com/2013/10/18/nyregion/new-york-soda-ban-to-go-before-states-top-
court.html.
	38	 “BlueDot Behaviors,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015, accessed  
May 15, 2017, www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/bluedot- 
behaviors-preview/.
	39	 Evgeny Morozov, “The Real Privacy Problem,” MIT Technology Re-
view, Oct. 22, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.technologyreview.
com/s/520426/the-real-privacy-problem/.
	40	Tim O’Reilly, “Open Data and Algorithmic Regulation,” in Beyond Trans-
parency: Data and the Future of Civic Innovation, ed. Brett Goldstein and 
Lauren Dyson (New York: Code for America Press, 2013), 289–302.
	41	 “How It Works,” SF Park, 2017, accessed on May 15, 201, http://sfpark.org/
how-it-works/.
	42	 McKenzie Wark, Gamer Theory (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2007), 15.
	43	 Ibid., 7.
	44	Sandra Lee Bartkey, “Foucault, Femininity, and the Modernization of Pa-
triarchal Power,” in Feminism and Foucault: Reflections on Resistance, 

162  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
ed. Irene Diamond and Lee Quinby (Boston, MA: Northeastern University 
Press, 1988), 25–45.
	45	 Health (Cupertino, CA: Apple, 2017), Mobile app.
	46	William Davies, The Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big 
Business Sold Us Well-Being (London: Verso, 2015).
	47	 Christian Rudder, Dataclysm: Who We Are When We Think No One’s 
Looking (New York: Crown, 2014).
	48	 Cynthia L. Selfe and Richard J. Selfe, Jr., “The Politics of the Interface: 
Power and Its Exercise in Electronic Contact Zones,” College Composition 
and Communication 45, no. 4 (Dec. 1994): 480–504.
	49	 Rita Felski, The Limits of Critique (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2015), 1.
	50	 Rita Felski, Literature After Feminism (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2003).
	51	 Byron Hawk, A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies 
of Complexity (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007), 173.
	52	 Felski, The Limits, 81.
	53	 Ibid., 81.
	54	 Jim Merod, The Political Responsibility of the Critic (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1987).
	55	 Felski, The Limits, 83.
	56	 Bruno Latour, “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact 
to Matters of Concern,” Critical Inquiry 30, no. 2 (Winter 2004): 164.
	57	 Ibid., 228.
	58	 Felski, The Limits, 164.
	59	 Ibid., 174.
	60	 Ibid., 174.
	61	 Ibid., 159.
	62	 Jeff Rice, “Networked Assessment,” Computers and Composition 23, no. 1 
(2011): 6.
	63	 Ibid., 6.
	64	T.L. Taylor, “The Assemblage of Play,” Games and Culture 4, no. 4 (2009): 
331–339.
	65	 Felski, The Limits, 171.
	66	 Ibid., 84.
	67	 Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2005), 41.
	68	 Bas Verplanken and Wendy Wood. “Interventions to Break and Create Con-
sumer Habits,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 25, no. 1 (2006): 101.
	69	 Felski, The Limits, 174.
	70	 J.P. Pollak, Geri Gay, Sahara Byrne, Emily Wagner, Daniela Retelny, and 
Lee Humphreys, “It’s Time to Eat,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE 9, no. 3 
(2010): 21–27.
	71	 Ibid., 22.
	72	 Ibid., 23.
	73	 Ibid., 23.
	74	 Ibid., 25.
	75	 Ibid., 25.
	76	 Ibid., 26.
	77	Annemarie Mol, “Moderation or Satisfaction? Food Ethics and Food 
Factsm” in Whose Weight Is It Anyway? Essays on Ethics and Eating, eds. 
Sofie Vandamme et al., (Leuvin: Acco Academic Publishers), 121.
	78	 Ibid., 125.
	79	 Ibid., 125.

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  163
	80	 N. Zijlstra, M. Mars, R. de Wijk, N. Westerterp-Plantenga, and C. de Graaf, 
“The Effect of Viscosity on Ad Libitum Food Intake,” International Journal 
of Obesity 32, no. 4 (Dec. 2007): 1–8.
	81	 Ibid., 125.
	82	 Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010), 52.
	83	 Ibid., 51.
	84	James J. Brown, Ethical Programs: Hospitality and the Rhetorics of Soft-
ware (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015), 5.
	85	 Ibid., 9.
	86	 Ibid., 57.
	87	 Ibid., 57.
Bibliography
Ascent. Los Gatos, CA: Montebello Software. 2014. Software.
Alexander, Jonathan. “Gaming, Student Literacies, and the Composition Class-
room: Some Possibilities for Transformation.” College Composition and 
Communication 61, no. 1 (Sept. 2009): 35–63.
Baerg, Andrew. “Governmentality, Neoliberalism, and the Digital Game.” sym-
ploke 17, no. 1–2 (2009): 115–127.
Bartkey, Sandra Lee. “Foucault, Femininity, and the Modernization of Patriar-
chal Power.” In Feminism and Foucault: Reflections on Resistance, edited by 
Irene Diamond, and Lee Quinby, 25–45. Boston, MA: Northeastern Univer-
sity Press, 1988.
Baumer, Eric P.S., Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E. Freeman, Phil Adams, Amy L. Gon-
zales, John Pollak, Daniela Retelny, Jeff Niederdeppe, Christine M. Olson, 
and Geri K. Gay. “Prescriptive Persuasion and Open-Ended Social Aware-
ness: Expanding the Design Space of Mobile Health.” In Proceedings of the 
ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Seattle, 
WA, February 11 - 15, 2012  475–484. ACM, 2012.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
Biesecker, Barbara A. “Rethinking the Rhetorical Situation from within the 
Thematic of ‘Différance’” Philosophy & Rhetoric 22, no. 2 (1989): 110–130.
Bogost, Ian. “Funemployed Playborers.” DIS. 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://dismagazine.com/disillusioned/discussion-disillusioned/70440/
ian-bogost-funemployed-playborers/
———. “Gamification is Bullshit.” The Atlantic. Aug. 9, 2011. Accessed  
May 15, 2017. www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/08/gamification- 
is-bullshit/243338/
“BlueDot Behaviors,” Stanford Persuasive Technology Lab, 2015. Accessed 
May 15, 2017, www.behaviorwizard.org/wp/all-previews-list/bluedot- 
behaviors-preview/
Brennan, Teresa. The Transmission of Affect. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2004.
Brown, James J. Ethical Programs: Hospitality and the Rhetorics of Software. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015.
Burke, Kenneth. “(Nonsymbolic) Motion/(Symbolic) Action.” Critical Inquiry 
4, no. 4 (1978): 809–838.

164  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Chaput, Catherine. “Rhetorical Circulation in Late Capitalism: Neoliberalism 
and the Overdetermination of Affective Energy.” Philosophy and Rhetoric 
43, no. 1 (2010): 1–25.
Colby, Richard, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and Rebekah Schultz Colby, editors. 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Davies, Russell. “Playful.” Presentation at This is Playful, Lond, UK, Oct. 
31., 2009. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/ 
2009/11/playful.html
Davies, William. The Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big Busi-
ness Sold Us Well-Being. London: Verso, 2015.
Davis, Kevin. Chore Wars. Kevan.org, 2007. Mobile app.
Destiny. Bellueve, WA: Bungie and Activision, 2014. Videogame.
Dreyfus, Hubert L., and Paul Rabinow. Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism 
and Hermeneutics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014.
Felski, Rita. The Limits of Critique. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
———. Literature After Feminism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Fitbit Tracker. San Fransisco, CA: FitBit Incorporated, 2009. Wearable device.
Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of Biopolitics. Translated by Graham Burchell, ed-
ited by Michel Senellart. New York: Palgrave, 2008.
———. Security, Territory, Population. Translated by Graham Burchell, edited 
by Michel Senellart. New York: Palgrave, 2007.
———. Discipline and Punish. Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Vitantage, 
1995.
FoldIt. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Center of Game Science, 2008. 
Videogame. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://fold.it/portal/.
Foursquare. Foursquare Labs, Inc. 2009. App.
Galloway, Alexander R. Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota, 2006.
Gee, James Paul. “Learning by Design: Good Videogames as Learning Machines.” 
E-Learning 2, no. 1 (2005): 5–16.
Go Fucking Do It! Levels.io. 2014. Videogame.
Glow. San Francisco, CA: Glow Inc., 2017. Mobile app.
Greene, Ronald Walter. “Rhetoric and Capitalism: Rhetorical Agency as Com-
municative Labor.” Philosophy and Rhetoric 37, no. 4 (2004): 188–206.
Grynbaum, Michael J. “New York Soda Ban to Go Before State’s Top 
Court.” NY Times. Oct. 17, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.nytimes.
com/2013/10/18/nyregion/new-york-soda-ban-to-go-before-states-top-court.
html.
Habitica: Gamify Your Life. Santa Monica, CA: HabitRPG, Inc. Mobile app 
(1.0.1)
Hawk, Byron. A Counter-History of Composition: Toward Methodologies of 
Complexity. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, 2007.
Health. Cupertino, CA: Apple, 2017. Mobile app.
Hodgson, Justin. “Developing and Extending Gaming Pedagogy: Designing a 
Course as Game.”

Gamification and Suggestion Technologies  165
In Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby, 45–62. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
“How It Works.” SF Park, 2017. Accessed on May 15, 2017. http://sfpark.org/
how-it-works/
Jagoda, Patrick. “On Gamification and Other Forms of Play.” Boundary 2 40, 
no. 2 (2013): 115–147.
Jones, Rhys, Jessica Pykett, and Mark Whitehead. Changing Behaviours: On 
the Rise of the Psychological State. Cheltenham: Elgar, 2013.
Kirsner, Scott. “Can Pavlok’s Wristband Zap You Into Better Shape?” Boston.
com. Feb. 25, 2014. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.boston.com/business/tech-
nology/innoeco/2014/02/ can_pavloks_wristband_zap_you.html
Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005.
———. “Turning Around Politics: A Note of Gerard de Vries’ Paper.” Social 
Studies of Science 37, no. 5 (Oct. 2007): 811–820.
———. “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters 
of Concern.” Critical Inquiry 30, no. 2 (Winter 2004): 225–248.
Lynch, Paul, and Nathaniel A. Rivers, editors. Thinking with Bruno Latour in 
Rhetoric and Composition. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 
2015
McAllister, Ken S. Game Work: Language, Power, and Computer Game Cul-
ture. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama, 2004.
McGonigal, Jane. Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How 
They Can Change the World. New York: Penguin, 2011.
———. SuperBetter. Berkeley, CA: SuperBetter, LLC, 2014. Videogame (1.1.2).
McLuhan, Marshall, and Wilfred Watson. From Cliché to Archetype. Vol. 150. 
Viking Adult, 1970.
Merod, Jim. The Political Responsibility of the Critic. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
­University Press, 1987.
Moberly, Kevin. “Composition, Computer Games, and the Absence of Writ-
ing.” Computers and Composition 25 (2008): 284–299.
Mol, Annemarie. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2002.
———. “Moderation or Satisfaction? Food Ethics and Food Facts.” In 
Whose Weight Is It Anyway? Essays on Ethics and Eating. Edited by So-
fie ­Vandamme, Suzanne van de Vathorst, and Inez de Beaufort, 121–132. 
­Leuvin: Acco Academic Publishers, 2010.
Morozov, Evgeny. “The Real Privacy Problem.” MIT Technology Review. Oct. 
22, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.technologyreview.com/s/520426/
the-real-privacy-problem/
One, Mark. Vessyl. Mark One, Inc. 2017. Mobile app.
O’Reilly, Tim. “Open Data and Algorithmic Regulation.” In Beyond Transpar-
ency: Data and the Future of Civic Innovation, edited by Brett Goldstein and 
Lauren Dyson, 289–300. New York: Code for America Press, 2013.
Parker, Jeremy. “Homeland Subjectivity: The Algorithmic Identity of Secu-
rity.” Communication Kirsner and Critical/Cultural Studies 4, no. 2 (2007): 
211–215.

166  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Paul, Christopher A. Wordplay and the Discourse of Videogames: Analyzing 
Words, Design, and Play. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Peterson, Anne Helen. “Big Mother is Watching You.” Buzzfeed. Jan. 1, 
2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://newrepublic.com/article/115347/
parental-surveillance-creepy-new-ways-spy-your-kids
Phylo. McGill Center for BioInformatics, 2010. Videogame.
Pollak, J.P., Geri Gay, Sahara Byrne, Emily Wagner, Daniela Retelny, and Lee 
Humphreys. “It’s Time to Eat.” Pervasive Computing, IEEE 9, no. 3 (2010): 
21–27.
Pruchnic, Jeff. Rhetoric and Ethics in the Cybernetic Age: The Transhuman 
Condition. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Rice, Jeff. “Networked Assessment.” Computers and Composition 23, no. 1 
(2011): 1–12.
Rudder, Christian. Dataclysm: Who We Are When We Think No One’s Looking. 
New York: Crown, 2014.
Schrier, Karen. Knowledge Games: How Playing Games Can Solve Problems, 
Create Insight, and Make Change. Baltimoder, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2016.
Selfe, Cynthia L. and Gail E. Hawisher, editors. Gaming Lives in the Twenty-First 
Century: Literate Connections. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Selfe, Cynthia L. and Richard J. Selfe, Jr. “The Politics of the Interface: Power 
and Its Exercise in Electronic Contact Zones.” College Composition and 
Communication 45, no. 4 (Dec. 1994): 480–504.
Schyman, Gary. Bioshock. Novato, CA: 2K Games, 2007. Videogame.
TaskRabbit. TaskRabbit. Ver. 3.5. Jul. 28, 2015.
Taylor, T.L. “The Assemblage of Play.” Games and Culture 4, no. 4 (2009): 
331–339.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. Nudge: Improving Decisions about 
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
Verplanken, Bas, and Wendy Wood. “Interventions to Break and Create Con-
sumer Habits.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 25, no. 1 (2006): 
90–103.
Wark, McKenzie. Gamer Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2007.
Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Lodz, Poland. CD Projekt Red, 2015. Videogame.
Zichermann, Gabe, and Christopher Cunningham. Gamification By Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. Sebastopol, CA: 
O’Reily Media, 2011.
Zichermann, Gabe. “Gamification.” Gamification Corporation. 2015. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. www.gamification.co.
Zombies, Run! London, UK: Six to Start, 2014. Mobile app.
Zijlstra, N., M. Mars, R. de Wijk, N. Westerterp-Plantenga, and C. de Graaf, 
“The Effect of Viscosity on Ad Libitum Food Intake.” International Journal 
of Obesity 32, no. 4 (Dec. 2007): 1–8.

In Chapter 4, I explore affective design as one way in which more tra-
ditional FPS games employ a select number of Foggian design elements 
among other more conventional videogame components. In Chapter 5, 
I examine an entire genre, gamified persuasive technologies (GPTs), as 
consisting entirely of Foggian design elements and only the most superfi-
cial use of conventional videogame elements. By comparison, ­Chapter 6 
features a case study of a videogame genre that exists somewhere in 
between these two extremes on the Foggian design spectrum: social 
media games for casual gamers. While the traditional consumer audi-
ence for videogames could once be described as a mostly young male 
audience who desired complex game mechanics that required a con-
siderable degree of time and skill to master, games studies researcher 
Jesper Juul chronicles the rising popularity between 2000 and 2010 of 
“casual games.”1 As the name indicates, casual games require only low-
skill gaming ability to enable individuals with no previous experience in 
traditional videogames to play. One afternoon during a social gathering 
in 2008, I watched a friend’s 90-year old grandmother successfully win 
a series of matches on the Nintendo Wii’s Sports Tennis videogame.2 
Afterward, I asked her when she had last played a videogame, and she 
commented that she was not sure that she had ever played one in the 
past—not even the older prototypes of casual games, such as Tetris or 
Solitaire. Released in 2006, the Wii console was a reflection of the rising 
interest in casual gaming. The Wii not only incorporated a handheld 
remote controller with a motion sensor to allow in-game motions to be 
intuitive to casual players (i.e., to hit a tennis ball, a player swings the 
controller like she’s holding a racket), but part of its marketing plan and 
types of videogames offered were designed for a much broader audience 
than the traditional gamer.
By extension, many social media games can be accurately described as 
a genre of casual multiplayer videogames that are played synchronously 
or asynchronously through social media networks like Facebook. These 
games require low skill to play in comparison to the demanding game 
mechanics of the sorts of videogames privileged by a traditional gaming 
audience, and they are social in the sense that players are procedurally 
5	
Achieving Eudaimonia 
in Free-to-Play Social 
Media Games

168  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
encouraged to post their in-game achievements on their newsfeeds as 
well as to solicit in-game aid from other players in their social networks. 
Arguably, a central part of the growing overall number of gamers world-
wide is due to social media gaming (alongside other factors such as 
competitive esports and online play streaming platforms like Twitch). 
In 2015, for example, Facebook estimated that over 250 million world-
wide players each month play social media games, such as Farmville, 
CityVille, Happy Street, and Words with Friends.3 As a point of com-
parison, Dota 2, one of the top played videogames on Steam, averaged 
a mere 500,000 to 600,000 monthly players during the same calendar 
year.4
The reason that many social media games exist in between tradi-
tional videogames and GPTs is that social media games do in fact have 
more conventional features of videogames than GPTs. As an example, 
consider one of the most popular social media games: King Digital 
­Entertainment’s Candy Crush Saga (CCS).5 Modeled after Bejeweled, 
CCS is a tile-matching videogame that requires players to spend count-
less hours trying to crush different types of candy in a mostly timed 
environment with obstacles. A typical level requires combining candies 
of the same type in order to eliminate them for points or to remove ob-
stacles with increasing difficulty for each subsequent level. While it is by 
no means rich or expansive, CCS does in fact create a narrative world in 
a way that a gamified Fitbit does not. The player’s efforts are designed 
to support cartoon characters named Tiffi and Mr. Toffee, who seek to 
attempt to end the plague of woes faced by the inhabitants of the Candy 
­Kingdom. Yet, still closer to GPTs than to traditional videogame genres, 
CCS and many other social media games’ expressive components have 
little if anything to do with the gameplay. While CCS does require play-
ers to solve in-game puzzles in real-time, players’ interactivity with many 
other social media games like Zynga’s Farmville 2 is typically limited to 
logging in at predetermined intervals only to perform a series of clicks in 
order to set some in-game cycle into motion and, in turn, to receive some 
small reward (Figure 5.1).
Farmville 2 is a farming simulator in which the player takes on the role 
of a farmer who has to oversee various farm-related tasks such as plant-
ing, harvesting, and growing livestock. A player does not have to solve 
puzzles or overcome complex in-game obstacles in order to plant crops. 
She simply clicks a button when the in-game timer allows her to plant a 
crop, and the crop becomes planted. It is for this reason that many so-
cial media games are popularly known as “clicker” games. The popular 
webcomic Saturday Morning Breakfast Cereal satirized clicker games 
(or “incremental rewards” games) through a comparison to the myth of 
Sisyphus, commenting “Attendum: each time the rock rolls back down, 
a meaningless counter will say you’ve increased one level.”6 (Weiner).
It is the popular association of social media games with mind-
less repetition that makes this genre another important case study for 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  169
examining how digital rhetoricians need to continually balance the pres-
ence of Foggian design elements and genres alongside procedural habits. 
­Furthermore, these questions are also important to rhetoric and writing 
teachers as we make decisions about how best to incorporate social me-
dia games into our classrooms (or to avoid this heavily commercialized 
genre entirely). While independent game designers who are interested in 
more artistic or expressive videogames frequently complain that social 
media games make the videogame seem like a mere means to the more 
central activity of social media communication, this emphasis poten-
tially makes social media games all the more attractive to the writing 
classroom. Social media games are undeniably spaces where writing and 
persuasion occur as players attempt to solicit in-game aid for players, 
join guilds, or simply chat with friends using Facebook messenger while 
they harvest their crops in Farmville.7 A good number in digital rheto-
ric have already enjoined us to connect our writing classroom practices 
to the forms of writing in social media that students are already en-
gaged in.8 Scholars like John Alberti productively suggest that we can 
use social media games that students play outside the classroom to direct 
student writers’ efforts toward more formalized academic means of writ-
ing.9 Yet, as Procedural Habits has demonstrated repeatedly, to argue 
for the incorporation of any videogame genre into the writing classroom 
Figure 5.1  Screenshot from Farmville 2 on Facebook.

170  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
also means exploring the procedural habits it supports beyond just the 
types of traditional texts that student writers might produce.
In the first section of this chapter, I trace one primary way to define so-
cial media games, by examining critical reactions to social media games 
by various game designers and industry bloggers in the wake of the 2010 
Game Design Conference (GDC), the largest annual gathering of game 
design professionals. The year 2010 was when independent designers 
began to criticize the ascendance of Zynga’s Farmville through a se-
ries of familiar binaries: expressive/artistic/independent (good rhetoric) 
and mundane/commercial/embodied (bad rhetoric) to separate authentic 
from inauthentic videogames. Alongside this reduction, I must point out 
that many free-to-play social media games use intricate Foggian design 
elements as part of their play experience. I offer a detailed examination 
of how CCS utilizes “coercive monetization techniques,” “layering,” 
and other forms of behavioral psychology to create frustrating barri-
ers to in-game progression (after a habit of continuous play has been 
carefully cultivated) in an effort to encourage players to spend money to 
receive in-game help.
In the second section, I suggest that procedural habits call our attention 
to theorize the rhetoric of social media games beyond mere mindless click-
ing. Here, I offer a very brief examination of some of the creative proce-
dural habits of actual expert players in The House of the Black Goat, one 
of the strongest and most active guilds in the Facebook social media game 
Game of Thrones: Ascent,10 which is grounded in the fantasy universe of 
the popular HBO television series. Despite the fact that the game play’s 
mechanics are reducible to mindless clicking, just as a player does more 
than “just shoot enemies” in an FPS game, I feature numerous examples 
of how a player in a social media game does more than “just click” the 
mouse. Echoing my discussion in Chapter 2 of the idea of the “craftsman,” 
for whom repetition through habit is a form of active refinement rather 
than mindless repetition, I foreground some ways in which these expert 
players cultivate what the contemporary virtue ethicist Shannon Vallor 
calls (by way of Aristotle) “non-moral virtues” or “skills.” These skills can 
help individuals develop good behavioral dispositions but without neces-
sarily being interpersonal in nature, such as the development of technical 
competence or learning how to coordinate group actions against enemy 
factions to take advantage of time management algorithms. ­Members of 
The House of the Black Goat have reported other players (or, have their 
own players banned) for illegally “scripting” in order to automate (and 
cheat) its “mindless clicking” game mechanics. Simply put, procedural 
habits direct us toward the cultivation of non-mechanistic dispositions 
that are hardly reducible by the metaphor of mindless clicking.
If social media games can involve positive procedural habits like ac-
tive refinement, then rather than condemn this genre entirely, I want 
to inquire how rhetoricians might come to understand or locate new 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  171
spaces for rhetorical invention and—if desired—intervention within 
these spaces. In the third part of this chapter, I begin to think through an 
answer to this question by examining the unexpected success of Bogost’s 
social media satire videogame Cow Clicker. Alongside giving numerous 
public interviews critical of social media games, one of Bogost’s out-
standing responses to the rise of social media games was to create Cow 
Clicker.11 Cow Clicker is not a persuasive game that modeled the logics 
of a social media game in order to persuade players to stop playing this 
genre. Rather, Cow Clicker is an actual social media game that allowed 
players to play a social media game on Facebook ironically. Early Cow 
Clicker players, social media game critics, and indie gaming enthusiasts 
who were “in on the joke,” so to speak, employed Cow Clicker as Bogost 
intended: to mock their friends’ public posts from Zynga’s social media 
games by posting their achievements from Cow Clicker on Facebook. 
However, the “joke” ended up being on Bogost and his supporters, be-
cause Cow Clicker went viral. Many players who did not understand 
the satire took Cow Clicker quite seriously, even posting comparative 
reviews between Bogost’s game and other non-satirical social media 
games like Mafia Wars.12 Amazingly, even players who initially played 
ironically reported continuing to play the game somewhat seriously be-
cause they enjoyed it so much.
While undoubtedly, there are many conclusions that can be derived 
from the unexpected success of Cow Clicker, my suggestion is that we 
can understand Cow Clicker’s apparent failure as satire as an accidental 
confirmation of an important rhetorical model for intervening in social 
media players’ procedural habits through their procedural habits. As 
I suggest in this section, one lesson that Cow Clicker offers rhetoric and 
composition scholars is not to avoid examining or playing videogames 
that involve mindless clicking as a central game mechanic but to learn 
instead how to direct this habituated game mechanic toward different 
creative and, especially, more ethical ends. To make this claim, I draw 
on electracy theorist Gregory Ulmer’s concept of “heuretics,” or the use 
of avant garde art—or avant garde videogames like Cow Clicker in my 
example—as a guide for rhetorical invention beyond critique. Ulmer’s 
thinking can be combined with a specific ethical end for procedural hab-
its that Cow Clicker can be seen to support: Aristotle’s eudaimonia, a 
non-utilitarian ethics grounded in individual happiness or flourishing.
In the final section, I use Cow Clicker as a lens to highlight how mun-
dane design elements can be incorporated to channel mindless clicking 
game mechanics toward more eudaimonic ends. I examine several re-
lated heuretical models that involve similar artistic or novel efforts to 
redirect rather than avoid play habits of mindless clicking, such as ac-
tivist clicker games like Freerice.com, bio-media artist Eduardo Kac’s 
Teleportation in an Unknown State,13 and the “upcycling” social media 
game Trash Tycoon.14 Along these lines, I also feature two alternative 

172  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
approaches to gamification that attempt to similarly use behavioral repe-
tition through play in order to cultivate what I read as eudaimonic hexeis 
of scientific inquiry (Karen Schrier’s discussion of “knowledge games”) 
and resiliency (Jane McGonigal’s GPT SuperBetter) to cultivate a hexis 
of resiliency.15 What unites these disparate examples is the sustained 
attempt to work within existing players’ habituated forms of mindless 
clicking game mechanics and to channel them toward non-utilitarian 
ends by working within rather than apart from procedural habits.
Foggian Design Elements in Social Media Games
My entry point for this case study lies in game designers’ critical re-
actions to the 2010 Game Designer Conference (GDC). According to 
multiple media descriptions by industry reporters, game designers, and 
technology bloggers, the 2010 gathering was a particularly “tense af-
fair,” as one journalist from Wired magazine described it.16 In 2009, 
console videogame sales had dropped 9%. Traditional industry pow-
erhouses like Activision/Blizzard and Electronic Arts had also wit-
nessed significant stock price collapses. The culprits were the growing 
numbers of casual gamers who were not interested in traditional vid-
eogames consumers’ demands for complex game mechanics. Instead, 
casual gamers liked to incorporate games with low skill thresholds 
as part of their overall social media experience. At the time of the 
2010 conference, ­Farmville had over 100 million total subscribers and 
31 million daily players. It unsurprisingly took home the Best Social/­
Online Game award.
When Zynga studio vice president Bill Mooney bragged on stage 
about the triumph of the new game design revolution while accepting the 
award at GDC, he was booed and catcalled by many independent devel-
opers in the audience.17 Zynga, a company that specialized in social me-
dia games, seemed to represent the sum of all fears for many traditional 
game designers. While creative videogame designers were more interested 
in how to produce better graphics or game engines, Zynga presented an 
industry model of gaming as a means of producing more social interac-
tions online for a mass player audience with little interest in traditional 
videogames, while being able to profit from it simultaneously. Most—if 
not all—free-to-play games have what are called ­“microtransactions” 
built in to encourage players to spend real-life money to purchase in-
game resources or aid. In Farmville 2,18 for instance, players are en-
couraged to purchase “farm bucks” as well as to prod their social media 
friends to participate in the game by sending players resources. As a 
result, many game designers beyond even the immediate context of the 
2010 conference undeniably interpreted Zynga’s market domination and 
ascendance as a direct attack on the artistic (i.e., expressive) potential of 
videogames. The title of a summary article on the proceedings of GDC 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  173
penned by veteran designer of Civilization IV and Spore, Soren Johnson, 
said it all: “Fear and Loathing in FarmVille.”19
For context, Gordon Hayward, a blogger at Gamastura, observed in 
his write-up of the 2010 conference that there has long been tension 
between independent/artistic and commercially successful game design-
ers.20 While Zynga and social media games were the main targets in 
2010, he points toward similar criticisms hurled at Activison/Blizzard 
in previous years when independent game designers such as Jon Blow 
and Chris Hecker respectively complained about the treadmill or grind-
ing game mechanics of WoW (i.e., repetitive in-game activities such as 
mining for gold or other resources). However, at least WoW possessed a 
rich narrative universe in comparison to social media games. One pro-
motional infographic for WoW’s 2015 expansion, Mysts of Pandaria, 
boasted that the entire game now contained over 6 million words, 
“which is the equivalent of twelve copies of the Lord of the Rings.”21 By 
comparison, social media games’ game mechanics begin and end with 
clicking and seemingly outsource the more meaningful forms of expres-
sion to a player’s social media communication network. A bit simply 
stated, if popularity and minimalist for-profit game mechanics were to 
become the new model of what professional game designers strive for, 
then it is understandable why game designers, many of whom had fought 
(and continue to fight) for the relevance of videogames as an artistic, 
serious, or meaningful medium, would be so hostile.
To be clear, my comments in this section (and, indeed, throughout 
this entire book) should not be taken as an attempt to intervene in—let 
alone represent in its entirety—what is undoubtedly a complex and mul-
tifaceted debate among professional game designers, whose artistic and 
economic livelihoods are at stake. My goal is not to make recommenda-
tions about what type of videogames designers should and should not 
make. Furthermore, I also enthusiastically support the need for indepen-
dent game designers to pursue political issues and forms of expression 
that might not be profitable, including work on behalf of marginalized 
groups and communities. Nor is my aim to uncritically celebrate Zynga’s 
at times unfair and narrow design model, which some of its critics have 
unaffectionately described as a “fuck the user” strategy due to its inten-
tionally poor interface design.22 However, in as far as rhetoric and com-
position researchers might be drawn to this debate to learn something 
about rhetoric of social media games, what piques my interest is that the 
criticism of social media games seems to turn once more upon a series of 
familiar binary oppositions, including expressive versus mundane, artis-
tic versus commercial (for-profit), and, especially, cognitive (meaningful 
interaction) versus repetitive embodiment (mindless clicking).
Bogost quickly emerged as a notable public critic of Zynga and gave 
voice to the attitude of many independent game designers in complaining 
about the reduction of videogames to mindless clicking. While I do not 

174  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
know if Bogost had his previous discussion of Fogg’s work in mind, there 
is one comment that Bogost made about Zynga that offers an illustration 
of the Foggian mechanisms behind social media games. In one interview 
with CNET, Bogost compared Zynga’s games to “behaviorist experi-
ments with rats”—precisely the same complaint that I locate in Chap-
ter 2 in his distinction between persuasive games and Fogg’s persuasive 
technologies.23 Bogost was far from alone in possessing the Skinner box 
complaints, which were also articulated by others, including Carnegie 
Mellon Professor and game designer, Jesse Schell in his presentation to 
the 2010 Design, Innovate, Communicate, Entertain (DICE) Summit.24 
From these critical perspectives, social media games such as Farmville 
2 are essentially GPTs and not authentic videogames with meaningful 
forms of player interactivity. Similar to his trenchant criticisms of Fogg 
and gamification, Bogost’s comments about social media games do re-
flect some of the ways in which the appearance of mindless clicking is 
supported by Foggian design elements.
Let me return to CCS to identify a few of these behavior-shaping game 
mechanics through Fogg’s thinking. In 2013, CCS passed FarmVille 2 as 
the most popular game on Facebook, with over 9 million daily players.25 
As of June 2015, CCS has expanded to over 510 levels, including new 
expansion worlds, such as Soda Saga (May 2014) and Dream World 
(Nov. 2013), an in-game expansion (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2  Screenshot from Candy Crush Saga on Facebook.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  175
Within CCS, we see mundane habit-shaping elements such as coercive 
monetization techniques. Consider a description from games studies re-
searcher Ramin Shokrizade:
A coercive monetization model depends on the ability to ‘trick’ a 
person into making a purchase with incomplete information, or by 
hiding that information such that while it is technically available, the 
brain of the consumer does not access that information.26 (n.pag)
CCS allows for rapid progress and positive reinforcement to create a sus-
tained play habit. The game is designed for fast cycles of epiphany and 
catharsis to produce immediate positive reinforcement through audio and 
visual feedback for each successful action as levels are designed to be 
played (and replayed) in two to three minutes. However, players peri-
odically reach intentionally difficult levels by design, which can require 
hours or days of constantly replaying before achieving success. CCS’s 
designers are adept at creating cognitively stressful moments that prompt 
players to purchase in-game aid in order to release the stress. Naturally, 
difficult levels can be more easily overcome by purchasing in-game aid. 
This element is Foggian because we have ever again his general equation 
for persuasion: behavioral psychology coupled with computer-monitored 
reinforcement. As behavioral psychologists have described through the 
idea of “loss aversion,” our brains tend to dislike losing things we have 
earned or have invested time in achieving.27 This is exactly the sort of 
stimulus-response loop that Foggian design elements hope to produce.
Relative to Alberti’s desire to use social media games to teach stu-
dents something about rhetoric and writing, it would seem as though 
we also need to add a discussion about these sorts of habit-shaping fea-
tures. Highlighting once again the need to examine the rhetorical work 
that these functional mechanisms produce, consider the fact that CCS is 
rated “Ages 4+” by iTunes. Despite the fact that many adults play CCS, 
the graphics in CCS are cartoonish because the true audience is not just 
adults. Children and teenagers are more susceptible to these forms of in-
game manipulation because of the unique ways in which their thinking 
bodies and pre-frontal cortexes develop and relate to their digital envi-
ronments. The pre-frontal cortex, which weighs long-term opportunity 
cost versus short-term pain relief, is only fully developed by the age of 
25.28 Simply stated, current rating systems fail to account for attempts 
to intervene in children’s embodied play habits, an element that rheto-
ricians would miss entirely if we only examined social media games for 
their discursive implications or content on the screen.
Similar to ways in which I highlighted how affective design tried to 
keep players playing the game, CCS employs more than one Foggian de-
sign element. As an example, consider the design technique called “layer-
ing.” CCS’s designers place a virtual intermediary (a game gem) between 

176  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
a player and the act of spending actual money. In industry language, this 
intermediary is aimed to lessen players’ ability to connect the purchase 
in the game to its real-world cost. Even social media games that are not 
quite as stressful as CCS, like Farmville 2, are often designed to spend 
players’ daily allotment of in-game energy unless they are willing to pay 
money to immediately continue. In a great deal of irony in compari-
son to “mindless clicking”—the metaphor used to dismiss social media 
games as inauthentic—it would seem as if the mind and cognition are 
what many social media game designers intend to intervene in.
The Procedural Habits of Social Media Games
Given these mundane habit-shaping elements, what then should rhetoric 
and writing teachers who are interested in videogames conclude about 
social media games? To start to answer this question, we might as well 
inquire as to whether these mechanisms, as cognitively sophisticated as 
they may seem, are even effective. Here, the evidence is mixed. King Dig-
ital Entertainment’s 2015 global earnings from in-app purchases totaled 
some $1.33 billion.29 However, King Digital Entertainment also con-
firms that 70% of players never spend any money at all on in-app pur-
chases, despite the presence of these mechanisms. Nevertheless, the mere 
presence of microtransactions is becoming less sufficient as a means to 
distinguish between the different types of commercial videogames. For 
example, each time a player earns enough in-game points to increase her 
avatar’s level in Blizzard’s popular MMO FPS Overwatch, she receives 
a loot box, which randomly grants the player customizable avatar ele-
ments (sprays, emotes, voice lines) and the occasional highly desirable 
rare item (“Legendary skins”) (Figure 5.3).30
Figure 5.3  Screenshot of Hero customization gallery in Overwatch.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  177
A player’s skin is the way in which he or she is able to customize his or 
her avatar. Players also earn in-game coins to purchase better skins for 
their avatars. It is form of ethos construction for many videogame play-
ers, as having good or rare skins is a clear rhetorical signal that separates 
experienced from inexperienced players.31 In Overwatch, players can 
purchase additional loot boxes with real money (24 loot boxes for $20), 
in a process that several game industry bloggers have claimed amounts 
to a covert form of legalized in-game gambling akin to a slot machine. In 
fact, “skin betting” websites now exist to enable players to gamble their 
rare or legendary skins on the outcomes of competitive esport matches.
By contrast, the more damaging criticism would seem to be the re-
duction of videogames to mindless clicking, in which perhaps the social 
media interactions become more important than the videogame. Yet, 
Juul confirms that for any casual games, including social media games, 
meanings are “socially embeddable.” As a result, what our field would 
identify as a social media game’s rhetorical content comes equally from 
what players add to the game as opposed to their experience of play 
against the game mechanic32. In the Introduction chapter in Procedural 
Habits, for example, I note how the social media game Kim Kardashian: 
Hollywood functions as a time management game to habituate players’ 
daily lives to the game mechanics.33 In this particular example, we can 
find gender-specific figurations of habit’s mechanistic character as it re-
lates to the mindless clicking topoi. Kim Kardashian has become a pop-
ular outlet for online commentators to reinforce patriarchal assertions 
that teen girls are silly and being easily mislead by an equally mindless 
fashion icon. Gaming blogger Patricia Hernandez at Kotaku observes:
The way [male gamers] talk about these games online, you get this 
warped perception of the game’s audience. You stop considering 
them as people, and instead think of them more like mindless, easily 
seduced zombies who don’t know any better.34
In other words, we have to be careful as rhetorical analysts of social 
media games not to confuse one important motive—independent game 
designers’ need to argue that videogames can encompass a diverse array 
of serious and rhetorical topics—with a rejection of the need to exam-
ine social media gamers’ actual procedural habits and forms of rhetoric 
within the assemblage as a whole.
As a case in point, not all procedural habits formed in these for-
profit and coercive spaces are necessarily negative. If we examine the 
actual dispositions that form surrounding the rhetorical use of Kim 
Kardashian, we do not (only) find zombies. Teen girls actively promote 
Kim Kardashian online, asserting their right to enjoy a game devoted 
to photoshoots, dress up, and parties—all things that society uses 
to “tell girls that their interests are stupid, vapid, and not worthy of 

178  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
respect.”35 The fairly simple point is that by figuring female or, as is of-
ten the case, male free-to-play gamers as mindless zombies—regardless 
of whether researchers like the videogame or its negative coercive mon-
etization techniques—researchers may miss detecting the performance 
of critical rhetorical activities. The advantage of epistemic approaches 
to the rhetoric of videogames is that they do not restrict rhetoric to a 
designers’ aims.
The concept of procedural habits is all about balance. Where we find 
Foggian design elements, we have to follow Latour’s lead and carefully 
trace specific networks so that we do not risk missing how positive dis-
positions may also form from within these spaces. Clearly, one way to 
respond to the accusation of mindless clicking is to use social-epistemic 
approaches. Paul’s wordplay, for example, allows us to view these sorts 
of surrounding rhetorical activities as part of rhetoric. Matthew S.S. 
Johnson similarly discusses the idea of the “gamer author,”36 who uses 
writing about play in online player wikis as a form of public writing. 
However, another way to respond to the suggestion of mindless clicking 
is to ask if even repetitive mindless habits, such as clicking a single but-
ton to set in-game processes into motion, is inherently mindless. Here, 
I am interested in a form of procedural habits that stems from Aristot-
le’s non-mechanistic hexis. Vallor, a contemporary philosopher of virtue 
ethics and social media, helpfully describes how social media networks 
shape positive disposition. Social networks sites in general have been 
demonstrated to produce positive dispositions in youth by causing them 
to reflect upon how they form and negotiate their online and offline 
identities, similar to the ways in which young teen girls promote Kim 
Kardashian. Once again, procedural habits is less interested in the ques-
tion about what videogames should be but rather in the types of overall 
dispositions that a given videogame cultivates.
Vallor’s attention to “non-moral” virtues is instructive here because it 
comes from the same mold as the philosopher Richard Sennett’s atten-
tion to the theoretical concept of “craft,” which I feature in Chapter 2. 
For Sennett, craftmanship’s repetition in the service of improving a skill 
is simultaneously a process of active—which is not to say rational or 
always conscious—refinement. Similarly, non-moral virtues can refer to 
the achievement of technical competencies within social media play as 
part of individual flourishing.37 Let me offer an example from the so-
cial media game Game of Thrones: Ascent (owned by Disruptor Beam, 
GoTA). To analyze GoTA, I observed “Melanie,” a casual gamer and 
PhD in the humanities (Figure 5.4).
Like the Wii-playing grandmother from the introduction, Melanie has 
no interest in conventional videogames beyond the Lego Harry Potter fran-
chise (designed for children) and the occasional puzzle game, like Portal 2 
or The Witness. However, over the past two years, she has become a habit-
ual player of GoTA. Melanie became so good at the game that she joined 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  179
The House of the Black Goat, the largest and most powerful alliance in 
the game (out of thousands of alliances). I actually tried to play GoTA and 
quit almost immediately. I tend to identify more as a traditional or hard 
core gamer: I personally enjoy complex fighting games like Dark Souls 3 
or indie games like Firewatch and the Stanley Parables. Using games as a 
means to socialize online is not one of my primary dispositional motives 
for play. However, in observing Melanie’s experience, it is difficult to argue 
that social media games are only limited to mindless clicking.
What forms of dispositional and non-mechanistic competencies emerge 
from GoTA? Here is a sampling of the various activities that I have heard 
reported through a series of informal interviews with Melanie and other 
alliance members during the month of May 2016. Her alliance makes col-
lective decisions about various forms of in-game relation for players who 
break perceived decorum rules and social activities. For example, they 
report players for “scripting”; that is, they contact customer service for 
investigation of players who they believe are using illegal coding elements 
or programs to cheat. The members of the alliance utilize their in-game 
persona as satanic black “goats” to lead the divided GoTA landscape as 
“darksiders” (a more difficult approach to war and therefore preferred by 
“hard core” alliances) in contrast to “lightsiders” who prefer to “farm” (or 
hit empty camps over and over to earn XP) (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.4  Screenshot of main play interface in Game of Thrones: Ascent.

180  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Although the game takes place on four possible platforms (Facebook, 
Kongregate, DisruptorBeam, and Armor Games), serious players utilize 
Facebook chat for social and war-game coordination, planning online 
games of Cards Against Humanity with their own modded decks with 
inside humor, for example. The Goats, along with many other alliances, 
have an active social membership that helps keep the alliance together 
when it is not war time (and, in turn, each alliance has their own unique 
game play strategy). Similar to Nardi’s analysis in My Life as a Night Elf 
Priestess about how WoW functions as an important space of rhetorical 
interaction, GoTA can serve as a space through which players’ positive 
and, especially, creative dispositions emerge.
To sum up, procedural habits demonstrates that social media games 
can be explored as simply a different genre of rhetorical actor, neither 
better nor worse than any other medium. Even if we have cause (espe-
cially in the case of children and for-profit coercive monetization tech-
niques) to be critical of certain manifestations of social media games, it 
is simply not advisable for our field—again, I am not making recommen-
dations to professional game designers here—to use a dismissal of the 
rhetoric of social media games that is largely predicated upon an ideal of 
what videogames should be. Along these lines, I think our field in partic-
ular is better suited turning to an overlooked contribution to this debate 
found in the scholarship of the individual who coined the term “casual 
games” in the first place. In Casual Games, Juul comments that casual 
Figure 5.5  Screenshot of multiple platforms in use in Game of Thrones: Ascent.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  181
gamers, and, I would add, social media games, offer game designers (and 
digital rhetoricians) an opportunity to redefine exactly what it is that 
defines a videogame or a gamer. By analogy, my contention is that pro-
cedural habits refuses to dismiss the rhetorical validity of a videogame 
genre simply because it uses a different combination of game mechanics 
and social media networks. Indeed, the mechanistic specter of players 
as mindless zombies threatens to re-inscribe habits to Kantian strictures 
once more.38
Achieving Eudaimonia by Clicking Cows
By analogy, rather than taking a primary orientation of trying to di-
rect gamers or our students to play more expressive serious, political, or 
persuasive games, we can also work within these popular social media 
game spaces to channel procedural habits differently. To unpack this 
claim, I want to update another dimension of the parallel that I have 
drawn throughout the book to the expressive bias that marked our field’s 
first engagements with hypertext and, in turn, constitutes our emerging 
interests in videogames. One reason that Johnson-Eilola in Nostalgic 
Angels offered for examining non-literary commercial hypertexts like 
WordPerfect’s online Help menu is that we can find within them an 
untapped dimension for social change. To offer more recent examples 
beyond hypertext, Sean Zdenek, has highlighted the need for digital 
rhetoricians to pay attention to the availability and accuracy of screen 
captioning in online video content.39 Here, the presence or absence of 
mundane elements might not seem like it carries great rhetorical weight 
in comparison to the content of the video that we might analyze. How-
ever, as Zdenek maintains, these mundane elements offer clear rhetor-
ical implications, such as presumption of an unconscious able-bodied 
bias in YouTube as a video content platform that does not require screen 
captioning. In turn, my belief is that the realm of procedural habits in 
videogames is not different in kind. We can and should evaluate how 
mundane design elements and genres in videogames constrain and en-
able social change.
While I believe that digital rhetoricians have good cause to push on his 
assumption that social media games are only mindless clicking, there is 
nevertheless a great deal that our field can stand to learn from Bogost’s 
novel and original criticism of the latter: Cow Clicker, which Bogost 
states is inspired in part by the 2010 GDC, is a satire of all the worst 
design elements of a social media game (Figure 5.6).
His description of Cow Clicker is worth repeating in full:
You get a cow. You can click on it. In six hours, you can click it 
again. Clicking earns you clicks. You can buy custom “premium” 
cows through micropayments (the Cow Clicker currency is called 
“mooney”), and you can buy your way out of the time delay by 

182  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
spending it. You can publish feed stories about clicking your cow, 
and you can click friends’ cow clicks in their feed stories. Cow 
Clicker is Facebook games distilled to their essence.40
Bogost launched Cow Clicker on Facebook in July 2010. Indie-game 
enthusiasts as well as social media game critics quickly lauded the game. 
Players could flood their friends’ Facebook newsfeeds with posts such 
as “I’m clicking a cow” as a form of ironic protest aimed at Farmville 
players or Zynga’s monopoly on social media games. However, much to 
Bogost and his supporters’ surprise (and truly a testament to Bennett’s 
thing theory universe of aleatory effects), Cow Clicker swiftly became 
popular with other social media gamer audiences. In an interview with 
Bogost, Wired reported:
The inherent virality of the game mechanics Bogost had mimicked, 
combined with the publicity, helped spread it well beyond its initial 
Figure 5.6  Screenshot of Cow Clicker play interface on Facebook.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  183
audience of game-industry insiders. Bogost watched in surprise and 
with a bit of alarm as the number of players grew consistently, from 
5,000 soon after launch to 20,000 a few weeks later and then to 
50,000 by early September.41
Many of these new audiences of players were not aware that they were 
playing satirical games. Some players even posted earnest one-star re-
views of Cow Clicker, because they thought it was inferior in compari-
son to other social media games like Mafia Wars or CCS.
In this situation, it is tempting—indeed, almost too tempting—to 
view social media gamers’ ability to miss the satire element as evidence 
of traditional game designers’ complaints about social media games. We 
could in fact point to the ostensible failure of Cow Clicker as a satire 
to persuade audiences who were not already in agreement with Bogost’s 
criticism of social media games. However, I have an alternative point to 
raise. In many ways, Cow Clicker was simply too close to its target of 
satire. In adopting the structures of a social media game and distilling 
the game mechanics to their essence (i.e., mindless clicking), Bogost was 
not creating a persuasive game but, a satirical persuasive technology that 
perhaps too effectively mimicked the social media gaming structures that 
millions of Farmville players had become accustomed to. Cow Clicker 
does not just seem like a social media game, but it is in fact a social me-
dia game. Bogost calls Cow Clicker a “playable theory of social games,” 
but it does not model an argument about social media games in the same 
sense that a persuasive game might model a real-life system. For exam-
ple, modeling a social media game in a persuasive videogame might pres-
ent a player with an avatar of a social media player to control. The player 
might have to try to make decisions for the avatar about how to waste 
the hours in between each mindless clicking activity or be presented with 
dialogue options about how best to persuade a given social media net-
work friend to send in-game aid. A persuasive game about social media 
games would not actually let the player play—even ­ironically—an actual 
social media game in an actual social media network.
For me, this distinction is important for understanding the potential 
role of procedural habits to rhetorically intervene in social media games. 
Cow Clicker signals the complex ways in which our procedural habits 
and Foggian design elements in game mechanics habituate us to expect 
certain affects and modes of repetition from social media games, which 
includes mindless clicking and negotiating for-profit structures, timing 
mechanisms, and so on, all the while being able to chat online with 
our friends or alliance members in the case of The House of the Black 
Goat. Thus, I wonder if rhetoric and composition scholars can draw an-
other lesson from Cow Clicker. Perhaps we need to take Cow Clicker’s 
­failure—if we even call it that—at satire with new social media gamer 
audiences seriously as an invitation to consider how we can channel 

184  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
habits differently through social media games and mindless clicking. 
Rather than trying to change hearts and minds by directing them to 
more expressive genres, is Bogost’s Cow Clicker not inadvertently sug-
gesting that perhaps one way to reach 250 million social media gamers 
might be through creating more ethical types of clicker games? It is the 
ease with which players click into Cow Clicker that actually signals an 
altogether different mode of being together during play.
Cow Clicker as Heuretic Method
One way to help understand the point that I am attempting to make is 
to place Bogost’s Cow Clicker in the context of the history of rhetorical 
invention. Cow Clicker is related to a technique of rhetorical invention 
that some in our field have previously explored called “heuretics” by 
electracy theorist Gregory Ulmer (and here, I echo games studies re-
searcher Jan Rune Holmevik’s previous claims that Ulmer’s thinking is 
useful as a lens for examining videogames alongside previous work on 
Ulmer by rhetoric and composition scholars outside the context of vid-
eogames, by Sarah J. Arroyo, Byron Hawk, and many others). While 
this term is quite complex, a quick gloss of Ulmer’s argument is that 
we should study literary texts or avant garde art not merely with the 
goal of analysis and the composition of an analytical text that mimics 
a philosopher’s linear chain of cause-effect reasoning.42 This is more or 
less the process in miniature that we ask our digital rhetoric students to 
go through when we assign videogames to play in the classroom and, in 
turn, ask them to compose analytic essays about them—the structure of 
critique I take issue with in Chapter 4.
In part, heuretics is related to the issues of critique that I point to in 
Chapter 3 and earlier in this chapter. In Heuretics, Ulmer states:
…we have been aware for some time, after all, of the limitations 
of the finest institutional instantiations of logical and conceptual 
reasoning—of critique and hermeneutics in the human sciences, and 
of empirical in the nature sciences—to the point that critique has 
become cynical.43
Citing the philosopher Peter Sloterdijk’s critique of cynical reason, when 
the enlightened rose to power, the problem became that “knowing may 
leave people unaffected; that ‘people stick to their positions for any-
thing but ‘rational’ reasons.”44 While Ulmer does not mention the term 
“habit,” it is clear that he is describing a rhetorical university through 
which thinking and ideology formation occur through embodied and 
networked affects.
By extension, heuretics explores how we shift from analysis and in-
terpretation in compositions that might actually move audiences to 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  185
reconsider their points of view. Ulmer argues that we should study the 
work of artists like the surrealist Andre Breton not merely to appreciate 
his critical reactions to previous art movements or his own arguments of 
social criticism but also to actually learn how to produce our own argu-
ments through re-purposing and re-fashioning his composing techniques. 
My simple suggestion is that Cow Clicker offers a clear manifestation 
of a heuretic practice specific to social media games’ procedural hab-
its. Rather than merely writing or critiquing social media games alone, 
Bogost combines some theoretical ideas with a persuasive sort of game 
structure grounded in habit production. Thus, lesson one of Cow Clicker 
is that an important method of intervening in procedural habits of social 
media lies in producing structures that interact with them differently.
However, what ethical ends should we criticize and promote in social 
media games? Ulmer recommends using an artist’s like Breton’s “mani-
festo” (i.e., a description of his method of composition) as a model. Sim-
ilarly, we can turn to Bogost’s discussion of Cow Clicker, which is quite 
useful if we treat it similarly as a manifesto for intervening in procedural 
habits through social media games design. As part of his explanation, 
Bogost draws upon Heidegger’s term “enframing” (Gestell) as a way to 
describe how Zynga’s social media games reduce online friendship to 
a mere means to an end in as far as the game play in involved.45 As a 
brief description, enframing is one of Heidegger’s criticisms of an instru-
mental view of modern technology in that it encourages us to approach 
technology and nature as only a means to an end. We see coal in the 
ground and we extract it with our tools for the instrumental goal of 
powering our energy plants and other tools (computers, mobile phones, 
etc.), but we ignore the environmental consequences of these activities. 
Bogost draws a point of comparison to how the social media network 
LinkedIn strips a social media interface of any forms of true personal 
expression, by forcing everything into a template-y or formulaic business 
relation. Friends on LinkedIn are not friends but professional business 
connections. However, he adds:
But there’s something particularly insidious about enframing in 
games—taking even the contexts of interaction that don’t have to 
do with work, stripping them of enjoyment, and imbuing them once 
more with the spirit of potential use. In social games, friends aren’t 
really friends; they are mere resources.46
Obviously, with my example of The House of the Black Goat alliance 
above or the ability of social media games to produce positive non-moral 
dispositions as a case in point, we might wish to qualify Bogost’s fairly 
pessimistic account. However, what interests me is this exploring of 
a non-utilitarian justification as the object of Cow Clicker’s heuretic 
practice.

186  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
As it turns out, there is a related non-utilitarian ethic within the his-
tory of non-mechanistic approaches to habit in Aristotle’s eudaimonia 
(flourishing, happiness).47 As I observe in Chapter 3, the overall strength 
of Aristotle’s virtue ethics lies in the fact that he offers an evaluative 
framework for contingent ethical practices. Briefly stated, virtue ethics 
does not seek to develop a comprehensive taxonomy of practices or cus-
toms or habits that we would identify as good. Aristotle is also not a de-
ontologist like Kant who seeks out universal ethical principles grounded 
in rationality. Rather, his question is how an individual can live well. Eu-
daimonia translates to “living as if a god has approved this conduct.”48 
Aristotle starts from the presumption that health, prosperity, and happi-
ness are a telos that are desirable for their own sake, and consequently 
all other means should be directed toward these ends. Eudaimonia has 
three non-utilitarian characteristics: “it is desirable for itself, it is not de-
sirable for the sake of some other good, and all other goods are desirable 
for its sake.”49 Ethics can only function as the highest end and any other 
characteristics of good living (health, money) must work to support the 
achievement of flourishing.50 Thus, what we might ask more generally 
about the type of heuretic response that we privilege or even seek to 
design ourselves within social media games lies in whether the resulting 
forms of procedural habits are or are not conducive to flourishing. The 
heuretical question for social media games would be: Can we use the 
types of procedural habits common to these spaces to compose some-
thing in a way that promotes non-utilitarian ends?
From this vantage point, the problem of social media games is not 
necessarily mindless clicking as a game mechanic in and of itself. Rather, 
the ethical problem would lie in whether a resultant disposition that it 
contributes to does not work toward flourishing. For example, Aristotle 
defines evil (kakos, phaulos) individuals as those who confuse a mean to 
an end with eudaimonia, such as individuals who are driven by a desire 
for luxury or domination of others. Valuing a mean that does not work 
toward eudaimonia leaves individuals divided, because their desire for 
more and more (pleonexia) only leaves them unhappy with their lack. 
Virtue does not obtain from having good results but only from the desire 
to do good, which can come from a wide variety of environment, social, 
embodied, and discursive forces (i.e., hexeis). If individuals desire plea-
sure or wealth, then they are welcome do so; however, Aristotle warns 
that acting virtuously does not mean that pleasure or wealth will find 
us.51
Intriguingly, this commitment to dispositions that contribute to more 
ethical forms of interaction carry a semblance of a non-universal, but—
dare I say it—normative commitment to flourishing. Echoing this line of 
thinking, the philosopher Richard W. Miller has argued that eudaimonia 
can make Aristotle sound a bit like Karl Marx, even if ­Aristotle does not 
view a hidden historical dialectic as the secret telos that motivates human 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  187
rhetorical behavior. Consider Marx’s thesis that avoidable labor alien-
ation is morally wrong (“The activity of the worker is not his sponta-
neous activity. It is another’s activity, and a loss of his own spontaneity”) 
and that actions that remedy various forms of alienation are morally 
good.52 Alienated labor does not help individuals realize Marx’s dream 
of “an association in which the free development of each is the condition 
for the free development of all.”53 Intriguingly, both Marx and Aristotle 
emphasize the moral importance of exercising the most creative human 
faculties, especially those involving purpose and intelligence. Aristotle is 
quite emphatic that it would be a waste of time for slaves to spend their 
time cultivating hexeis that are their own end, because their lives and 
ethos are subject to the whims and ends of others’ directives.54 Even if 
Aristotle is in favor of slavery, his own analysis of eudaimonia offers a 
strong argument against slavery. Thus, reading against the grain, Miller 
concludes, “an amazing similarity emerges, uniting the great opponent 
of exploitation with the most celebrated defender of slavery.”55 As a re-
sult, eudaimonia gives us an ethical language through which to think 
about which habits are more desirable to cultivate in social media games 
than others.56
Alternative Heuretic Models for Procedural Habits
Thus, rather than abandon social media games entirely or avoid pro-
cedural habits, the thesis I entertain here, through a combination of 
heuretics (with Cow Clicker as a model) and eudaimonia, is not to 
view social media games only as sources to satirize or critique, but as 
spaces in which we can direct players’ procedural habits toward more 
eudaimonic outcomes. In this section, I will sketch a few illustrations of 
different mundane habit-shaping genres that take habit formation and 
mindless clicking as their object of intervention as alternative models to 
explore heuretic strategies. Building from this framework, I also suggest 
in Chapter 7 how our writing classrooms can incorporate some of these 
techniques not necessarily by designing entire videogames but by inter-
acting with the material and physical inputs of videogames.
One of the best examples of how a habit of mindless clicking through 
social media games can lend itself to support non-utilitarian aims lies in 
the free web-based vocabulary testing game FreeRice, hosted by the non-
profit humanitarian organization World Food Programme (Figure 5.7).57
Each correct answer to a multiple choice question donates ten grains 
of rice to the United Nations World Food Program. FreeRice aims to 
­cultivate—in the language of Procedural Habits—a hexis of charity. Like 
Fogg, FreeRice’s designers start by taking advantage of our collective ha-
bituation for mindless clicking through “refresh” on Facebook. Another 
corollary lies in our neoliberal penchant for “lifehacking”: locating and 
overcoming mechanistic habits with reductive and simplistic quick fixes 

188  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
in the rise of brain improvement apps like Lumosity, which recent stud-
ies have confirmed offers little more than a placebo effect (Futurism). 
Simply put, a great deal of our digital habitus—to borrow Bourdieu’s 
term—are structured by these sorts of prompts. Thus, FreeRice is an at-
tempt to channel these procedural habits toward more eudaimonic ends. 
Has it been successful? In November 2007, The BBC quoted a United 
Nations official who said that in its first month of operation (thanks in 
part to a great social media marketing campaign), FreeRice had gener-
ated enough rice to feed 50,000 people for a single day.58
FreeRice.com is not an isolated example, even if it is the most well-
known version of this type of online game. Different versions include 
Freekibbles (for pets), Answer for Earth (planting trees), The RainForest 
Site, and FreePoverty. Arguably, many of these are bare bones games 
cobbled together by non-profit organizations with small game develop-
ment budgets. They could probably enjoy even more success if they ac-
tually start utilizing better social media game mechanisms. Not all of 
these types of games work from the same principles. In another example, 
Chariti allows players to solve puzzles and then choose which causes to 
support. Will playing these games produce eudaimonia in the player? 
Over time, perhaps they will eventually lend themselves toward forming 
a hexis of charitable giving beyond this game. Nevertheless, it is the 
operating structure of these types of games that I am interested in. They 
do not start with an ideal, an implicit rhetorical one, that the effective 
way to motivate individuals to change their minds and to participate in 
feeding individuals in impoverished nations is to present them with a 
single expressive artifact that make this claim. Instead, these games start 
Figure 5.7  Screenshot of FreeRice’s trivia interface in web browser.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  189
by looking at the actual procedural habits that 250 million ­Facebook 
players each month employ (and internet users’ procedural habits more 
broadly) and, in turn, try to direct these habits of clicking to more eu-
daimonic ends. These online games accept—without criticizing—the 
fact that some players simply like casual clicking games for multiple rea-
sons. These same audiences may also (for a wide variety of reasons) not 
wish to participate in direct activism or community service. In turn, 
the operating assumption for these types of trivia games is not “How 
I can make social media players into the activists that I desire to see?” 
and instead, “How can I intervene within the leisure habits of play that 
individuals are engaged in to support different ends?”59
There are also more complex forms of artistic experimentation along 
the lines of Cow Clicker that work within the realm of mindless clicking 
and eudaimonia. Media artist Eduardo Kac’s discussion of his installa-
tion Teleportation in an Unknown State offers another heuretic man-
ifesto statement for procedural habits: “More than making visible the 
invisible, art needs to raise our awareness of what firmly remains beyond 
our visual [and sensory] reach but, nonetheless, affects us directly.”60 
Audiences directly participated in this installation through a website 
that “combined biological growth with (remote) Internet activity.”61 
The website featured a grid with nine remote videoscreens. Users were 
responsible for clicking on a given image and activating a remote light 
on a video projector for five minute intervals to ensure that a given plant 
seedling would survive. If no users participated, then the plant seedlings 
would die in the total darkness. Kac viewed his work as a “metaphor of 
the Internet as a life-supporting system.”62
Importantly, Kac does not place his audience inside a collective Skin-
ner box that forces them to form new behaviors. Rather, what he offers 
is a persuasive technology-like opportunity to cultivate a hexis of care. 
Similarly, individuals who lack access to goods like friends, Aristotle 
maintains, will never find happiness (eudaimonia) simply because they 
will have fewer opportunities to engage in virtuous practices of friend-
ship to form a hexis.63 Indeed, contemporary virtue ethicists interested 
in the environment similarly interpreted eudaimonia as that which 
“presupposes a harmonious integration with the rest of nature, and rep-
resents an objective condition of doing well in one’s environment, rather 
than subjective satisfaction with one’s condition.”64 Kac channels our 
procedural habits toward environmental entanglement as a heuretical 
model for invention.
These habit-forming digital genres can also be combined with more 
expressive forms as well. Guerillapps’s Trash Tycoon (2011–2013) of-
fered a fascinating and short-lived hybrid example of a persuasive game 
combined with a persuasive technology structure in a social media game. 
Trash Tycoon is the first “upcycling” or creative reuse game (transform-
ing waste into new materials with better environmental value) to exist 

190  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
on Facebook. Players function as recycling entrepreneurs who simulate 
these roles by collecting trash within a virtual city. It is in part a persua-
sive game in Bogost’s sense. Similar to Sim City, players earn in-game 
money and points by creating new products from in-game waste. Yet, 
the novelty of the game is that it ties the cultivation of players’ out-of-
game upcycling habits into in-game rewards. It partners with real-world 
sites like TerraCycle’s recycling programs, and players can earn points 
(in-game money, exclusive badges) for recycling work they perform out-
side the game. At one point, Trash Tycoon also partnered with Treehu-
gger.com and donated 10% of its revenues from virtual currency and 
advertising to Carbonfund.org.
Gamification as Eudaimonic Practice
To revisit eudaimonia in the context of other habit-forming genres that I 
consider in other chapters in Procedural Habits, gamification is another 
area in which rhetoricians can turn to models. To clarify my argument, 
I fully acknowledge that rhetoric and composition scholars productively 
employ videogames in the writing classroom in ways that are not reduc-
ible to gamification in the sense criticized by Bogost in “Gamification 
as Bullshit” (a polemic that was actually occasioned by his lone presen-
tation at the Conference on College Composition and Communication 
in 2011). Nevertheless, I want to be sure that when we do approach and 
theorize gamification per se, we avoid an unproductive division between 
expressive and mundane rhetorical forms. For example, we can follow 
the lead of other games studies researchers, such as Karen Schrier, and 
seek to understand gamification as more than a monolithic game design 
strategy. As I mention in Chapter 1 through the context of procedural 
rhetoric, the weak defense of rhetoric will tend to privilege persuasive 
games that model the interactive arguments to the cogito. These are part 
of, broadly, a larger rhetorical genre of what the games design indus-
try and games studies scholars call “games for change” or “social im-
pact games,” such as Peacemaker, The World Peace Game, or Darfur 
is Dying, which are created to help spur knowledge, understanding, or 
even real-world action related to these issues. Social impact games are 
designed to stir outrage and pathos. They might even lead individuals 
toward taking action in various causes (and they might not as well). As a 
second genre, gamification applies game elements to nongame contexts, 
as I demonstrate in Chapter 4. Gamification adds game elements to ex-
isting and defined real-world problems to motivate and reward activity. 
By comparison, Schrier usefully defines a hybrid genre of gamification 
called “knowledge games,”65 in which problems to be solved are fully 
integrated into the games, and the game play experience is part of help-
ing solve a problem. As an example, Schrier mentions EyeWire, a game 
created by MIT Neuroscientist Sebastien Seung’s lab in 2012.66

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  191
EyeWire is a 3D puzzler game that challenges players to map neurons 
in the eye’s retina. Basically, it is a variation of gamified crowdsourc-
ing and citizen science. Since there are trillions of neurons in the eye, 
­EyeWire attempts to receive non-expert help to further a non-utilitarian 
cause (perhaps) of expanding general scientific knowledge. The differ-
ence between gamification and knowledge games is subtle and yet criti-
cally important for procedural habits. Eyewire, Schrier writes:
…does not take game mechanics and apply them to studying neu-
rons or neurological subjects, nor does it take these elements and 
take them onto science research. Rather, in EyeWire, neurons and 
process of investigating them are transformed into a game environ-
ment, and we can use this to directly produce new knowledge with 
real-world applications.67
As it now has over 200,000 players from over 100 countries, one might 
suggest that Eyewire as a way for individuals to produce new knowledge 
may indeed be successful in cultivating some range of Vallor’s non-moral 
skills (creative inquiry, scientific empathy). 
Even within gamification proper, we can find different heuretic mod-
els that attempt to cultivate a eudaimonic hexis.68 While McGonigal 
is often lumped in with utopian supporters of gamification, in truth 
she has criticized narrow appropriations of the videogame genre and 
actually coined one subspecies “gameful design.” With gameful design, 
­McGonigal challenges gamification enthusiasts to avoid merely using 
the signifiers of games (levels, points, etc.) and thinking, “How can 
I make something look like a game,” and actually create “something 
[that] feel[s] like a game” in a way similar to Schrier’s foregrounding of 
knowledge games.69 One of McGonigal’s answers lies in the creation 
of the habit-­shaping app SuperBetter. SuperBetter is commendably 
open-ended.
It allows a player to determine his or her own health habits to im-
prove as well as thoroughly customize the types of gamified inputs and 
prompts that he or she uses. Consider the game’s description on the 
download portal:
SuperBetter is a free game, and once you sign up, you can choose 
a goal you want to work towards, and add “quests” to your ac-
count that you can complete to work your way there. As you com-
plete quests and inspire other people with your progress, you’ll earn 
points in different character areas, like mental, emotional, social, 
and physical resilience. Once you select your goal, you can add 
quests and create your own adventure, or you can choose a “power 
pack” that’s a bundle of quests, activities, and “bad guys,” (or things 
that stand in your way) that will help you get started.70

192  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
SuperBetter impels players to “make an enemy out of a symptom.” Mc-
Gonigal’s welcome video on the SuperBetter website mirrors popular 
gaming trailers (“take down bosses!”). Sample steps include asking play-
ers to raise their arms fifty times and record the behavior to receive 
points. To fight a generic “bad guy” such as Liquid Calories (i.e., to stop 
drinking soda, beer), players can “Chug a glass of water” for a PowerUp. 
“Got a Block? Walk Around it!”
I confess that my earliest inclination was to lump Super Better in with 
the bad side of Foggian rhetoric—Bogost’s for-profit snake oil in examples 
like Go Fucking Do It!—rather than the non-mechanistic camp of pro-
cedural habits. For example, while open-ended, McGonigal’s description 
of habit formation as “error correction” accurately captures the nature of 
habit that Foggian rhetoric in GPTs presupposes. SuperBetter’s website in-
structs a player to devote time to de-bugging her own software—“fix your 
own code.” This metaphor figures a habit as a mechanistic obstacle that 
is produced by a machine-like body. Habit thus interferes with an other-
wise “properly” functioning individual who possesses an innate sense of 
resiliency (and therefore who does not require the intervention of a GPT).
Yet, it is Aristotle’s hexis that is closer to what McGonigal’s Super 
Better is actually after in terms of habit formation. As the webpage for 
SuperBetter describes, gamification helps create a meta-habit of “resil-
iency” that can give players support for various life tasks. Similar to 
actor-­network theorist Annemarie Mol’s discussion of how obesity is not 
just a cognitive response, as I describe in Chapter 4, McGonigal knows 
that resiliency is going to be produced through the spaces and modes 
of repetition within individuals’ daily habits. Furthermore, resiliency is 
not reducible to any specific form of repetition that it asks players to 
do. These forms of positive and negative reinforcement are after an end 
that is not just a stimulus-response effect. Rather, taken together, the 
various steps cultivate a hexis—an orientation toward staying “strong, 
optimistic, and motivated even in the face of difficult obstacles.”71 By 
comparison, while one could argue that Go Fucking Do It! is after a 
positive habit—saving—its primary means of doing so are simply pun-
ishing the bad habit. There is little complexity given to producing more 
complex forms of gamified interaction that might have a better result 
for some players in shaping positive hexeis that enable actions beyond a 
narrow goal of saving for a vacation. As I read this design effort, ideally, 
resiliency in Super Better is a dispositional goal while stimulus-response 
saving through negative behavioral reinforcement in Go Fucking Do It! 
is unlikely to extend to any other aspects of players’ lives (although, 
again, procedural habits can always form in unexpected ways).
Conclusion
I offer these heuretic models as simply models to encourage our field to 
explore more habit-shaping genres as part of videogame rhetoric as well 

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  193
as to investigate the sorts of mundane commercialized genres as spaces 
to work within rather than to avoid or merely critique. Indeed, if it is 
within procedural habits of social media games where our dispositions 
are increasingly shaped, then it is by channeling these procedural habits 
differently where we have an opportunity to locate forms of intervention 
and, particularly, to diagnose when habits are not necessarily conducive 
to flourishing. These examples are fairly explicit: the use of mundane 
habit-shaping genres to channel habits differently. However, they are 
hardly exhaustive. I also make no claims here about whether exploring 
these forms will be better or worse at shaping procedural habits. Here, 
I echo a comment made by Schrier in her discussion of knowledge games: 
I am not calling for everything to be more gamelike … Knowledge 
games may be another viable way we produce new knowledge, but 
they are not necessarily a better way. As such, it is important to un-
derstand their unique advantages and disadvantages as compared to 
other knowledge-seeking experiences and methods.72
My friend’s grandmother is not going to form habits of charity in social 
media games anytime soon, and likely, neither are more hard core vid-
eogame players like myself. Echoing Schrier, my single largest belief in 
examining procedural habits as a heuretic strategy is simply to call at-
tention to the possibility that, since habits do form in these spaces, con-
cerns about social justice—following Johson-Eilola’s comments about 
mundane hypertexts—might provide cause to learn how to work within 
these spaces. Along these lines, it also means respecting the agencies 
of the technologies themselves to move us in unpredictable ways even 
when we are trying to work on habits. Thus, in Chapter 6, I turn toward 
a similar procedural habit—a hexis of enchantment—that helps rheto-
ric and composition scholars respect the independent agency of another 
mundane habit-shaping element: a videogame’s software code.
Notes
	 1	 Jesper. Juul, A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Video Games and Their 
Players (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2010).
	 2	 Wii Sports (Kyoto, Japan: Nintendo, 2006), Videogame.
	 3	 Donna Tam, “Facebook Game Developers Generated $2.8 Billion in 2012,” 
CNetNews.com, Mar. 26, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.cnet.com/
news/facebook-game-developers-generated-2-8-billion-in-2012/
	 4	 “Dota 2,” Steamcharts, 2017, accessed May 15, 2017, Videogame, http://
steamcharts.com/app/570
	 5	 Candy Crush Saga (London: King Digital Entertainment, 2012), Videogame.
	 6	 Zach Weiner, “Sisyphus,” SMBC cartoon, no. 3259, Feb. 2014, accessed 
May 15, 2017, www.smbc-comics.com/?id=3259
	 7	 Farmville (San Francisco, CA: Zynga), 2009, Videogame.
	 8	 See, for example, Bill Hart-Davidson, Ellen Cushman, Jeffrey T. Grabill, 
Danielle Nicole Devoss and James Porter, “Why Teach Digital Writing,” 

194  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Kairos 10.1 (2005), accessed May 15, 2017, http://english.ttu.edu/kai-
ros/10.1/binder2.html?coverweb/wide/index.html
	 9	 John Alberti, “The Game of Facebook and the End(s) of Writing Pedagogy,” 
in Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: Reshaping Theory 
and Practice of Writing, ed. Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 9–24.
	10	 Game of Thrones: Ascent (Framingham, MA: Disruptor Beam, 2010), Social 
Media Game.
	11	 Ian Bogost, Cow Clicker (2010), Videogame, accessed May 15, 2017. https://
cowclicker.com/
	12	 Mafia Wars (San Francisco, CA: Zynga, 2008), Social Media Videogame.
	13	 Eduardo Kac, Telepresence & Bio Art: Networking Humans, Rabbits & 
Robots (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2005).
	14	 Trash Tycoon (Manhattan, NY: Guerilla Apps, 2011), Social Media 
Videogame.
	15	 Jane McGonigal, SuperBetter (Berkeley, CA: SuperBetter, LLC, 2014), 
Videogame (1.1.2).
	16	 Jason Tanz, “The Curse of Cow Clicker: How a Cheeky Satire Became 
a Videogame Hit,” Wired, Dec. 20, 2011, accessed May 15, 2017, www.
wired.com/2011/12/ff_cowclicker/
	17	 Soren Johnson, “Opinion: Fear and Loathing in Farmville,” Gamasutra, 
Mar. 22, 2010, accessed May 15, 2017, www.gamasutra.com/view/news/ 
118697/Opinion_Fear_and_Loathing_in_Farmville.php
	18	 Farmville 2 (San Francisco, CA: Zynga. 2009), Videogame.
	19	 Johnson, “Fear and Loathing.”
	20	 David Hayward, “Zynga: The Future, Or Just a Bit of It?” Gamasutra, 
Mar. 15, 2010. accessed May 15, 2017, www.gamasutra.com/blogs/David 
Hayward/20100315/4670/ Zynga_The_Future_Or_Just_A_Bit_Of_It.php
	21	 “Blizzard Infographic,” Blizzard Entertainment, December, 2013, accessed 
May 15, 2017, http://media.wow-europe.com/infographic/en/world-of- 
warcraft-infographic.html
	22	See Hayward, “Zynga: The Future.” Heyward writes, “Zynga have a ‘fuck 
the users’ approach to game development. Their games extract revenue and 
multiply users in every way possible. Mark Pincus himself is on record saying 
‘I did every horrible thing in the book to, just to get revenues right away.’”
	23	 Daniel Terdiman, “Why Zynga Ticks off the Games Industry,” 
Cnet, Apr. 20, 2010, accessed May 15, 2017, www.cnet.com/news/
why-zynga-ticks-off-the-games-industry/
	24	 Jesse Schell, “When Games Invade Real Life,” Dice Summitt, Feb, 
2010. TED.com, Video, accessed, May 15, 2017, www.ted.com/talks/
jesse_schell_when_games_invade_real_life
	25	Brandy Shaul, “Candy Crush Saga crushes Zynga, becomes top Facebook 
game by DAU.” Games.com, Jan. 14, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, http://
blog.games.com/2013/01/14/candy-crush-saga-top-facebook-game/
	26	 Ramin Shokrizade, “The Top F2P Monetization Tricks,” Gamasutra, Jun. 
26, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.gamasutra.com/blogs/Ramin-
Shokrizade/20130626/ 194933/The_Top_F2P_Monetization_Tricks.php
	27	 “Game Mechanics: Loss Aversion,” iGamify, 2013, accessed May 15,  
2017, www.igamify.com/category/toolkit-gamification-game-mechanics-loss- 
aversion-design-game-mechanics
	28	 Shokrizade, Ibid.
	29	 Joe Rossignol, “Candy Crush Saga Players Spent Over $1.3 Billion on In-
App Purchases in 2014,” MacRumors, Feb. 13, 2015, accessed May 15, 
2017, www.macrumors.com/2015/02/13/candy-crush-saga-revenue-2014/

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  195
	30	 Will Greenwald, “Overwatch is Becoming Blizzard’s Subtle, Sinister Gam-
bling Simulator,” Geek.com, Jun 3, 2016, accessed May 15, 2017, www.
geek.com/games/blizzards-slow-trudging-parade-of-disgusting-­overwatch-
microtransaction-decisions-1657224/
	31	 Wendi Sierra and Eyman, Doug, “‘I Rolled the Dice with Trade Chat 
and This is What I Got.’ Demonstrating Context-Dependent Credibility 
in ­Virtual Worlds,” in Online Credibility and Digital Ethos: Evaluating 
­Computer-Mediated Communication, ed. Shawn Apostel and Moe Folk 
(Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2013), 332–352.
	32	 Juul, A Casual, 20.
	33	 Kim Kardashian: Hollywood (2014. San Francisco, CA: Glu Mobile, 2015, 
3.3.0), iOS Videogame.
	34	Patricia Hernandez, “Teen Girls Don’t Care What We Think of Kim 
Kardashian,” Kotaku, Sept. 15, 2014, accessed May 15, 2017, http:// 
kotaku.com/teen-girls-dont-care-what-we-think-of-kim-kardashian- 
1611225640
	35	 Ibid.
	36	 Matthew S.S. Johnson, “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces,” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
	37	 Shannon Vallor, “Social Networking Technology and the Virtues,” Ethics 
Information Technology 12 (2010): 157–170.
	38	 Indeed, designers are also not blind to these elements. Stephanie Vie, for 
example raises the question of how “players’ data is elicited to create a 
user-friendly gaming space on the surface and to segment and categorize 
players behind the scenes” through behavior tracking and affect. Design-
ers of social media games may not make a ton of money through in-game 
purchases, but the data that they are able to collect about users’ habits of 
mobility and patterns of clicking from cookies or other monitoring software 
is invaluable. See Stephanie Vie, “You Are How You Play,” in Computer 
Games and Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications 
at the Intersection, ed. Jennifer deWinter and Ryan M. Moeller (Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2014), 173.
	39	 Sean Zdenek, Reading Sounds: Closed-Captioned Media and Popular Culture 
(Chicago,: University of Chicago Press, 2015).
	40	Ian Bogost, “Cow Clicker: The Making of an Obsession,” Bogost.com 
Jul. 21, 2010, accessed May 15, 2017, http://bogost.com/writing/blog/
cow_clicker_1/
	41	 Tanz, “The Curse.”
	42	 Gregory Ulmer, Heuretics: The logic of invention (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1994), 1–40.
	43	 Ibid., 19.
	44	Ibid., 18.
	45	 Bogost, “Cow Clicker.”
	46	Ibid.
	47	 To read a full treatment of eudaimonia, see Eugene Garver, Confronting 
Aristotle’s Ethics: Ancient and Modern Morality (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2008).
	48	 Richard Kraut, “Aristotle’s Ethics,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
April 21, 2014, accessed May 15, 2017, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
aristotle-ethics/
	49	 Ibid. As an illustration, consider this passage from Aristotle: “We said, 
then, that eudaimonia is not a disposition (i.e., fixed characteristic); for if it 
were it might belong to some one who was asleep throughout his life, living 
the life of a plant, or, again, to some one who was suffering the greatest 

196  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
misfortunes. If these implications are unacceptable, and we must rather class 
eudaimonia as an activity, as we have said before, and if some activities are 
necessary, and desirable for the sake of something else, while others are so 
in themselves, evidently happiness must be placed among those desirable 
in themselves, not among those desirable for the sake of something else; 
for eudaimonia does not lack anything, but is self-sufficient.” See Aristotle, 
Nicomachean Ethics, 10.1176a.30-1175b.5.
	50	 To invoke a well-known idea from Aristotle, being human involves utilizing 
the soul’s rational elements to sustain “activity in accordance with virtue.” It 
is our function (ergon). The soul is comprised of numerous lower capacities, 
such as a locomotive soul for motion and a perceptive soul for perception, 
and higher ones, such as the use of reason over the course of an individual’s 
life. Reason has to be a distinctly human process for Aristotle to distinguish 
it from the ways in which plants will nourish themselves through biological 
activity. See Ibid., 1097b22–1098a20.
	51	 Ibid, 4.1.1120b17-20.
	52	 Richard W. Miller, “Marx and Aristotle: A Kind of Consequentialism.” 
­Canadian Journal of Philosophy 7 (1981): 330.
	53	 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (New York: 
Penguin, 2002), 112.
	54	 Garver, Confronting, 122.
	55	 Miller, “Marx,” 178.
	56	 There is a much larger argument to be made here about virtue ethics and 
digital rhetoric that is the subject of my second book project (with Jared S. 
Colton, Rhetoric, Technology, and the Virtues).
	57	 Free Rice (United Nations World Food Programme, 2007), Videogame, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, http://freerice.com
	58	 “Web Game Provides Rice for the Hungry,” BBC, November 10, 2007, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7088447.stm
	59	 (To anticipate one obvious counter-argument, I am not suggesting that Free 
Rice is a replacement for other forms of activism. However, at question 
is not whether these sorts of games are better or worse forms of activism 
than other mediums. Indeed, while internet “slacktivism” such as clicking 
on online petitions rather than marching in the streets—pace Malcolm 
Gladwell’s famous criticism—has been criticized on similar grounds, other 
supporters of slacktivism counter, “Isn’t raising awareness one of the goals 
of activism?”)
	60	 Kac, Telepresence, 236.
	61	 Ibid., 221.
	62	 Ibid., 223.
	63	 Aristotle, Nicomachean, 1153b17–19.
	64	O. Bina and S.G. Vaz, “Humans, Environment, and Economies: From Vi-
cious Relationships to Virtuous Responsibility,” Ecological Economics 72 
(2011): 173.
	65	 Karen Schrier, Knowledge Games: How Playing Games Can Solve Prob-
lems, Create Insight, and Make Change (Baltimoder, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2016), 1–10.
	66	 EyeWire (Cambridge, MA: Wired Differently, Inc, 2012), Videogame, ac-
cessed May 15, 2017, http://eyewire.org/explore
	67	 Schrier, Knowledge, 11.
	68	 Sebastian Deterding, Dan Dixon, Rilla Khaled, and Lennart Nacke have ar-
gued that such heated debates should not discredit the study of gamification 
but that scholars might require a new term for the phenomenon.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  197
	69	 Chealsea, “Gameful Design,” SuperBetterBlog, Jun 13, 2010, accessed May 
15, 2017, http://blog.superbetter.com/gameful-design/
	70	 Welcome to Super Better, SuperBetter, Video, accessed May 15, 2017, www.
superbetter.com/
	71	 McGonigal, SuperBetter.
	72	 Schrier, Knowledge, 7.
Bibliography
Alberti, John. “The Game of Facebook and the End(s) of Writing Pedagogy.” In 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing, edited by Richard Colby, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and 
Rebekah Schultz Colby, 9–24. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by Joe Sachs. New York: Focus Phil-
osophical Library, 2002.
Bina, O., and S.G. Vaz. “Humans, Environment, and Economies: From Vicious 
Relationships to Virtuous Responsibility.” Ecological Economics 72 (2011): 
170–178.
“Blizzard Infographic.” Blizzard Entertainment. December, 2013. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://media.wow-europe.com/infographic/en/world-of-warcraft- 
infographic.html.
Bogost, Ian. Cow Clicker. 2010. Videogame. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://
cowclicker.com/.
———. “Cow Clicker: The Making of an Obsession.” Bogost.com Jul. 21, 2010. 
Accessed May 15, 2017. http://bogost.com/writing/blog/cow_clicker_1/.
Candy Crush Saga. London: King Digital Entertainment, 2012. iOS Videogame.
Chealsea. “Gameful Design.” SuperBetterBlog. Jun 13, 2010. Accessed May 15, 
2017. http://blog.superbetter.com/gameful-design/.
Colby, Richard, Matthew S. S. Johnson, and Rebekah Schultz Colby, editors. 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play Through Video Games: Reshaping Theory and 
Practice of Writing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
“Dota 2.” Steamcharts, 2017. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://steamcharts.com/
app/570.
EyeWire. Cambridge, MA: Wired Differently, Inc, 2012. Videogame. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://eyewire.org/explore.
Farmville. San Francisco, CA: Zynga. 2009. Videogame.
Farmville 2. San Francisco, CA: Zynga. 2009. Videogame.
Free Rice. United Nations World Food Programme. 2007. Videogame. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://freerice.com.
“Game Mechanics: Loss Aversion.” iGamify. 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017.  
www.igamify.com/category/toolkit-gamification-game-mechanics-loss-aversion- 
design-game-mechanics.
Game of Thrones: Ascent. Framingham, MA: Disruptor Beam, 2010. Social 
Media Game.
Garver, Eugene. Aristotle’s Rhetoric: An Art of Character. Chicago: University 
of Chicago, 1994.
Greenwald, Will. “Overwatch is Becoming Blizzard’s Subtle, Sinister Gambling Sim-
ulator.” Geek.com Jun 3, 2016. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.geek.com/games/

198  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
blizzards-slow-trudging-parade-of-disgusting-overwatch-microtransaction-­
decisions-1657224/.
Hart-Davidson, Bill, Ellen Cushman, Jeffrey T. Grabill, Danielle Nicole Devoss, 
and James Porter. “Why Teach Digital Writing.” Kairos 10, no. 1 (2005). Ac-
cessed May 15, 2017. http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/10.1/binder2.html?cover 
web/wide/index.html.
Hayward, David. “Zynga: The Future, Or Just a Bit of It?” Gamasutra Mar. 15,  
2010. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.gamasutra.com/blogs/DavidHayward/ 
20100315/4670/Zynga_The_Future_Or_Just_A_Bit_Of_It.php.
Hernandez, Patricia. “Teen Girls Don’t Care What We Think of Kim Kar-
dashian.” Kotaku. Sept. 15, 2014. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://kotaku.
com/teen-girls-dont-care-what-we-think-of-kim-kardashian-1611225640.
Johnson, Matthew S.S. “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces.” Computers and 
Composition 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
Johnson, Soren. “Opinion: Fear and Loathing in Farmville.” Gamasutra. Mar. 
22, 2010. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.gamasutra.com/view/news/118697/
Opinion_Fear_and_Loathing_in_Farmville.php.
Juul, Jesper. A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Video Games and Their Players. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2010.
Kac, Eduardo. Telepresence & Bio Art: Networking Humans, Rabbits & Robots. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2005.
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood. 2014. San Francisco, CA: Glu Mobile, 2015 
(3.3.0). iOS Videogame.
Kraut, Richard. “Aristotle’s Ethics.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
April 21, 2014. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
aristotle-ethics/.
Mafia Wars. San Francisco, CA: Zynga, 2008. Social Media Videogame.
Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. The Communist Manifesto. New York: 
Penguin, 2002.
McGonigal, Jane. SuperBetter. Berkeley, CA: SuperBetter, LLC, 2014. Videogame 
(1.1.2).
Miller, Richard W. “Marx and Aristotle: A Kind of Consequentialism.” Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 7 (1981): 323–352.
Nardi, Bonnie A. My Life as a Night Elf Priest: An Anthropological Account of 
World of Warcraft. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2010.
Rossignol, Joe. “Candy Crush Saga Players Spent Over $1.3 Billion on In-App 
Purchases in 2014.” MacRumors. Feb. 13, 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
www.macrumors.com/2015/02/13/candy-crush-saga-revenue-2014/.
Sarkar, Samit. “Farmville 2 Has 40 Million Monthly Active Users, Amid Other  
Staggering Numbers.” Polygon Jan. 4, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www. 
polygon.com/2013/1/4/3837236/farmville-2-infographic-40-million-monthly- 
active-users.
Schell, Jesse. “When Games Invade Real Life.” Dice Summitt, Feb, 2010.  
TED.com Accessed May 15, 2017. www.ted.com/talks/jesse_schell_when_ 
games_invade_real_life.
Shokrizade, Ramin. “The Top F2P Monetization Tricks.” Gamasutra. Jun. 
26, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.gamasutra.com/blogs/Ramin 
Shokrizade/20130626/194933/The_Top_F2P_Monetization_Tricks.php.

Achieving Eudaimonia in Free-to-Play Social Media Games  199
Schrier, Karen. Knowledge Games: How Playing Games Can Solve Problems, 
Create Insight, and Make Change. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2016.
Shaul, Brandy. “Candy Crush Saga crushes Zynga, becomes top Facebook game 
by DAU.” Games.com. Jan. 14, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://blog.
games.com/2013/01/14/candy-crush-saga-top-facebook-game/.
Sierra, Wendi, and Eyman, Doug. “‘I Rolled the Dice with Trade Chat and 
This is What I Got.’ Demonstrating context-dependent credibility in virtual 
worlds.” In Online Credibility and Digital Ethos: Evaluating Computer-­
Mediated Communication, edited by Shawn Apostel & Moe Folk, 332–352. 
Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2013.
Sennett, Richard. The Craftsman. Cambridge, MA: Yale University Press, 2008.
Tam, Donna. “Facebook Game Developers Generated $2.8 Billion in 2012.” 
CNetNews.com. Mar. 26, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.cnet.com/
news/facebook-game-developers-generated-2-8-billion-in-2012/.
Tanz, Jason. “The Curse of Cow Clicker: How a Cheeky Satire Became a Vid-
eogame Hit.” Wired. Dec. 20, 2011. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.wired.
com/2011/12/ff_cowclicker/.
Terdiman, Daniel. “Why Zynga Ticks off the Games Industry.” Cnet 
Apr. 
20, 
2010. 
Accessed 
May 
15, 
2017. 
www.cnet.com/news/
why-zynga-ticks-off-the-games-industry/.
Trash Tycoon. Manhattan, NY: Guerilla Apps, 2011. Social Media Videogame.
Ulmer, Gregory. Heuretics: The logic of invention. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 1994.
———. Internet Invention: From Literacy to Electracy. New York: Longman, 
2003.
Vallor, Shannon. “Social Networking Technology and the Virtues.” Ethics In-
formation Technology 12 (2010): 157–170.
Vie, Stephanie. “You Are How You Play.” In Computer Games and Technical 
Communication: Critical Methods and Applications at the Intersection, ed-
ited by Jennifer deWinter and Ryan M. Moeller, 171–187. Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate, 2014.
“Web Game Provides Rice for the Hungry.” BBC. November 10, 2007. ­Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7088447.stm.
Weiner, Zach. “Sisyphus.” SMBC cartoon. No. 3259. Feb. 2014. Accessed May 
15, 2017. www.smbc-comics.com/?id=3259 25 Aug. 2015.
Welcome to Super Better. SuperBetter. Video. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.
superbetter.com/.
Wii Sports. Kyoto, Japan: Nintendo, 2006. Videogame.
Zdenek, Sean. Reading Sounds: Closed-Captioned Media and Popular Culture. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.

At the end of Chapter 6, I closed by discussing how ethical or eu­
daimonic responses to some of the utilitarian procedural habits in social 
media games should not avoid Foggian design elements or the more gen-
eralized forms of habituation that occur during videogame play; rather, 
these responses should channel habits using similar structures toward 
non-utilitarian ends. In so doing, I suggested that Bogost’s Cow Clicker 
offers one way to call social media games players’ attention to the ways 
that their play habits can convert their online relations to Heidegger’s 
notion of enframing—a standing reserve or a means to an end. Cow 
Clicker did not actually avoid the effort to make players click; instead, 
the game channeled players’ habits differently beyond the attempt to cre-
ate an argument that satirizes the lack of expressive interactive features. 
I argue that Bogost’s work directs us toward concepts like Aristotle’s 
eudaimonia and other related forms of heuretic (Ulmer) invention.
In Chapter 6, I pick up the question of ethical responses to procedural 
habits and our field’s expressive/mundane bias from a different perspec-
tive. Throughout the book, I have suggested that procedural habits emerge 
as a result of the—at times—emergent or aleatory effects of videogames 
beyond a designer’s or player’s conscious intents. In fact, in a list of hypo-
thetical research inquiries that considerations of nonhuman agency can 
provoke, alongside “Can a hurricane bring down a president?” Bennett 
asks, “Can a videogame produce effects that were not intended by its 
designer?”1 In previous chapters, I have pointed to examples that answer 
this question affirmatively, such as Tetris curbing the craving to smoke 
cigarettes. Yet, so far in Procedural Habits, I use ­Bennett’s work pri-
marily in Chapters 1 and 2 as a brief point of comparison for the forms 
of rhetorical materialism and embodiment that ­Procedural Habits seeks 
to expand upon. I have yet to directly engage some of Bennett’s most 
relevant implications for thinking about the forms of nonhuman agency 
that undergird, support, and even erode human habits of play as part of 
her—and my own—justification for wanting to avoid “human-centered 
demystification” in relationship to critique.
Bennett, as I note in Chapter 1, uses the Deleuzian term “assem-
blage,” which characterizes how agencies are distributed into loose 
6	
The Habits of Highly 
Unsuccessful Nonhuman 
Computational Actors

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  201
associations of human and nonhuman actors, whose energies—at 
times—can cause the entire assemblage to behave in unexpected ways. 
It is because of this orientation that Bennett’s work allows some schol-
ars in our field, like Laurie Gries in Still Life With Rhetoric, to build 
new terms like “rhetorical transformation,” which enables her “to em-
pirically discover how an image becomes rhetorical in divergent ways 
as it circulates with time, enters into new associations, transforms, and 
generates a multiplicity of consequences” in the context of the imagery 
mutations of the Obama Hope campaign.2 Beyond just a matter of 
descriptive accuracy, there are political and ethical stakes attached to 
matters of nonhuman agency. Nathaniel R. Rivers invokes Bennett to 
declare, “If [writing] students decide ahead of time that publics are the 
mundane and monumental work of humans, they risk rendering invisi-
ble the work of nonhumans. This is ethically and practically suspect.”3 
Without mentioning the term, Rivers is advocating for a particular 
­disposition—the inclusion of nonhuman actors as part of rhetoric—
and it is one that I believe Bennett’s work and procedural habits can 
help to more explicitly unpack in the context of videogame rhetoric and 
mundane texts.
One term from Deleuze that Bennett does not do much with is the 
term “habit.” When Deleuze writes at one point, “We are nothing but 
habits of saying ‘I,’” he signals an extension of habit to include the ma-
terial operations of the world’s material nature even beyond human con-
trol. As a result, I can ask questions such as “Do nonhuman actors form 
their own procedural habits?” In posing this question, I am not advocat-
ing (as some philosophers do) a panpsychipist or polypsychipist theory 
in which I claim that inanimate objects are conscious. Rather, this ques-
tion is along the lines of Bennett’s political aims for a world of ­vibrant 
matter. It is necessary at times, she argues, to even overemphasize the 
contributions of nonhuman actors in order to avoid anthropocentric 
accounts of reality.4 When Bennett locates electricity’s unexpected or 
aleatory agency within the 2003 North American Blackout, her goal is 
an unspoken commitment to cultivate a particular dispositional aware-
ness that is actually a hexis that I will call “enchantment.”5 A hexis 
of enchantment characterizes a particular dispositional attitude toward 
the agency of things and their “slight surprise of action” that she hopes 
the reader will develop as an ethical orientation to the world of non-
human agency. In responding to the collapse of the electrical grid, we 
must have the patience to trace a network of how human and nonhu-
man ­actors—­including mundane habit-shaping elements and texts—­
participate in how rhetoric emerges. Here, my concern in this chapter 
shifts from my efforts in Chapter 5 to foreground videogames that shape 
habits. Instead, I discuss how we need to cultivate a broader method of 
discernment, or if you will, an ethical habit that characterizes this search 
for the autonomous habits of nonhuman actors.

202  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
There is one particularly mundane text that helps to highlight this 
need for enchantment, because it overwhelmingly remains the disci-
plinary object of computer scientists for the majority of rhetoric and 
composition scholars: the code of videogames. Part of my reason for 
wanting to focus on code is to demonstrate that it is not just discrete 
behavior-shaping Foggian design elements that explicitly seek to shape 
bodies and minds that digital rhetoricians need to pay attention to. 
Rather, we also need to pay attention to any and all forms of conven-
tionally mundane elements—even those that players might not directly 
perceive—that contribute to the formation of procedural habits in vid-
eogames. Thus, I want to move away from the Foggian design element 
versus procedural habits comparison and instead more directly highlight 
the need to pay attention to any and all forms of functional or pragmatic 
elements that contribute to the formation of procedural habits. While for 
many digital rhetoricians, the analysis of videogames may still feel more 
comfortable as expressive features on the screen or, at least, the social 
and political contexts of how videogames and their forms of habituation 
function, I hope to highlight the need to consider the mundane in rela-
tionship to the habitual through procedural habits rather than avoiding 
habit’s role in code entirely.
As a conventionally mundane design element, code poses several prob-
lems for digital rhetoricians. In the first section of this chapter, I high-
light a new manifestation of the expressive/mundane division, especially 
in the existence of a sort of implicit weak defense of rhetoric (and habit), 
in which critical code theorists like Alexander R. Galloway treat code 
as logos: code conceals nothing in its functional enactment. Code does 
what it says it will do. Code cannot be rhetorical, and it certainly cannot 
be described by procedural habits except as an object of critique, such 
as Galloway’s link between software code and neoliberal control strat-
egies. The reason this view is important is because it helps to highlight 
the ways in which digital rhetoricians have largely approached code in 
terms of the strong defense. With a few exceptions, such as Brown Jr.’s 
Ethical Programs, which I discuss below, a small but growing number 
of digital rhetoricians have successfully argued that code exceeds its lit-
eral functionality and instead is shot through with social and epistemic 
forces. Still bracketed are embodied and material sorts of agencies and, 
in turn, considerations of code’s procedural habits, like those that Ben-
nett gestures toward.
Building from these efforts, I argue that the rhetorical reclamation 
of code—a mundane text that interests computer scientists and digital 
humanities scholars most—and, in turn, our understanding of code in a 
videogame, is sure to acknowledge the types of material and embodied 
agencies that produce procedural habits. Fortunately, code is not the lo­
gos. After noting the weak and strong defenses, I feature an insight made 
by Wendy Chun’s Programmed Visions and her response to the “code-
as-logos” view. Chun argues that code does not actually “do what it says 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  203
it does”; that is, code does not exhaust its reality in its literal execution. 
In a tantalizingly brief discussion of Paul Ricouer’s techne, Chun argues 
that code “conceals” part of its enactment in its use. Code is inherently 
“devious,” she says. More importantly, we do not know what code is or 
can be, because its execution is dependent upon a host of other input 
factors, including the agencies of human users.
Chun’s admittedly complex aims are to use a deconstructive reading of 
code’s perpetually lost presence (i.e., it never does what is says it does) to 
make a larger point about politics within the neoliberal order of things. 
However, I want to take her basic insights in a different direction more re-
lated to my own arguments in this book. As I argue in the second section 
of this chapter, the general idea that code’s agency is not fully revealed 
in its literal description or its instrumental use helps to illustrate how we 
might read code as part of Bennett’s new materialist assemblages. While 
the term “assemblage” has been employed by games studies scholars like 
T.L. Taylor (via Latour’s ANT) to describe videogames, Bennett’s new 
materialism pushes us to explore how code’s inexhaustibility confirms 
the necessity of theorizing its role within a vibrant assemblage. I extend 
Bennett’s discussion briefly through Deleuze’s non-mechanistic discus-
sion of habit as a property of the material contraction of the world. We 
can indeed talk of code’s autonomous procedural habits, because it helps 
us to develop this hexis of enchantment. Here, the lesson for rhetoricians 
is that we might never fully know what a videogame does, even when 
we attend to the rhetoric of its functional or Foggian design elements 
alongside its expressive and social constructed essence.
In the third section, to offer an illustration of how an assemblage of 
code relates to procedural habits, I analyze FreeCiv 2.0,6 the opensource 
equivalent of Sid Meier’s videogame Civilization II (Figure 6.1).7
Figure 6.1  Screenshot from FreeCiv’s main play interface.

204  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
In 1991, Sid Meier and Bruce Shelley created the first Civilization 
videogame, a turn-based strategy game.8 Unlike a real-time strategy 
game in which all players play simultaneously, a turn-based strategy 
game requires players to take turns like in a game of chess. ­Civilization 
is also a “simulation game”—a videogame that attempts to model as-
pects of real or fictional reality, with Will Wright’s SimCity series one 
of the most prominent examples. Civilization’s goal, as the game’s 
motto reads, is to “build an empire to stand the test of time.” A player 
takes on the role of a ruler of a developing civilization from 4000 BC 
to AD 2100, in competition with two to six other civilizations played 
by other players online or controlled by the computer. The player has 
to make decisions about how to spend resources to build settler units, 
how to maintain citizen happiness, the type of technologies to invest 
in, and countless other features, all the while fending off randomly 
generated barbarian attacks as well as advances from other players’ 
civilizations.
My rationale for focusing on FreeCiv as a case study is—frankly—­
because the code is available for analysis, and FreeCiv is a fairly accu-
rate reproduction of Civilization II. Secondly, Civilization represents a 
videogame genre in which games studies theorists like Wark and Gallo-
way tend to figure (implicitly) the trend of habits as an ideal neoliberal 
“allegorithm.” While not discounting these factors, procedural habits 
adds that we also need to look at how the functional code elements 
relate to the production of rhetorical activities with Civilization II. 
In part, the 2.0 update of FreeCiv that I examine represents a spe-
cific procedural effort to control or curtail the universally abhorred 
“infinite city sprawl” (ICS) strategy for empire building. Players who 
build numerous small cities as opposed to fewer large cities have a clear 
strategic advantage that is rewarded by the game mechanics. ICS rep-
resents an intriguing case study, because addressing it involves the use 
of multiple rhetorical forms, including revising the procedures in the 
game by adjusting in-game rulesets, altering the code itself to change 
baseline game mechanics, justifying code changes through technical 
documentation and notational commentary, composing impassioned 
textual arguments in online player communities (Jing), and finally, 
employing conventional Ciceronian rhetorical decorum (Hariman) to 
encourage players to stop playing online with any player who employs 
ICS. Hence, the title of my chapter is an admittedly obvious play on 
words taken from Stephen R. Covey’s classic book The Seven Habits 
of Highly ­Successful Individuals.9 Unlike Covey, I do not offer any 
confirmation of how acquired managerial habits like “synergize” can 
fulfill life satisfaction. Rather, procedural habits confirms that code’s 
procedural habits will invariably produce some unsuccessful (i.e., un-
expected) individual affects and relations.

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  205
Software Studies and Rhetoric in Conflict
A videogame’s code is an intriguing case study for digital rhetoricians 
because the claim that code is rhetoric is hardly self-evident in software 
studies conversations. Decades ago, making Lanham’s strong argument 
for rhetoric involved undermining the epistemic certainty of the sciences. 
Charles Bazerman once called physics the proverbial “hard case” for 
rhetoric in that revealing the operation of rhetorical forces in physics 
would a fortiori mean that the entire scientific enterprise also contained 
rhetorical appeals.10 Code and computer science may indeed be rheto-
ric’s new analogous hard case in the twenty-first century.
To back up, why should the average rhetoric and composition scholar 
even care about a videogame’s code? In part, the early justification 
comes from Bogost’s Persuasive Games. He criticizes digital rhetoricians 
of focusing on the communicative practices that a user produces on a 
computer rather than focusing on the forms of rhetoric that a computer 
can produce through interaction with a user.11 When Bogost claims, 
“the computer is secondary,” he is concerned that early efforts to define 
digital rhetoric tended to rely on older text-based criteria rather than ex-
plore the unique persuasive affordances of computers.12 A bit generally 
stated, software studies as a specific research field, as well as a prevailing 
interest in code among media studies scholars and digital rhetoricians, 
came from a similar line of criticism. Echoing Lev Manovich’s pioneer-
ing claims in The Language of New Media, a number of researchers 
have argued that software studies needs to focus both on the expressive 
capacities that code enables for end-users and the actual execution of 
the code itself.13 For example, Noah Wardrip-Fruin declares, “[t]rying 
to interpret a work of digital media by looking only at the output is like 
interpreting a model solar system by looking only at the planets.”14 Dig-
ital rhetoricians such as Collin Gifford Brooke make similar appeals to 
study “ecologies of code” to understand how new media rhetoric func-
tions. By analogy, to study a videogame without looking at its proce-
dures or code is to risk missing an important source that shapes players’ 
procedural habits.
Yet, software studies’ efforts to study code are not very hospitable to 
rhetoric. Indeed, Manovich’s initial argument to study code established 
the analytical discourse of computer science as the authentic source of 
truth or meaning for computational media. Peter Lunenfeld similarly 
rejected “vapor theory,” which he defined as “dialectical immaterialism, 
discussions of technology untethered to the constraints of production” 
governed by the knowledge of computer science.15 Picked up in turn by 
Manovich, Lovink, and Galloway, vapor theory as a metaphor separated 
computer science’s technical description of code as material (substance, 
essence, authentic) from approaches within new media and software 

206  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
studies that focused on the screen as immaterial (appearance, inessen-
tial, inauthentic) in search of what can be fixed as a hermeneutic center. 
To be clear about this point, the call to banish vapor theory does con-
stitute a turn toward the materiality of technology and the nonhuman. 
However, code is granted materiality (substance or expressiveness) only 
insofar as code’s technical and literal nature is the object of analysis.
Across these arguments, knowledge of code’s technical operation 
through computer science enables critical theorists to leave Plato’s cave 
and distinguish between screen and code, immaterial and material, demo 
and product, or fiction and reality. Galloway specifically carves out the 
space between the “literal” (code) and “metaphorical” (screens).16 He 
forcefully declares: 
Code draws a line between what is material and what is active, in es-
sence saying that writing (hardware) cannot do anything, but must 
be transformed into code (software) to be effective. … code is the 
first language that actually does what it says.17
Unlike the graphic interface (metaphor), code cannot dissimulate its 
art in its execution. Software is like a neatly layered recipe that can be 
fully understood and known by the programmer or computer science 
discourses.
As I discuss in Chapter 2 in the context of game designers’ criticisms 
of Fogg’s persuasive technology, it is not much of a stretch to see in these 
conversations the weak defense of rhetoric (i.e., there exists an unchang-
ing rhetorical realm) or simply between rhetoric (figurative) and philos-
ophy (truth).18 As Chun critically observes, “Like the King’s speech in 
Plato’s Phaedrus, [the logos of code] does not pronounce knowledge or 
demonstrate it—it transparently pronounces itself.”19 In no small coinci-
dence, the King’s speech in the Phaedrus that supports the code-as-logos 
perspective simultaneously dismisses rhetoric as sophistry by comparing 
it to cookery, makeup, hunting, and concealment. In direct or indirect 
response to the bracketing of rhetoric, a growing number of rhetorical 
approaches to code have emphasized the epistemic and figurative prop-
erties of code—Lanham’s strong defense of rhetoric. Code in execution 
undeniably lacks the figurative range of spoken or written languages. A 
compiler does not encounter metaphors such as Hobbes’s line “man is 
wolf to man” and then determine a sequential step depending on how it 
resolves the metaphor. However, the composition of source code involves 
idiosyncrasies of individual coding styles, justifications for patches/cor-
rections in notational commentary, a variety of procedural rhetorics, 
and even the rhetoricality of platform or coding language selection.
Let me offer a few brief (and by no means comprehensive) examples. 
Alexandria Lockett notes how non-native English-speaking coders must 
engage code-switching literacies in software across versions of English.20 
Focusing on the interplay between semiotic systems and rule-governed 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  207
procedures has enabled scholars to integrate procedural literacies as a 
form of writing. Kevin Brock encourages researchers to view “code as 
a significant rhetorical component of textual creation and performance 
rather than simply a vehicle to transmit a text to an audience,”21 and 
Teena A.M. Carnegie suggests that it is necessary to consider the possi-
ble range of rhetorical interactions for audiences and rhetors that exist 
within each layer: uncompiled source code, execution, and expression.22 
Citing Brooke’s Lingua Fracta, Brock maintains, “A goal of [digital] 
rhetoric then is to understand exactly how language [or code] influ-
ences certain possibilities to become realized over others when used by a 
rhetor in a particular situation.”23 All of these elements impact a rhetor’s 
ability to control or delimit a range of potential meanings in order to 
persuade an audience.
With respect to Bazerman’s comment about physics as the hard case, 
these approaches show rhetorical elements at work in code. In stark con-
trast to Galloway’s claim that “code essentially has no other reason for 
being than instructing some machine in how to act.”24 Mark Sample 
close reads videogame code as an iterable “text” that contains multiple 
forms of expressive (i.e., rhetorical) signification.25 In ­Micropolis,26 the 
opensource version of SimCity, only the police levels in a player’s city 
have an impact on crime. The game makes a procedural argument that 
other potential mitigating factors (city watch groups, rehabilitation) have 
no impact. By examining the code, Sample teases out nuances to the pro-
cedural argument that the player might never consciously realize, such 
as the fact that a “populous neighborhood with little police presence 
can never be crime-free.”27 Sample also explores what Mark Marino 
calls code’s “extra-functional significance” in notational commen-
tary. One notational comment in Micropolis indicates how ­Electronic 
Arts removed one randomly spawning disaster—a plane crashing into 
a tower—after 9/11. Such comments signify, but “aren’t intended for 
the end-user.”28 Notational comments are literally concealed from the 
player and the compiler alike, but they are nevertheless part of the rhe-
torical composition of a videogame.
Chun’s Turn to Rhetorical Ontology
While an improvement on the code-as-logos perspective, rhetorical 
treatments of code largely flip from the weak defense of rhetoric to the 
strong defense. These accounts do not actually lead us closer toward 
understanding code through procedural habits. However, a third per-
spective refuses to reduce code to its literal properties or social contexts 
and, in turn, highlights the need to treat the rhetoric of a videogame’s 
code through enchantment. Out of both software studies’ and rhetori-
cal studies’ treatments of code, Chun’s Programmed Visions is unique 
in suggesting that code cannot be fully known through either its logi-
cal instrumental aims or figurative social contexts. In her chapter, “On 

208  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Sourcery and Sourcecode,” she directly criticizes software studies for 
achieving critical and hermeneutic clarity in code by maintaining a sep-
aration of code’s instruction from its machinic execution. Chun doc-
uments how commodification and proprietary interests contributed to 
the need to establish a true essence of code, converting “programming” 
(verb) from a service and temporal process to a “program” (noun) that 
designated a fixed, stable, visualizable, and knowable “thing” (a concep-
tual distinction I will return to momentarily).29 Code as thing becomes 
logos or the authentic representation of computational action. Software 
becomes “the end all and be all of computation and putting in place 
a powerful logic of sourcery that makes source code—which tellingly 
was first called pseudo-code—a fetish.”30 Chun’s play on words with 
“sourcery” calls attention to the desire of the sovereign programmer 
who, like a magician, desires to have her words instantly become action 
in the world.
Chun’s very provocative suggestion is that we can never fully reveal 
code and that source code cannot be conflated with either its process 
of execution or its executable version.31 The vapory, withdrawn, and 
iterable elements that both commercial forces and software studies criti-
cism sought to exclude are inseparable from how code actually operates. 
To offer one example, Chun challenges Galloway’s claim of the logical 
equivalence between uncompiled source code and the compilation of the 
same code into machine code or assembly language. Galloway writes, “it 
is absurd to claim that a certain value expressed as a hexadecimal (base 
16) number is more or less fundamental than that same value expressed 
as binary (base 2) number.”32 There is no empirical difference between 
higher and lower symbolic interactions with respect to the voltages that 
pass through logic gates. Galloway continues:
It is foolish to think that writing an ‘if/then’ control structure in 
eight lines of assembly code is any more or less machinic than doing 
it in one line of C, just as the same quadratic equation may swell 
with any number of multipliers and still remain balanced.33
He emphatically declares that the “relationship between the two is tech­
nical” and immune from figuration in any form.34
In contrast, Chun suggests that a technical relationship glosses over 
coding as a materially enacting and temporally unfolding process. She 
writes, “This reduction, however, does not capture the difference be-
tween the various instantiations of code, let alone the empirical differ-
ence between the higher symbolic machine and the lower interactions of 
voltages.”35 Furthermore, she maintains that code is not simply “run” 
but compiled and interpreted, and this is “not a trivial action.”36 Exe-
cutability is not the same as the translation from a decimal into a bi-
nary. The ways in which the material and actual processes occur must 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  209
utilize instruction explosion while converting symbolic figures into real 
addresses. She explicates the instructions for adding two numbers in 
PowerPC assemblage language (one level higher than machine language), 
commenting that the explosion is by no means logically equivalent to 
the mathematical function of multiplying the two sides of a quadratic 
equation, but instead “focuses on the movement of data within the 
machine.”37 Crucially, there is no mathematical identity then between 
executable and higher level code, but “logical equivalence, which can 
involve a leap of faith.”38 Furthermore, the object and source of code 
(pseudo-code) always differ because an object of code is always embed-
ded within an operating system.
In contrast to Galloway’s limited understanding of code’s technical 
character, coding—“programming” as a verb and unfolding process—
becomes technical more in the sense of the ancient Greeks’ concept of 
techne. Coding is not a fully willful act of critical revelation or instru-
mentality but rather “the technique of providing a dynamic background 
to control the automatic evolution of a meaning.”39 In Chun’s brief ref-
erence to a well-known rhetorical concept, she invokes Paul Ricoeur’s 
quotation that “techne is something more refined than a routine or an 
empirical practice and in spite of its focus on production, it contains a 
speculative element.”40 While I do not have the space to reproduce our 
field’s entire techne debates (which are admirably summarized by Kelly 
Pender),41 suffice to say that Chun is implicitly pushing against one of 
our field’s prevailing views of techne as an instrumental art or skill. By 
contrast, I would argue that the view that Chun is closer to is the one 
that Byron Hawk calls “post-techne,” a co-productive notion of rhetor-
ical making in which the material and ecological context of production 
are responsible for setting the work into motion. As Chun describes, 
source code’s essence is not reducible to human manipulation or repre-
sentation but serves instead as a co-productive “re-source” that points 
back to the fact that our agentive actions and understandings can only 
proceed from the traces of code’s prior iterability. Indeed, Chun observes 
in her analysis of the compiled code above that we cannot even com-
pletely predict the sequence of code, because code is always dependent 
on intermediate results.42 Therefore, we must also learn, she says, to 
“play with” vapory elements of code’s balance of presence and absence 
and to take “pleasure” in “things that do not end when they should,” in 
order to realize we are attuned through a more ontologically complete 
vision of human and nonhuman being.43
Procedural Habits of Code in the Assemblage of Play
At this point, I want to clearly acknowledge that I am stepping aside from 
Chun’s strict reading and, instead, shifting from this basic insight to-
ward a different end than she is after. If code never appears in execution, 

210  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
then it is possible to begin to argue that what code is—its rhetoricality—
depends upon the nature of the reality that we assume produces it.44 For 
me, this is a critical observation that provides an opening for thinking 
about code’s agency or, in the terms of this book, code’s “procedural 
habits.” Here, a point of comparison to Bennett’s Deleuzian assem-
blages is useful. An assemblage for Bennett is a confederation of differ-
ent elements and actors that can function together despite the constantly 
changing and evolving nature of the energies within them.45 Many who 
have responded to her work cite her memorable description of an assem-
blage in the great 2003 North American electrical grid blackout. Here, it 
was not merely human errors or caprices of nature (i.e., a lightning strike 
to the grid) that led to the blackout but the ways in which these activities 
intersected with various other nonhuman elements, including the active 
and reactive power of electricity.
There are two questions that a vibrant assemblage poses for studying 
the rhetoric of code. First, if we treat code as an actor within an assem-
blage, how is this a form of procedural habits; and secondly, why should 
we do this? My answer to the second will be that Bennett tacitly calls 
for a hexis of enchantment, while my answer to the first is that Bennett’s 
Deleuzian assemblages allow us to apply the term “habit” here. Let me 
back up for a moment to clarify this distinction. With respect to the cur-
rent desire to include the nonhuman in rhetoric, “habit” is a particularly 
relevant and underexplored theoretical lens. Habit forms at the porous 
borders between nature and culture to shape our second natures (ethos, 
hexis) through both conscious and nonconscious forms of affect. Yet, 
ontological conceptions of habit can be pushed further still beyond my 
previous discussion of Aristotle, Ravaisson, and Bergson. Habits, for 
instance, are not strictly human capacities. Any observant pet owner 
can readily generate a litany of his or her pet’s unique habits of behavior. 
An animal’s “habitat” is a pattern of learned instincts and behavioral 
affordances specific to a localized set of ecological affordances and con-
straints. Charles Darwin writes, “worms have played a more important 
part in the history of the world than most persons would at first assume” 
in a treatise tellingly entitled, Formation of Vegetable Mould through 
the Actions of Worms with Observations on Their Habits.46 Debra 
­Hawhee describes how foxes play dead to avoid a predator by develop-
ing a basic habit of cunning (metis).47 Even Burke offers an anecdote of 
how a wise trout may gain the habit of avoiding the fisherman’s hook 
through revising its judgments in response to signs, such as receiving a 
ripped jaw from a hook.48
While Carlisle correctly observes that it is likely that only humans or 
advanced mammals use habit as an instrument of action as well as an 
object of reflection, habit’s ability to stabilize a physical form is where 
borders between humans and nonhumans truly grow porous.49 In bo-
tanical discourses, a “habit” widely refers to how a plant takes and holds 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  211
its shape by maximizing energy efficiency through repeated forms of 
engagement with the environment. Even inorganic matter can be said 
to have habits in this sense of forming a semi-permanent pattern of em-
bodiment. Habit in mineralogy describes the process through which a 
crystal is conditioned to contract a relatively stable form with respect 
to its unique material makeup in relation to the influence of other ac-
tors around it. The ability of habit to form material shapes explains 
how humans’ physical bodies passively or actively take on forms in our 
habits of movement. One can easily recognize a colleague on campus 
from a distance, not by his or her clothing but by his or her physical 
bearing, posture, or stride. The pragmatist philosopher William James 
affirms this point, claiming that habit was “the possession of a struc-
ture weak enough to yield an influence, but strong enough not to yield 
all at once.”50 Our bodies therefore contract and not always willfully 
construct an ethos with respect to our physical characteristics and our 
patterns of dwelling among things.
One of the theoretical ideas that draws Bennett’s interest, Deleuze’s 
concept of “the space of virtual” refers to the space prior to actuality, 
when things can potentially take shape as many different entities. When 
Deleuze indicates, “Every actual surrounds itself with a cloud of virtual 
images,” he describes a universe that is in a constant and ongoing flux 
of Becoming,51 wherein humans and nature are not opposed but part 
of “one and the same essential reality.”52 As I note in Chapter 4, Alex 
Reid discusses rhetoric and composition studies’ two virtuals: the first 
virtual (the space of the screen) is where we analyze, and the second is 
a space of flux and Becoming out of which the first emerges (“actual-
izes”). Events, individuals, and situations emerge from the virtual into 
actuality yet leave the virtual unexhausted. Each actualization—a code 
in a videogame that executes a process—retains a virtual dimension to 
become something new or different in the future. The virtual is simul-
taneously creative in enabling actuality and destructive by transforming 
actors through each change (actualization). Entities in the world are not 
fixed in a Platonic world of ideal forms or boxed into static containers 
in a Newtonian grid. Rather, reality starts “in the middle” where things 
are indeterminate—like Chun’s compiler that waits for its intermediate 
results before actualizing them.
Here, I do not wish to offer a comprehensive overview of Deleuze’s 
thought, because what interests me specifically is his conception of 
habit. Across his various writings and especially in What is Philosophy? 
with Guattari, the passage from virtual to actual complicates any notion 
of a fixed essence, identity, or resemblance; the present is best character-
ized as a temporal process (repetition). The past actualizes the virtual in 
the present, while nevertheless containing a virtual element toward an 
entity’s emerging future. Grosz summarizes for Deleuze that, “differ-
ence, divergence, variation, elaboration also requires repetition, never 

212  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
sameness or identity, but generative repetition and its creative forms, 
contraction, synthesis or habit.”53 Repetition enables an entity to stabi-
lize a form but not in a fixed or essential sense. Deleuze offers perhaps 
the strongest ontological claim for habit by making it synonymous with 
“contraction”: the basis of openness to the virtual through the reception 
of change and the potential to engage in future change. For Deleuze, 
habit characterizes how time emerges through the ways in which living 
beings engage in contraction by taking the past into the future through 
actualization. Importantly, contraction is not a purely human faculty. 
Deleuze and Guattari describe how a plant engages in repetitive forms of 
interaction (“contemplates”) with its situated environments:
The plant contemplates by contracting the elements from which it 
originates—light, carbon, and the salts—and it fills itself with col-
ors and odors that in each case qualify its variety, its composition: 
it is sensation in itself. It is as if flowers smell themselves by smelling 
what composes them, first attempts at vision or of sense of sense, 
before being perceived or even smelled by an agent with a nervous 
system and a brain.54
Even inorganic forms contract habits, because all entities are temporal 
and material beings. To revisit my previous example, crystals in nature 
contract pressures or forces to solidify into a semi-stable form. How-
ever, this state is not fixed but temporal in the sense that it is always 
in a process of attempting to hold a form or moving to a new form if 
the pressures surrounding it change. For Deleuze, habit is nothing less 
than the way a matter inscribes itself on any manner of beings, and—in 
turn—beings coordinate their activities and thoughts within these re-
peated material and embodied inscriptions.
From Deleuze’s standpoint, we can certainly talk about procedural 
habits of nonhuman actors as the ways in which their particular modes 
of repetition or bearing within a system temporarily takes on a semi-­
permanent characteristic or form. The second part of my question about 
attributing procedural habits to nonhuman actors like code involves the 
“Why?” Why should we make this attribution? Building from Deleuze, 
the strength of Bennett’s analysis lies in extending the idea of ethical dis-
positions to contend that the ways in which writers form ethical habits 
must also include how nonhuman actors shape these and other habits 
as well. As we see in Chapter 1, Bennett argues that matter ­(physis) 
possesses its own agency, or, more accurately, she disagrees with exist-
ing political models that have characterized the human-world relation-
ship as one in which the human acts and the environment is a passive 
object that is only acted upon (instrumentally). Understanding the 
agency of matter enables us to better understand how our hexeis form 
from environmental sources. She declares, “To begin to experience the 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  213
relationship between persons and other materialities more horizontally, 
is to take a step toward a more ecological sensibility.”55 When Bennett 
examines a political situation, like the collapse of an electrical grid, she 
views the grid as an assemblage that distributes agency through human 
and nonhuman actors. Naturally, politicians and popular audiences 
wanted a scapegoat for this situation, such as the notorious company 
Enron FirstEnegry, which had been siphoning energy from the grid to 
maximize profits.56 Yet, Bennett cautions that we must accurately trace 
the full assemblage and, furthermore, that human-centered outrage may 
distract us from this goal.57
To make sense of this type of ethical response, Bennett’s discussion of en-
chantment is relevant. In Bennett’s first book, she challenges the theoretical 
legacy of modernity through a narrative of disenchantment. In modernity, 
cultural alienation replaces our faith in reason, control, and freedom.58 
Disenchantment “discourage[s] affective attachment to the world” and, 
in turn, forecloses the possibility of ethical (eudaimonic) dwelling.59 In 
response, enchantment becomes Bennett’s call to explore how the world 
“can be experienced as enchanted” to open up a space of concern and 
care for a wider variety of affective states and encounters.60 To return to 
Vibrant Matter, her opening lines in the “Preface” situate her exploration 
of “thing theory” as a continuation of her earlier theoretical work:
I now emphasize even more how the figure of enchantment points in 
two directions: the first toward the humans who feel enchanted and 
whose agentic capacities may be thereby strengthened, and the sec-
ond toward the agency of the things that produce (helpful, harmful) 
effects in human and other bodies.61
Enchantment as a dispositional orientation toward appreciating the ale-
atory agency of nonhuman actors’ functions like what Aristotle calls a 
hexis. Enchantment similarly requires us to be open to the various non-
human agencies in the world around us as an ethical practice. In fact, it 
is not a stretch in the least to claim that Bennett views her project in an 
Aristotelian vein: “The ethical task at hand here is to cultivate the ability 
to discern nonhuman vitality, to become perceptually open to it.”62
She offers us a de facto update of Aristotle by acknowledging that 
enchantment can emerge out of our attempts to account for the multi-
ple social and environmental relations that cultivate our various dispo-
sitions. Once we trace the ways in which our ethical obligations take 
shape as writers, we can begin to gain a glimpse into how our habits of 
environmental dwelling shape us to a far greater extent than any rational 
model of writing can explain.
Shifting agency from a rational possession to something distributed 
through networks of affects, this step, Bennett maintains, “does not 
thereby abandon the project of identifying (what Arendt called) the 

214  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
sources of harmful effects. To the contrary, such a notion broadens the 
range of places to look for sources.”63 Bennett is concerned not with 
letting Enron escape responsibility for its part in the Great North Amer-
ican Blackout but with advocating as a virtue the realization that we 
are produced by these nonhuman systems before we seek to form (or to 
teach) political or ideological judgments. Furthermore, Bennett declares, 
“The ethical responsibility of an individual human now resides in one’s 
response to the assemblages in which one finds oneself participating: Do 
I attempt to extricate myself from assemblages whose trajectory is likely 
to do harm?”64 Enchantment as a way to build ethical responsibility 
acknowledges the fundamentally dispositional nature of rhetors’ beliefs 
and habits of engaging one another as writers and readers in fundamen-
tally environmental networks. To behave ethically is first and foremost 
to cultivate a specific disposition of enchantment when writing in and 
about environments. To sum up, it is a hexis of enchantment—a proce-
dural habit to cultivate—that allows us to have the patience to respect a 
videogame’s code to possess its withdrawn agency.
Within contemporary work in software studies, Brown Jr.’s Ethical 
Programs comes closest to illustrating a dispositional enchantment sim-
ilar to what I highlight through Bennett’s work. Similar to how I locate 
a classic rhetoric tension in Galloway’s “code-as-logos” problem, net-
worked computing and software, Brown Jr. suggests, has another ancient 
problem as well: hospitality—“the problem of others arriving whether 
we invited them or not—over and over again.”65 For the philosopher 
Emmanuel Levinas, who Brown Jr. draws upon as a theoretical source, 
our proximity to one another brings up a presymbolic relation when we 
try to identify or know the other: “a relationship with singularity, with-
out the mediation of any principle or ideality. In the concrete, it describes 
my relationship with the neighbor, a relationship whose signifyingness 
is prior to the celebrated ‘sense of bestowing.’ ”66 Thus, Brown Jr. con-
cludes, “the guest has already arrived” and forced this relationship, even 
if we did not intend it. We are hostages to one another. Answering the 
phone when someone else calls us is to already say “yes.” He extends 
what the theorist Avital Ronell calls the problem of “answerability”—
the duties, obligations, and taxes that are imposed upon us and obligate 
us to respond (even if we just hang up!)—to encompass how digital net-
works and algorithms filter, sort, and organize our ethical behaviors.
In addition to Levinas, Brown Jr. also turns to Derrida’s “law of hos-
pitality” as part of his exploration for the complex rhetorical character 
of code. On the one hand, we have to welcome everything that is Other: 
“Networked technology would not exist without the Law of hospitality, 
since connectivity is necessary for such technology to function.”67 Yet, 
on the other hand, everything that we receive is filtered, shifted, and 
sorted by algorithms, such as those that try to catch spam emails in our 
university email accounts. Thus, the law of hospitality is undermined 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  215
constantly. These laws, he suggests, are fundamentally rhetorical in na-
ture. If we were to lose the password to our university emails accounts, 
then “the university server … examines the situation and determines the 
best course of action is to lock me out.”68 Mundane texts in videogames 
such as code, as I will make clear in the following section, behave identi-
cally. Their procedural habits help to co-produce and shape our own in 
unexpected ways and we can start to recognize this presence if we have 
the patience to trace these enchanting relations.
Code in the Assemblage of Play
To illustrate code as a nonhuman agent and a hexis of enchantment 
within an assemblage, I want to explore a case study grounded in vid-
eogame code as seen through assemblage through this hexis of enchant-
ment to help us respect code’s autonomous procedural habits. Aside 
from Sample, relatively few close readings—let alone specifically rhe-
torical readings—of code in videogames exist. In large part because of 
Civilization’s popularity among games studies theorists and its freely 
available code, the FreeCiv players’ and developers’ rhetorical responses 
to the Infinite City Sprawl (ICS) epidemic offers a compelling illustration 
of code as a nonhuman actor as part of an aleatory assemblage. Three 
students from Aarhus University—Peter Unold, Claus Leth Gregersen, 
and Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg—created the first playable version of FreeCiv 
(version 1.0). Modeled after Meyer’s Civilization II, the videogame was 
initially released in 1996 under a GNU General Public License as free 
and opensource software. FreeCiv’s use of C programming language 
and its intentionally portable design enabled rapid development across 
numerous platforms. In FreeCiv, players start in the year 4000 BC as 
tribal leaders and aim to build an empire in a competitive environment 
(versus NPCs or other players). Winning occurs when all other oppo-
nents’ civilizations have been destroyed, when space colonization has 
been achieved, or when a player has the most valuable civilization after 
a certain specified time period. Given that its last stable release (version 
2.4.2) occurred in February 2014, FreeCiv still enjoys a great number 
of players who are drawn to its nearly limitless configurability. FreeCiv 
offers players the ability to act as game administrators, to modify game 
rules collaboratively, and to code unique rulesets or other content.
At the level of procedural rhetoric, the code offers clear support for 
ICS. Among other factors, the success of an empire depends upon the 
emotional states (happy, angry, content, or unhappy) of its citizens. 
­After each turn, all relevant variables that impact (positively or nega-
tively) citizens’ emotions are calculated and the ability to build or pro-
duce in new directions is enabled or constrained by the emotional states 
that are returned. In the 1.0 versions’ government ruleset, cityfactor by 
default is fourteen.69 Cityfactor establishes the most number of cities 

216  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
that a player can build without encountering the unhappy limit. By de-
fault, three citizens will always be content in a given city without forcing 
the player to invest in luxuries, improvements, or wonders. If a player 
wants cities that operate in more than four terrain squares each, she will 
have to anticipate changes to morale and invest in resources to ensure 
positive emotional states. Another part of the ruleset, empire_size, auto-
matically increases the number of unhappy citizens with respect to the 
total number of cities that the player builds. The total number of unpe-
nalized cities is subtracted from cityfactor and depends on the type of 
civilization: Anarchy (−5), Despotism (−4), Monarchy (−3), Communism 
(−2), Republic (−1), and Democracy (0). Once a player builds a twelfth 
city under Monarchy, then every fourth citizen in each city becomes un-
happy, and the player is required to spend resources on luxuries. Since a 
single unhappy worker moves a city into disorder (which limits produc-
tion to luxury and increases the likelihood of revolt), ICS players keep 
a vast number of small cities under three tiles and gain a real advantage 
because they never go over the unhappiness limits. ICS players never 
have to invest in improvements and can exclusively build attack units.
In partial response to ICS, the 2.0 version in 2005 included significant 
changes to core game mechanics to make it worthwhile for players to 
develop a handful of large cities with advanced technologies and trade 
routes, rather than employing numerous small towns.70 To determine 
the rhetorical response to ICS, we could simply reveal the literal changes 
to the code that attempted to mount different procedural claims. ­FreeCiv 
Wikia notes that adjustable server elements for determining citizens’ 
emotional states such as empire_size_mod, cityfactor, angrycitizen, and 
unhappy limits (unhappysize) were removed in 2.2 updates and replaced 
with empire_size_base and empire_size_step—rulesets that more di-
rectly penalized larger empires by adding one additional unhappy citizen 
when the number of cities grows past a default number regardless of the 
size of a player’s various cities.71
Yet, the rhetorical treatments of code that I discuss above indicate 
that FreeCiv’s code is irreducible to its literal or automatically executing 
elements alone. In actuality, analyzing these added components’ techni-
cal operation (in Galloway’s sense) by separating instruction from ex-
ecution is quite difficult to achieve given FreeCiv’s opensource status. 
What makes FreeCiv both an interesting and yet difficult case study 
is the fact that its coding community and networked archives already 
reveal a broad range of rhetorical, social, and expressive dimensions. 
Players are perhaps too aware of the code that structures their expressive 
and procedural experience of the game’s arguments on the screen. They 
actively negotiate with one another about making server adjustments to 
play options, such as the overall size of the map or the chance percentage 
of certain resources or items being contained within a given territory 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  217
space. While many videogames offer players the ability to adjust set-
tings, FreeCiv’s opensource nature blurs the boundaries between players 
and ­coders. The FreeCiv Wikia notes, “The ruleset files in the data di-
rectory are user-editable, so you can modify them to create modified or 
custom rulesets without having to recompile FreeCiv.”72 Even a player 
with little coding knowledge can readily locate and adjust many of the 
default ruleset settings. Indeed, Mike Jing—a player with little coding 
skill—published an infamous and polemical 2003 essay on FreeCiv 
Wikia in response to the ICS spread. He offered an excellent argument 
for altering core game mechanics to eliminate ICS.
FreeCiv’s coding manifesto also calls into question the warrant of the 
all-knowing programmer and the automatic executability of the code: 
“Basically, we believe in the power of distributed software development, 
and the tenet that ‘to an infinite number of eyes, all bugs are shallow.’”73 
Individual agency is considered grossly inferior to the distributed or 
crowdsourced agency of a collective of programmers and players. This 
collaborative design community necessarily requires that rhetorical deci-
sions and justifications accompany any change to code through patches, 
mods, or rulesets. In a clear acknowledgment of both code’s extra-­
functional significance as well as the rhetoricality of different program-
ming styles and approaches (and in a clear affirmation of the fact that 
code does not do what it says it does), the “Style” instructions read:
The description of the function should be here. Also describe what is 
expected of the arguments if it is not obvious. Especially note down 
any non-trivial assumptions that the function makes. Do_not_ 
­introduce a new function without some sort of comment.74
Decisions about trivial versus non-trivial are clearly dependent on a 
programmer’s assumptions about audience and require becoming famil-
iar with the knowledge of the FreeCiv community. Thinking back to 
­Sample’s essay, notational comments in FreeCiv are often expressive in 
addition to denominative. The code reveals that converting a worker to 
an entertainer is often dubbed an “elvis”—a metaphor and not a literal 
description.75 We also find evidence of “bro-grammer” humor intended 
for a male programming audience in a notational comment that dubs a 
city in Rapture the “XXX Days.”76
FreeCiv is akin to a perpetually revealed blackbox across its multiple 
layers of rhetorical expression. FreeCiv’s documentation archives are 
also replete with literal traces of “pseudo-code,” or rhetorical negotia-
tions both in writing and in code, that demonstrate a variety of attempts 
to solve ICS through the individual patches or frameworks that led up 
to the formation of these overall coding changes in 2.0. Consider one of 
Per Mathison’s early efforts to battle ICS in a patch on Oct 13, 2004, 

218  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
prior to the update to 2.0 that offered (in my best estimation) an early 
attempt to develop the empire_size_base code.77 He developed a patch 
that combined: 
…empire_size_inc and empire_size_mod, and two server options 
cityfactor and angrycitizen. The attached patch combined the three 
first into one government ruleset option unhappy_factor … One un-
happy starting citizen for each unhappy_factor number of cities you 
have in total.
His particular patch for the city.h is a “diff” file that uses “−” and “+” 
symbols to indicate which lines are being added or subtracted from the 
original code. Diff files particularly highlight the literal difference be-
tween pseudo-code and executable code, because they indicate the dif-
ferences between files and the automatic patching of those differences 
into code.
Mathison’s specific addition to the city.h code in a patch for the “con-
tent_citizens()” function is prefaced by the notational comment,
Give base number of content citizens in any city owner by pplayer. 
We + reduce the number of content citizens for each ruleset value + 
unhappy_factor number of total cities we have. This is a game me-
chanic + meant to punish horizontal expansion (infinite city sprawl).
In the actual code, he has deleted the old basis variable and located 
the more important step at “if (step > 0).” This function calculates the 
number and constrains the behavior of happy citizens within the em-
pire. It does that by taking the total number of citizens (which starts 
out with the name “content” in the code) and subtracting the number 
of cities divided by the “unhappy_factor” step (unhappy_factor is obvi-
ously defined elsewhere by the ruleset). With this addition, we see that if 
unhappy_factor is set to 0, then this patch will do nothing. Otherwise, 
unhappy_factor will effectively control how quickly the number of un-
happy citizens increases as the number of cities increases. The player 
gains an extra unhappy citizen for each unhappy_factor number of cities 
a player has.
The patch and the diff file testify to FreeCiv’s iterability as a part 
of code’s condition of possibility. Mathison’s justification for the patch 
clearly mounts claims through written expression that precede the ac-
tual code, and—through figurative and technical expressions within the 
code—he hopes to persuade other programmers and users of the impor-
tance of his patch. However, despite all of these visible elements of multi-
ple agents, figurative and expressive significations, and traces of temporal 
and processual iterability, we cannot locate rhetoric in epistemic and vis-
ible elements alone. Chun’s arguments clearly indicate the causation in 
code is nonlinear. Individual rhetorical acts in this collaborative coding 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  219
community function more like perturbations within complex ecological 
systems, where Mathison’s agency is established through his individua-
tion within the emerging coding assemblage. Rhetorical agents can bring 
forth actions and engage in interactions within the whole network of 
inter- and intra-acting parts of FreeCiv, but the changes that result are 
determined by the structure of the disturbed system—­the condition of 
possibility for symbolic action and the automatic executability of code 
alike. In this sense, actors who program the code of FreeCiv are deter-
mining without being fully determined, in an ongoing disclosure and 
attunement that participate in the unconcealment of FreeCiv’s code 
without ever fully revealing it. Programming is therefore not reducible 
to a single effect from an individual (or collective) instrumental action. 
Rather, as an enacted process, programming refers to patterns that 
develop out of the dynamic multitude of interacting parts: speculative 
techne. Mathison is responsible for his actions within this system that he 
is an agent within; however, at the same time, he is not the sole cause of 
all emergent effects. Code retains its speculative and withdrawn nature.
Evidence of nonhuman agency in Bennett’s sense can be seen by 
asking of FreeCiv’s code the same question that Bogost asks in Alien 
Phenomenology: What does code perceive that players and human 
coders do not? In his more recent work, Bogost explores videogames 
through the idea of “alien phenomenology”: an extension of Harman’s 
Heideggerian-­infused and object-oriented ontology.78 Echoing Harman, 
Bogost declares that the Being of any object is ontologically withdrawn. 
Regardless of our ability to perceive or manipulate code as a means to 
an end or to experience its various sensual profiles, humans never fully 
exhaust the withdrawn but real “subterranean depths” of code’s reality. 
While we cannot fully know code’s reality, Bogost nevertheless suggests 
that we can metaphorically speculate about the way that it perceives the 
player’s activities. Consider the following lines that establish the city 
parameters in the city.c code:
bool is_valid_city_coords(const int city_x, const int 
city_y)
{ 
int dist = map_vector_to_sq_distance(city_x - CITY_MAP_ 
RADIUS,

city_y - CITY_MAP_RADIUS);79
This code scans the player’s city map and, in turn, determines happi-
ness factors with relationship to empire_size_inc and other ruleset op-
tions. These lines are responsible for telling the game engine about the 
state of the game at any one moment. The scan mechanism (checked 
alongside X/Y axes) looks at the borders and then determines happiness/­
unhappiness factors. Simply put, the computer perceives a quantitative 
relationship. The player seeks to take in the map as a qualitative whole 

220  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
for interpretation, while the computer employs numbers to check at 
point-by-point intervals. Cities in FreeCiv, for example, are never com-
pletely experienced in this fashion by the player.80 The computer’s per-
ception never entirely appears, and yet it is nevertheless an actual part of 
ontological thing-ness of FreeCiv’s code: a present absence.
Perhaps my favorite example of ontological deviousness in FreeCiv’s 
city.c code lies in the original 1.0 code regarding the production of con-
tent, unhappy, and angry citizens. We find a curious notional comment 
in lines 2386:
\/*******************************************************
Create content, unhappy and angry citizens.
********************************************************/
static void citizen_base_mood(struct city *pcity)
{  
struct player *pplayer = city_owner(pcity);  
citizens *happy = &pcity->feel[CITIZEN_HAPPY][FEELING_ 
BASE];
citizens *content = &pcity->feel[CITIZEN_CONTENT]
[FEELING_BASE];
citizens *unhappy = &pcity->feel[CITIZEN_UNHAPPY]
[FEELING_BASE];
citizens 
*angry 
= 
&pcity->feel[CITIZEN_ANGRY]
[FEELING_BASE];
citizens size = city_size_get(pcity);  
citizens specialists = city_specialists(pcity);
. . .  
/* No one is born happy. */  
*happy = 0;
}81
The phrase “No one is born happy” carries a double meaning for the 
citizen_base_mood function. The computer views all avatars in each 
round in terms of their potential numbers of happy, content, unhappy, 
or angry citizens—basic calculations for intermediate results that other 
functions will utilize later. The literal meaning of “happy = 0;” indi-
cates that the default state of the game means that we have no happy 
citizens if we only consider city size and ruleset. Happy citizens can only 
be added in other places in the code, incorporating other factors (such 
as luxuries). Within this file, citizen_base_mood is only referenced in 
one other place—a function called city_refresh_from_main_map(). We 
know then, from this line, that citizen_base_mood runs first and then 
runs many other functions to add or subtract happy citizens, such as cit-
izen_happy_luxury() and citizen_happiness_nationality(). At one level, 
“no one is born happy” is simply a flippant manner of reinforcing the 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  221
fact that other features beyond citysize and ruleset determine factors. 
One might say that citizens are “born” content, unhappy, and angry, 
because those base numbers are determined by city size and ruleset but 
not by happiness in and of itself.
At another level, the omitted conclusion of the phrase—intentional 
or unintentional—refuses to allow us to “end” our analysis at the lit-
eral code. The entire quote in common parlance reads, “No one is born 
happy but everyone is born with the ability to create happiness.”82 The 
quote anthropomorphizes autonomous (human) agency into the com-
piler. This metaphorical doubling indicates that the machine in non-­
linear execution (compiling intermediate effects) “chooses” to make 
citizens happy or not due more (perhaps) to its own perception of the 
gameset than any intended action by a player. Actual avatars in the game 
cannot make themselves happy or create their own happiness, but nei-
ther can the player ever autonomously assign an avatar happiness. It 
is the entire rhetorical ensemble—source code, compilation, execution, 
patches, play—that eventually affects the intermediate code results that 
make avatars happy. Happiness is not an emotional, subjective state 
randomly generated but a deterministic condition set in relationship to 
quantitative yet virtual factors. The lines also unconsciously satirize the 
player’s own futile existential condition with respect to ICS. Despite at-
tempts to eliminate ICS through collective acts of coding, the FreeCiv 
Wikia laments that even 2.0 and 2.2 updates were unable to ultimately 
solve the ICS problem. It is actually a core part of classical rhetoric in 
­Hariman’s sense—decorum and consensus—that actually stemmed 
the flow: an agreement within the player and coder community not to 
play ICS. By dubbing ICS a “serious breach of playing etiquette,” Free­
Civ’s code was finally able to produce mostly happy “players” alongside 
appropriately happy citizen avatars.83 Simply put, players used fairly 
conventional textual arguments on community forums as well as pro-
cedural arguments (i.e., refusing to play with anyone who used ICS) to 
encourage the entire community to develop new habits of play. This re-
course to social and discursive solutions—the historic domain of rhetor-
ical ­persuasion—­offers further confirmation of Chun’s most significant 
point: code never fully determines its results.
Conclusion
It is clear then that examining FreeCiv’s code as a nonhuman actor can 
more accurately describe the wide range of nonhuman agencies and pro-
cedural habits that form within an assemblage of play. A number of 
researchers have embraced the ethical strategy of demonstrating that 
a given rhetorical situation “exceeds the intentions of its designers” or 
rhetorical authors. For example, my tracing of code in FreeCiv could be 
considered a textual form of a practice that Bogost calls “carpentry” in 

222  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Alien Phenomenology, which is a rhetorical pedagogy practice subse-
quently theorized by Nathaniel Rivers and James J. Brown, Jr. ­Bogost 
offers Fry’s Deconstructulator as a form of videogame carpentry.84 
End-users therefore often find it uncanny when the coded “tools” that 
sustain the interface are visually “named” in artistic projects such as 
Ben Fry’s Deconstructulator, which visualizes the compiler’s real-time 
perception of the code in Super Mario Brothers for NES alongside the 
player’s actions in the game.85 Fry’s goal is to aesthetically defamiliarize 
the instrumental use of a videogame or, we could easily add, a persua-
sive technology in order to reveal empirical nonhuman agency that de-
centers the human player’s knowledge and control. Fry does not offer a 
strict symmetrical empirical tracing like Latour but a metaphorical sim-
ulation of how the code experiences the videogame. Rivers and Brown 
Jr. similarly describe teaching their writing students about nonhuman 
agency through a water puzzle that simulates the absence of human con-
trol or knowledge. If, borrowing loosely from Heidegger once again, it 
is “means-ends” enframing (Gestell) that produces a will-to-power or 
will-to-truth that converts human habits as a means to utilitarian ends, 
carpentry and decentering the human can enable us to imagine different 
and more ethical forms of procedural habits.
The use of tracing or carpentry in FreeCiv is therefore explicitly or 
implicitly tied into the development of a better form of ethical interac-
tions with the world of objects. In Ontocartography, Levi R. Bryant 
concludes that Bogost’s carpentry experiments will create empathy and 
compassion for the nonhuman Object as well as result in better forms 
of political efficacy in institutional contexts.86 The use of carpentry in a 
beef processing plant could “metaphorically simulate,” to use Bogost’s 
phrase, the cow’s death experience and indicate to audiences the need 
to make “less traumatic” forms of slaughter. Yet, as the philosopher 
Bryan E. Bannon observes in his review of Ontocartography, this is an 
assumption that requires qualification.87 Bannon facetiously suggests 
that more compassion for cows might mean not slaughtering them in 
the first place—an ethical commitment to the right of animals to have 
life. Indeed, I could also imagine a scenario in which experiencing the 
world in a metaphorical simulation of reality through a cow perspective 
might even lead audiences to affirm their beliefs in the cow’s inherent 
inferiority.
Fortunately, if I revisit eudaimonia from Chapter 5, we are not actu-
ally required to make this choice between decentering rhetorical agency 
to create awareness of how we are attuned by the habits of nonhuman 
actors and making value judgments about good and bad assemblages of 
play that we find ourselves enmeshed within. In fact, attributing proce-
dural habits to nonhuman actors like videogame code is part of how we 
cultivate the enchantment to look at our food sources with more than just 
a means-ends (enframing) point of view. Indeed, happiness (eudaimonia) 

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  223
is, as Aristotle argues, not something we are “born with” as FreeCiv’s 
notational commentary and code affirm. Rather, eudaimonia is a habit 
(hexis) that we cultivate across our lives with respect to changing and 
responding to relations within our material goods, politics, and other 
human and nonhuman actors. Thus, the route toward realizing the good 
life is not a priori grounded in human autonomous rational forces or dis-
embodied contemplation of the world. Rather, it is the ways in which we 
dwell within these conditions that produce hexeis that then either work 
toward or against eudaimonia. These are not just speculative academic 
questions. These are concrete strategies that we can teach our writing 
students, as I will argue in the final chapter of Procedural Habits.
Notes
	 1	 Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010), 107.
	 2	 Laurie Gries, Still Life With Rhetoric: A New Materialist Approach for 
Visual Rhetorics (Colorado: University Press of Colorado, 2015), 14.
	 3	 Nathaniel Rivers, “Tracing the Missing Masses,” Enculturation 17 (2014), 
accessed May 15, 2017, http://enculturation.net/missingmasses
	 4	 Bennett, Vibrant, xvi.
	 5	 Ibid., xii.
	 6	 Peter Unold, Claus Leth Gregersen, and Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg, FreeCiv, 
GNU General Public License, November 1995.
	 7	 Sid Meier and Bruce Shelley, Civilization II, 1996, Videogame.
	 8	 Sid Meier and Bruce Shelley, Civilization, 1991, Videogame.
	 9	 Stephen R. Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Successful Individuals (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 2013).
	10	 Charles Bazerman, Constructing Experience (Carbondale, IL: Southern 
Illinois University Press, 1994), 4.
	11	 Bogost, Ian. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT, 2007), 25.
	12	 Ibid., 26.
	13	 Scholars such as Mark Marino, Nick Montfort, Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, 
Lisa Gitelman, Mark Sample, and many others.
	14	 Noah Wardrip-Fruin, Expressive Processing: Digital Fictions, Computer 
Games, and Software Studies (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009), 158.
	15	 Peter Lunenfeld, Snap to Grid (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2001), 23.
	16	 Eugene Thacker, “Foreward,” in Alexander R. Galloway’s Protocol: How 
Control Exists After Decentralization (Cambridge, MA: MIT 2006), iii–xvi.
	17	 Alexander R. Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentraliza­
tion (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006), 165–166.
	18	 Scott Consigny, “Rhetorical Concealment,” paper read at Theory of Rheto­
ric: An Interdisciplinary Conference (Minneapolis, MN, 1979), 35.
	19	 Wendy Chun, Programmed Visions (Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press, 
2012), 22.
	20	 Alexandria Lockett, “I Am Not a Computer Programmer,” Enculturation 
13 (2009), accessed May 15, 2017, http://enculturation.net/node/5270
	21	 Kevin Brock, “One Hundred Thousand Billion Processes: Oulipian Compu-
tation and the Composition of Digital Cybertexts,” Technoculture 2 (2012), 
accessed May 15, 2017, https://tcjournal.org/drupal/vol2/brock

224  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
	22	Teena A.M. Carnegie, “The Interface as Exordium: The Rhetoric of Interac-
tivity,” Computers and Composition 26, no. 3 (2009): 164.
	23	 Brock, “One Hundred.”
	24	 Alexander R. Galloway, “Language Wants to Be Overlooked: Software and 
Ideology,” Journal of Visual Culture 5, no. 3 (2006): 326.
	25	Mark Sample, “Criminal Code,” Digital Humanities Quarterly 7, no. 1 
(2013), accessed May 15, 2017, www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/ 
000153/000153.html
	26	 Micropolis, 2008, Linux videogame.
	27	 Ibid.
	28	 Ibid.
	29	 Chun, Programmed Visions, 4.
	30	 Ibid., 19.
	31	 Ibid., 23.
	32	 Galloway, Protocol, 167.
	33	 Galloway, “Language,” 319. 
	34	Ibid., 319.
	35	 Chun, Programmed, 23.
	36	 Ibid., 23.
	37	 Ibid., 24.
	38	 Ibid., 24.
	39	 Ibid., 24.
	40	Paul Ricoeur, “Between Rhetoric and Poetics,” in Essays on Rhetoric and 
Aristotle, ed. Amelie Rorty(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 
324–384, 340 quoted in Ibid., 24.
	41	 Kelly Pender, Techne: From Neoclassicism to Postmodernism: Understand­
ing Writing as Useful (Anderson, SC: Parlor Press, 2011).
	42	 Chun, Programmed, 24.
	43	 Ibid., 20.
	44	Ibid., 24.
	45	 Bennett, Vibrant, 22–23.
	46	Charles Darwin, The Formation of Vegetable Mould, through the Action of 
Worms, with Observations on Their Habits (London: John Murray, 1881).
	47	 Debra Hawhee, Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece (Austin: 
University of Texas, 2004), 54.
	48	 Kenneth Burke, Permanence and Change: An Anatomy of Purpose (Berkeley: 
University of California, 1984), 5.
	49	 Claire Carlisle, On Habit (New York: Routledge, 2014), 15.
	50	 William James, Psychology: Briefer Course (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1984), 2.
	51	 Giles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues II, trans. Barbara Habberjam, 
Eliot Ross Albert, and Hugh Tomlinson (B. London: Continuum, 2007), 148.
	52	 Giles Deleuze and Felix Gauttari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizo­
phrenia, trans. Brian Massumi, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1987), 5.
	53	 Elizabeth A. Grosz, “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us,” 
Body & Society 19 (2013): 231.
	54	 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, What is Philosophy? (New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2014), 212.
	55	 Bennett, Vibrant, 10.
	56	 Ibid., 26.
	57	 Ibid., 38.
	58	 Jane Bennett, The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings, 
and Ethics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016), 3.

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  225
	59	 Ibid.
	60	 Ibid.
	61	 Bennett, Vibrant, xiv.
	62	 Ibid., 16.
	63	 Ibid., 37.
	64	Ibid., 37.
	65	 James J. Brown, Jr., Ethical Programs: Hospitality and the Rhetorics of 
Software (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015), 2.
	66	 Ibid., 2.
	67	 Ibid., 5.
	68	 Ibid., 9.
	69	 FreeCiv 1.0a, FreeCiv Development (Jan. 5, 1996).
	70	 FreeCiv 2.0.0 code, FreeCiv Development (Apr. 16, 2005).
	71	 “Editing Rulesets,” FreeCiv Wikia, accessed May 15, 2017, http://FreeCiv.
wikia.com/wiki/Editing_rulesets.
	72	 Ibid.
	73	 “Remember,” FreeCiv Wikia, accessed May 15, 2017, http://FreeCiv.wikia.
com/wiki/Remember.
	74	 “Coding Style.” FreeCiv Wikia, accessed May 15, 2017, http://FreeCiv.
wikia.com/wiki/Coding_Style.
	75	 See for example, Effects.ruleset from FreeCiv 2.4.0 (Apr. 2014). http://mod 
pack.freeciv.org/2.4/civ2civ3-2.4-3/civ2civ3/effects.ruleset
	76	 City.c, FreeCiv 2.0.0. “Corruption is halved during love—the XXX days.”
	77	Mathison, Per, “Cleanup of Empire Size and Unhappiness,” FreeCiv Devel-
opment, Oct. 13, 2004, accessed May 15, 2017.
	78	 Ian Bogost, Alien Phenomenology, Or What It’s Like to Be a Thing (Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012).
	79	 City.c, FreeCiv 1.8.9, FreeCiv Development, Apr. 2, 1999, accessed April 2014, 
http://svn.gna.org/svn/freeciv-warclient/tags/warserver/0.8.9asrv/common/
city.c
	80	 Sample offers a similar observation regarding computer perception in Micro­
polis, but he does not connect his observations to its ontological significance.
	81	 City.c, FreeCiv 1.8.9.
	82	 The author of this quotation is unknown to the best of my research efforts.
	83	 “Infinite City Sprawl,” Sid Meyer”s Alpha Centauri, accessed May 15,  
2017, http://sidmeiersalphacentauri.wikia.com/wiki/ Sid_Meier”s_Alpha_ 
Centauri/Getting_Starte
	84	James J. Brown, Jr., and Nathaniel A. Rivers. “Composing the Carpen-
ter’s Workshop.” Ozone: A Journal of Object-Oriented Studies 1 (Autumn 
2013): 27–36.
	85	 Ian Bogost, Alien Phenomenology, Or What It’s Like to Be a Thing (Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), 105.
	86	 Levi R. Bryant, Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of Machines and Media 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014), 71–72.
	87	 Bryan E. Bannon, “Review: Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of Ma­
chines and Media,” Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews: An Electronic 
Journal, Feb. 19, 2015, accessed May 15, 2017. http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/
onto-cartography-an-ontology-of-machines-and-media/
Bibliography
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by Joe Sachs. New York: Focus 
Philosophical Library, 2002.

226  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
———. On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse. Translated by G.A. Kennedy. 
2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Bannon, Bryan E. “Review: Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of ­Machines 
and Media.” Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews: An Electronic ­Journal. 
Feb. 19, 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/onto-cartography- 
an-ontology-of-machines-and-media/
Bazerman, Charles. Constructing Experience. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illi-
nois University Press, 1994.
Bennett, Jane. The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings, and 
Ethics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016.
———. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2010.
Bogost, Ian. Alien Phenomenology, Or What It’s Like to Be a Thing. Minneap-
olis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
———. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT, 2007.
Bogost, Ian. Cow Clicker. 2010. Videogame. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://
cowclicker.com/
Brock, Kevin. “One Hundred Thousand Billion Processes: Oulipian Compu-
tation and the Composition of Digital Cybertexts.” Technoculture 2 (2012). 
Accessed May 15, 2017. https://tcjournal.org/drupal/vol2/brock
Brooke, Collin Gifford. Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media. 
Philadelphia, NJ: Hampton, 2009.
Brown, James J. Ethical Programs: Hospitality and the Rhetorics of Software. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015.
Brown, James J., and Nathaniel A. Rivers. “Composing the Carpenter’s Work-
shop.” Ozone: A Journal of Object-Oriented Studies 1 (Autumn 2013): 
27–36.
Bryant, Levi R. Onto-Cartography: An Ontology of Machines and Media. Ed-
inburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014.
Burke, Kenneth. Permanence and Change: An Anatomy of Purpose. Berkeley: 
University of California, 1984.
———. A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969.
Cahn, Michael. “The Rhetoric of Rhetoric: Six Tropes of Disciplinary Self-­
Constitution.” In The Recovery of Rhetoric: Persuasive Discourse and Disci­
plinarity in the Human Science, edited by R.H. Roberts and J. M. M. Good, 
61–84. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1993.
Carlisle, Claire. On Habit. New York: Routledge, 2014.
Carnegie, Teena A.M. “The Interface as Exordium: The Rhetoric of Interactiv-
ity.” Computers and Composition 26, no. 3 (2009): 164–173.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. De Oratore. Translated by H. Rackham. 2 vols. Loeb 
Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1942.
Cherwitz, Richard A. and T.J. Darwin. “Why the “Epistemic” in Epistemic 
Rhetoric? The Paradox of Rhetoric as Performance.” Text and Performance 
Quarterly 15 (1995): 189–205.
Chun, Wendy. Programmed Visions. Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press, 
2012.
“Coding Style.” FreeCiv Wikia. Accessed on May 15, 2017. http://FreeCiv.
wikia.com/ wiki/Coding_Style

Habits of Unsuccessful Nonhumans  227
Colby, Richard, and Rebekah Shultz Colby. “Reading Games: Composition, 
Literacy and Video Gaming.” Computers and Composition Online: Special 
Issue 13 (2008). www.cconlinejournal.org/fall2008.html
Cole, Thomas. The Origins of Rhetoric in Ancient Greece. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991.
Consigny, Scott. “Rhetorical Concealment.” Paper read at Theory of Rhetoric: 
An Interdisciplinary Conference. Minneapolis, MN, 1979.
Cooper, Marilyn R. “Rhetorical Agency as Emergent and Enacted.” College 
Composition and Communication 62, no. 3 (2011): 420–449.
Covey, Stephen R. The Seven Habits of Highly Successful Individuals. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 2013.
Darwin, Charles. The Formation of Vegetable Mould, through the Action of 
Worms, with Observations on Their Habits. London: John Murray, 1881.
Davis, Diane. Inessential Solidarity. Pittsburg: Pittsburg University Press, 2012.
Deleuze, Gilles. Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on Humes Theory of 
Human Nature. Translated by Constantin V. Boundas. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1991.
Deleuze, Giles, and Felix Gauttari. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophre­
nia. Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1987.
———. What is Philosophy? New York: Columbia University Press, 2014.
Deleuze Giles and Parnet, Claire. Dialogues II. Translated by Barbara Habber-
jam, Eliot Ross Albert, and Hugh Tomlinson. B. London: Continuum, 2007.
“Editing Rulesets.” FreeCiv Wikia. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://FreeCiv.
wikia.com/wiki/ Editing_rulesets
FreeCiv 1.0. FreeCiv Wikia. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://FreeCiv.wikia.com/
wiki/ Editing_rulesets
———. 2.0. FreeCiv Wikia. Accessed May 15, 2017.
Galloway, Alexander R. Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006.
———. “Language Wants to Be Overlooked: Software and Ideology.” Journal 
of Visual Culture 5, no. 3 (2006): 315–331.
Garsten, Bryan. Saving Persuasion: A Defense of Rhetoric and Judgement. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006.
Gries, Laurie. Still Life With Rhetoric: A New Materialist Approach for Visual 
Rhetorics. Colorado: University Press of Colorado, 2015.
Grosz, Elizabeth A. “Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze, and Us.” Body & 
Society 19 (2013): 217–239.
Harman, Graham. “On Vicarious Causation.” Collapse: Philosophical Re­
search and Development 2 (2007): 187–221.
Hawhee, Debra. Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece. Austin: 
University of Texas, 2004.
Heidegger, Martin. “The Thing.” In Poetry, Language, Thought, 161–184. 
New York: Harper, 2013.
“Infinite City Sprawl,” Sid Meyer”s Alpha Centauri. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://sidmeiersalphacentauri.wikia.com/wiki/Sid_Meier”s_Alpha_Centauri/
Getting_Starte
James, William. Psychology: Briefer Course. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1984.

228  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Jing, Mike. “FreeCiv Without City Smallpox.” FreeCiv Wikia, 2003. Accessed 
May 15, 2017. http://FreeCiv.wikia.com/wiki/FreeCiv_without_city_smallpox
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagina­
tion. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2012.
Lockett, Alexandria. “I Am Not a Computer Programmer.” Enculturation 13 
(2009). Accessed May 15, 2017. http://enculturation.net/node/5270
Lunenfeld, Peter. Snap to Grid. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2001.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2007.
Mathison, Per. “Cleanup of Empire Size and Unhappiness.” FreeCiv Develop-
ment, Oct. 13, 2004. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://permalink.gmane.org/
gmane.games.FreeCiv.devel/47205
Meier, Sid, and Bruce Shelley. Civilization. 1991. Videogame.
———. Civilization II. 1996. Videogame.
Micropolis, 2008, Linux videogame.
Miller, Carolyn R. “Should We Name the Tools?” In The Public Work of Rheto­
ric: Citizen-Scholars and Civic Engagement, edited by John M. Ackerman and 
David L. Coogan, 19–38. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2010.
Pender, Kelly. Techne: From Neoclassicism to Postmodernism: Understanding 
Writing as Useful. Anderson, SC: Parlor Press, 2011.
Plato. The Collected Dialogues. Edited by E. Hamilton and H. Cairns. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1961.
Lockett, Alexandria. “Program or Be Programmed.” Computers and Writing 
Conference. Raleigh, N.C. 2012. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://enculturation.
gmu.edu/computational-literacy
Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria. Translated by H.E. Butler. 4 vols. Loeb Classical 
Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1920.
“Remember.” FreeCiv Wikia. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://FreeCiv.wikia.
com/wiki/ Remember
Rickert, Thomas. Ambient Rhetoric. Pittsburg: Pittsburg University Press, 2013.
Ricoeur, Paul. “Between Rhetoric and Poetics.” In Essays on Rhetoric and Ar­
istotle, edited by Amelie Rorty, 324–384. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1996.
Rivers, Nathaniel. “Tracing the Missing Masses.” Enculturation 17 (2014). 
­Accessed May 15, 2017. http://enculturation.net/missingmasses
Sample, Mark. “Criminal Code.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 7, no. 1 (2013). 
Accessed May 15, 2017. www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000153/ 
000153.html
Taylor, T.L. “The Assemblage of Play9.” Games and Culture 4, no. 4 (2009): 
331–339.
Thacker, Eugene. “Foreward.” In Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentral­
ization, edited by Alexander R. Galloway, iii–xvi. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah. Expressive Processing: Digital Fictions, Computer 
Games, and Software Studies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009.
Worsham, Lynn. “The Question Concerning Invention.” Pre/Text 8 (1987): 
197–244.
Unold, Peter, Claus Leth Gregersen and Allan Ove Kjeldbjerg. FreeCiv. GNU 
General Public License. November 1995.

In the conclusion of Chapter 6, I state that what I am calling a hexis of 
enchantment involves tracing the aleatory agency of nonhuman actors in 
mundane texts, like a videogame’s code. I note that one additional strat-
egy for exploring this withdrawn agency lies in Bogost’s heuretic notion 
of carpentry. With carpentry, videogames do not attempt to make a per-
suasive argument to change an audience’s mind about a political topic. 
Rather, designers and players use videogames to simulate the absence 
of human agency or representational ability within a videogame, such 
as Ben Fry’s Deconstructulator. In the final case study of Procedural 
­Habits, I want to make a more specific appeal for how carpentry in rela-
tionship to a hexis of enchantment and procedural habits can form part 
of the ways in which writing teachers seek to incorporate videogames 
into various writing classrooms.
While pedagogy may not seem like the direct concern of this book’s 
subject matter, it is nevertheless an important consideration, as it is un-
deniably a pedagogical orientation that motivates a great deal of rhetoric 
and composition studies’ interests in videogame rhetoric. This focus in-
cludes our preference for teaching traditional texts with regard to emerg-
ing mediums like videogames while paying less attention to the types of 
multimodal forms and genres (modding, machinima, etc.) that players 
also create about play. One obvious remedy for this ongoing traditional 
text preference is to teach students how to design a wide range of videog-
ames, including commercialized genres, like social media games, while 
using examples like Cow Clicker as heuretic models. However, this 
straightforward pedagogical application runs into two main problems. 
First, explicitly teaching theoretical concepts like procedural habits is 
not an easy task. Along with countless others (post-techne, ambient rhet-
oric, postcomposition), certain theoretically complex concepts in our 
field are difficult to translate into pedagogy because they emerge in part 
to challenge the role of systematic or formalized pedagogical models. 
The other more pragmatic problem is that teaching game design is not as 
easy as teaching more common multimodal assignments, like audio or 
video remixes or even basic webtext design.
7	
The Materiality of Play as 
Public Rhetoric Pedagogy

230  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
As a case in point, Cow Clicker is a highly sophisticated videogame 
as a work of game design even before we consider its subtle rhetorical 
aims of satirizing social media games. Although a number of point-and-
click and drag-and-drop game design interfaces, such as GameSalad, 
enable users without any coding knowledge to design and publish a vid-
eogame, planning let alone designing even one of Bogost’s most basic 
examples of a persuasive game would require no inconsiderable amount 
of understanding of how complex game mechanics work to create ar-
guments. Suffice to say (and my own teaching experience with under-
graduates bears this out in part), videogame creation remains a medium 
with a steep and time-intensive learning curve. As a result, full-fledged 
­videogame design is likely not a realistic goal for many in our field, 
­particularly writing teachers who are obligated to fulfill regimented cur-
ricular tasks in general education first year- and advanced-composition 
classes, where multimodal teaching may only be a smaller part of the 
overall curriculum structure.
As a result, what I want to do in this final case study on videogame peda-
gogy is to explore some basic ways that writing teachers can ask students 
to compose with and through mundane texts of interface design in vid-
eogames as a form of carpentry. In this chapter, I trace a combination of 
two pedagogical concepts not specifically directed at ­videogame rhetoric 
that nevertheless have come to inform a great deal of my own pedagogi-
cal interests in videogames and procedural habits: Jody ­Shipka’s Toward 
a Composition Made Whole1 and David M. ­Sheridan, Jim Ridolfo, and 
Anthony J. Michel’s idea of multimodal public rhetorics.2 In the open-
ing pages of her book, Shipka describes a classroom project in which 
her student writes letters in pen on a pair of ballet slippers. For Shipka, 
rhetoric and composition studies all too often mean “multimodal” as 
“digital,” while avoiding a more diverse consideration of non-digital ma-
terial sources of composition. By contrast, even the non-digital presence 
of a chalkboard in a college classroom is also a form of multimodality, 
in that it involves particular visual, spatial, and material affordances for 
teachers and students who use the space. In asking students to compose 
with different forms of physical materiality, Shipka maintains that stu-
dents still learn about the writing process (drafting, planning, revising, 
etc.). Furthermore, she affirms that there is a great deal of practical value 
in having students develop self-­consciousness about print-based writing 
practices when they are forced to compare these familiar practices to 
their inventional strategies in multimodal forms of composition.
While not in direct dialogue with Shipka, I often view Sheridan et al.’s 
book as offering a way to connect Shipka’s insights toward a form of 
public rhetoric through digital writing. Sheridan et al. argue that we 
should teach in multimedia in part to expose students to a wide range of 
multimodal genres in order to make them aware of their ability to partic-
ipate in contemporary public spheres, many of which form in mediums 

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  231
beyond print. If we do not teach students different mediums as part of 
public rhetoric, then we have foreclosed certain forms of public inter-
action and kairotic realization. Thus, part of teaching writing students 
the available means of persuasion in the present means teaching about 
the various affordances and constraints of different mediums, ­including 
how they circulate through networked spaces.
Taken alongside Shipka’s thinking, I am interested in how we might 
direct student writers to view the physical and networked spaces of vid-
eogames’ rhetorical interactivities as a kairotic opportunity to teach 
them something about the relationship between videogame rhetoric and 
procedural habits. For me, “to play” a videogame is always already “to 
write,” thanks to the easy ability to mod or customize many elements 
of videogames as well as to record, recompose, stream, and disseminate 
play. These activities offer a more realistic approach that, as I demon-
strate in this chapter, can be combined with carpentry, a hexis of en-
chantment, and some of the theoretical ideas of procedural habits in 
general. In the first section of this chapter, I outline a teaching example 
that I will use as a lens to discuss some of these pedagogical concerns: SB 
Nation blogger Jon Bois’s weekly column in fall 2013 entitled Breaking 
Madden.3 During a given American professional sports season, Bois of-
fers a weekly blog post that creates multimodal narratives from record-
ing play. Specifically, Bois records his attempt to “break,” or “mod,” a 
popular sports videogame such as Madden 25 by attempting to reveal 
limits of the game mechanics.4 Bois combines these attempts to break 
Madden 25 with satire related to ongoing real-life story lines from a 
given 2013–2014 NFL season.
In the second section, I introduce some theoretical concepts from 
games studies, media studies, and rhetorical studies to help writing 
students connect Bois’s rhetorical strategies to carpentry, the hexis 
of enchantment, and multimodal public rhetoric. On the one hand, 
I suggest that Bois illustrates the value of Burkean identification as a 
public rhetoric practice. In as far as any videogame maps onto real-­
world situations the way that Bois satirizes contemporary athletes, 
students can begin to see a videogame not as an authorial argument or 
official source of meaning that they have to accept; rather, they see the 
videogame as an epideictic medium that they can customize to start 
intervening in existing publics’ procedural habits of play. On the other 
hand, I argue that Bois’s ability to view recording and remixing play 
as a rhetoric activity in itself is an effective model for public rhetoric 
practice. In part, I compare Bois’s work to media studies theorist Beth 
Coleman’s concept of “cross-platform avataring” as a way to explain 
how Bois utilizes multiple mediums to explain the compositional ac-
tivity of play beyond videogames as a form of epideictic satire.5
In the third section, I turn to the pedagogical value of Bois’s idea of 
“breaking Madden” as a sort of Heideggerian “broken tool” simulation 

232  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
as a form of rhetorical carpentry. By foregrounding the machine’s ale-
atory agency, Bois requires audiences to see beyond the screen toward 
the realm of the invisible elements that structure our expressive writing 
and rhetorical practices through procedural habits without most players 
knowing it. For me, this gesture has an analogy in carpentry (and espe-
cially in the context of Shipka’s goal of having students experiment with 
material composing) not just to “break” the machine but to mod it by 
adding physical input objects. Here, I feature my past classroom experi-
ments of asking students to use JoyLabz’s Makey Makey programmable 
circuit board as a public rhetoric practice of “critical making” (discussed 
below). This description of the Makey Makey—“Ever played Mario on 
Play-Doh?”—from the company’s website effectively captures my ped-
agogical orientation. The Makey Makey allows student writers to plug 
in any physical object that will carry an electric current (fruit, coins, 
makeup, metals, etc.) to take over keyboard input functions and, specific 
to my interests in Procedural Habits, play videogames on a computer 
through interacting with these physical objects.
By incorporating some basic coding knowledge through Scratch, a ba-
sic visual programming language, writing students can use the Makey 
Makey to make arguments through the types of embodied interactions 
that they require players to input in order to play a videogame, thereby 
converting the videogame into a “broken tool” while inviting them to 
see the digital as a space of material composing (Shipka) and kairotic 
invention (Sheridan et al.). In closing, I feature a project by Ben Crane, 
one of my former undergraduate students, in which he used some highly 
creative forms of tactile interactivity to reinforce certain embodied pro-
cedural arguments within the RPG satire Undertale on Steam. In part, 
my goal is to place this sort of assignment in dialogue with how digital 
rhetoricians’ emergent interest in critical making is, in a sense, an appeal 
first and foremost to a generalizable sort of procedural habit or hexis: a 
spirit of creative material inquiry and a refusal to accept the authority 
of the procedural habits that game designers try to manifest as a site of 
potential public rhetorical agency.
Jon Bois’s Breaking Madden NFL
I started teaching Jon Bois’s Breaking Madden columns in my writing 
classes in 2014, 1 year after he started publishing them. For readers 
unfamiliar with the Madden NFL videogame series, I offer some brief 
context (Figure 7.1).
Madden NFL is routinely one of the top selling sports videogames 
in America; the 2014 version, Madden 16,6 ranked second in overall 
North American sales.7 EA Sports took the name of the videogame from 
the personality of John Madden, the popular former player and coach 
cum broadcaster, to entitle the first version John Madden Football.8 
The latter eventually became Madden NFL in 2003. While graphics, 

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  233
customizable features, networked multiplayer interaction, and gameplay 
have changed over the years, the basic purpose of the videogame re-
mains unchanged: The Madden series strives to be an ever more realistic 
football simulation. Released in 2013, a major draw of Madden 25 in 
particular involved increased potentials for online play.9 Multiplayer in-
teraction in Madden 25 was very public, with leaderboards, networked 
franchises, online leagues, and other social media forums. Bois actually 
indicates in one post that he chose to write his column about Madden 
25’s “Connected Franchise mode” because it represented the “deep-
est mode in the history of the Madden NFL franchise.”10 Connected 
Franchise mode is a full simulation mode where a player can choose to 
be an NFL player, coach, or owner. The owner, for example, has unique 
decisions about selecting players for a roster or transferring cities for new 
stadium rewards. The goal of this mode is to earn admittance into the 
Hall of Fame leaderboard by increasing a player’s Personal Legacy Score.
Since Bois’s weekly columns often reference previous weeks, it is use-
ful to begin with Week 1’s column, “Meet CLARENCE BEEFTANK.”11 
Week 1 featured a simulated game in anticipation of a Week 1 actual 
season opener between the Jacksonville Jaguars and the Kansas City 
Chiefs. Bois’s exigency was two-fold: First, SB Nation’s pre-season 
poll had ranked the Jaguars as the 31st worst team in the league out of 
32 teams. Second, the Jaguars were the only team who had yet to resolve 
their starting quarterback situation, because their two real-life choices—
Chad Henne and Blaine Gabbert—were terrible, in Bois’s opinion. In 
response to this exigency, Bois elected to create a quarterback avatar for 
the Jaguars in Madden 25 that would make a procedural argument to 
highlight “the League’s saddest quarterback controversies.”12
Figure 7.1  Screenshot of play interface for Madden 16 on Playstation 4.

234  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
The central element of Bois’s transmedia avatar occurs by recording 
play through animated .gifs or machinima-like compositions. Yet, rather 
than creating narrative meaning by overlaying a unique audio narrative 
over live feed video capture, Bois achieves his primary rhetorical effects 
through the strategic manipulation of rulesets and player customization. 
Bogost defines procedural rhetoric as the use of interactive rule-bound 
procedures in computationally expressive media to make an argument. 
In tacit reflection of Bogost’s thinking, Bois selected the Jaguars as his 
user-controlled team. In a decision designed to highlight the Jaguars’ 
real-life woes, Bois released every quarterback from the team’s default 
roster. Using the player creation tool, he created a new quarterback 
character called “BEEFTANK”—“all caps, please”—as the starter and 
posted a screenshot to his blog page (Figure 7.2).
He assigned BEEFTANK the highest ratings allowed to the following 
adjustable rulesets: Strength, Speed, Acceleration, Carrying, Throwing 
Power, Trucking, Stiff Arm, Injury, Stamina, and Toughness. Ordinarily, 
famous quarterbacks in the NFL have high Pass or Awareness ratings. 
By contrast, Bois hyperbolically comments:
Trying to injure BEEFTANK is like trying to puncture a cinder block. 
He runs like the roundest of freight trains. He is like Pac-Man, only 
his maze is of the existential sort that funnels him through the cock-
les of football’s pure heart. He can frequently bowl over multiple 
defenders in a single run.13
Figure 7.2  Screenshot of BEEFTANK customization from Jon Bois’s Breaking 
Madden Column.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  235
At the same time, BEEFTANK was not perfect. He had the lowest pos-
sible ratings of Throw Accuracy, Elusiveness, Agility, Awareness, Spin 
Move, and Juke Move. BEFFTANK was also five feet tall and 400 
pounds in weight. As I interpret Bois’s decision, this lack of total perfec-
tion (i.e., giving each adjustable setting in the ruleset a 99 rating) serves 
a purpose. Bois was not giving the Jaguars a quarterback equivalent of 
a graceful or elegant running back who can elude tacklers with agility, 
juking, or misdirection. Instead, he offered the Jaguars an undignified 
bowling ball that reinforced his criticism of the Jaguars’ front office fail-
ings, through a deliberately unsubtle procedural metaphor.
At a basic level, Bois strongly implies that a writer’s ability to adjust 
a videogame’s simulated mechanisms is thoroughly a rhetorical choice 
along the lines of Bogost’s procedural rhetoric. Making the avatar nim-
ble would have created a different visual and narrative effect than the 
monolithic BEEFTANK. The latter cannot be tackled by defending play-
ers, but he is unable to look elegant or graceful in his performance. Bois 
acknowledges that his choices are intentional, noting:
This isn’t just for fun. I constructed BEEFTANK in this way be-
cause I reckon it’s time for the Jaguars to take a break from throwing 
for a while. In Cecil Shorts III and (the currently-suspended) Justin 
­Blackmon, Jacksonville possesses one of the best young pairs of wide-
outs in the NFL … Judging from their recent performance in the pass-
ing game, they do not deserve these guys. I’m taking their toys away.14
This procedural decision highlighted a different storyline related to the 
Jaguars. Blackmon was popularly claimed to be a poor selection in the 
first round of the 2013 NFL draft due to off the field issues. By contrast, 
Shorts was on the field but was ultimately ineffective.
Identification and Epideictic Rhetorics of Play
While I gesture toward different rhetorical elements, the first teaching 
principle that Bois helps writing students to realize is not to accept vid-
eogame designers’ narratives as authoritative sources of meaning. This 
mentality is valuable because there are many aspects of Madden worth 
examining as fodder for public intervention. In the history of the ­Madden 
franchise, it was not until 2015 that Madden 25 added female fans to 
its simulated stadium stands. Madden 92 added an ambulance15 and 
a game mechanic (“trucking”), which encouraged players carrying the 
football to violently run over and injure the opposing side (a feature that 
the NFL asked them to remove). With the addition of the “Hit Stick” 
button in Madden NFL 2005,16 opposing players lost their helmets if 
they were tackled with this particularly violent game mechanic (which 
was subsequently removed in 2006). By Madden 12,17 consciousness 

236  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
about injuries began to be integrated, as in-game players who received 
a randomly generated concussion injury were required to sit out for an 
entire game. Simply put, there is a great deal of intriguing rhetorical 
significance to Madden, even above and beyond Bois’s specific purposes.
How then might we begin to think through multimodal recomposing 
in Breaking Madden as a form of public rhetoric? In general, modding 
can be a rhetorical practice. Citing Sicart’s criticism of proceduralism 
(understanding meaning in videogames through their rules), which po-
sitions designers as the primary rhetorical creators, Kevin Moberly and 
Ryan M. Moeller argue that play can be a dialectical “process of appro-
priation,” where player engagement with the rules produces the mean-
ing in the game. Thus, “modding asks players to be co-constructors of 
meaning” as well as to see how various rhetorical performances relate to 
political ideology in game play.18 Thus, one starting place lies in helping 
to offer students some rhetorical frameworks for understanding what 
forms of political meanings lie within videogames.
Clearly, Bogost’s procedural rhetoric has a role to play in Bois’s com-
positions. Along similar lines, I have found Burke’s identification is 
particularly useful to help students start to approach videogames as a 
way to think through public rhetoric. In Distant Publics, Rice describes 
Burke’s classic example of the butcher and the shepherd. A shepherd 
may identify as a caretaker, but he is “implicitly identified with their 
slaughter.”19 “The shepherd raises sheep to the point of slaughtering, 
and the butcher performs the act for which the sheep were carefully 
raised.”20 Both identify with a common act even though their feelings 
about the activity may differ. Rice claims that these feelings demon-
strate that “public subjects are not only defined by the fact that they act 
in relation to a constellation of discourses, but they are often shaped by 
the particular feelings they have about the relation.”21 Years earlier, in 
the “Preface” to Rhetoric, Race, and Technology, Adam Banks raises a 
similar point in discussing the different annual iterations of Madden.22 
To play Madden competitively across each upgrade pathway requires 
players to have monetary wealth in order to purchase each new ver-
sion as well as the leisure time to transfer previously accumulated game 
mechanic knowledge in response to minor or major changes in game-
play. Banks goes on to describe how these upgrade paths are histor-
ically and systematically denied to marginalized populations such as 
African-Americans, who therefore start their relationship to play—and 
technology use more broadly—at a competitive disadvantage. Extend-
ing Bank’s insights, any one version of the Madden franchise is at once 
a videogame and a site at which players (Burke’s butchers) and non-­
players are habituated to class-based and racialized divisions. Madden is 
at once a site that houses multiple identificatory relations—human and 
nonhuman—through which players’ existing and emerging dispositions 
must negotiate.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  237
Identification is thereby useful because it helps alert students to new 
sites where political ideas form and function in videogame player com-
munities. For example, I often teach Henry Jenkins’s work on fan fiction 
and public spheres alongside Bois, particularly Jenkins’s discussion of 
the Harry Potter Alliance,23 which documents attempts to shift fan fic-
tion interests to public rhetoric. Since Harry Potter is a marginalized foe 
fighting a great evil power in Lord Voldemort, fans in the Harry Potter 
Alliance share an intuitive connection to political situations, such as in-
dependent bookstore owners versus multinational conglomerates such as 
Amazon.com. Lord Voldemort becomes “Wald(e)mart” (e.g., Walmart) 
with minimal effort. While Jenkins does not mention rhetoric, it is clear 
that he is implicitly working out of Burke’s identification; herein, rhet-
oric is a “precondition” and part of persuasion. The analogy back to 
Breaking Madden lies in the fact that the starting place for rhetorical 
invention in videogames is to remember that these particular audiences’ 
procedural habits have formed through certain identification points—
either in videogames or in the broader terrain of points of motivation 
in the NFL. Thus, to reach these audiences requires intervening within 
these familiar patterns of association and these networks of support (i.e., 
procedural and non-procedural habits). Students are able to spend some 
time thinking with Bois about how these points of identification within 
their chosen videogame may resonate with an actual audience.
As a result, one strong teaching point that emerges out of Bois’s com-
position activities is epideictic rhetoric. Of Aristotle’s three branches 
of rhetoric—deliberative, judicial, and epideictic—epideictic is a par-
ticularly appropriate mode for Bois given that the former is the most 
likely to be dismissed as “mere” rhetoric: “‘artificial,’ ‘contrived,’ and 
‘irrelevant’…‘empty rhetoric’” given its historical function in affirming 
pre-existing community values through praise or blame.24 However, 
several researchers have argued against this marginalization, claiming 
that inherent in epideictic rhetoric is the potential for civic contribution 
or activism.25 Cynthia Sheard notably suggests that epideictic rhetoric 
can also challenge or subvert pre-existing values.
Bois usefully demonstrates to students that effective rhetorical argu-
ments in videogames mean that one must start by establishing the world 
of the videogame—its narrative and its mechanics—and then determine 
what real-life allegories or points of identification exist (more on this be-
low) coupled with deliberate rhetorical purposes (epideictic, deliberative, 
forensic). I often draw an analogy to Jenkins’s reference to comedian 
Jon Stewart’s The Daily Show. Stewart employs jokes to allow viewers 
“to share, deploy, trust, evaluate, contest and act upon collective knowl-
edge.”26 Bois’s satirical participatory orientation similarly invites others 
to participate in various issues of praise and blame in the NFL. As a 
case in point from the Week 1 composition, Bois even takes “punting 
privileges away” from his simulated Jags squad to shame them, because 

238  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
he knows that BEEFTANK as an offensive force will never need to punt. 
As the inverse of the actual Jaguars’ offense, BEEFTANK cannot be 
stopped.
Building a Network of Participatory Avatars
Echoing Moberly and Moeller’s call, some scholars in our field have al-
ready explored modding as well as machinima (videos composed through 
recording play from videogames).27 Yet, machinima is often viewed as 
the production of a standalone composition. By contrast, the major-
ity of recorded play has a specific orientation toward cross-­platform 
or networked circulation, due in large part to the wide availability of 
high-quality recording and streaming software and online sharing hubs, 
such as YouTube channels, Let’s Play, or Twitch.tv. Electronic Arts re-
leased Madden 15 in August 2014 alongside the Gifferator social me-
dia portal,28 which enables players to create, share, and edit animated 
.gifs. Many commercial videogames across different genres, from sports 
(MLB’s The Show 15)29 to role-playing games (Skyrim V: The Elder 
Scrolls),30 now feature sophisticated multimedia creation interfaces to 
streamline players’ compositional activities. Writing as recorded play 
now includes hybrid genres such as “brag clips,” where players post 
in-game achievements to social media in order to elicit responses from 
other players.
As additional evidence of this growing trend, some of the most pop-
ular YouTube channels since 2013 have involved recorded play. Since 
August 2013, a user named “PewDiePie” has operated the most popular 
YouTube channel (aka Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg). He uses vlogs, social 
media, audio recordings, and other multimedia forms to offer entertain-
ing walkthroughs of horror and action videogames, such as Amnesia: 
The Dark Descent. His YouTube channel listed over 38 million subscrib-
ers in July 2015.31 Some studies also indicate that close to 95% of play-
ers supplement their in-game experiences with player-created YouTube 
videos, such as instructional walkthroughs or gaming-related entertain-
ment.32 Recording and sharing play constitutes an emergent form of 
what Kathleen Blake Yancey calls “textured literacy,”33 wherein social 
networking sites (i.e., Facebook, Vine, or Periscope) offer individuals 
the opportunity to create and share self-expression through multimedia 
composition, often combining text, images, sounds, hypertext links, and 
now, recorded play.
As a result, Bois helps to illustrate to writing students the fact that 
“to play” is increasingly “to write.” Consider the following rhetorical 
activities: Tweens (and many of my academic colleagues) post CCS or 
other casual games achievements in social media; players send animated 
.gif memes to one another via Gif Keyboard on mobile phones while 
simultaneously chatting on Ventrilo during a raid in Destiny; players 

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  239
attend videogame conventions dressed as their customized avatars from 
any number of videogames; when I was a PhD student back at ­Clemson 
University, I observed the co-leader of my old academic WoW guild 
(Venture), Cynthia Haynes, use her WoW avatar to teach an MA semi-
nar in Composition Theory; and, finally, players exchange screenshots 
and animated .gif files of their avatars in rhetorically crafted poses after 
complex in-game achievements.
Media studies researcher Beth Coleman identifies these composing 
practices as a player’s “ambient networked presence.” This term charac-
terizes the way in which the space of play is not properly characterized by 
the player’s form of engagement alone; rather, the space of play captures 
the ways in which a player’s “co-present media engagement” occurs si-
multaneously across various spatial, medial, and temporal moments.34 
Intriguingly, Ulmer has highlighted that the etymology of the term 
“avatar” supports this ongoing and dynamic dimension of avatar-ing. 
Alongside Coleman, Ulmer explores the roots of seminal play theorist 
Johan Huizinga’s claim that civilization was created through play by 
examining the Sanskrit poem, Bhagavadgita (“Song of God,” Book VI 
of the Mahabharata), a major work of the Hindu religion.35 According 
to Coleman, avatar in Sanskrit (the origin of all languages) is composed 
of two elements: tatari, which translates to “base of,” and ava, which 
means “down.”36 According to Hindu mythology, gods or deities such 
as Vishnu took avatar form (as human or animal) to appear to human 
heroes. During the battle of Kuruskhetra, the god Vishnu incarnates as 
Krishna to assist Prince Arjuna.37 Whenever dharma (duty, virtue) was 
in decline, the god Vishnu would incarnate as Krishna through avatars 
such as dwarf, Rama, Buddha, man-lion, and boar: “The term avatar 
in Sanskrit literally means descent.”38 Our modern English and Ameri-
canized meanings retain some of this original context. By the eighteenth 
century, the English term “avatar” was analogous to a literary allegory. 
Nevertheless, phrases such as “He is the picture of guilt,” still capture 
this sense of someone incarnating or personifying a principle or an in-
tangible quality.39 Indeed, incarnation still describes avatars in virtual 
worlds. In popular examples such as Second Life, the multiplayer online 
virtual world, players fashion an online persona called an “avatar.”
 Bois’s work successfully demonstrates these cross-media authoring 
or “avatar-ing” practices as well. In the Week 2 column, Bois maintains 
his narrative emphasis—epideictic satire of NFL events—while adding 
more specific elements of participatory avatar-ing. Week 2’s column is 
entitled “Peyton Manning and his offensive line of 160-pound  twig-­
people” in response to widespread praise of the performance of real-­
life quarterback Peyton Manning of the Denver Broncos against the 
New York Giants in Week 1 of the NFL season.40 The exigency lies in 
Manning’s “videogame-like” numbers. Such is a typical comparison by 
sports commentators. Declaring that a player in a real-life sports game 

240  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
plays like “he or she is in a videogame,” functions as a simple simile to 
characterize an extremely high level of athletic performance. From Bois’s 
perspective, the more that play in a real-life game resembled a perfor-
mance only thought to be possible in a videogame, the more tempting 
it became to satirize this activity. As an act of humbling Manning, Bois 
declares, “This week, let’s try to break him,” by keeping his default rule-
set ratings intact while reducing the effectiveness of his offensive line.41
To begin his process of rhetorical invention, Bois sought to bring in var-
ious aspects of his former cross-media avatars in different sports posts. 
Bois cleverly referenced his prior blog on recorded play in the videog-
ame NBA2K12 by reintroducing a narrative character, “Robert ‘Bobert’ 
­Awful.” Bobert was part of Bois’s pre-existing transmedia network. Bois 
employed this point of identification with his audience to solicit new 
forms of participation through social media. In the week leading up to 
the Week 2 column, Bois reminded his readers of ­Bobert and posted on 
Twitter, “if you’d like a horrible player [i.e., one of ­Manning’s offensive 
linemen] named after you/your Twitter profile in a Madden experiment, 
please submit one crappy fact about yourself.”42
Adding a new dimension to his overall argument, his Twitter call 
satirized and procedurally complimented Manning’s actual brilliant 
performance in the NFL. To help create the simulation of real life, Bois 
asked users to reveal a personal real-life awful performance or event. 
A  Tweeter named Kelly Murphy joined the team with the following 
story: “I once owned a single cassette tape of ‘Are you Jimmy Ray?’ 
by Jimmy Ray.”43 As I read it, Bois was not simply soliciting random 
content in a mere desire to gain more readers. Rather, he asked his par-
ticipants to reproduce past actual occurrences of the public humbling 
of Manning that he was about to simulate. He wished to connect the 
epideictic satire of Breaking Madden to users’ actualized hexeis of vir-
tue and vice as well as to create a hexis of epideictic avatar-ing. Un-
like ­Manning’s real-life performance, Bois does not ask viewers for 
their amazing accomplishments in life. Rather, he enjoins his viewers 
to become both literal avatars and active participants in the process 
of avatar-ing. Clearly, this gesture combines interactive storytelling 
to form a participatory rhetorical argument. The lines between game 
and daily life were permanently blurred in this gesture, as Bois began 
to inject the actual play space of Madden 25 with characters, stories, 
and para-­textual references to non-football and non-videogame issues. 
­Furthermore, with a nod ­toward his cross-platform avatar-ing orienta-
tion, the Week 2 composition could not take shape without these par-
ticipatory activities. Each of these elements worked together to help the 
overall transmedia narrative unfold.
For those tweeters whose tales of woe were deemed worthy, Bois re-
named his offensive line to make their interaction part of his subsequent 
avatar-ing. In terms of procedural rhetoric, Bois reduced the height of 
the offensive linemen—typically the largest players on the field—and 

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  241
set their weight to a very light 160 pounds. Actual NFL linemen are 
routinely upwards of 280 pounds. He gave each lineman a rating of zero 
for every skill category. Bois minimized their talents except for injury 
ratings, which he turned to zero because he wanted them on the field the 
entire game, regardless of how much virtual punishment they received. 
In other words, he refused to let the videogame substitute a more skilled 
backup lineman. Bois took active control of the Giants and allowed the 
CPU to control the Broncos’ offensive line and Manning’s avatar. This 
gesture confirms again Sheard’s excellent observation that epideictic 
rhetoric does more than simply affirm community standards. Rather, 
epideictic procedural mods can begin to subtly challenge these norms. 
Bois’s gesture to reduce Manning’s offensive line poked gentle fun at an 
implicit context, in that many of Manning’s detractors argue that part of 
his brilliance was enabled by his outstanding offensive line. Bois wants 
to ask a provocative question via procedural rhetoric and allegorithm: 
“how good are you, real-life Peyton Manning?”
Bois’s other weekly columns fit a similar script. Throughout his columns, 
Bois is clearly effective in soliciting user interaction while building cross-­
platform narratives grounded in epideictic forms of procedural rhetoric. 
He confirms the point that modding contains no less degrees of ­rhetorical 
­creativity than composing a textual argument. Echoing Jan Rune ­Holmevik’s 
claim that videogames are an important form of rhetorical invention in elec-
tracy, Constance Steinkuehler and Barbara Z. Johnson suggest:
…modding illustrates what it means to be technically literate in the 
contemporary participatory sociotechnical world (collaborative and 
negotiated rather than individually achieved) … [It is a] digital me-
dia literacy practice … involving design and production, not merely 
passive or critical consumption.44
Furthermore, echoing Sheridan et al., Bois indicates that modding can 
function as a way to locate gaps within simulation fever for rhetorical 
effects across multiple rhetorical situations.
To wrap up the importance of epideictic rhetoric and Breaking ­Madden, 
I want to expand briefly on Sheridan et al. and the idea of kairos within 
the activities of cross-platform avatar-ing. Citing the obligatory qualifi-
cation that must precede even a short discussion of kairos, I acknowl-
edge James L. Kinneavy’s remark that “kairos is a complete concept, 
not easily reduced to a single formula.”45 Typically thought of as the 
opportune moment, “timing,” or “right” time, its meanings are diverse, 
including “occasion” and “due measure.”46 Sheridan et al. offer an ex-
cellent summary of this body of work.47 To inform their particular con-
ception, they draw on Eric Charles White:
Kairos regards the present as unprecedented, as a moment of deci-
sion, a moment of crises, and considers it impossible, therefore, to 

242  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
intervene successfully in the course of events merely on the basis 
of past experience. … Rather than understand the present solely in 
terms of the past, one should seek to remain open to an encoun-
ter with the unforeseen spontaneity we commonly describe as the 
“mother of all inventions.”48
According to Sheridan et al., White’s kairos indicates that to foreclose 
students’ writing medium in advance is to simultaneously limit their op-
portunities for kairotic responses. Students will never develop the hexeis 
necessary to interact rhetorically from within these spaces if they are not 
learning strategies for playing and recording within them. As teachers, 
our medium selection is implicitly a centering and valuation of a me-
dium, such as when we ask students to only engage videogames through 
print writing. Building from White, the reason why I believe Bois is so 
useful for teaching transmedia avatar-ing as public rhetoric is because 
he does not just treat recording play as film or as audio narrative (i.e., 
mediums of the past) but instead employs its unique persuasive forms 
(identification, procedural rhetoric) in relationship to the embodied net-
works where these forms can kairotically reach the appropriate audi-
ences (player publics). Players who avatar through viewing or composing 
mods or machinima start to learn the forms of procedural habits that 
function as the realization of the available means of persuasion in the 
present moment.
Breaking Madden: Composing with Broken Tools
My analysis of Breaking Madden thus far has yet to address arguably 
the most salient part of Bois’s composition with respect to teaching pro-
cedural habits, and it is at this point where I see Shipka’s interest in 
physical objects aligning with a hexis of enchantment. As a final note, 
beyond the theme of satire, the Week 1 column also introduced one of 
Bois’s narrative subtexts throughout the column: breaking the videog-
ame. Despite the fact that BEEFTANK should be impossible to tackle, 
the computer simulation unexpectedly causes BEEFTANK to trip him-
self up without any defensive player touching him. The videogame be-
gins to stop functioning properly: “[A]t one point the controller wouldn’t 
stop vibrating because of a hit.”49 Each weekly column down to the final 
column, “The Machine Bleeds to Death,” offers humorous examples of 
Bois’s carpentry-esque frustration with the machine’s aleatory behav-
ior. Over and over again, he offers a confirmation of my observations 
from Chapter 6 about the aleatory agency of code, by observing how the 
machine thwarts his carefully planned ruleset decisions. In a tacit use 
of Bogost’s carpentry, Madden 25 is akin to Heidegger’s broken tool, 
simulating the way in which an object contains a withdrawn reality that 
a player may never fully understand during play.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  243
Breaking Madden importantly illustrates a rhetorical strategy of pro-
cedural defamiliarization, in which a videogame’s persuasive power can 
exceed a persuasive comparison to the designer’s aims and cause a dis-
turbance of simulation denial, resignation, and acceptance altogether. 
Bois creates what the theater critic and playwright Bertoldt Brecht called 
the “Alienation Effect.”50 Brecht worried about the power of cinematic 
realism to create such convincing forms of immersion that individuals 
would respect a given film as a naturalized representation of reality, 
thereby sublimating revolutionary attitudes. While Brecht puts critique 
into the service of rational (leftist) reflection, Bois borrows the same 
Alienation Effect formula to offer a more generalized commentary about 
the agencies of nonhuman actors akin to Bennett’s claim, “I will em-
phasize, even overemphasize, the agentic contributions of nonhuman 
forces (operating in nature, in the human body, and in human artifacts) 
in an attempt to counter the narcissistic reflex of human language and 
thought.”51 The Alienation Effect can function as part of demonstrating 
to students how we are attuned toward or away from eudaimonia in 
videogames and procedural environments in the analogy sense to how 
Cooley reveals GPS-tracking habit formation within the August App or 
Kac directs Internet habits to form environmental hexeis.
Far from unrelated to rhetoric, Burke’s notion of “planned incongru-
ity” confirms that Brecht’s Alienation Effect is a profoundly rhetorical 
activity. Echoing Bennett’s strategy, Burke recommends “[a]ttempting 
to understand motives and purposes by avoiding as much as possible 
the clues handed you ready-made in the texture of language itself.”52 
Rather, “where the accepted linkages have been of an imposing sort, one 
should establish perspective by looking through the reverse end of his 
glass, converting mastodons into microbes, or human beings into vermin 
upon the face of the earth.”53 Indeed, planned incongruity is the aim of 
my attention to the procedural habits of software code as a nonhuman 
agent in Chapter 6. If terms of embodiment have been bracketed from 
videogame rhetoric (i.e., “clues handed you ready-made in the texture of 
language itself”), then discovering non-Cartesian elements to shake up 
these terministic orientations is part of what forms part of the search for 
new knowledge.
Planned incongruity offers writing students a rhetorical strategy for a 
more generalizable alienation effect in videogames, seen through interact-
ing with physical inputs in interface design. For example, artist Lindsay 
Grace’s videogame installation Big Huggin requires players to make well-
timed hugs to a 30-inch teddy bear controller in order to advance in 
the game. The press release describes Big Huggin’s clear rhetorical aim: 
“Instead of firing toy guns at countless enemies or revving the engines of 
countless gas-guzzling virtual cars, why not give a hug?”54 In addition to 
engaging Bois, students can explore an accessible application of planned 
incongruity as public rhetoric practice through Eric Rosenbaum and Jay 

244  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Silver’s Makey Makey kit: “an invention kit for the 21st century.”55 The 
kit comes with either a Makey Makey Classic or Go circuit board, which 
plugs into a laptop or computer via a USB cable. Both circuit board types 
have a directional arrow pad and various buttons. In turn, students can 
connect one end of an alligator clip to the Makey Makey circuit board. 
They touch the “Space” pad or another button on the Makey Makey cir-
cuit board, and it syncs the alligator clip’s metal node to make the laptop 
think that its “Space” key has been touched (Figure 7.3).
The Makey Makey Classic circuit board is perfectly suited for play-
ing videogames, because it has four arrow keys in addition to the space 
button (it can also control the mouse). While many of the processes that 
I describe in this section are not very advanced, the Makey Makey can 
also be combined with Arduino or Scratch to make more forms of soft-
ware and physical interactions.
As much as identification can be useful in thinking about how to 
customize or record play in videogames, students can start to explore 
the Makey Makey to think about the relationship between the content 
on the screen and the forms of habituation that occur through players’ 
physical controllers. For example, if students were working with an FPS 
game like Call of Duty 5, they might start with the observation that 
the neutral and non-content-specific shape of the controller to play any 
Figure 7.3  Personal photograph of a George Mason Writing and Rhetoric PhD 
student, Jacqueline Brown, setting up a Makey Makey asparagus 
piano experiment.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  245
console or PC version of these games can also help players ignore Call 
of Duty 5’s violent content, which Grace’s artistic project implicitly calls 
attention to in foregrounding empathetic forms of interactivity. Using 
a literal gun controller, like the NES Duck Hunt gun controller, would 
be akin to planned “congruity” rather than incongruity. One starting 
place for heuretical invention might lie in asking students to start brain-
storming through planned incongruity about FPS games and violence—
or whatever videogames are under consideration—to arrive at opposite 
or inverse terministic universes. Peace and violence are both hexeis that 
can be cultivated through play. The opposite of killing the Other in an 
FPS game could be unconditional love for the Other.
In fact, I have conducted this precise exercise in a number of differ-
ent teaching settings during my time at George Mason University to 
get students started on the Makey Makey. I have seen students experi-
ment with a variety of videogames and physical objects to think through 
how to use physical inputs to create different rhetorical arguments by 
interfering in users’ normal forms of habituation to play. Some took vi-
sual in-game representations of Lara Croft’s hypersexualized body in 
the Tomb Raider franchise and combined planned incongruity with a 
female Barbie doll dressed as a doctor. The ethical point is similar to the 
goal of carpentry or a hexis of enchantment: Realize that complex actor-­
networks are working on us and, in turn, that ideologies on the screen 
can be reinforced by the unconscious habits and postures that we absorb 
through the invisibility of the interface. These compositional strategies 
began to investigate the gap between algorithm and players’ subjectivity 
that produces and reinforces the misogynistic attitudes of anti-feminist 
issues in the videogame industry, such as #GamerGaters. Echoing Bois, 
these attitudes might be better foregrounded through creating planned 
incongruity or aesthetic distance.
If immersion is what abstracts play habits from analysis, planned in-
congruity can also make students think about the size of the controller 
as a material argument. As an artistic corollary to Breaking Madden, 
consider Mary Flanagan’s [giantJoystick].56 While players seem to be 
cognitively and socially immersed during game play, Flanagan sought 
to highlight the ignored presence of the materiality of the videogame 
game interface by creating a large controller modeled after a classic At-
ari 2600 joystick with a ten-foot joystick and a three-foot red button. 
The controller could be placed in public spaces and required collabo-
rative coordination from multiple players observing a common screen. 
These aspects of planned incongruity are specifically designed to call 
attention to the materiality of the interface—what Hayles in Writing 
Machines also calls a “material metaphor” or a “technotext.”57 I have 
had students suggest using a tiny GI Joe figure, the classic icon of Ameri-
can masculinity, as a physical input to an FPS game, because the figure’s 
small size would require players to constantly look down at it to avoid 

246  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
being poked by the sharp plastic rifle. It is clear through these scenar-
ios that students could ideally function as public rhetors by setting up 
play installations with various Makey Makey inputs around campus, to 
invite collaborative participation and interaction with other students or 
public audiences.
It is not just commercial videogames that can serve as forms of 
carpentry-­like experimentation but also indie or artistic videogames. 
One student project successfully connected these interface design ele-
ments by using the Makey Makey and some basic interface program-
ming elements to examine forms of habituation through play in indie 
designer Toby Fox’s Undertale, a satire of first-generation RPG games 
like The Legend of Zelda for the Nintendo system.58 Players control 
a human child lost in a magical realm under the Earth’s surface (the 
Underground). Players have to explore this underground world, interact 
with NPCs, and solve numerous puzzles (Figure 7.4).
Ben Crane, a student in one of my advanced-level writing classes, used 
the Makey Makey to cause the player to think more deeply about the 
unique way that Undertale asks players to battle monsters.59 In either 
scripted or random encounters, players in Undertale are posed with 
an option: Fight or Spare. Fighting is easiest. A few easy timed button 
presses is all it takes to kill a given monster. Yet, Sparing is actually more 
work and turns every fight into a dialogue puzzle.
Fox plays on this tension by humanizing the monsters and making 
them feel more like real people and, in turn, the player to feel like a 
monster by electing to kill them. This game mechanic reinforces the 
overall procedural argument of the game that there is no monster too 
Figure 7.4  Screenshots from Undertale that illustrate the main game interface 
and the Fight or Mercy game mechanic.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  247
evil that does not make dialogue and kindness a preferable choice to 
killing the Other. Ben’s Makey Makey utilized Scratch and Autohotkey, 
a freeware PC program that enables players to change their keyboard 
inputs even without the Makey Makey hooked up. For example, “K” on 
the keyboard can be reprogrammed through Autohotkey (or Scratch) to 
trigger a three-button complex function like “Ctrl+Alt+Delete,” thereby 
enabling Ben to navigate more complex moments of game play in the 
Fight/Spare box (Figure 7.5).
As physical inputs, he connected a physical heart out of Play-Doh 
to the Mercy button in the game, and he connected a second knife 
Play-Doh object to the Fight sequence (both were set up to “autohit” 
through the Autohotkey program and the Makey Makey). The heart 
button would warm up the more it was pressed (utilizing a runner’s 
handwarmer chemical) and the knife would get colder (utilizing icy-hot 
chemicals). In making these comparisons, Ben was trying to make even 
more explicit the implicit theme of the game, while also more directly 
requiring players to grapple with the physical inputs that shaped their 
own realities.
Conclusion
Far from being inhospitable to writing pedagogy, these material forms 
of planned incongruity fulfill and extend many of its traditional aims 
for print-based texts. In Toward a Composition Made Whole, Shipka 
argues that writing students still learn drafting, audience, rhetorical 
Figure 7.5  Screenshots from Undertale that illustrate the main game interface 
and the Fight or Mercy game mechanic.

248  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
reasoning, and many of our traditional text-based pedagogical goals 
when they compose in other media and physical forms of materiality. 
She argues:
A composition made whole recognizes that whether or not a partic-
ular classroom or group of students are wired, students may still be 
afforded opportunities to consider how they are continually posi-
tioned in ways that require them to read, respond to, align with, and 
negotiate a streaming interplay of words, images, sounds, screens, 
and movements.60
Shipka also challenges the extent to which our fixation on final product 
(i.e., five-paragraph essay; arrangement) ignores the process of inven-
tion, “the complex and highly rigorous decision-making processes the 
student employed while producing this text.”61 Thus, by having students 
work with actual physical and digital forms for actual audiences, Ship-
ka’s material process pedagogy goes against the “laboratory-like” view 
of process criticized by postprocess scholars. In a clear nod to Aristote-
lian hexis, viewing process in terms of rigid or abstract cognitive steps 
(pre-writing, drafting, editing) can work to “obscure actual settings in 
which, and conditions under which, writers typically worked.”62 Simi-
larly, we do not always want to isolate writing from its actual instantia-
tion through the various multimodal and material networks of avatars.
In concluding this chapter, I want to acknowledge that there are un-
doubtedly more interesting and sophisticated ways to pursue planned 
incongruity or carpentry in videogames. Brock and Rieder also engage 
rhetorical carpentry and planned incongruity by hacking an Xbox360’s 
Kinect sensor to visualize how the sensor perceives human bodies much 
in the same way I asked how the code of FreeCiv perceives the videogame. 
Yet, when combined with Bois’s irreverence in Breaking ­Madden toward 
official or sanctioned meaning, these efforts confirm that ­Shipka’s gen-
eral orientation toward material making can be productively combined 
with Sheridan et al.’s multimodal public kairos or larger humanities 
scholarly interests in ideas of “critical making” and “DIY citizenship.” 
As Matt Ratto and Megan Boler argue in the “Introduction” to DIY 
Citizenship: 
…making [is] a ‘critical’ activity, an activity that provides both the 
possibility to intervene substantively in systems of authority and 
power and that offers an important site for reflecting on how such 
power is constituted by infrastructures, institutions, communities, 
and practices.63
Simply “questioning ownership rights to media” by avatar-ing through 
modding or experimenting with materiality can function as part of 

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  249
cultivating a hexis of negotiating different mediums to tease out how to 
make kairotic interventions in emergent publics surrounding videogames 
and procedural habits. Part of learning how to overcome the expressive/
mundane bias can lie in simply learning about how videogames habituated 
us through material input sources and, in turn, recombining them to make 
multimodal kairotic arguments through devices like the Makey Makey.
Notes
	 1	 Jody Shipka, Toward a Composition Made Whole (Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press, 2011).
	 2	 David M. Sheridan, Jim Ridolfo, and Anthony J. Michel. The Available 
Means of Persuasion: Mapping Theory and Pedagogy of Multimodal Public 
Writing (Anderson, SC: Parlor Press, 2015).
	 3	 Jon Bois, Breaking Madden. SB Nation. 2013. Web. www.sbnation.com/
breaking-madden. 25 Aug. 2015.
	 4	 Madden 25 (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Jan. 9, 2013), Videogame.
	 5	 Beth Coleman, Hello Avatar: Rise of the Networked Generation (Massa-
chusetts: MIT Press, 2011).
	 6	 Madden 16 (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 2015), Videogame.
	 7	 Michael Kain. “The Top Ten Bestselling Videogames of 2014,” Forbes, Jan. 19, 
2015, accessed May 15, 2017. www.forbes.com/sites/erikkain/2015/01/19/
the-top-ten-best-selling-video-games-of-2014/.
	 8	 Robin Antonik, John Madden Football (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 
1988), Videogame.
	 9	 Madden 25, Videogame.
	10	 Jon Bois, “[Week 1] Meet CLARENCE BEEFTANK,” Breaking Madden, 
SB Nation, Sept. 5, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.sbnation.com/
nfl/2013/9/5/4691010/breaking-madden-clarence-beeftank-jaguars.
	11	 Ibid.
	12	 Ibid.
	13	 Ibid.
	14	 Ibid.
	15	 John Madden Football 92 (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 1992), 
Videogame.
	16	 Madden NFL 2005 (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Aug. 9, 2004), 
Videogame.
	17	 Madden 12 (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Aug. 30, 2011), Videogame.
	18	 Kevin Moberly and Ryan M. Moeller, “Working at Play: Modding, Rev-
elation, and Transformation in Technical Communication,” in Computer 
Games and Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications 
at the Intersection, ed. Ryan M. Moeller and Stephanie Vie (Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate, 2014), 191.
	19	 Jenny Rice, Distant Publics: Development Rhetoric and the Subject of Crisis 
(Pittsburgh, : University of Pittsburgh Press, 2014), 42.
	20	 Ibid., 48.
	21	 Ibid., 49.
	22	Adam J.  Banks, Race, Rhetoric, and Technology: Searching for Higher 
Ground (New York: Routledge, 2006), xxi.
	23	 Henry Jenkins, “Fan Activism as Participatory Politics: The Case of the Harry 
Potter Fan Alliance,” in DIY Citizenship: Making and Social Media, ed. Matt 
Ratto and Megan Boler (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014), 65–74.

250  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
	24	 Cynthia M. Sheard, “The Public Value of Epideictic Rhetoric,” College English 
58, no. 7 (1996): 766.
	25	See Agnew; Bostdorff and Ferris; Carter; Richards.
	26	 Jenkins, “Fan Activism,” 226.
	27	 See Marc Pepper, “Virtual Gorillas: Machinima in Second Life,” in Writing 
and the Digital Generation: Essays on New Media Rhetoric, ed. Heather 
Urbanski (New York: McFarland, 2010), 174–183.
	28	 Gifferator (Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 2014), accessed May 15, 2017, 
http://giferator.easports.com/create/team.
	29	 MLB 15: The Show (Tokyo, Japan: Sony, 2015), Videogame.
	30	 Skyrim V: The Elder Scrolls (Bethesda Game Studios, Nov. 11, 2011), 
Videogame.
	31	 Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg (“PewDiePie”), YouTube channel, accessed May 
15, 2017, www.youtube.com/user/PewDiePie.
	32	 Sam Gutelle, “95% of Gamers Enhance Their Experience with You-
Tube,” Tubefilter, Jul. 1, 2013, accessed May 15, 2017, www.tubefilter.
com/2013/07/01/gaming-google-study-youtube/.
	33	 Kathleen Blake Yancey, “Using Multiple Technologies to Teach Writing,” 
Education Leadership, 62, no. 2 (2004): 38–40.
	34	Coleman, Hello, 6.
	35	 Gregory Ulmer, “Avatar Emeragency,” Digital Humanities Quarterly 5, 
no. 3 (2012), accessed May 15, 2017, http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/
vol/5/3/000100/000100.html.
	36	 Coleman, Hello, 44.
	37	 Ulmer, “Avatar”.
	38	 Ibid.
	39	 Coleman, Hello, 32.
	40	Jon Bois, “[Week 2] Peyton Manning and his Offensive Line of 
160-pound Twig People,” Breaking Madden, SB Nation, Sept. 11, 2013, 
accessed 
May 
15, 
2017, 
www.sbnation.com/nfl/2013/9/11/4710566/
peyton-manning-madden-giants.
	41	 Ibid.
	42	 Ibid.
	43	 Ibid.
	44	Constance Steinkuehler and Johnson, Barbara Z. “Computational Liter-
acy in Online Games: The Social Life of Mods.” International Journal of 
­Gaming and Computer-Mediating Simulations 1, no. 1 (2009): 53.
	45	 James M. Kinneavy, “Kairos in Classical and Modern Rhetorical Theory,” 
in Rhetoric and Kairos: Essays in History, Theory, and Praxis, ed. Phillip 
Sipiora and James S. Baumlin (New York: SUNY Press, 2012), 60.
	46	Phillip Sipiora, “The Ancient Concept,” in Rhetoric and Kairos: Essays in 
History, Theory, and Praxis, ed. Phillip Sipiora and James S. Baumlin (New 
York: SUNY Press, 2012), 2 quoted in David M. Sheridan, Jim Ridolfo, and 
Anthony J. Michel, The Available Means of Persuasion: Mapping Theory and 
Pedagogy of Multimodal Public Writing (Anderson, SC: Parlor Press, 2015), 5.
	47	 Ibid., 5–12.
	48	 Eric Charles White, Kaironomia: On the Will-to-Invent (New York: Cor-
nell University Press, 1987), 17.
	49	 Bois, “Meet CLARENCE.”
	50	 Bertolt Brecht, “On Chinese Acting,” The Tulane Drama Review 6, no. 1 
(Sept. 1961): 130–136.
	51	 Bennet, Vibrant, xvi.
	52	 Kenneth Burke, Counter-Statement (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1968), 122.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  251
	53	 Ibid., 120.
	54	 Lindsay Grace, “Big Huggin,” Game Art Show, 2013, accessed May 15, 
2017, http://gameartshow.siggraph.org/gas/big-huggin/.
	55	 Makey Makey (Makey Makey LLC, 2012), Reprogrammable Circuit Board, 
accessed May 15, 2017, www.makeymakey.com/.
	56	 Mary Flanagan, [giantJoystick], 2010, accessed May 15, 2017, http://
maryflanagan.com/work/giant-joystick.
	57	 Katherine Hayles, Writing Machines (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2002), 46.
	58	 Toby Fox, Undertale, 2015, Videogame.
	59	 Ben Crane, Makey Makey and Undertale, Personal Project for Steve 
Holmes’s Engl 308 Course (Fairfax, VA: George Mason University, spring 
2016), Makey Makey.
	60	 Shipka, Toward, 21.
	61	 Ibid., 3.
	62	 Ibid., 32.
	63	 Matt Ratto and Megan Boler, “DIY and Activism: New Modes of Civic En-
gagement and Participatory Politics,” in DIY Citizenship: Critical Making 
and Social Media, ed. Matt Ratto and Megan Boler (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2014), 1.
Bibliography
Agnew, Lois. “‘The Day Belongs to the Students’: Expanding Epideictic Civic 
Function.” Rhetoric Review, 27, no. 2 (2008): 147–164.
Alberti, John. “The Game of Facebook and the End(s) of Writing Pedagogy”. In 
Rhetoric/Composition/Play through Video Games, edited by Richard Colby, 
Matthew S.S. Johnson, & Rebekah Shultz Colby, 9–24. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2013.
Alexander, Jonathan. “Gaming, Student Literacies, and the Composition Class-
room: Some Possibilities for Transformation”. College Composition and 
Communication, 61, no. 1 (Sept. 2009): 35–63.
Antonik, Robin. John Madden Football. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 
1988. Videogame.
Banks, Adam J. Race, Rhetoric, and Technology: Searching for Higher Ground. 
New York: Routledge, 2006.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2010.
Bogost, Ian. Cow Clicker. 2010. Videogame. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://
cowclicker.com/.
———. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2007.
Bois, Jon. Breaking Madden. SB Nation, 2013. www.sbnation.com/breaking- 
madden.
———. “[Week 1] Meet CLARENCE BEEFTANK.” Breaking Madden. 
SB Nation. Sept. 5, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.sbnation.com/
nfl/2013/9/5/4691010/breaking-madden-clarence-beeftank-jaguars.
———. “[Week 2] Peyton Manning and his Offensive Line of 160-pound Twig 
People.” Breaking Madden. SB Nation. Sept. 11, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
www.sbnation.com/nfl/2013/9/11/4710566/peyton-manning-madden-giants.
Brecht, Bertolt. “On Chinese Acting.” The Tulane Drama Review, 6, no. 1 
(Sept. 1961): 130–136.

252  Thinking Persuasive Technologies Differently
Burke, Kenneth. Counter-Statement. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1968.
———. A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1950.
Call of Duty 5: World at War. Infinity Ward. Santa Monica, CA: Activision, 
2008.
Coleman, Beth. Hello Avatar: Rise of the Networked Generation. Massachu-
setts: MIT Press, 2011.
Crane, Ben. Makey Makey and Undertale. Personal Project for Steve Holmes’s 
Engl 308 Course. Fairfax, VA: George Mason University, spring 2016. Makey 
Makey.
Flanagan, Mary. [giantJoystick]. 2010. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://mary 
flanagan.com/work/giant-joystick.
Fox, Toby. Undertale. 2015. Videogame.
Gee, James Paul. “Learning by Design: Good Videogames as Learning Machines.” 
E-Learning, 2, no. 1 (2005): 5–16.
Gifferator. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 2014. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://giferator.easports.com/create/team.
Grace, Lindsay. “Big Huggin.” Game Art Show. 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. 
http://gameartshow.siggraph.org/gas/big-huggin/.
Gutelle, Sam. “95% of Gamers Enhance Their Experience with YouTube.” Tube­
filter. Jul. 1, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.tubefilter.com/2013/07/01/
gaming-google-study-youtube/.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson. New York: Harper, 1927.
Hayles, Katherine. Writing Machines. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2002.
Jenkins, Henry. “Fan Activism as Participatory Politics: The Case of the Harry 
Potter Fan Alliance.” In DIY Citizenship: Making and Social Media, edited 
by Matt Ratto and Megan Boler, 65–74. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
John Madden Football 92. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 1992. Videogame.
Johnson, Matthew S.S. “Public Writing in Gaming Spaces”. Computers and 
Composition, 25, no. 3 (2008): 270–283.
Joseph, Barry. “Minecraft and the Future of Learning.” Henry Jenkins.org. 
Apr. 23, 2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://henryjenkins.org/2015/04/­
minecraft-and-the-future-of-transmedia-learning.html
Juul, Jesper. A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Videogames and their Players. 
Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
Kain, Michael. “The Top Ten Bestselling Videogames of 2014.” Forbes. Jan. 19, 
2015. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.forbes.com/sites/erikkain/2015/01/19/
the-top-ten-best-selling-video-games-of-2014/
Kinneavy, James M. “Kairos in Classical and Modern Rhetorical Theory.” 
In Rhetoric and Kairos: Essays in History, Theory, and Praxis, editors by 
­Phillip Sipiora and James S. Baumlin, 58–76. New York: SUNY Press, 2012.
Kjellberg, Felix Arvid Ulf (“PewDiePie”). YouTube channel. Accessed May 15, 
2017. www.youtube.com/user/PewDiePie.
Lanham, Richard A. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the 
Arts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Madden 12. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Aug. 30, 2011. Videogame.
Madden 16. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, 2015. Videogame.
Madden 25. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Jan. 9, 2013. Videogame.

The Materiality of Play as Public Rhetoric Pedagogy  253
Madden NFL 2005. Los Angeles, CA: Electronic Arts, Aug. 9, 2004. Videogame.
Makey Makey. Makey Makey LLC, 2012. Reprogrammable Circuit Board. 
www.makeymakey.com/.
MLB 15: The Show. Tokyo, Japan: Sony, 2015. Videogame.
Moberly, Kevin, and Ryan M. Moeller. “Working at Play: Modding, Revelation, 
and Transformation in Technical Communication.” In Computer Games and 
Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications at the Inter-
section, edited by Ryan M. Moeller and Stephanie Vie, 189–207. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2014.
Pepper, Marc. “Virtual Gorillas: Machinima in Second Life.” In Writing and 
the Digital Generation: Essays on New Media Rhetoric, edited by Heather 
Urbanski, 174–183. New York: McFarland, 2010.
Ratto, Matt, and Megan Boler. “DIY and Activism: New Modes of Civic En-
gagement and Participatory Politics.” In DIY Citizenship: Critical Making 
and Social Media, edited by Matt Ratto & Megan Boler, 1–22. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Rice, Jenny. Distant Publics: Development Rhetoric and the Subject of Crisis. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2014.
Ridolfo Jim, and DeVoss, Danielle Nicole. “Rhetorical Velocity.” Kairos. Jan. 
15, 2009. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/13.2/­
topoi/ridolfo_devoss/velocity.html.
Sheard, Cynthia M. “The Public Value of Epideictic Rhetoric.” College English, 
58, no. 7 (1996): 765–794.
Sheridan, David M., Jim Ridolfo, and Anthony J. Michel. The Available Means 
of Persuasion: Mapping Theory and Pedagogy of Multimodal Public Writing. 
Anderson, SC: Parlor Press, 2013.
Shipka, Jody. Toward a Composition Made Whole. Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press, 2011.
Sipiora, Phillip. “The Ancient Concept.” In Rhetoric and Kairos: Essays in History, 
Theory, and Praxis, edited by Phillip Sipiora and James S. Baumlin, 1–22. New 
York: SUNY Press, 2012.
Skyrim V: The Elder Scrolls. Bethesda Game Studios. Nov. 11, 2011.
Steinkuehler, Constance, and Johnson, Barbara Z. “Computational Literacy in 
Online Games: The Social Life of Mods.” International Journal of Gaming 
and Computer-Mediating Simulations, 1, no. 1 (2009): 53–75.
Tomb Raider: Underworld. Wimbledon, London: Eidos Interactive, 2008. 
Videogame.
Ulmer, Gregory. “Avatar Emergency.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5, no. 3 
(2012). May 15, 2017. http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000100/000100.
html.
White, Eric Charles. Kaironomia: On the Will-to-Invent. New York: Cornell 
University Press, 1987.
Yancey, Kathleen Blake. “Using Multiple Technologies to Teach Writing.” Educa-
tion Leadership, 62, no. 2 (2004): 38–40.

My argument in Procedural Habits has been fairly straightforward. To 
date, our field’s efforts to engage emerging mediums is largely marked 
by a preference for expressive texts and the exclusion of mundane ones. 
Beyond a mere subjective preference, I have sought to demonstrate that 
these exclusions often reflect a preference for certain types of theoretical 
assumptions about rhetoric and writing as well (expressive/mundane, dis-
course, social construction). As a result, rhetoric and composition studies 
continues to have difficulty in addressing the presence of mundane habit-­
shaping design elements or genres that often function rhetorically at lev-
els of nonconscious behavior reinforcement. In turn, my efforts here are 
to recast these related sets of preferences for the expressive by using mun-
dane habit-shaping elements and genres of videogames to reach some 
more fundamental conclusions about habit’s role in rhetoric in general.
In concluding this book, I want to reiterate that my aim in foreground-
ing commercialized videogame genres and mundane habit-shaping ele-
ments is not to suggest that rhetoric and writing scholars should only 
study or privilege these sorts of videogames. By the same token that 
I suggest that expressive texts and videogames are neither better nor 
worse than mundane texts and persuasive technologies, my goal is not 
to invert this bias by claiming that the latter are superior to the for-
mer. What I am in fact claiming throughout Procedural Habits is that 
rhetoric and composition scholars should treat mundane habit-shaping 
design elements and genres of videogames as authentic and unique me-
diums of digital rhetoric. Persuasive technologies may produce desirable 
effects in certain circumstances and not in others, just as a presidential 
speech may move or fail to move some audience members to change their 
hearts and minds. In turn, I have sought to examine some neglected re-
sources for understanding mundane texts as rhetorical actors, including 
Fogg’s persuasive technologies and non-mechanistic approaches to habit 
through the rhetorical tradition (especially Aristotle and Ravaisson), to 
encourage others to explore these inroads further. In doing so, it is my 
belief that understanding the full rhetorical impact of mundane habit-­
shaping elements and genres helps us to rethink entirely rather than in-
vert the expressive/mundane binary.
Conclusion to 
Procedural Habits

Conclusion to Procedural Habits  255
Yet, entertaining this paradigm shift in videogame rhetoric means 
undeniably contending with the extent to which our field continues to 
map on borders between expressive and mundane texts. Some readers 
may still be wondering how pervasive this trend truly is. To recap, I 
established the origins of the expressive/mundane bias within hypertext 
through Johnson-Eilola’s Nostalgic Angels at the beginning of Proce-
dural Habits, and I hope to have demonstrated by now the continuation 
of this bias in how our field examines videogames. However, it is worth 
noting that this bias can also be seen in our fields’ first engagements 
with other emerging mediums as well. In Persuasive Games, ­Bogost 
cites scholars like Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers’s early work 
to define visual rhetoric en route to his own efforts to articulate pro-
cedural rhetoric.1 Hill and Helmers employ an ancient warrant criti-
cized by Derrida in Dissemination that elevates one medium (speech or 
writing as logos) as authentic presence over another (images). For Plato, 
speech has no technological relation and can be a form of unmediated 
self-­presence. Drawing on this implicit warrant, in another essay Hill 
maintains that visual rhetoric is not persuasive but inherently coercive, 
because advertisers do not want us to think or analyze discrete units of 
text but merely be stimulated to purchase—precisely the lack of dialogi-
cal demonstration criticism that Bogost cites against persuasive technol-
ogies.2 J. ­Anthony Blair similarly argues that the visual is non-coercive 
only if we are able to construct an equivalent verbal argument—another 
variation of logocentrism, wherein images are only good if they resem-
ble speech and transparent text.3 In visual rhetoric, as well as hyper-
text and videogames, there remains a basic—perhaps even human or 
­pragmatic—impulse to treat the emergent through the “known.” In re-
sponse to this ongoing trend, I hope that Procedural Habits serves an 
analogous function to Johnson-Eilola’s work on hypertext in reminding 
rhetoric and composition scholars to use emergent mediums as an invi-
tation to expand and interrogate our working assumptions about what 
rhetoric is and, in turn, what types of texts in the world surrounding an 
emergent medium are worth working on.
As my invocation of material and nonhuman agency frameworks (es-
pecially from Latour’s ANT) testify, the key to rethinking without in-
verting this expressive/mundane bias is to avoid the knee-jerk hostility 
to any digital medium as inherently “coercive” and rather to examine 
it with the empiricist’s eye for tracing the actual dispositions that mun-
dane habit-shaping elements produce through complex combinations 
of human and nonhuman agencies. As I was finishing my revisions of 
­Procedural Habits, I was reminded of this need to trace actual networks 
when the free-to-play augmented reality game (ARG) for mobile me-
dia Pokemon GO was released in July 2016.4 While geocaching activ-
ities and games through GPS capabilities have been around for quite 
some time, Pokemon GO was many casual gamers’ first introduction to 

256  Conclusion to Procedural Habits
using a mobile device’s GPS and camera lens in physical spaces to play a 
game, by hunting for Pokemon to capture, battle, and train. Pokemon, 
of course, is a well-known Japanese videogame initially released for 
the handheld Nintendo Gameboy platform. The videogame eventually 
gained enough global popularity to spawn an entire media empire with 
television shows in the United States.
Amazingly, Pokemon GO managed to draw in a large number of 
players who were not even interested in the original videogame or fan 
culture. The ARG went viral almost overnight. Some estimates put the 
total number of downloads at 75 million for the first month alone.5 My 
Facebook and Twitter feeds were flooded for a few straight weeks with 
stories about coffee shops around the United States banning Pokemon 
GO players, complaints about big data and corporate surveillance in 
free-to-play games, clever thieves using players’ in-game GPS beacons 
to rob them at gunpoint, anxieties from male African-American play-
ers about having to wander around alone in new and mostly Cauca-
sian spaces, millennial bashing by older non-gaming audiences, positive 
stories about meeting up with random strangers, and countless others 
public areas of concern.
The reason that I find myself thinking about Pokemon GO and La-
tour at the close of Procedural Habits is because of a social media post 
made by a friend at some point toward the end of July. On July 9, the 
social media account @CommonWhiteGirl posted a meme that had 
countless different iterations online: “#PokemonGO has done more 
to combat childhood obesity in 24 hours than Michelle Obama has in 
the past 8 years.”6 This (largely ethnocentric) social media account in-
tended this post as a criticism of First Lady Michelle Obama’s (in the 
author’s opinion) lack of success in her efforts to work on children’s 
health and exercise levels in her eight-year “Let’s Move” initiative. Yet, 
after reading countless posts in social media about individuals walking 
three miles through cemeteries in search of rare Pokemon, I wondered if 
this critical meme and countless other similar online posts did not have 
a point? Isn’t it entirely too easy for many of us to be cynical about yet 
another free-to-play social media game? Is it not possible that Pokemon 
GO, a free gamified for-profit app, managed to realize a potential kai-
rotic method—what Fogg would call a suggestion technology—to start 
to cultivate some new habits of walking and exploring through the 
widespread availability of mobile media phones and GPS tracking? Of 
course, Pokemon GO will likely wane in popularity as its novelty wears 
off and, in turn, as new ARGs take its place. We can also pick apart its 
big data surveillance problems as well as other issues, such as the poten-
tial of procedural racism in accusations that there are fewer Pokestops 
for players to train Pokemon in largely African-American neighbor-
hoods than in largely white neighborhoods (and, of course, there are 
ableist norms to critique, too). However, who knows what Pokemon 

Conclusion to Procedural Habits  257
GO’s longer lasting contributions might be on particular players’ dispo-
sitions or even the collective forms of habituation of players around the 
world? Perhaps some non-gamers will shift to becoming gamers because 
of Pokemon GO. Perhaps traditional gamers (like myself), who tend to 
sit around and stare at computer screens a lot when we play, will start to 
become drawn toward geocaching or other more mobile exercise games 
as a result of playing Pokemon GO. Would Fitbit be more effective if 
it incorporated some better interactive game mechanics like Pokemon 
GO’s? What if traditional console-based or PC videogames started to 
incorporate ARG components as part of their overall narrative game 
mechanics?
For me, procedural habits reminds rhetoric and composition scholars 
to understand habit production in rhetorical situations like Pokemon 
GO beyond the specter of Skinner-esque determinism or by imposing 
some sort of epideictic ideal standard of what a serious or authentic 
videogame should be. My point is simply that until we contend with the 
extent to which we continue to imagine traditional texts as our province, 
while lumping mundane texts (interface design, code, game mechanics, 
commercial elements) into other disciplinary domains, we may risk not 
being able to fully contend with what is arguably becoming the most 
important rhetorical medium of our time and the near future. As a case 
in point, a 2015 study published in the Journal of Adolescent Culture 
reports that 97% of American adolescents play videogames, and indi-
viduals between the ages of eight and eighteen play for an average of 
roughly thirteen hours each week.7
In closing, it is also important to reiterate that the shift in focus that 
my book proposes does not mean that we abandon traditional texts or 
forms of writing but rather seek to connect their production to a more 
accurate picture about how all forms of rhetoric work through habits. 
For Latour, it is not just the videogame or the persuasive technology that 
it is important, but it is also the entire network of texts, materials, game 
labs, beta testers, marketers, and countless other actors who work to 
create a finished product that an end-user incorporates in some fashion 
as part of his or her daily habitus. Furthermore, while my comments 
through this book at times may seem critical when discussing previ-
ous work in rhetoric and composition studies, I want to affirm that my 
thoughts here genuinely are not written in that spirit. In fact, it is only 
because of the excellent work that others in the field have done, notably 
McAllister’s pioneering conclusions in Game Work and Paul’s efforts 
in Wordplay, to start to theorize rhetoric through cultural studies and 
social-­epistemic forms of rhetoric that have enabled me to build upon 
these frameworks. It is my belief, following Latour and Bennett respec-
tively, that the politics of videogames is best understood through rhetor-
ical frameworks grounded in individuals’ dispositional natures and by 
an accurate assessment of the full range of political relations and affects 

258  Conclusion to Procedural Habits
that videogames produce with respect to the realization of eudaimonic 
ends. In the end, as my comparison to Aristotle’s hexis throughout this 
book makes clear, my arguments here do not actually require us to do 
anything new. Instead, we need to better understand how habits have 
always been at the center of the dispositional (second) natures of classi-
cal rhetoric and, in turn, seek to understand how emerging mediums are 
shaping them differently.
It is on this final point where it is possible to gesture toward a more im-
portant role for habit (hexis) in rhetoric beyond some of the themes that 
I have focused on so far. For example, we can revisit Bank’s complaint 
(Chapter 7) regarding racism and technological access through the up-
grade paths in the Madden franchise. Here, a productive analogy might 
be drawn to Pokemon GO with regard to the ways in which bodies en-
gage mobile media controllers, by engaging the work of disability rheto-
ric scholars like Shannon Walter8 or Jay Timothy Dolmage.9 The released 
version of Pokemon GO presupposed an able-bodied player with a full 
range of manual dexterity and vision capacity. Yet, the nonprofit organi-
zation AbleGamer, which lobbies game designers like ­Niantic Labs (the 
creators of Pokemon GO) to be more inclusive of disabled users, ob-
served that players with muscular dystrophy, cerebral palsy, or even low 
vision would find Pokemon GO almost unplayable. In these instances, 
changing the game interface to help accommodate disabled users is ac-
tually quite simple. According to AbleGamer’s Includification guide for 
game developers, adding features such as remote travel, voice-enabled 
in-game commands, or even a one-button Pokemon-catching option 
would greatly improve accessibility at minimal cost.10 Here, I will revisit 
again a quote from Dolmage that I mentioned in the “Introduction” 
to Procedural Habits: If we do not attend to the ways in which norms 
of ableism maintain dispositional exclusions, then “we have erected a 
rhetorical tradition that . . . valorizes the split between the mental and 
the physical”11 and ignore the multiple ways in which “[t]he body is 
­rhetorical—it communicates and thinks.”12 Thinking of digital rhetoric 
in terms of habituation means simultaneously accounting for which us-
ers are and are not allowed to flourish within certain media ecologies.
Beyond ethical considerations, a related implication of the central-
ity of habit lies in highlighting the need for future scholarly efforts to 
squarely interrogate and analyze habit’s role in any rhetorical medium. 
Dispositions will form through repetition—for virtue and for vice—­
regardless of the medium involved, even as we necessarily acknowledge 
each new medium will engender the formation of different habits in dif-
ferent players.iii Another productive analogy for my claim here can be 
found in Brooke’s argument that there is a “mutually transformative” 
relationship between new media technologies and rhetoric.13 In Lingua 
Fracta, Brooke reminds us that the traditional canons of rhetoric can 
continue to offer contemporary digital rhetoric scholars some important 
ways through which we can understand the rhetoric of new media. At 

Conclusion to Procedural Habits  259
the same time, the latter’s uniqueness from other forms of oral and print-
based mediums also push us to rethink how we understand the canons 
as well. By analogy, by placing habit in tension with rhetoric, which, 
arguably, remains largely centered on human actors achieving instru-
mental goals within socially or discursively structured digital and net-
worked spaces, procedural habits also offers us a means through which 
to fundamentally rethink what it is we mean by rhetoric and rhetorical 
agency in the first place. First and foremost, procedural habits requires 
us to realize that regardless of what we attribute to the effectiveness of 
power of a given human act of instrumental or rhetorical creativity, it 
is dispositions that condition the rhetor’s ability to act and speak and, 
in turn, influence how the audience will respond over time to rhetorical 
inputs. Habit will always remain Aristotle’s “second nature,” which is 
situated firmly at the permeable borders where it is impossible to draw 
clear lines between human and nonhuman, nature and culture, or mind 
and body. As more and more cultural and political anxieties emerge in 
the present over government or corporate algorithmic behavior tracking 
and behavioral nudging, it is worthwhile for rhetoricians to remember 
that even the desire to critique certain forms of habit production does 
not mean that we can eliminate or ignore habit’s role in rhetoric.
Acknowledging habit’s centrality to rhetoric, of course, does not offer 
us any simple answers for how to produce or theorize better interven-
tions in contemporary rhetorical practices. Habit (like writing itself) is a 
pharmakon: a cure (presence) and poison (absence). Thus, habit can only 
offer up a more accurate and, in many instances, complex picture of how 
rhetoric actually functions in the world. For example, within scholarship 
on rhetorical materialism and ecology, many of us tend to highlight how 
rhetoric circulates and flows through networks or in physical spaces. We 
seek to replace static (Bitzerian) models of the rhetorical situation with 
dynamic “events,” following Jenny Edbauer’s lead. By extension, ­habits 
are undeniably the results of the circulation of rhetoric across time, 
space, and material instantiations. However, habit also signals an em-
bodied state productively characterized by affect theorist Sarah Ahmed’s 
focus on affective “blockage”: “Things might appear fluid if you are go-
ing the way things are flowing,” but “[w]hen you are not going that way, 
you experience a flow as solidity.”14 While Ahmed’s thoughts clearly ap-
ply to instances such as Pokemon GO and disabled bodies, I also believe 
that Ahmed’s thinking offers yet another nuanced implication for habit. 
­Affective blockage is not only the space where certain bodies are pre-
vented from playing Pokemon GO or Madden (in the case of racialized 
bodies) but also includes the stopping points where rhetorical circula-
tions run into embodied or material recalcitrance that has been produced 
through multiple repeated habituations. One can only think of contem-
porary examples such as #altfact and #fakenews in which certain voters’ 
affect and identification with the current Trump presidential adminis-
tration may continue to function as a powerful affective blockage, to the 

260  Conclusion to Procedural Habits
point where any circulated logical, empirical, or rhetorical textual proof 
is simply ineffective as a means to change these hearts and minds. Fun-
damentally, habit confirms that successfully employing and understand-
ing rhetoric in the present era means paying at least as much attention 
to the sorts of networks that support the formation of these dispositions 
(metanoia) as it does to creating singular persuasive texts (kairos).
Thus, rather than continuing to seek refuge in our traditional rhetor-
ical comfort zones of language, I would like to entertain the suggestion 
(following Peter Sloterdjik) that as a field we need to increasingly consider 
that it is not always better political speeches, persuasive videogames, or 
enlightened critique that the present moment requires. Perhaps alongside 
our traditional doctoral education courses in Public Rhetoric, Cultural 
Rhetorics, Classical Rhetoric, and Contemporary Composition Theory, 
we now have need to start offering seminars in big data and behavioral 
science as a form of rhetorica docens (study) and rhetorica utens (prac-
tice). For better or for worse, our contemporary rhetors are BJ Fogg, fake-
news twitterbots, Zenga, and social media algorithms that structure how 
we encounter (or fail to encounter, in the case of filter bubbles) rhetorical 
content. In any case, hexis offers us hope: The ethical response to habit 
production in videogames or other mediums is not the presence or absence 
of an attempt to shape habits. Rather, it is the resultant disposition(s) by 
which any medium encourages individuals to interact with one another 
with patience, good temper, and justice—to name just a few of Aristotle’s 
ancient hexeis. Nonhuman actors like algorithms are undoubtedly play-
ing a more explicit role in shaping rhetorical selves as well as composing 
rhetorical activities. However, much in the same way that hypertext as 
a medium foregrounded Roland Barthes’s poststructuralist “birth of the 
reader” thinking, procedural habits points to an analogous relationship 
to algorithmic behavior-shaping efforts. Thus, more pressing to my mind 
lies the need to revisit and update the question of eudaimonia, which has 
always involved this exposure and openness to our constitution by the 
relations of the objects in the world around us. As Scot Barnett puts it in 
his analysis of the role of nonhuman things in rhetoric, “The good life … 
is nothing new for ethical theory. The challenge we face today is deciding 
whether an ethics of things … directs us (back) to something like the good 
life.”15 Echoing Barnett’s thinking, happiness in the present is very much 
like the
/* No one is born happy. */*happy = 0;}
citizen_base_mood function from FreeCiv. Rather than endlessly re-
hearsing the search for that perfect kairotic means of securing the nec-
essary rational or cognitive means of shifting that happy = 0 to happy = 
1, habit instead requires us to reconfigure what flourishing and thriving 
mean in the gamified or non-gamified spaces of play that countless mil-
lions around the world will only continue to participate in.

Conclusion to Procedural Habits  261
Notes
	 1	 Marguerite Helmers and Charles A. Hill, “Introduction,” in Defining Vi-
sual Rhetorics, ed. Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers (Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004), 1–24.
	 2	 Charles A. Hill, “The Psychology of Rhetorical Images,” in Defining Visual 
Rhetorics, ed. Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers (Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004), 25–40.
	 3	 J. Anthony Blair, “The Rhetoric of Visual Arguments,” in Defining Visual 
Rhetorics, ed. Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers (Mahwah, NJ: 
­Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004), 25.
	 4	 Pokemon GO (San Francisco, CA: Niniac, Jul 6, 2016), Videogame (mobile).
	 5	 Darrell Etherington, “Pokemon Go Estimated At Over 75M Downloads 
Worldwide,” Tech\Crunch, Jul. 25, 2016, accessed May 15, 2017, https://
techcrunch.com/2016/07/25/pokemon-go-75m-downloads/.
	 6	 @CommonWhiteGirl, “#PokemonGo has….past eight years,” Twitter, Jul. 9, 
2016, accessed May 15, 2017, https://twitter.com/commonwhitegiri/status/ 
751480393828802560.
	 7	 “Study Examines Video Game Play Among Adolescents,” ScienceDaily,  
July 4, 2007, accessed May 15, 2017, www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/ 
07/070702161141.htm.
	 8	 Shannon Walters, Rhetorical Touch: Disability, Identification, Haptics 
(Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2014).
	 9	 Jay Timothy Dolmage, Diability Rhetorics (New York: Syracuse University 
Press, 2013).
	10	 Julia Alexander, “Pokemon Go Players with Disabilities Want Better Accessibility  
Options,” Polygon, July 18, 2016, accessed May 15, 2017, www.polygon. 
com/2016/7/18/12214664/pokemon-go-players-with-physical-disabilities- 
want-better.
	11	 Dolmage, Disability, 70.
	12	 Ibid., 289.
	13	 Collin Gifford Brooke, Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media 
(New York: Hampton, 2009), 7.
	14	 Sara Ahmed, On Being Included: Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012), 186–187.
	15	 Scot Barnett, Rhetorical Realism: Rhetoric, Ethics, and the Ontologies of 
Things (New York: Routledge, 2016), 214.
Bibliography
Alexander, Julia. “Pokemon Go Players with Disabilities Want Better Accessibility  
Options.” Polygon. July 18, 2016. Accessed May 15, 2017. www.polygon. 
com/2016/7/18/12214664/pokemon-go-players-with-physical-disabilities- 
want-better.
Ahmed, Sara. On Being Included: Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012.
Barnett, Scot. Rhetorical Realism: Rhetoric, Ethics, and the Ontologies of 
Things. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Bogost, Ian. Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT, 2007.
Blair, J. Anthony. “The Rhetoric of Visual Arguments.” In Defining Visual 
Rhetorics, edited by Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers, 41–62. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004.

262  Conclusion to Procedural Habits
Brooke, Collin Gifford. Lingua Fracta: Toward a Rhetoric of New Media. 
New York: Hampton, 2009.
@CommonWhiteGirl. “#PokemonGo has….past eight years.” Twitter. Jul. 9, 
2016. https://twitter.com/commonwhitegiri/status/751480393828802560.
Dolmage, Jay Timothy. Disability Rhetoric. Syracuse, NY: Syracus University 
Press, 2014.
Etherington, Darrell. “Pokemon Go Estimated At Over 75M Downloads 
Worldwide.” Tech\Crunch. Jul. 25, 2016. Accessed May 15, 2017. https://
techcrunch.com/2016/07/25/pokemon-go-75m-downloads/.
Helmers, Marguerite, and Charles A. Hill. “Introduction.” In Defining Visual 
Rhetorics, edited by Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers, 1–24. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004.
Hill, Charles A. “The Psychology of Rhetorical Images.” In Defining Visual 
Rhetorics, edited by Charles A. Hill and Marguerite Helmers, 25–40. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004.
Pokemon GO. San Francisco, CA: Niniac, Jul 6, 2016. Videogame (mobile).
“Study Examines Video Game Play Among Adolescents.” ScienceDaily. July 4, 2007. 
Accessed May 15, 2017. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/07/070702161141.
htm.
Walters, Shannon. Rhetorical Touch: Disability, Identification, Haptics. Co-
lumbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2014.

Index
AbleGamer 258
actor-network theory 16, 20, 35, 51, 
138, 151–3, 158
actors in actor-network theory 151–2
affect: creativity and 121–2; habits 
help to cope with heightened forms 
of 121; by space/place 101, 102; 
structuring procedural habits 120–1
affective design 6; in Destiny 114–19; 
in first-person shooter videogames 
111–29; memory in 124–6; 
producing habits of consumption 
123–4; producing procedural habits 
119–24
affect theory 120–1
affordances 154; gamified persuasive 
technologies (GPTs) and 154–8
agency, nonhuman 85, 243
Ahmed, Sarah 259
Airport Security 43
Alberti, John 1, 169
Alcorn, Marshall 85–6
Alexander, Jonathan 2, 139
algorithmic regulation 137, 145–6, 150
alienated labor 187
Alienation Effect 243
alien phenomenology 219, 222
allegorithms 148, 204
Amazon 147
Amazon.com book prompt feature 37
ambient networked presence of 
player 239
ambient rhetoric 65
Ambient Rhetoric (Rickert) 79
The Ambiguity of Play (Sutton-Smith) 
42, 105
American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP) 105
amplification in videogames 101, 113, 
116–18, 127
Anable, Aubrey 5
answerability 214
Answer for Earth 188
Anthropy, Anna 6, 87
anticipatory readiness 101, 123
AppleHealth 147
a priori 50
Aquinas, Thomas 74
Aristotle 14, 19, 64–75, 83, 186–7, 
200, 213, 223, 258
Ash, James 6, 100, 113, 117–18, 
120–5, 128–9
assemblage 53, 200–1, 210
Atlas Shrugged 106
augmented reality game 255–6
Automated Targeted Screening (ATS) 
program 144
autonomous habits of nonhuman 
actors 201–23
avatars, participatory 238–42
Baerg, Andrew 143
Banks, Adam 236
Bannon, Bryan E. 222
barely games 137
Barnett, Scot 260
Barter 35, 45–6, 85, 156
Barthes, Roland 260
Bartkey, Sandra Lee 147
Bay, Michael 124
Bazerman, Charles 205
BEEFTANK 234–5
behavioral reinforcement 111, 119, 
136; by videogames 38–41
behavioral rhetorics 41
behavior change: as form of rhetoric 
33–4; in gamified persuasive 
technologies (GPTs) 141, 144; 
mundane interface design elements 
and 33; through interface design 37

264  Index
behaviorism 36
Bennett, Jane 16, 35, 52, 53, 85, 123, 
128, 158, 200–1, 203, 210, 212–14
Bergson, Henri 14, 19, 102, 128
Berlant, Lauren 101
Berlin, James 48, 49
Biesecker, Barbara A. 142
Big Huggin 243
biopolitical capitalism and 
gamification 142–8
bio-power 137, 138, 142–3; see also 
power
BioShock 106–7, 110
8-Bit Philosophy 107
BlackPath Behavior 38
Blair, J. Anthony 255
Blink (Gladwell) 122
Blow, Jon 173
BlueDot Behavior 37–8
Bodily Arts (Hawhee) 76
body: affects shaping body’s 
response to videogames 120–1; 
being structured by spaces and 
environments 76, 78, 101; effect of 
first person shooter videogames 125
body studies 76
Bogost, Ian 1, 8, 34, 46, 66–7, 
87, 137, 140, 142, 171, 173–4, 
200, 205, 219, 255; criticism of 
B. J. Fogg 43–4, 105–6; criticism of 
Cow Clicker 181–5
Bois, Jon 21, 231–42
Boler, Megan 248
Bourdieu, Pierre 5, 84, 152
Bourgenon, Jeroen 107–8
brag clips 238
Breaking Madden 21, 231–47
Brecht, Bertoldt 243
Breton, Andre 185
Brock, Kevin 207, 248
Brooke, Collin Gifford 10, 126, 127, 
159, 205, 258
Brown, James J., Jr. 21, 159, 202, 
214, 222
Brummett, Barry 8, 47
Bryant, Levi 87–8, 222
Burke, Kenneth 8, 41, 42, 107–8, 
210, 243
Burkean rhetoric 100, 106–8
Byrne, Sahara 155
Call, Joshua 104, 108
Call of Duty 100, 103
Call of Duty 3, 106
Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare 118
Call of Duty 5, 6, 114, 244–5
Callon, Michel 51
Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs 41
Candy Crush Saga 5, 20, 168, 174–5
capitalism: blurring lines between 
work and play 125–6; capitalist 
commodification strategy 122, 123; 
producing gamification 142–3
capitalist memory-altering 
strategy 125
capitalist neoliberalism 102
captology 36
Carlisle, Claire 11–12, 65, 210
Carnegie, Teena A.M. 207
carpentry 221–22, 229, 231–2, 
242, 245
Cartesian-Kantian split between active 
minds and passive objects 51
Cassell, Justine 108
casual games 167, 172
Casual Games (Juul) 180
Changing Behaviors: The Rise of the 
Psychological State 145
Chaput, Catherine 142
Chariti 188
choice architectures 145
Chore Wars 136
Chun, Wendy 84, 202–3, 206–9
Civilization II 203–4
Clark, Andy 9, 122
classical conditioning 36
clicker games 168, 171, 178–84, 
229–30
code 202–23; in assemblage of play 
215–21; being rhetoric 205–6; 
contributing to procedural habits 
203–23; differentiated from the 
interface screen 206; as logos 202, 
206, 208; as nonhuman actor 
215–21; as part of materialist 
assemblages 203; procedural habits 
of 209–15
coercive monetization techniques 5, 
20, 170, 175
cogito 12–13, 157
cognitive habits 70
Colby, Rebekah Shultz 1, 6
Colby, Richard 1
Coleman, Beth 231, 239
computer-specific techne 37
Connected Franchise mode 233
Consalvo, Mia 48
Consigny, Scott 44

Index  265
content and habit formation 244–5
core mechanism of videogames 109
Corts, Thomas 67
Coulton, Paul 45
Counter-Strike: Global Operations 
(GO) 100, 103, 110–11, 121, 125
Counter-Strike franchise 100
Cow Clicker 20, 200, 229–30; 
criticized by Ian Bogost 181–4; as a 
failure as satire videogame 171; as 
heuretic method 184–7
craftsman 65–6, 82, 170, 178
Crane, Ben 232, 246–7
creativity and affect 121–2
critical theory 149
critique: inability to capture how 
rhetorical reality is composed 84–5; 
limitations of 148–50; not always 
being persuasive 85
Crogan, Patrick 126
cross-platform avataring 231
Crowley, Sharon 46
cultural-activity theory 52
cultural spaces where games are 
played 146
cyberethos 68
cynical reasoning 85
The Daily Show 237
Darwin, Charles 210
Dataclysm (Rudder) 147
Davies, Russell 137
Davies, William 147
de Certeau, Michel 83
Deconstructulator (Fry) 222, 229
Deleuze, Gilles 52, 53, 120, 143, 201, 
211–12
Delta 136
Democritus 52
Destiny 6, 101, 103, 125, 127–8; 
affective design in 114–19
Dewey, John 153
deWinter, Jennifer 1, 3
dietary habits 155–8
differentiation of emotion and 
affect 120
Diner Dash 5
disenchantment 213
Distant Publics (Rice) 236
Dolmage, Jay Timothy 14, 258
Donald, Merlin 122
Doom 99, 103, 109, 110
Dota 2, 100, 168
double-law of habit 77, 121
Dream World 174
Dreyfus, Hubert 150
dualism 49
Ducan, Aaron 108
Dys4ia 6, 7
Easen, Adrienne 3
eating healthy game 155
echein 69
ecology of practice 54, 159
Economics of Attention (Lanham) 119
Edbauer, Jenny 51, 259
education use of game semiotics 139
Elbow, Peter 13
embodied captivation 113
embodied contexts of use and 
reception of meaning 120–1
embodied habits 70, 108
embodied knowledge 72
embodied repetition 82
embodied stimulation in first person 
shooter videogames 125
embodiment 8; created by videogames 
49–50; as products of environments 
78, 88, 101
emotional attachment to pet 
encouraging habit change 155–6
Empedocles 70
employee productivity through 
gamification 140
enchantment 201–3, 207, 213
enframing 185, 200, 222
Enron FirstEnergy 85
entrepreneurship of the self 143
environment: producing habits 78, 88, 
101; structuring bodies 76; used to 
structure writing 52
Epicurus 52
epideictic rhetoric 237–42
epistemic rhetoric 47–8, 50; in first 
person shooter videogames 102–11
ethea 67
ethical action resulting from a habit 
69–70
ethical program 159
Ethical Programs (Brown) 21, 
202, 214
ethical responsibility 214
ethics 186–7
ethopoeia 67
ethos 19, 65, 177; as ongoing form 
of character formation 66; as 
rhetorical habituation 66–71
êthos 67

266  Index
eudaimonia 70, 75, 83, 171, 186–90, 
200, 222–3, 243, 260; gamification 
and 190–2
eudaimonic hexis 172, 191–2
Evans, Michael A. 66
Evenus 69
expressive/mundane bias on 
scholarship on videogames 3, 6, 9, 
18, 20, 44, 64, 137
expressive theoretical preferences 8
externalize memory functions 9–10
EyeWire 190–1
Eyman, Douglas A. 33
Facebook 168
facts not changing people’s beliefs 42
Families First 105
fan fiction 237
Far Cry 103
Farias, Ignacio 51
Farman, Jason 120
Farmville 170, 172, 183
Farmville 2, 168, 172, 174
Featherstone, Brigid 101
feedback loop activities 36–7
Felski, Rita 84, 138, 148–54
femininity being docile to 
patriarchy 147
Final Fantasy series 48
first-person shooters 19
first person shooter videogames: 
affective design in 111–29; defining 
103–5; diminishing emphasis 
on narrative 110–11; embodied 
stimulation in 125; habit and 105; 
masculinity in 108; persuasion in 
107–8; positive reinforcement in 
113–14, 117; producing habits 
108–11, 119–24; rhetoric of 
105–11; traditional texts in 102–11
Fitbit 5, 142
Flanagan, Mary 245
Fleckenstein, Kristie S. 68
Fogg, B.J. 18–19, 33–42, 53–4, 72, 75, 
119, 141, 154–5; being criticized by 
Bogost 43–4
Fogg Behavior Grid 37, 145
Fogg Behavior Model 37
Foggian design elements 39–41, 75, 
101, 110–11, 116, 119; code of 
videogames 202; in game persuasive 
technologies (GPTs) 137–8, 141, 
144–5, 148, 155–6; in social media 
games 172–6
FoldIt 158
Foucault, Michel 143, 150–1
Foursquare 136
Fox, Toby 246
FPS see first person shooter 
videogames
Frasca, Gonzalo 43
FreeCiv 20, 215–21
FreeCiv 2.0, 203–4
Freekibbles 188
FreePoverty 188
FreeRice 187–8
Freerice.com 171
free-to-play social media games 4, 6, 
8, 34, 167–93
Frequent flyer rewards program 136
From Barbie to Mortal Kombat 108
Fry, Ben 222, 229
Galloway, Alexander R. 73, 143, 202, 
206, 208
Game Design Conference (GDC) 
170, 172
gameful design 191
gamer author 2, 178
Gamer Theory 146
GameSalad 230
Games of Thrones: Ascent 170, 
178–80
gamespace 146–7
gamework 8, 47–8
gamification 2, 7, 136–60; as bio-
political object 142–8; changing 
habits 156–7; definition 140; as 
eudaimonic practice 190–2; as 
object of bio-power 137, 138; as a 
rhetorical actor 159
gamified habit-shaping apps 5, 
19–20, 136
gamified persuasive technologies 
(GPTs) 136–60; affordances and 
154–8; Foggian design elements in 
137–8, 141, 144–5, 148, 155–6; 
as potential source of rhetorical 
knowledge 153; procedural habits 
formed by 137, 154–8; as a 
rhetorical actor 159
Gaming Lives (Selfe and Hawisher) 1
Gay, Geri 155
Gee, James Paul 2, 100, 139
geocaching games 255–6
[giant]Joystick 245
Gibson, James J. 154
Gladwell, Malcolm 122
Go Fucking Do It 140, 192
gold farming 73, 83

Index  267
Golumbia, David 80, 84, 100, 109–11
Gorgias (Plato) 13, 44
governmentality 143
Grace, Lindsay 243
grammar of gamework 48
Grand Theft Auto-San Andreas 105–6
A Greek-English Lexicon (Liddell and 
Scott) 67
Greene, Ronald Walter 142
Gregersen, Claus Leth 215
Gries, Laurie 201
Griffin, Daniel 1
Grossberg, Lawrence L. 126
Grosz, Elizabeth 15, 53, 211
Guattari, Felix 52, 120, 211
Guns, Grenades and Grunts 
(Voorhees, Call, and Whitlock) 108
Gut Feminism (Wilsons) 78
gymnasidion 16
habit-knowledge 148–58
habit memory 19, 102, 125; 
neoliberalism and 128
HabitRPG 5, 140–1, 144
habits 1, 201; being changed by 
gamification 156–7; being shaped 
by videogames 16; definition 11–12; 
Deleuze’s conception of 211–12; 
enable both virtue and vice 83; in 
first person shooter videogames 
105, 108–11; formation and 
content on screen 244–5; formation 
in rhetoric 13, 17–18; forming 
mechanisms in social media games 
5–6; mechanistic 11–14, 42, 50; 
memory and 127; modulating 
heightened forms of affect 
121; negative view of 13; non-
mechanistic 14–18, 64–5, 122, 128; 
not influencing thinking 13; part of 
digital rhetoric 19; physiology and 
78–9; as a priori 35; procedural 
64–6; produced by interface design 
3–4; produced in first person 
shooter videogames 119–24; 
production of by habit-shaping 
design element 120; regularities of 
behavior produces creativity 77–8; 
role in rhetorical medium 258–60; 
shaped by human and nonhuman 
agencies 154; as unreflective 
spontaneity 77–8
habit-shaping apps 141–2, 191
habit-shaping design element 33, 
99, 120
habit-shaping mechanism 65; of 
free-to-play social media games 34; 
procedural habits not dependent on 
71–5
habitus 5, 84, 152, 188, 257
Haier, Richard J. 9
Half-Life 2, 103
Halo 2, 112–13
Halo 3, 112–13
happiness 222–3; individual 171
Hariman, Robert 74
Harry Potter Alliance 237
Hawhee, Debra 16, 46, 71, 76, 210
Hawisher, Gail E. 1
Hawk, Byron 82, 149, 209
Hayles, Katherine 127
Haynes, Cynthia 72, 239
Hayward, Gordon 173
Hecker, Chris 173
Helmers, Marguerite 255
hermeneutics of suspicion 149–50
Hernandez, Patricia 177
heuretic models for procedural habits 
187–92
heuretics 87, 171, 184–7
heuretic strategy of invention 20
hexis 14, 15, 19, 64–5, 78, 128, 158, 
178, 192, 213, 232, 258, 260; being 
shaped by WoW 73–5; of care 189; 
of charity 187–8; of enchantment 
(see hexis of enchantment); 
eudaimonic 172, 191–2; second 
nature and 68–71; shifting points 
of critical emphasis for videogame 
rhetoric 72
hexis of enchantment 201–3, 210, 
214, 215, 231, 242, 245
hexis of resiliency 172
Hey Baby 108
hidden persuaders 145
Hill, Charles A. 255
A History of Habit (Sparrow and 
Hutchinson) 15
HIV Roulette 34, 38
Hodgson, Justin 139
Holmevik, Jan Rune 72, 184, 241
The House of the Black Goat 
170, 179
Huizinga, Johan 239
Humphreys, Lee 155
Hutchinson, Adam 15
Hyde, Michael J. 68
hypertext 10; functional being ignored 
for theoretical 3; traditional versus 
mundane basis for 3, 9

268  Index
identification and epideictic rhetorics 
of play 235–43
implacement 120–1
incarnation 239
indecorous speech 74
infinite city sprawl (ICS) strategy 204, 
215–16
in-game aid 4–5, 172
intellectual virtues 70
intense spaces 117–18
interface design: to change behavior 
37; producing habits 3–4, 19
Isocrates 76
Jagoda, Patrick 142
James, William 14, 211
Jameson, Frederic 143
Jenkins, Henry 108, 237
Jing, Mike 217
Johnson, Barbara Z. 241
Johnson, Matthew S.S. 2, 47, 178
Johnson, Soren 173
Johnson-Eilola, Johndan 2–3, 6, 7, 9, 
17, 181, 255
Joyce, Michael 3
JoyLabz 232
Juul, Jesper 167, 177, 189
Kac, Eduardo 171, 189
kairos 37, 139, 155, 241–2, 248
Kameen, Paul 149
Kant, Immanuel 12, 42, 50
Kellner, Douglas 47
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood 4–5, 38, 
39, 177
King Digital Entertainment 5, 176
Kinneavy, James L. 241
Kjeldbjerg, Allan Ove 215
knowledge games 159, 191, 193
Knowles, Bran 45, 46, 156
Kohn, Alfie 42
Krishna 239
labor alienation 187
Lacey, Kim 127
Lancaster, England 45
Lanham, Richard 34, 35, 44, 49, 119
Latour, Bruno 16, 20, 35, 51, 54, 85, 
138, 151–3, 257
law of hospitality 214–15
layering design technique 175–6
Levinas, Emmanuel 214
libidinal investments 85–6
lifehacking 187
The Limits of Critique (Felski) 148
Lingua Fracta 258
LinkedIn 185
Lochrie, Mark 45
Lockett, Alexandria 206
logocentralism 255
logos 44, 45, 202–3
Losh, Elizabeth 33, 66
loss aversion 5, 175
low process intensity 43
Lumosity 188
Lunenfeld, Peter 205
Lynch, Paul 49, 154
machinima 238
Madden 25, 231, 233, 242
Madden, John 232
Madden NFL videogame series 232, 
235–6
Makey Makey devices 21, 232, 244, 
246
Malabou, Catherine 12, 64
Malaby, Thomas 117
Malskey, Bea 4
Malthroupe, Stuart 3
manipulation technology 43
Manning, Peyton 239
Manovich, Lev 205
Marino, Mark 207
Marx, Karl 187
masculinity in first person shooter 
videogames 108
Mass Effect series 103
massively multi-player online role-
playing game (MMORPG) 1, 2, 
72–3, 101
Massumi, Brian 120
materialist thinking 35
materiality 8; of the interface 245–6; 
as products of environments 78, 88; 
within videogame rhetoric 50–3
material metaphor 245
Mathison, Per 217–18
matter’s vitality 52–3
McAllister, Ken S. 1, 8, 34, 47–50, 
87, 257
McGonigal, Jane 140, 172, 191–2
McLuhan, Marshall 146
mechanistic habits 11–14, 42, 50
Meier, Sid 203–4
memory: in affective design 124–6; 
captivation of in first-person shooter 
videogames 99–129; functions being 
externalized 9–10; habit 102, 127; 

Index  269
proletariatization of 101; recollective 
102, 128; rhetoric and 126–7
menstruation tracking 147
Meras, Noortje 153
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 78
Merod, Jim 151
metanoia 87–8
Michel, Anthony J. 230
Micropolis 207
microsuasion 119
microtransactions 172, 176
Miller, Carolyn R. 67
Miller, Richard W. 186–7
mindless clicking 20, 178–80
MMORPG see massively multi-
player online role-playing game 
(MMORPG)
Moberly, Kevin 2, 111, 236
modding function in videogames 111, 
236, 238, 241
Moeller, Ryan M. 1, 111, 236
Mol, Annemarie 139, 155, 157, 192
Mooney, Bill 172
Moore, Christopher 108–9
moral perspective of first person 
shooter videogames 107–8
moral virtues 70
Morozov, Evgeney 146
multimedia creation 238
multimodal forms of composition 230
multimodal public rhetoric 230, 231
mundane design elements 34, 54, 100, 
254; affective design as 102; behavior 
change in 33; being rhetorical 3, 8, 
9, 10; in clicker games 171; code as 
202; enable social change 181–7; 
producing rhetorical habits 17
Murray, Donald 13
Murray, Janet 9
MyBO 159
Nakamura, Lisa 48, 72
Nardi, Bonnie A. 74
narrative structure of first person 
shooter videogames 103
NBA2K12, 143
NBA2K16, 13
neoliberalism 125–6; habit memory 
and 128; plot to colonize leisure 
time into work 110
Never Alone 6
Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle) 14, 
66, 68, 75
Nicotra, Jodie A. 67
Nieborg, David B. 103
Nintendogs 155
nonconscious in-game behavior 
becoming habits 5–6
nonhuman actors: agency of 243; 
having procedural habits 212–15; 
as part of rhetoric 201
nonhuman agency 85, 200–1, 222
non-mechanistic habits 14–18, 64–5, 
122, 128
non-moral virtues 170, 178
non-player characters 74, 103
nonrepresentational theory 122
non-rhetorical videogames 46
non-symbolic motion 41
Nørgård, Rikke Toft 80
2003 North American electrical grid 
blackout 85, 201, 210, 214
Nostalgic Angels (Johnson-Eilola) 2, 
181, 255
NPCs see non-player characters
nudge to shape habits 144–6
Nyhan, Brandon 42
Obama, Barack 159
Obama, Michelle 256
Obama Hope campaign 201
obesity linked to moral failure 157
Objectivist utopia 106
“Of Habit” (Ravaisson) 76
Ohl, Jessy 108
Ong, Walter J. 127
online user-generated content 111
Ontocartography (Bryant) 222
ontological questioning 79–80
opportune moment 37
O’Reilly, Tim 20, 145–6
Overwatch 108, 110, 176–7
Parker, Jeremy 143–4
Parmenides 13
participatory avatars 238–42
passively received impressions 77
patriarchy producing docile 
femininity 147
Paul, Christopher A. 8, 34, 46–7, 
178, 257
Pavlok wristband 144
pedagogy of videogames 229–49
persuasion: in first person shooter 
videogames 107–8, 119; habituated 
use of technologies and 156
Persuasive Games (Bogost) 42–3, 
205, 255

270  Index
persuasive technologies 6, 18, 33–54, 
144–5, 157–8, 254; differing from 
procedural habits 71–87; as form of 
videogame rhetoric 36–41
Persuasive Technology (Fogg) 33, 34, 
36, 37, 119
pet attachment encouraging habit 
change 155–6
Peterson, Anne Helen 141
PewDiePie 238
Phaedrus (Plato) 126
phusiopoiesis 76
Phylo 158
physiology and habit 78–9
physis 68–9
planned incongruity 243–5
plasticity 64–5
Plato 13, 44, 255
player killers 74
player’s ambient networked 
presence 239
player-versus-player encounters in 
videogames 39
play spaces (hyper-immersive) 
101, 102
Pokemon GO 255–8
political meanings within 
videogames 236
Politics (Aristotle) 72
politics of affective design 101
Pollak, JP 155, 156
Pong 109
positive reinforcement in first person 
shooter videogames 113–14, 117
post-cinematic affect 101, 124–5
postcritical reading 84, 138, 
148–9, 151
post-techne 209
Potter, Harry 237
power see also biopower
power in gamification 137, 138, 159
pre-frontal cortex of brain 175
prescriptive persuasion 33, 144
Principle of Surveillance 141
Prior, Paul 52
pristeis 65, 67
problem of answerability 214
procedural defamiliarization 243
procedural ethos 67
procedural habits 9–11, 64–6, 101; 
alternative heuretic models for 
187–92; being expressive 80–3; 
being non-mechanistic habits 87; 
code contributing to formation 
of 202–23; of code in assemblage 
of play 209–15; differing from 
persuasive technologies 71–87; 
diminishing impulses to action 
121; ethical responses to 200; 
expressiveness of 80–3; in first 
person shooter videogames 119–24; 
formed through multiple forces 83; 
in gamified persuasive technologies 
(GPTs) 137, 154–8; linking mind 
and body 17; of nonhuman actors 
212–15; not dependent on a habit-
shaping mechanism 71–5; produced 
by interface design mechanics 
19; re-orient from critique to 
composition 83–7; of social media 
games 176–81; theorizing 33–89; 
as unique forms of rhetorical 
embodiment produced through 
repetition 76–80
proceduralism 11, 236
procedural rhetoric 1, 8, 34, 43, 66–7; 
in Barter 45–6; in first person 
shooter videogames 105–6; weak 
defense of 41–6
product design to heighten reception 
of affective cues 122–3
Programmed Visions (Chun) 202, 207
progression in videogames 
113–14, 117
progymnasmata 16, 37
proletarianization 101, 125–6
Proust, Marcel 13
Pruchnic, Jeffrey 127, 142
public figure of exception 86
public rhetoric pedagogy 229–49
publics 153
purpose-act ratio 107
purpose-agency ratio 108
Q Question 44
Quandalh, Ellen 69
Quicken 119
Quintilian 44
Rabinow, Paul 150
The Rainforest Site 188
Rand, Ayn 106, 110
rationalism being rejected 48–51
Ratto, Matt 248
Ravaisson, Felix 14, 19, 65, 70, 76–80
recollective memory 102, 128

Index  271
Recommend feature of Amazon 147
Reid, Alex 76, 211
Reifler, Jason 42
repetition 128; as active refinement of 
ecology of play 65; being expressive 
80–3; role in rhetorical embodiment 
76–80; of social media games 
168–9
resiliency 192
Retelny, Daniela 155
Reynolds, Nedra 52
rhetoric 1–3, 6–8; ambient 65; 
behavioral 41; Burkean 106–7; code 
being 205–7; creating knowledge 
49; epideictic 237–42; epistemic 
47–8, 50; of first person shooter 
videogames 105–11; habit and 
9–11, 13, 17–18; materiality 
of 50–3; memory and 126–7; 
nonhuman actors of 201; persuasive 
technologies as a form of 36–41; as 
pre-symbolic relation to the world 
79; procedural 1, 8, 34, 43, 66–7; 
social-epistemic 34, 35, 46–8, 83–4, 
108; weak and strong defenses of 
34–5, 46–53, 190
Rhetoric (Aristotle) 66
Rhetorica Ad Herenium 126
rhetorical embodiment 76–80
rhetorical engagement 79–80
rhetorical habituation 66–87
rhetorical ontology 207–9
Rice, Jeff 153
Rice, Jenny 13, 79–80, 86, 236
Rickert, Thomas 46, 65, 79
Ricoeur, Paul 149, 203, 209
Ridolfo, Jim 230
Rivers, Nathaniel 49, 154, 201, 222
Ronell, Avital 214
Rosenbaum, Eric 243
Royer, Daniel J. 50
Rudder, Christian 147
Ruggillist, Judd Ethan 1
Rutten, Kris 106
Salen, Katie 109
Sample, Mark 207
Sarkeesian, Anita 108
Saturday Morning Breakfast 
Cereal 168
scene-act ratio 108
Schell, Jesse 174
Schiappa, Edward 47
Schrier, Karen 119, 159, 172, 
190–1, 193
score reinforcement 113
Scott, Robert E. 47
Scratch language 232
second nature and hexis 68–71
second order hermeneutics 151
Selfe, Cynthia 1, 139, 149
Selfe, Richard J., Jr. 139, 149
self-management through mobile 
media 144
Selzer, Jack 50
semiotics of virtuality 127
Sennett, Richard 65, 82, 178
September 12, 43
Sethi, Maneesh 144
Seung, Sebastien 190
sexism of videogames 108
Shaviro, Steven 101, 124
Sheard, Cynthia 237
Shelley, Bruce 204
Sheridan, David M. 230
Shipka, Jody 52, 230, 242, 247–8
Shokrizade, Ramin 175
Sicart, Miguel 11, 236
Silver, Jay 243–4
SimCity 88, 204
The Sims 48
simulated violence linked to violent 
real-life behavior 105
Skinner, B.F. 36
Skyrim V: Elder Scrolls 104–5, 116
Sleep Cycle app 141–2
Sloterdijk, Peter 85, 184
smart cup 144
soap operas compared to social media 
games 5
social as an emerging process 151
social change through mundane 
design elements 181–7
social dramas of narrative 100
social-epistemic rhetoric 34, 35, 46–8, 
83–4, 108, 178
social impact games 190
social media games see also free-to-
play social media games: being 
socially embeddable 177; compared 
to soap operas 5; connecting to 
student writing practices 169–70; 
criticism of 172–3; Foggian design 
elements in 172–6; popularity 
of 167–8; procedural habits of 
176–81; repetition of 168–9

272  Index
Socrates 44, 126
Soda Saga 174
Soetaert, Ronald 106
software studies 205–7
Sommers, Nancy 11
space of virtual 211
space/place theory 121
spaces of play 101, 102
Sparrow, Tom 15
spending currency locally 45
Spinoza 52
Star Wars: Battlefront 34, 39–40, 110
Steinkuehler, Constance 241
Stewart, Jon 237
Stiegler, Bernard 101, 125
Still Life With Rhetoric (Gries) 201
suggestion technology 37, 139, 
155, 256
Sunstein, Cass R. 20, 144–5
SuperBetter 191–2
Sutton-Smith, Brian 42–3, 105
symbolic action 41
Tactical Iraqi 66
Tamagotchi 155
TaskRabbit 136
Taylor, T.L. 153, 203
teaching writing 229–49
techne 82, 101–2, 113, 116, 137, 203, 
209; instrumental 140
technotext 245
Telecycle 36
Teleportation in an Unknown State 
171, 189
terrorist subject identification 144
Tetris 9, 14, 114
texts: in first person shooter 
videogames 102–11; of interface 
design as carpentry 230
textured literacy 238
Thaler, Richard 20, 144–5
theoretical hypertexts 3
thing power 123
thinking not being influenced by 
habit 13
Thrift, Nigel 101, 121–3, 128
time management game 4–5, 177
Time to Eat (TTE) 139, 155
to hoti 72
Tomb Raider 14, 48, 245
topoi 139, 153
Toward a Composition Made Whole 
(Shipka) 230, 247
Track-Everything Revolution 144
Transformers series 124–5
Trash Tycoon 171, 189–90
TreeLoot.com 41
Ulmer, Gregory 20, 87, 171, 184–5, 239
Undertale 232, 246
Unold, Peter 215
unpredictable outcomes 40
unthinking mechanism 77
Upper One Games 6
users’ ecologies of practice 159
Valcke, Martin 106
Vallor, Shannon 170, 178
vapor theory 205–6
Venture Guild 72–5
Verplanken, Bas 154
Vessyl smart cup 144
vibrant matter 201
Vibrant Matter (Bennett) 123, 213
victim narratives 86
videogame carpentry 221–2, 229, 
231–2, 242, 245
videogames: amplification in 113, 
116, 117–18; code of 202–23; 
core mechanism of 109; creating 
embodied affects 49–50; creation 
230; cultivating violent real-life 
behavior 105; habit-shaping 
elements of 5–6, 33; pedagogy 
of 229–49; as persuasive 
technologies 38–41, 43; possessing 
psychophysiological force 49; 
progression in 113–14, 117; 
reproducing larger ideologies 108; 
sensory stimulations in 111–14; 
sexism of 108; shaping habits 16; 
stop functioning 242–7
Vie, Stephanie 3
violence, virtual linked to violent real-
life behavior 105
virtual into reality 211
virtual-pet care games 155
virtue ethics 186–7
virtues 70; non-moral 170, 178
Vishnu 239
visual rhetoric 255
vitalism 149
vitality of matter 52–3
Voorhees, Gerald A. 34, 48, 104, 108
Wagner, Emily 155
Walker Assault match 39–40
Walter, Shannon 258

Index  273
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah 205
Wark, McKenzie 143, 146, 148
Warnick, Barbara 33
weak defense of rhetoric 190, 206
What Videogames Have to Teach 
Us About Learning and Literacy 
(Gee) 100
White, Eric Charles 241
Whitlock, Katie 104, 108
Wii 167
Wilsons, Elizabeth A. 78
The Witcher 3, 148
Wohl, Benjamin 45
Wood, Wendy 154
wordplay 8, 178
Wordplay (Paul) 46–7
World Food Programme 187
The World of Warcraft 1
World Without Oil see WoW
WoW 72–5, 87, 173; healer in 80–1; 
shaping players’ hexis 73–5
Wright, M. R. 14, 70
Wright, Will 204
writing: being structured by the 
environment 52; by game players 2; 
literacy of videogames 139; in social 
media gaming spaces 1–2; teaching 
using videogames 229–49
writing classroom and social media 
games 169–70
writing teachers incorporating 
videogames in classrooms 229–30
Yancey, Kathleen Blake 238
Yoos, George 67
Young, Richard 82
YouTube 238
Zappen, James P. 33
Zdenek, Sean 181
Zichermann, Gabe 136–7, 140
Zimmerman, Eric 109
Zombies, Run! 137
Zynga 172, 173–4

