 

 
THE MEDIA HANDBOOK
A COMPLETE GUIDE TO ADVERTISING MEDIA 
SELECTION, PLANNING, RESEARCH, AND BUYING

 
LEA’S COMMUNICATION SERIES
Selected titles include: 
Alexander/Owens/Carveth/Hollifield/Greco • Media Economics: Theory and Research,
Third Edition
Moore/Farrar/Collins • Advertising and Public Relations Law 
Moore • Mass Communication Law and Ethics, Second Edition 
Reichert/Lambiase • Sex in Advertising: Perspectives on the Erotic Appeal 
Reichert/Lambiase • Sex in Consumer Culture: the Erotic Content of Media and 
Marketing 
Wicks/Sylvie/Sohn/Lacy/Hollifield/Powers • Media Management: A Casebook Approach,
Third Edition 
For a complete list of titles in LEA’s Communication Series, please contact Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers at www.erlbaum.com.
Jennings Bryant and Dolf Zillmann, General Editors

 
THE MEDIA HANDBOOK
A COMPLETE GUIDE TO ADVERTISING MEDIA 
SELECTION, PLANNING, RESEARCH, AND BUYING
Third Edition
Helen Katz
Starcom Media Group
LAWRENCE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES, PUBLISHERS
Mahwah, New Jersey London

 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2009.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of
Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks 
please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
Copyright © 2007 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in 
any form, by photostat, microform, retrieval system, or any 
other means, without prior written permission of the 
publisher.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers
10 Industrial Avenue
Mahwah, New Jersey 07430 
www.erlbaum.com
Cover design by Tomai Maridou
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Katz, Helen E.
The media handbook: a complete guide to advertising media 
selection, planning, research, and buying/Helen Katz.—3rd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8058-5717-6 (cloth: alk. paper)—ISBN 0-8058-5718-4 
(pbk.: alk. paper) 1. Advertising media planning. 2. Mass 
media and business. 3. Marketing channels. I. Title.
HF5826.5K38 2007 
659–dc22 2005057745 
CIP
ISBN 1-4106-1397-6 Master e-book ISBN

 
Dedication
To my daughters, Stephanie, Caroline, and Vanessa.

 

 
Contents in Brief
 
Preface 
 
xiii
Acknowledgments 
 
xv
Introduction 
 
xvii
 
1 What Is Media? 
 
1
2 Media in the Marketing Context 
 
8
3 Developing Optimal Media Objectives 
 
29
4 Exploring the Media 
 
42
5 Terms, Calculations, and Considerations 
 
91
6 Creating the Plan 
 
108
7 Offering Alternatives 
 
123
8 Making the Media Buys 
 
132
9 Evaluating the Media Plan 
 
142
 
Appendix A: Key Resources 
 
148
Appendix B: Associations and Sources 
 
152
 References 
 
158
 Index 
 
162

 

 
Contents
 
 Preface 
 
xiii
 Acknowledgments 
 
xv
 Introduction 
 
xvii
 
1 What Is Media? 
 
1
  
  What Media Are Out There? 
 
2
  
  The Role of Media in Business 
 
2
  
  How the Media World Has Changed 
 
3
  
  Media Versus Communications 
 
4
  
  The Role of Media in Consumers’ Lives 
 
5
  
  How Media Work With Advertising 
 
5
  
  Tasks in Media 
 
6
  
  Summary 
 
7
2 Media in the Marketing Context 
 
8
  
  Getting to Know the Consumer 
 
9
  
  Looking at the Marketplace 
 
15
  
  What Are the Competitors Up to? 
 
16
  
  Where Is Your Brand Sold? 
 
22
  
  Consumers and Media 
 
25
  
  A Word About Budgets 
 
26
  
  Timing and Other Issues 
 
26
  
  Summary 
 
27
  
  Checklist—Media in the Marketing Context 
 
27
3 Developing Optimal Media Objectives 
 
29
  
  How the Marketing Objective Leads to the Media Objective 
 
29
  
  Media and the Advertising Objective 
 
30
  
  Advertising Objectives and the Consumer Decision Process 
 
33
  
  Media and the Consumer Decision Process 
 
33
  
  Consumers, Brands, and Media 
 
34
  
  Establishing Media Objectives 
 
35

 
x  Contents
 
 
  Summary 
 40
 
 
  Checklist—Developing Optimal Media Objectives 
 
4 Exploring the Media 
 42
 
 
  Media as Brand Contacts 
 42
 
 
  Media Categories 
 42
 
 
  A Television in Every Home 
 43
 
 
  New Forms of Television 
 53
 
 
  Benefits of Television to Advertisers 
 55
 
 
  Drawbacks of Television Advertising 
 56
 
 
  Research on Television 
 59
 
 
  Radio—The “Everywhere” Medium 
 59
 
 
  Benefits of Radio to Advertisers 
 63
 
 
  Drawbacks of Radio Advertising 
 65
 
 
  Research on Radio 
 
 
 
  All the News That’s Fit to Print—Newspaper Advertising 
 
 
 
  Benefits of Newspapers to Advertisers 
 
 
 
  Drawbacks of Newspaper Advertising 
 72
 
 
  Magazines—An Explosion of Choice 
 73
 
 
  Benefits of Magazines to Advertisers 
 75
 
 
  Drawbacks of Magazine Advertising 
 76
 
 
  Research on Magazines 
 77
  Outdoor Billboards and Beyond—From Cairo, Egypt, to Cairo,
Illinois 
 
77
 
 
  Benefits of Outdoor Billboards to Advertisers 
 79
 
 
  Drawbacks of Outdoor Billboard Advertising 
 80
 
 
  Internet—The Ultimate Choice 
 81
 
 
  Benefits of Internet to Advertisers 
 83
 
 
  Drawbacks of Internet Advertising 
 84
 
 
  Research on the Internet 
 85
 
 
  Alternative Forms of Communication 
 85
 
 
  Which Media Should You Use? 
 89
 
 
  Summary 
 89
 
 
  Checklist—Exploring the Major Media 
 89
41
66
6
70
7

 
Contents  xi
5 Terms, Calculations, and Considerations 
 91
 
  Understanding Ratings 
 91
 
  Reach and Frequency 
 92
 
  Beyond Reach and Frequency 
 94
 
  Calculating Costs 
 96
 
  Category-Specific Criteria 
 97
 
  Summary 
 106
 
  Checklist—Terms, Calculations, and Considerations 
 106
6 Creating the Plan 
 108
 
  Target Audience’s Use of and Relationship to Media 
 108
 
  Timing of the Plan 
 109
 
  Balancing Reach and Frequency 
 110
 
  ROI and Media Models 
 110
 
  Scheduling Your Ads 
 112
 
  Cost-Efficiencies 
 113
 
  Tactical Considerations 
 115
 
  Presenting the Plan 
 117
 
  A Media Plan Example 
 118
 
  Summary 
 122
 
  Checklist—Creating the Plan 
 122
7 Offering Alternatives 
 123
 
  Spending More Money 
 123
 
  Spending Less Money 
 124
 
  Changing Targets 
 127
 
  Changing Media 
 128
 
  Tests and Translations 
 130
 
  Summary 
 131
 
  Checklist—Offering Alternatives 
 131
8 Making the Media Buys 
 132
 
  Merchandising a Magazine Buy 
 132
 
  Getting News into Newspapers 
 133
 
  Buying Time on Television 
 134
 
  Local TV and Radio Buys 
 137

 
xii  Contents
  
  The Great Outdoors 
 138
  
  Implementing an Internet Buy 
 139
  
  Buying Nontraditional Media 
 140
  
  Summary 
 140
  
  Checklist—Making the Media Buys 
 141
9 Evaluating the Media Plan 
 142
  
  Pre-Plan Analysis 
 143
  
  Post-Buy Analysis 
 143
  
  Custom Consumer Research 
 144
  
  ROI Impact 
 145
  
  Summary 
 146
  
  Checklist—Evaluating the Media Plan 
 146
 
Appendix A: Key Resources
 
148
Appendix B: Associations and Sources
 
152
 References 
 158
 Index 
 162

 
Preface
Having already written two versions of this book, the need for another revision may at
first seem unnecessary, if not greedy. Hadn’t I already answered that perennial question
of “What do you do in media” sufficiently? With another 3 years behind us, has the
answer really changed? In some ways, the media business (and advertising’s role within
it) has encountered bigger and more significant changes in the past 3 years than it did in
the 10 years since the book was first written.
There are three critical changes in how media today are planned, bought, and sold.
These can be thought of as the “3 Cs”—consolidation, consumer control (technology-
enabled), and communication accountability. Anyone who follows business news knows
that the media business seems to find endless ways to consolidate. Just when you think a
company like Viacom or WPP cannot possibly get any bigger, it swallows up another
player. The desire to dominate a field—driven in part by stockholder demands for
ever-higher profits—leads more and more companies down the path of purchasing their
competitors to create something bigger and (they hope) better.
Media planning has, for most of those involved with it on a regular basis, been
transformed into communications planning as the definition of “media” has expanded to
include everything from the Internet to sports stadiums, to elevator or airport TV screens
to  event  sponsorships  and  promotions.  On  the  buying  side,  successive  waves  of
ownership consolidation have reduced the number of media owners significantly in most
major media forms, leading to the frequent need to negotiate across media types by
owner rather than simply buying time or space in specific vehicles. So while account
executives still deal with the client, creatives continue to design the message, and
consumer researchers are just as busy focusing on what people think, feel, and do, the
media folks have a new and challenging role to play.
The goal of this book, however, remains the same. The Media Handbook is written as a
basic introduction to the media planning-and-buying process. It can help the college
student gain a clearer understanding of what media is and how it fits into the overall
marketing process, or it can be a useful reference book for people working in the
advertising or media industries whose responsibilities sometimes overlap with the media
function. The book begins with a look at the larger marketing, advertising and media
objectives, followed by an exploration of major media categories (including the emerging
ones, such as branded entertainment and viral marketing). The nuts and bolts of planning
and buying take up much of the remainder of the text, with a continued focus on how
those tactical elements tie back to the strategic aims of the brand and client.
Media terms are defined when they are introduced so that, in the jargon-filled worlds
of  media  acronyms,  the  reader  will  start  to  feel  more  comfortable  in  subsequent
discussion of GRPs, DMAs, or BDIs. The book also includes numerous examples, mostly
of actual national brands in largely fictitious situations, in order to provide a better sense
of how media planning and buying work in the real world. Examples of research studies,
from  both  the  industry  and  the  academic  world,  have  been  added  to  give  readers
additional resources to go to for more in-depth information. At the end of the book, a
selection of key resources is offered as an appendix for those individuals or companies
that wish to find out more about a particular service or system.

 
Media planning and buying are not, and should not be thought of as, mystical or
esoteric. The media function certainly involves a good deal of expertise and intelligent
thinking, and also requires a judicious combination of art and science, creativity, and
mathematical applications, but it should be fairly easy to understand to anyone involved
in the marketing of a product or service. Indeed, it should really be a prerequisite that all
those who are trying to sell something, whether it is a widget or an image, should have
the basic knowledge of how media planning operates. That is where the message ends up,
and if it is placed incorrectly or not seen by the chosen target audience, even the most
creative or inspiring ad will be unable to boost sales.
After reading this new edition of The Media Handbook, you will be able to answer the
question of what is done in media with confidence, clarity, and a fuller understanding of
how media fits in to the larger advertising and marketing picture.
—Helen Katz

 
Acknowledgments
A third edition may seem, in many ways, to require few acknowledgments. Much of the
material is still usable. Updating a few facts and statistics would not seem to require
much outside help. But, in fact, many of those who inspired me to write the first edition
of this Handbook continue to provide inspiration and guidance today. Thus, I would like
to thank Mike White and David Drake, both of whom worked with me when I was at
DDB Worldwide. They taught me to see the big picture and to think creatively. Kevin
Killion, my first boss in the industry, remains a valued friend and mentor, and has as
much enthusiasm for media and research today as he did in 1989 when I started at DDB.
Since the first edition came out, I have had the opportunity to work with several other
inspiring people. At Zenith Media in New York, both Wendy Marquardt and Peggy Green
helped me learn much about how media planning and buying truly work together. At GM
Planworks, I worked with a stellar group of professionals, from Jana O’Brien at the
agency to my clients at General Motors, Michael Browner and Betsy Lazar, all of whom
taught me much and challenged me to think more closely about how and why consumers
use media. Those lessons are continuing at Starcom Mediavest Group, where Kate Sirkin
and Jack Klues educate and inspire me.
I remain grateful to my former professors and supporters from the academic world:
Kim Rotzoll, Steve Helle, Kent Lancaster, and Bruce Vanden Bergh all helped me
become  enamored  of  research.  My  editor  at  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates,  Linda
Bathgate, has been such a pleasure to work with. She has given me all the trust and
support an author could ask for.
And this third revision still required the patience and support of my family—my
husband, Eric, and daughters, Stephanie, Caroline, and Vanessa. So it is to them that I
dedicate this latest effort. They continue to bring joy and happiness into my life.

 

 
Introduction
This book is deliberately designed as a Media Handbook. It will not tell you every last
detail about each individual medium, nor will it go into great depth on nonmedia
advertising elements, such as the creative message or the consumer research that goes on
behind the scenes. What it will do, however, is give you a complete picture of how media
planning, buying, and research work. You will see what each function entails, and how
they fit together with each other and within the framework of the marketing mix. You will
know enough by the end of this book to be able to create your own media plan, or
undertake a print or broadcast buy. Even if you are not directly responsible for either of
those tasks, a greater understanding of how media fit in to the marketing picture will help
you communicate with those who do such work. Each chapter builds on and works off
the preceding ones, although once you have been through them all, it is designed to be
very easy for you to refer to specific tasks or concepts at a later date. At the end of each
chapter, you will see a checklist of questions that you should ask yourself if you actually
have to fulfill the objective of that particular chapter (e.g., setting objectives or evaluating
the plan). At the end of the book, you will find a list of additional resources you can turn
to for help in media planning, buying, and research.

 

 
CHAPTER 1 
What Is Media?
It’s 7:30 a.m. You wake up and turn on your satellite radio, then click on the Web to 
catch the latest world news. During breakfast you turn on the television to catch a few
minutes of the morning news shows. Before heading off to work you check your e-mail
on the Internet. On the subway, you listen to your iPod (commercial free), looking out of
the window at a few outdoor billboards along the highway.
In that brief timespan, you have been immersed in the world of media. Very broadly,
that  world  includes  radio,  Internet,  television,  newspapers,  magazines,  and  outdoor
billboards. Although you selected satellite radio to listen to music, or the Internet to see
the latest news, or the television to watch a program, what you also did was receive information 
through  a  means  of  communication,  or  a  medium.  Given  this  broad definition, you
can see that there are in fact hundreds of different media available, including direct mail, 
skywriting, coupons, stadium signs, key-rings, and food containers. All of these, and many other 
media, offer ways of communicating information to an audience. As advertising media 
professionals, we are interested in looking at the media as a means of conveying a specific 
kind of information—an advertising message—about a product or service to consumers.
The media play a very important role in our lives. Media help fulfill two basic needs: 
They inform and they entertain. We turn, for instance, to the media when we want to hear
the latest world news or what happened in financial markets. We also look to the media to
fill our evenings and weekends with escapist fare to get us out of our everyday, humdrum
routine. Television entertains us with movies, dramas, comedies, game shows, and sports.
Radio offers us a wide variety of music, talk, and entertainment. We turn to magazines to
find out more about our favorite hobbies and interests. News-papers help us keep up with the 
world around us. And the Internet provides limitless information that you can search through.
The media’s informational role is perhaps best illustrated by considering what happens 
during a national or international crisis, such as the 2001 terrorist attack on the World 
Trade Center and Pentagon or the southeast Asian tsunami disaster at the end of 2004. On 
each occasion, millions of people were glued to their television sets, clicking to favorite
Web sites, tuned in to their radios, and reading newspapers and magazines for daily in-
depth coverage and subsequent follow-up stories.
The  media  also  affect  our  lives  through  their  entertainment  function.  Television 
situation comedies, such as All in the Family and Mary Tyler Moore, not only reflected
what was happening in U.S. society in the 1970s, but also helped to influence attitudes
and behaviors concerning the issues of race and equality. Stories appearing in magazines 
such as People or InStyle let us know what is happening in other people’s lives, both
famous and ordinary. In addition, we increasingly take our cell phones everywhere so 
that we can go online to get the latest sports scores while we relax.

 
2 The Media Handbook
Historically,  the  world  of  media  was  broadly  divided  into  two  types—print  and
electronic. Print media include magazines and newspapers, whereas electronic media
cover  radio,  television,  and  the  Internet.  Other  media  types  are  not  quite  so  easily
categorized.  Thus,  outdoor  billboards  are  generally  defined  as  a  print  medium  and
out-of-home options, such as transit ads or stadium signage, are variously classified as
nontraditional, alternative, or ambient media. Exhibit 1.1 provides a list of each type.
In today’s ever-changing media  world, however, these distinctions are fast becoming obso-
lete. Is a newspaper that is read online in the print or electronic columns? Where does one
place cell phones or word of mouth or product placement? What is increasingly distinguishing
one media type from another is how much consumer control there is in the medium’s use.
Print Media 
Electronic Media
Magazines—Consumer, Farm, Business 
Television: Broadcast, Cable,
Syndication, Spot
Newspapers—National, Local Outdoor
billboards
Radio: Network, Local Internet
Direct mail Yellow Pages 
 
Magazines and newspapers have always been under their readers’ control; after all, they
choose what to read. Regular TV, on the other hand, is more passive; the networks decide what
programs to air, and when. But now, with technologies like digital video recorders (DVRs), it is
viewers who have become the program schedulers, controlling what they want to see, and
when. Here in Exhibit 1.2, is how a list of media types might look if divided into those two
categories. This is a topic that will reverberate throughout this book, reflecting one of the major
changes in how people use media and, therefore, how the advertising media business works.
THE ROLE OF MEDIA IN BUSINESS
It is important to emphasize here that the focus of this book is commercial media. That is,
the communications media we will be talking about are not there simply to beautify the
landscape or fill up the pages of a newspaper. They are designed to sell products to
customers.  Of  course,  there  are  also  media  that  convey  information  but  are  not
commercial  in  intent.  Consumer  Reports  is  a  magazine  that  does  not  carry  any ad-
vertising. Neither does public television (except for sponsorships, which we’ll talk about
later). The white pages of the telephone directory, web search engines, and airline safety
instructions  are  all  informative,  yet  these  are  not  advertisements  in  and  of
themselves (even if they  can  carry  advertisements  within  them).  And  books  certainly
WHAT MEDIA ARE OUT THERE?
EXHIBIT 1.1 Major print and electronic media

 
What Is Media?  3
communicate information to readers. Here, however, we shall concentrate on those media that 
currently accept advertising messages. It is worth emphasizing the word “currently.” Twenty-
five years ago, you did not find commercial messages at supermarkets, schools, doctors’ 
offices, or ski slopes. Today, advertisers can reach people in all of those places. Even novels 
are not immune. A popular British author wrote Bulgari Jewelers into her fictional story 
in 2000, and the company paid her. Hasbro paid young, hip preteens to use its Pox videogame 
and talk about it with their friends to encourage additional sales. Although these ventures 
EXHIBIT 1.2 Control vs. noncontrol
Controlled Media 
Non-Controlled Media!
Magazines 
Television (other)
Newspapers 
Radio
Direct Mail 
Outdoor
Yellow Pages 
 
were criticized by the public, that does not mean there will not be other similar attempts 
in the future. After all, what is true for today may very well change by tomorrow.
The generic term media (or medium in the singular) means different things to different peo-
ple. To Joe Smith sitting at home on a Friday evening, the media mean whatever TV shows he 
watches or magazines he leafs through. For the local Chevy car dealer, the media provide a 
way to advertise this week’s deals on Impalas and Blazers. And the Podunk Electric Utility 
Company uses the media to remind its customers that they can get free replacement lightbulbs.
Strictly  speaking,  a  medium  may  be  defined  as  a  means  by  which  something  is 
accomplished, conveyed, or transferred. This deliberately broad definition means that 
consumer media would cover everything from handbills passed out in parking lots, to “For 
Sale” signs taped to lampposts, to the 10-page advertising supplement that fell out of the last 
copy of Business Week you read, to electronic flashing signs in Times Square, to the young hip 
folk who are “planted” in certain upscale bars to surreptitiously promote certain liquor brands.
HOW THE MEDIA WORLD HAS CHANGED
The media business can be thought of as an ocean. Each media type starts out as a few 
drops of water (individual newspapers or radio stations). They flourish and grow, and as 
more drops form, they start to combine together, creating ponds that turn into streams, 
rivers, and oceans. There is a certain kind of predictability to it. It starts out small, then 
expands as more companies enter the field. Over time, a handful of these companies start
Television (via DVRs, Video On Demand) 
 
Internet 

 
4  The Media Handbook
to grow by buying out their competitors and the industry consolidates to the point where
only a few extremely large players remain. This cycle has occurred in all but the newest
media, from newspapers to radio to magazines to television. Even the Internet, one of the
most diverse media forms in terms of its offerings, has seen those consolidate in recent
years as popular Web sites get bought out by larger, better funded companies that are
often rooted in traditional media. Take, for example, about.com, a very popular Web site
for learning more about any topic. It was purchased in 2005 by the New York Times
Company, which saw it as a good “fit” for its information-oriented newspaper. In the
outdoor industry, there used to be tens, if not hundreds, of locally based companies, each
of which focused its efforts on selling ads in a particular city or region. Today, there are
just two companies—Viacom and Clear Channel—that are responsible for more than half
of all billboards in the United States.
But what does media industry consolidation have to do with advertising? Why does it
matter that the TV network NBC (itself owned by the Universal movie studio) also owns
the Bravo cable network and the Spanish-language network Telemundo? How is a media
plan or buy affected by the fact that the Tribune Company owns WGN-TV, radio stations,
and the Chicago Tribune newspaper? Well, although consumers are being offered more
and more media choices (more radio stations on satellite radio, more online newspapers,
more TV shows they want to watch via their Tivos), the advertisers trying to reach them
find that they must negotiate with fewer companies selling advertising space or time. This
paradox is something to which we return throughout the book.
MEDIA VERSUS COMMUNICATIONS
In the business world, we think of a medium as a way to transfer and convey information
about goods or services from the producer to the consumer, who is a potential buyer of
that item. There are various ways to accomplish that in business besides using radio,
television, or magazines. Product or company publicity, sales brochures, or exhibits can
all be useful ways of conveying information to potential buyers. Note that although this
book refers to all potential buyers as “consumers,” we should really think of them as us.
One of the biggest dangers in media planning or buying, as we shall learn in chapter 3, is
to categorize viewers, listeners, or readers into broad consumer groups (e.g., “Adults
18–49”) that make it too easy to forget that, in the infamous words of one of the founders
of the advertising industry, David Ogilvy, “that person is your wife.”
Although this book is titled the Media Handbook, it is increasingly important to think
of media in the broadest terms, as communications. Advertising media used to be thought
of solely as traditional, or mass. That is, planners and buyers worked with television,
radio, magazines, newspapers, and outdoor. Anything beyond that was considered more
specialized. Direct mail was handled by one group, event marketing by another, and
promotions by a third. Today, most agencies look for integrated ways to make contact
with  consumers,  whether  that  is  paying  to  display  their  brand  of  soap  in  “The
Apprentice,” sponsoring a blimp flying over a popular baseball field in the summer, or
putting the brand’s message on coffee cup holders in Starbucks. The goal of these
disparate efforts is to surround the target audience with an holistic campaign that presents
them with the same message about the brand in various creative ways.

 
What Is Media?  5
THE ROLE OF MEDIA IN CONSUMERS’ LIVES
As our lives grow increasingly busy and demanding, and as technology moves ahead with
sophisticated ways to improve our lives, it seems that the media are playing a more
important role in what we do, where we go, or how we behave. As the example at the
opening of this chapter suggested, many of us wake up to the sound of the clock radio;
we read the newspaper or check the Internet while watching morning television and
eating breakfast; and we connect to our offices via e-mail and a wireless PDA. We
commute to work either in the car listening to music on regular or satellite radio, or on
the bus or train surrounded by posters with advertising messages on them (or listening to
an iPod during the commute). At work, we are likely to see a broad array of Internet
advertising or e-mail advertising messages, and many of us watch (or videotape) our
favorite soap operas at lunchtime. When we get home in the evening, we’ll probably turn
on the TV to catch the local news, and after dinner we’ll forget about our daily worries by
watching a few episodes of prime-time TV that we recorded through our DVRs, while
catching up with the daily newspaper. Before we go to sleep for the night, we may check
some information online, and then we’ll probably glance through a couple of magazines
while lying in bed.
When you sit down to watch TV and see a commercial that then appears in a magazine
or on a Web site you are browsing through, and it is mentioned again in that night’s
evening newscast because of the tie-in to a local charity event, you generally don’t think
about the effort that went into coordinating all of those elements. In fact, if the “seams”
between them are too obvious, then something probably isn’t working right! Whereas
you, as a member of the reading, listening, or viewing audience, are interested primarily
in the particular program or publication, the medium is interested in you as a potential
buyer, offering you up to advertisers who wish to talk to you.
The role of media in conveying information through advertising messages is not
something consumers generally consider. Indeed, when they do think about it they are
likely to complain about being inundated by commercial messages! Yet, despite the fact
that no one has yet proven “how advertising works,” businesses continue to believe in its
power, as evidenced by the $264 billion spent on advertising in this country in 2004.
HOW MEDIA WORK WITH ADVERTISING
Advertising in the media performs the dual role of informing and entertaining. It informs
us of the goods and services that are available for us to purchase and use. And, along the
way, it often entertains us with some humorous, witty, or clever use of words and
pictures. For example, let’s say you have created a new razor blade for young men that
has a built-in counter to tell you how many times you’ve used it. You’ve shown it to some
friends and neighbors, all of whom are convinced that it would be extremely useful to
that target group. You have talked to several distributors and manufacturers of razors who
have some interest in producing it. Now, however, the question arises of what to do next.
How do you inform people you don’t know personally about this wonderful new product?
This is where the media can help. You could place an advertisement on TV announcing
this brand new razor type. Perhaps you’d take out magazine ads in men’s magazines that

 
6  The Media Handbook
show the product and explain what it does. You might create a long-form commercial
message, or infomercial, that you pay cable networks targeted to men to air at night and
on weekends. You’d want to have a Web site for your new product that allows people to 
purchase online directly from the site. Your message, that “Razor Sharp is the razor you 
can count on” would then be disseminated to an audience of hundreds, or possibly
thousands, depending on your location. You might also generate additional publicity by
persuading a national or local celebrity to endorse the product, and send out an electronic
news release to TV stations and/or men’s magazines. Or, perhaps you would decide to
send e-mails out to readers of men’s magazines who have opted-in (chosen) to receive
such messages, offering them a free sample in exchange for their opinion of the product. 
Whatever form of communication you use, all involve sending a message through a 
medium of one kind or another.
Again, it is important to keep in mind that we are talking of media in the broadest 
sense. So in trying to promote your Razor Sharp blades, your TV and print ads or Web 
site can show people what the product looks like and demonstrate how it works. Then, 
you might sponsor a men’s grooming night at the local department store as a public
relations effort to heighten awareness of the product and how well it works. You could
send out press releases in advance to notify the media of the event and thereby generate 
additional publicity both for the event and for your razor. You could offer retailers a 
special  deal,  such  as  contributing  funds  to  the  ads  that  they  run  (an  advertising 
allowance), if they will promote the product in their weekly newspaper ads. You might
also arrange for razors to be handed out on college campuses or health clubs so that
people can learn more about Razor Sharp. By advertising the product in a wide variety of 
media, each one fulfills a slightly different role, but your overall message—“Razor Sharp 
is the razor you can count on”—is conveyed clearly and consistently.
Media advertising also performs another vital function. It helps offset the cost of the
media communication itself to consumers. If we did not have commercials on television,
radio, or the Web, then the cost of the informational or educational content would have to
come through sponsorships, taxes, or government monies. Public broadcasting in the
United States derives most of its income through semi-annual pledge drives, during
which viewers and listeners are asked to give money to pay for the services. Government
funding provides additional revenues. But even here, more public broadcasting television 
stations are accepting restricted forms of paid commercials as long as they are image 
oriented and not hard sell. Indeed, there is even a network available, Public Broadcasting
Marketing, to help advertisers place their spots on public TV stations across the country.
TASKS IN MEDIA
The broad field of advertising media can be broken down into four primary tasks:
Planning how best to use media to convey the advertising message to the
target consumer (the media planner)
Buying media space and time for the message (the media buyer)
Selling that space or time to the advertiser (the media seller)
Researching the relationship between consumers, media, and the brands that 
advertise to them in those media (the researcher).
• 
• 
• 
• 

 
What Is Media?  7
Most large companies handle the media planning and buying functions through an
advertising agency. Smaller firms usually handle this task themselves, through their
marketing director or public relations coordinator. The role of the planner is to decide
where and when the message should be placed, how often, and at what cost. The plan is
then  implemented  by  the  media  buyer,  who  negotiates  with  the  media  providers
themselves to agree on the space and time needed and to determine or confirm where the
ad will appear. That buyer will, of course, be dealing with the salesperson at the media
company,  whose  job  it  is  to  sell  as  much  advertising  space  or  time  as  possible.
Throughout this process, the researcher tries to offer insights into how and why the media
impact the consumer’s brand decisions.
SUMMARY
The focus of The Media Handbook is the role of media in communicating and conveying
information about products and services to potential consumers. It is designed to explore
this media world in detail, looking at the changing structure of the industry itself, the
various types of communication that are available (printed, aural, visual) and how to use
these forms in day-to-day business. The aim here is to provide a better understanding of
what the media are and how they work. Media can be classified in several ways—print
versus electronic, or active versus passive. Within these categories, consumers choose
from a wide array of media in their daily lives, turning to them for both information and
entertainment. Advertising in the media also helps to offset the costs of production and
distribution. Any company that advertises in the media must deal either directly or
indirectly with the planning and buying of advertising space or airtime. This handbook
will show you how to do this efficiently and successfully.

 
CHAPTER 2
Media in the Marketing Context
Although this book is designed to take the media specialist through the planning and
buying of media, those functions do not occur in a vacuum. Both media and advertising 
are part of the bigger picture of the world of marketing. The primary goal of marketing is 
to increase sales and profits. Consider the example from chapter 1, where we were 
wondering how to market our reusable razor blade, Razor Sharp. We considered many
elements beyond which media to use. To market any product effectively involves not 
simply advertising it, but also figuring out how much to charge for it, where to distribute
it, and how to manufacture it. In marketing jargon, these four critical elements are known 
as the “Four Ps”: Product, Price, Place (distribution), and Promotion. Although your job
as a media specialist does not necessarily involve making the decisions on all of these 
criteria, it is critical that you have a clear understanding of how they work, and more
importantly, how they can impact your media decisions and strategy. This chapter guides 
you through these four marketing basics.
In order to sell anything you must first have a product, or service. You have to decide
how much you need to charge for it (the price) so that you can make a profit. You must
also figure out how and where the product will be made available to people (place, or
distribution). And last, but not least, you must consider how you will let potential buyers
know what you are offering (promotion). Within that last category, there are several key
channels  of  communication:  advertising,  personal  selling,  sales  promotion,  direct
marketing, event marketing, and publicity. All can be thought of as media, or ways of convey-
ing information to potential buyers. You  can see how these elements work in Exhibit 2.1.
Exhibit 2.1 The Marketing Mix

 
Media in the Marketing Context  9
One of the most important things to remember here is that the arrows move in many 
directions. Almost any decision you make concerning media will have an impact on 
something else in the marketing mix. For example, if you decided to advertise on network 
television,  then  you  would  have  to  ensure  that  your  product  was  in  fact  available 
throughout the country. Or, if you chose to concentrate your advertising efforts during 
holiday periods (Memorial Day, Fourth of July, etc.), then you might consider lowering 
your price at that time to boost sales even further.
The task of the media planner is to consider all of the marketing information available 
on the product and use that information to determine how best to reach the target 
audience with the brand message through advertising media. In this way, the media plan 
can be thought of as the pivot point, or hub, of the overall marketing plan, as shown in 
Exhibit 2.2.
Exhibit 2.2 Moving Toward the Media Plan
GETTING TO KNOW THE CONSUMER
There are two critical pieces of information that you, as a media specialist, need to know 
in order to successfully market a product. The first is an understanding of how your 
consumers view and use your product or service. The second is how they view and use 
different media types. Although much of the former has been developed over many years and  is  
considered  fairly  traditional  market  research,  the  latter  is  a  relatively  new phenomenon 
within the media world, applying market or consumer research principles and processes to 
enhance the understanding of how and why people use media. First, this chapter delves into 
the consumer-brand relationship, and then begins to explore the consumer-media relationship.

 
10 The Media Handbook
Consumers and Brands
First, you must know more about the brand and the product category. A brand is the
individual product or service that you are trying to sell. It can be thought of as the name
on the label. So Campbell’s Tomato soup is a brand, as is their Chicken Noodle soup, or
their Clam Chowder variety. The product category could either be defined as all brands
of tomato soup, or all kinds of soup. In the case of a service, such as insurance, the
product category could be one type of insurance (e.g., life, home, or auto) or all types.
The brand would be one particular company such as Allstate, or State Farm.
One way to think about brands is to consider your own behavior. When you go to the
grocery store, you are usually not thinking in terms of product categories or brands. More
likely, you are thinking about buying a container of Minute Maid orange juice, three Lean
Cuisine frozen dinners, or a box of Kellogg’s Frosted Flakes cereal. Similarly, when you
have to decide which restaurant to go to, you will not categorize them into quick service,
family style, or steak houses the way marketers do, but will instead think in terms of the
types of food (i.e., Chinese, Mexican, Indian, etc.). And, within those groups, you will
probably categorize them by geography, thinking of the specific restaurants by area.
What we need to know as marketers and media specialists, however, is how consumers
decide which brands and products to buy, as well as the process they go through when purchas-
ing  an  item.  This  will  vary,  depending  on  the  type  of  product.  Whereas  a consumer
might pick up any brand of floor cleaner, the decision process that person goes through to
select a car will take far longer because there are more elements to consider. Understand-
ing these decision processes will help you decide which media might best be used both to
reach your target and convey the desired message at the right time. When selling your new razor
blade with built-in counter, you could probably use a traditional medium such as magazines to
increase awareness of your product. However, a company trying to sell a more complex
product (e.g., a car or computer) will likely use a wider variety of communication forms.
Here, we will take a general look at how consumers view and use brands. From there,
we can establish some foundations for the media plan. We will do this by going back into
the past and looking at what has happened in the marketplace both to the brand and the
product category in which we are interested.
In looking at how consumers use brands, we must answer several key questions: How
much do consumers already know about the brand (brand and advertising awareness)?
And, when, where, and how often do they buy it (purchase dynamics)?
What Do People Know About the Brand?
People have the opportunity to be exposed to at least 5,000 ads every week, so it isn’t surprising
that they don’t remember many of them. In fact, a study conducted by the Newspaper As-
sociation of America in the 1990s showed that the percentage of people who  can  accurately 
remember  the  name  of  the  brand  they  last  saw  advertised  on television had fallen to an
all-time low of 4% of those surveyed. Indeed, 86% of TV viewers claim not to attend to regular
commercial breaks. And although we talk about “great” ads that we saw on television last

 
Media in the Marketing Context  11
night, or perhaps something we read in a newspaper or magazine, we are probably unlike-
ly to remember the brand that was being advertised. Is Tiger Woods the spokesperson for 
Buick or Chrysler? Does Britney Spears advertise Coca-Cola or Pepsi? In today’s increasingly 
competitive marketing climate, consumers are also likely to be exposed to more than one 
brand name in an ad. This comparison  advertising  is  extremely  common  in  categories  
such  as  analgesics, automobiles, and detergents. But although your brand, Brand A, em-
phasizes how much better it is than Brand B, will your target audience remember A or B?
How the Media Specialist Gets to Know Consumers and Brands
Finding out how aware your consumers are of your brand and its advertising is 
quite straightforward, although not without pitfalls. The easiest way to do this is through a 
survey  (mail,  telephone,  or  in  person)  in  which  you  simply  ask  people  what  they 
remember about certain ads. You can do this in one of two ways: unaided, where no prompts 
or assistance are provided; or aided, where you offer some kind of memory aid, such as men-
tioning something from the advertisement or giving an actual list of brand names  and  asking  
for  further  information  on  the  advertising.  The  unaided  method demands more on the 
part of consumers, asking them to tap deeper into their memories to recall the information you 
are seeking. With the aided method, you are basically asking people to recognize a brand and/or 
advertisement when it is placed before them, and then prompting them for additional information 
about it. 1
There are other issues to keep in mind with brand-awareness research. The most impor-
tant is that you cannot expect complete accuracy. That is, there is always the danger with 
any kind of memory check that you will not get full information from the people you 
survey. Obviously, the longer the time between when people see an ad and when they are 
questioned about it, the less they will remember about it. Human memory is highly falli-
ble. They may attribute pieces of one ad to another ad, or recite a list of brand attributes 
from Brand A that really belong to Brand B. So, if you do test consumer awareness of 
your ads, be sure to keep in mind the possibility of inaccuracies in the responses.
In addition, you must remember that all of these responses are what consumers claim 
to recognize or recall. Even if you give people a questionnaire to fill out on their own, 
they may not put down their real feelings or thoughts. They might not want to offend the 
interviewer or admit how they really feel, or for whatever reason do not want to tell the 
truth. For instance, they may have only a vague recollection of your brand’s name, but 
they may nevertheless write down that they are very familiar with it.
1 “Recall  and  Recognition:  A Very  Close  Relationship,”  Jan  Stapel,  Journal  of  Advertising
Research, vol. 38, no. 4, July/August 1998, 41–46.

 
12  The Media Handbook
Having said that, awareness checks do play a vital role in letting you know more about 
how your consumer interacts with the brand and its advertising. If no one can recall your 
brand name after it has been advertised on television every day for the past year, then you 
have a problem. It could be the message isn’t convincing at all, or it could be you are 
advertising it in the wrong medium. Perhaps people can recall the brand name very easily 
but nothing about the advertising has stuck in their minds.
The goal of increasing brand awareness should not be understated. It is commonly accepted 
that without consumer awareness of your brand, even the most spectacular media plan will 
be unlikely to generate many sales. People are far more likely to purchase a  brand  whose  name  
they  have  heard  before  than  one  about  which  they  have  no information. There are many 
companies that conduct this kind of research. Some of the larger ones are listed in Appendix A.
If you want to probe further into people’s responses, then you can find out more 
through focus groups, which are groups of 5 to 10 people who are interviewed together 
by a moderator. They are probed for their beliefs, attitudes, or feelings toward a given 
brand or product category and its advertis ing to help in development of the 
creative message as well as the marketing and media strategy.
A newer,  more  in-depth  technique  for  understanding  consumers,  at  least  in  the 
marketing world, is the use of ethnography. Developed in sociology and anthropology, 
the technique involves close observation of what consumers are doing. This may include 
visiting their homes to watch them prepare a meal (for a brand like Kraft salad dressing) 
or spending a few hours with them in the gym (for a brand like Nike). The idea is to see 
up close how the brand or product category really fits into people’s lives.2
2 See “Consuming Rituals,” Lawrence Osborne, New York Times Magazine, January 13, 2002,
28–31; “Visual Attention to Programming and Commercials: The Use of In-Home Observations,” 
Dean M.Krugman, Glen T.Cameron, and Candace McKearney White, Journal of Advertising, vol. 
24, no. 1, Spring 1995, 1–12.
The Consumer Decision Process
Many research studies have been conducted over the years to demonstrate the decision 
process that a consumer typically goes through when buying a routine product. In its 
simplest form, this process has three steps:
1. Think.
2. Feel.
3. Do.
People must first think about the item (i.e., be aware of it and know it exists). They must 
then develop some kind of attitude or feeling toward it (i.e., like it and prefer it to others); 
and, finally, they must take some action with regard to it (decide on it, and actually buy 
it). This latter stage is the do part of the model.
The process is in fact far more involved than this. We can break these three stages 
down further, coming up with the following eight stages the consumer goes through in 
buying a product or service:

 
Media in the Marketing Context  13
1. Need.
2. Awareness.
3. Preference.
4. Search.
5. Selection.
6. Purchase.
7. Use.
8. Satisfaction.
To begin with, consumers must first have a need to fulfill. They then become aware of 
the  brands  available  to  satisfy  that  need.  After  that,  several  brands  are  considered 
acceptable, and a preference is developed for one or more of them. The consumer will 
then search for the brand(s) desired, and make a selection of one over the others. A 
specific brand is purchased and used. Finally, the level of satisfaction obtained with that 
purchase helps determine whether that brand is bought on a future occasion. This is 
discussed in detail in the next chapter.
Of course, in reality, life isn’t always as simple. There are occasions (and products) where 
people think about a product, buy it, and only at that point do they develop attitudes 
toward it. This is especially true for new product launches, where consumers have not 
had a chance to develop emotional bearings for the brand or category. Another point to keep 
in mind is that the decision process can sometimes get stalled at a point before purchase. In 
our previous Razor Sharp example, your male target may become aware of the brand, decide 
that he’d like to buy it, and be unable to find it in his grocery store or pharmacy. As a result, 
he may give up. Or he could try it and then decide he prefers to stick with Gillette’s product.
How the Consumer Buys Products
One of the main drawbacks to using surveys or holding discussions with consumers about how 
they buy is that they are telling you what they think they do, which may be very different  
from  what  they  actually  do  in  real  life.  Moreover,  measuring  their  brand awareness 
and advertising recall often ends up being a poor predictor of sales. So, in addition 
to looking at awareness, or the top of the decision tree, you should also pay atten-
tion to what is happening at the bottom of the tree, with the purchase cycle. When are 
people buying your product? How much is bought? Is there some kind of seasonality to 
their purchases? All of this information will prove to be critical in planning and buying 
your media, and it will have a major impact on how and when you schedule your ads.
When Do People Buy?
The answer to this question is more complex than it seems at first. You might say, “Well, they 
buy my product all the time.” But, if you look more closely at purchase behavior, you will 
probably detect some kind of pattern. People are buying houses “all the time,” but 
they are more likely to do so when interest rates are low and prices are depressed. People

 
14  The Media Handbook
buy cars “all the time,” but sales increase when the new models come into the showrooms 
in the fall. In addition, more sales occur in the second half of the month than in the first. 
Even everyday kinds of items have a timing component to purchases. Sales of cheese are higher 
on the weekends and around paydays because that is when people have more money to go 
shopping. Moving companies are busiest between May and October because that is when 
most people change their residence. Greeting card sales go up before every holiday (whether 
traditional, e.g., Christmas; or “Hallmark holidays,” e.g., Grandparent’s Day and Boss’ Day).
If you know when consumers are most likely to buy your product, then you can time 
your media advertising to take advantage of that purchase cycle. For major purchases, in 
particular, you might also want to consider when people are thinking about buying. This 
might occur several weeks, or even months, before they make the actual purchase. In other 
words, the Smiths might buy a new Carrier air conditioner in July, but they will probably start to 
think about which one several months prior to that time. This provides you with a valuable 
opportunity to get your brand’s message to the Smiths early in their decision-making process.
How Much Do They Buy?
The size of consumer purchases is another important element of the purchase cycle with 
which the media specialist should be familiar. That is, what proportion of your brand’s 
sales comes from each size of the product? For Coca-Cola, it offers numerous sizes of its 
soda, from 12-ounce cans, to 2-liter bottles, to six-packs. The company needs to know 
which one is the most popular. Do most people buy their soda in plastic bottles, glass 
bottles, or cans? Does Coke sell three times as many cans as bottles, perhaps suggesting 
that this is where the majority of messages should focus? It turns out that nearly 40% of 
Coca-Cola volume consumed in a 7-day period is in glass bottles, with around 30% each from 
cans and from plastic bottles (MRI, 2004). This kind of information is not only important 
for production and distribution purposes, it can also play a key role in your media planning, 
because the users of each size are likely to be different kinds of people with different media 
habits. As seen in Exhibit 2.3, the person who chooses to drink glasses of Coca-Cola 
EXHIBIT 2.3 Profile of Coca-Cola buyer
Male
Precision/Crafts/Repair 
Household income $60,000–74,999 
Census region: South 
A county (urban)
Rent home 
Source: MRI 2004

 
Media in the Marketing Context  15
is more likely to be male, with an above-average household income, living in urban areas 
in the South of the country, and working in precision, craft, or repair jobs, whereas the 
can drinker is more likely to be a working professional female who is married, college-
educated, and living in the north central region of the country. Young working women 
prefer to watch programs such as “The Simple Life” and “The Bachelorette” and read 
Cosmopolitan and Glamour; older adults are more likely to choose “60 Minutes” and 
Reader’s Digest. Based on these differences in media preference, you may well end up 
with two media plans—one for the occasional purchaser of the single can, and another for 
the frequent user who consumes several plastic bottles per week.
LOOKING AT THE MARKETPLACE
Once you know about how consumers view and use your brand, the next step for the 
media specialist is to examine what has been happening to that brand in the marketplace 
in recent times. Given this information on past efforts to sell your product, you can decide 
whether to continue along the same path or try something different in terms of your 
media planning and buying. Examining the marketplace involves doing an analysis of 
historical data on both the brand and the product category. As the famous philosopher 
George Santayana said, those who do not learn from the past are condemned to repeat it.
Some of the basic questions the media specialist might ask include the following:
•   How long has this brand been available?
•   How successful has it been throughout its history?
•   How has it been positioned in the past?
•   What do you know about the company that makes this brand?
You can think of this as genealogical work in that you are trying to dig up as much “family 
background” on the brand as possible. You may find that the company has been in business for 
150 years, suggesting possible leverage to be gained by emphasizing in the message the long 
heritage the brand possesses and even placing it in media vehicles that have also been around a 
long time. Or perhaps the company has been around forever, but it is now moving in a different 
direction and starting to explore new opportunities, suggesting the use of new or different
media. Altoids, for example, for many years has made only mints. Recently, it started 
expanding its product line; first, it created sour candy, then it began moving into the 
highly competitive chewing gum arena. Despite the fierce competition, the brand 
captured several market share points because it responded to the underlying consumer 
desire for a stronger tasting food to eat between meals. But the new product may be 
targeted at different groups of consumers, which in turn may result in a need for more 
diverse and/or more selective media. Although its traditional mint brand would continue 
to have a strong outdoor billboard and print presence to reach a broad audience, the gum 
would have more appeal to teens and young adults, who might not have seen the ads 
much before. The company could feature its gum in titles such as Seventeen or  Maxim, 
appealing to younger people who want to have the latest new products.

 
16  The Media Handbook
WHAT ARE THE COMPETITORS UP TO?
In doing an historical analysis of the brand, you must also deal with competitive issues. 
That  is,  you  should  not  only  explore  and  uncover  as  much  marketing  and  media 
information as possible about your own brand, but you also need to do the same for all 
the brands against which you do or plan to compete. The marketing part of these issues 
may be divided into three main areas: product category trends, brand trends and share of 
market, and brand’s share of requirements.
Product Category Trends
Whether your brand has been available for half a century, 2 years, or is about to be launched, 
one of the most important preplanning considerations for the media specialist concerns what is 
happening in your product category. If you are creating a media plan for the manufacturer 
of a Cannondale mountain bike, then you would want to know whether sales of bicycles 
are increasing, decreasing, or flat. That will immediately influence your media budget, who 
you choose to target, and how you go about trying to reach that group. In some instances, 
in order to determine how the category has fared, you will have to decide what your “category” 
really is. If you are selling an oatmeal cookie, then it might seem obvious that it belongs 
in the cookie category. But perhaps this is a low calorie, low cholesterol  cookie  that  be-
longs  more  appropriately  in  the  “diet  and  health  food” classification. Does a yogurt 
drink fit better into yogurt products or milk drinks? And what about children’s software? 
Does it belong with general software or children’s media, such as books and videos?
How you define your product category will determine not only your assessment of the 
strengths or weaknesses of that category, but also the direction and potential marketing and me-
dia strategies you employ for your particular brand. To take the software example, if you decide 
it is part of the general software category, then you might want to send direct mail to people 
who have registered their own software and indicated that there are children in the household. 
If it is classified as a children’s product, however, then you will probably do consumer 
advertising in parenting books such as Child magazine. You could also work with schools 
and libraries to offer special deals offering a free CD if they purchase three titles. Or, you might 
choose to advertise the product to both target groups using a combination of those media.
There are numerous stories in advertising lore of how the redefinition of a product category 
gave new life to a moribund product or service. Altoids mints was a small brand with 
little cachet and low usage. But through unusual advertising focusing on people’s desire 
for a strong-tasting mint that refreshes and even excites, the brand took off. Perhaps the 
most renowned case of redefinition is that of Arm and Hammer Baking Soda. By finding 
a new use for an established product (keeping refrigerators smelling fresh), the  brand  in  
effect  positioned  itself  in  two  completely  distinct  categories—baking products and 
home fresheners. Today, it has a huge market share in the latter category, and has 
expanded into numerous other cleanser-related areas, from carpet freshener to toothpaste.

 
Media in the Marketing Context  17
Industry 
SIC Code Advertising as % of sales
Real estate agents and managers 
6531 
14.0
Amusement parks 
7996 
9.6
Books: Publishing and printing 
2731 
7.7
Furniture stores 
5712 
5.9
Jewelry stores 
5944 
4.6
Cigarettes 
2111 
4.0
Eating places 
5812 
3.2
Women’s clothing stores 
5621 
2.7
Shoe stores 
5661 
2.4
Poultry slaughter and processing 
2015 
2.3
Computer communication equipment 
3576 
2.2
Bakery products 2050 
2050 
1.2
Grocery stores 
5411 
1.1
Motion picture theaters 
7830 
1.0
Once you have determined in which product category your brand rightfully belongs (or the 
category in which you wish it to belong), you are then in a position to examine trends in that 
category. You can do this in one of several ways. You may have access to product category 
sales from a trade association or manufacturers’ group of some kind (e.g., the Juvenile Products 
Manufacturers Association, if you are marketing children’s toys; or the Electronics Industries 
Association, if you are marketing electronics items). You can often find such data in trade 
journals in your particular field (e.g., Supermarket News for supermarket food sales or Chemical 
Week for sales of liquid nitrogen). One invaluable source for this type of information is Sales 
and Marketing Management, which comes out several  times  a  year  with  overall  category  
sales.  Advertising  Age  also  produces  an advertising-to-sales ratio in all major product cat-
egories annually that shows spending on advertising relative to sales (see Exhibit 2.4). In many 
larger companies, these data are routinely collected, usually within the marketing department.
In looking at category trends, be careful to look back beyond the past year. In fact, if 
you can find 5 to 10 years of data, you’ll be in a much stronger position to see the real 
trends. Another important point to remember is that there will be many factors to explain 
the rise or fall of product sales. These trends do not occur in a vacuum.
Interpreting Sales Trends. Four factors that help explain sales trends are economic, 
social, political, and cultural trends. Each will, in turn, influence your media choices. For 
instance, if you are selling a new high-end plasma TV with lots of fancy features, then the 
overall health of the economy is going to have a large impact on whether or not people feel 
they can afford  to spend  the money  on such a piece of  entertainment  equipment. If you 
EXHIBIT 2.4 Example ad:sales ratio
Source: AdAge.com, 2005

 
18  The Media Handbook
decide that despite the economic downturn you want to emphasize a sophisticated image 
for your product, aiming it at innovators who always want to buy the latest equipment, then 
you might use magazines targeted to electronics aficionados, such as Electronic House or 
Sound & Vision. If, on the other hand, you choose to emphasize how the large screen 
returns TV to a family viewing experience, then you might look to a broader audience 
and use more popular, broad-based vehicles like Family Fun or Entertainment Weekly.
Politics can play an important role in the marketing of goods and services. For satellite 
TV services trying to promote themselves to rival cable subscribers, what happens in 
Washington at the Federal Communication Commission, or in state or local politics will 
affect what they are allowed to sell and whether consumers are likely to buy the service. In 
1999, satellite TV companies were allowed, for the first time, to beam local channels to their 
subscribers, a feature that had previously been banned and, therefore, impeded the growth 
of satellite services. They were quick to advertise this new benefit to prospective customers.
Cultural changes, although slower to occur, can also explain movements in product 
sales that have implications for media planning and buying. This is seen in the growth of 
ethnic foods, such as Mexican or Chinese dishes. The increasing popularity of different 
ethnic food products can be attributed in part to the enormous growth of Hispanic and 
other immigrant populations in the United States, leading to a greater diversity of cultures 
that are gradually intermingling and changing tastes and preferences. People living in the 
West are 17% more likely than the average to consume soy sauce, and 9% less likely than 
the norm to eat ketchup. The marketers of these foods try different ways of reaching their 
target audiences, for example, through product sampling in stores or sponsorship of 
community events.
Finally, social changes, which also tend to happen slowly, can ultimately have a major 
impact on media activities. The cigarette companies of today have a much tougher job 
selling their product than they did 20 or 30 years ago, primarily because smoking is no 
longer considered socially acceptable due to its proven health risks. The marketing task is 
made  more  difficult  because  since  1971  they  have  been  forbidden,  by  law,  from 
advertising on television at all, and since 1999, from being on any outdoor billboards.
So whereas you, as a media specialist, may not have to pinpoint all the reasons behind 
category trends, it is important for you to gain a broad understanding of what is really 
happening in the category and not simply limit yourself to whether sales are up or down. 
Having this additional background  information will help you decide which media you 
can or should be using in your plan.
What Should You Measure? Another important issue when looking at category trends 
is deciding which trends you should be measuring: Sales? Units? Volume? The answer to 
this may ultimately depend on the types of data you are able to obtain, but you need to 
keep in mind that what seems to be a trend when examining one number may disappear or 
be reversed if you turn to another. For example, although sales of your screwdrivers could 
be going up in dollar terms, you may actually be selling fewer units if sales are rising primarily 
due to price increases (i.e., you make more money on each unit sold, but sell fewer units 
as a result). When looking at category trends in dollar terms, always remember to factor 
in the effects of inflation. What may seem to be a 7% annual growth rate could turn out to 
be a 2% to 3% rate after accounting for inflation. Perhaps the category trend line shows 
that the number of units of shampoo sold is declining, but volume is holding steady.

 
Media in the Marketing Context  19
This might occur if the unit size has been enlarged, so the same total volume is being sold 
but in larger bottles. Again, ideally, you want to look at several trend lines using diverse 
measurements so that you can get an overall picture of what is going on in the category.
Brand Trends
When you turn your attention to individual brands, you perform similar analyses to those 
done at the category level. This time, however, you focus your attention on specific brand 
names. The use of the plural here is critical: You are not just looking at how your brand 
has been doing over the past several years, but even more importantly, you need to track 
how your brand’s competitors have been faring during that same period. This requires 
finding the answers to the following questions:
• How many competitors are there?
• How many of these are major, and how many minor? In some categories, 
where  there  are  just  a  few  players  (e.g.,  the  airline  industry),  you  should 
probably  consider  all  of  them,  but  in  larger  categories  (e.g.,  fast  food 
restaurants), where myriad companies have offerings, you will do better to pay 
attention to those you believe are your most serious threats. In certain instances, 
it is a good idea to look at all of the competitors regardless of their size; you 
may find that the fourth-tier player of 3 years ago has gradually been gaining 
market share and is now a far bigger concern. For several years, Dell computers
was largely ignored by the likes of IBM and Compaq. Today, however, Dell is 
the number one seller of personal computers, and IBM no longer makes them.
• How is the category characterized? Is it an oligopoly, where 3 or 4 brands 
define the category, or are there 20 or 30 brands each shouting to be heard?
•  How  aggressively do  the  brands in  this category compete against one 
another? For example, is it advertising driven, or promotion driven, or does 
everyone rely heavily on direct mail? You can answer this either from your own 
experience in the category, or by looking at any available syndicated data on 
competitive media expenditures.
For each competitor (ideally for all of them, but at least for the major ones), you must 
also find out the following:
• What is the company’s financial position? This can be found by looking at 
stock market information or Standard & Poors reports, where available, or by 
obtaining a recent issue of the company’s annual report.
• How does the competitor position its brand? To determine this, you will have to 
use your own judgment. Examine the advertising for the brand and see what is being 
emphasized. Is it similar to your own current efforts, or not? If it is dissimilar, is that 
because there is an actual differ-ence between the two brands, or do consumers just 
perceive a distinction between them? And who has the more favorable position?

 
20  The Media Handbook
• How does the competitor promote its brand? Which media are used? How much 
does the competitor spend to promote its brand? Where and when does it spend  
its  money?  The  answers  to  these  questions  may  come  from  several sources. 
Many large companies, and/or their agencies, subscribe to syndicated competitive 
spending data from either TNS-Sofres or Nielsen Monitor Plus. Both show, on a 
weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual basis, how much money was spent by a 
brand in each major media category (see Exhibit 2.5). Smaller businesses may simply 
try to keep track of where their competitors’ ads are appearing. This is not too difficult 
if you are dealing with a local product, but gets more complicated the wider the 
area that you or your competitors try to cover. You can also subscribe to a clip-
ping service that will do the tracking for you (see Appendix A for more on this).
Share of Market. Once you have looked at the trends for your brand and its competitors, 
you must then put that information together and see how your brand is faring in the marketplace. 
The percentage of total category sales that your brand enjoys is known as the market share. You 
should try to examine how this figure has changed over time. Have you been gaining or 
losing market share in the past few years? Again, be careful to avoid oversimplifying the 
picture. It could be that you have been losing market share, but because  of  the  entry  of  
several  new  brands  into  the  category,  so  have  your  major competitors. We can see 
this in the media arena in television. Whereas 10 years ago the four broadcast networks 
commanded 90% of the prime time audience, today fewer than half of all viewers tune in 
to ABC, CBS, FOX, or NBC at that time, with the remainder watching cable networks.
Share of Requirements
One of the most useful pieces of information you can examine is the source of your brand’s 
sales. This is known as the share of requirements. It is calculated by taking the percentage 
of total category volume accounted for by a particular brand’s users. Quite simply, it tells you 
whether your brand is being bought primarily by your customers or by your various competitors’ 
customers. And, conversely, how much of your competitors’ sales are coming from your brand 
users. Looking at this figure, you will be able to determine what percentage of the volume that 
you sell is accounted for by your users, as opposed to people who usually buy another brand. 

 
Media in the Marketing Context  21

 
22  The Media Handbook
TABLE 2.1 Example of share of requirements
 
Total Category
Volume
Brand Share 
Volume
Brand Share of 
Requirements
National
Pretzels
38% 
25% 
65%
Regional
Pretzels
42 
29 
69
Pioneer Pretzels 
27 
15 
55
Other Brands 
9 
5 
65
Let’s  say  you  are  a  manufacturer  of  a  local  brand  of  pretzels  (Pioneer  Pretzels),
competing with other regional brands as well as a major national brand. As you can see in
Table 2.1, Pioneer Pretzels buyers account for 27% of all the pretzels sold in the last 30
days. Of all the pretzels they purchase, 15% of their usage is to your brand (Pioneer), and
12% is to other brands. This means that 55% (15%/27%) of their total category volume is
given to your brand, which gives Pioneer a 55% share of requirements. This is the lowest
figure among all pretzel types, suggesting that Pioneer’s users are not especially brand
loyal, which could harm sales and future market share.
WHERE IS YOUR BRAND SOLD?
Once you have found out as much as possible about how your brand stacks up against the
competition,  you  need  to  think  about  geographic  and  distribution  considerations.
Specifically, you must look at where your brand is selling well and where it is doing poorly both 
in terms of markets, regions, or states, and in terms of type of retail outlet. This holds true 
whether your brand is available on a national, regional, or local basis. Unless your product is 
sold in just one store or location, there are likely to be some differences in sales according
to geography and distribution outlet. What you discover by looking at the sales for your
brand in these ways may lead you to develop a media plan with regional or local differences.
Indeed, more marketers have adopted a regional approach to selling, realizing that people 
in Boise have different tastes, customs, and buying habits than people in Boston or Baton
Rouge. So marketers are customizing their marketing and media plans (and, in some cases, their
products) to meet the needs of specific areas of the country. Although some regional differences 
are obvious, such as higher snowblower sales in Maine than in Arizona, others might seem sur-
prising (e.g., the fact that insecticides sell most heavily in the South). These types of differences 
occur not just at the product category level, but also for individual brands. Dannon yogurt sells 
far better on the East Coast than does Yoplait, which has traditionally been stronger in the West.
To  understand  geographic  skews,  the  media  specialist  can  turn  to  two  pieces  of 
information: development indices and market share.

 
Media in the Marketing Context 23
Development Indices
You could, in theory, obtain sales data from every region or store in the country and look
through them to find out your brand’s sales picture. But a more efficient method for
analyzing geographic strengths and weaknesses is to look at how the product category is
doing across the United States and, then, how the brand is developing over time. Both of
these are calculated by using developmental indices.
Category  Development  Index.  The  category  development  index  (GDI)  looks  at
product  category  sales  in  each  potential  region  or  market.  A norm,  or  average,  is
calculated at 100, and then each area is assigned a value relative to that, expressed as a percent.
Numbers below 100 indicate the category has lower than average sales in a given region,
whereas those above 100 suggest sales of the category are greater than the national aver-
age in a certain part of the country. If, on average, 30,000 tractors are sold per month per
region across the United States, that might mean 25,000 units are sold in the East, 45,000
in the West, and 33,000 in the South. Eastern sales would index at 83 (25,000/30,000),
meaning that sales in that area are 17% below the national norm, whereas sales in the
West would have a GDI of 150 (45,000/30,000), indicating that that region’s sales are
50% higher than average. Those in the South have a GDI of 110 (33,000/30,000), which
shows that southern sales are 10% higher than the norm. Based on such information, a
company might decide to concentrate its marketing and media efforts in those regions
with higher GDIs, because that is where there is greater potential for all tractor sales.
Brand  Development  Index.  You  should  not  rely  solely  on  the  GDI  in  making
geographic media decisions, however. You also need to look at how your brand stacks up
against other brands in the category. One tool for this job is the brand development index
(BDI). The calculation is very similar to that of the GDI. You calculate a norm, or
average, for all brands (or chief competitors) in the category, which is again set at 100,
and then see how your own brand is doing in comparison. The John Deere tractor
company might find its BDI for tractor sales is 10% above average in the eastern region
and 5% below the norm in the West, suggesting that it is doing better than other brands in
the category in the East, but slightly less well in comparison in the West.
When you look at the BDI, you need to keep the GDI in mind too. Once you have these
two sets of data, you should compare your BDI to your GDI. In that way you will be able
to find those markets where your brand is doing better than the category overall and, conversely,
where your brand appears to be underperforming the category (see Exhibit 2.6). For John Deere,
its eastern BDI is greater than the GDI, so the brand is doing better than the category in that
region. In the West, however, its BDI is below the GDI, so there is room for improvement here.
Armed with this information, you may choose to adopt one of three possible marketing
and media strategies. You can focus your attention on those areas of the country where
your brand is doing better than the category, playing to your strengths. Or you might
choose to give more attention (and money) to the weaker markets where the category is
doing well but your brand isn’t in an attempt to bolster your sales there. Alternatively,
you might decide to play it safe and concentrate on markets where both category and
brand are successful. The one strategy you should probably avoid is pouring money into
areas where both brand and category are doing poorly, because that suggests there is
something about all the brands that  is  not  liked  or  does  not  meet  the  needs  of  those

 
24  The Media Handbook
consumers. To try and rectify that situation single-handedly is probably going to be more 
trouble (and cost) than it is worth.
EXHIBIT 2.6 BDI versus CDI
Market Share
When looking at the development indices you can also find out how your competition is 
doing in each territory and calculate their BDIs. It is common to see that where your 
brand is doing well, your competitors are having a harder time, and vice versa. The 
exception here would be for a new or relaunched category where all brands are selling 
well, such as flavored water.
One way of investigating sales further in geographic terms is to look at your share of 
the market by region or locality. Is your brand number one in sales in the Central region 
but in third place in the South? Are you neck-and-neck in New York, but a distant second 
in Florida? Faced with these different scenarios, you should explore some of the possible 
reasons behind the distinctions. And here you should go back to the other “Ps” of the 
marketing process. Perhaps you have distribution problems in Florida that are harming 
sales. Maybe your brand is being undercut in price in the South by a local manufacturer. 
Or it could be that your chief competitor is flooding the local airwaves with promotional 
messages in New York and drowning out yours. By putting together the information you 
gather from the development indices with your market share figures, you will start to 
create a picture of how your brand is doing across the country. That will help you decide 
what marketing and media tactics might be needed in each situation.
The media plan will not be the miracle solution to all of the problems you might 
encounter, and you should not expect it to turn a floundering brand into a superstar. But, 
as we shall see in subsequent chapters, the better your understanding of the marketing 
situation your brand is in, the more likely you are to come up with creative solutions to 
the problems. For example, if your problem is distribution, then you might want to 
include  extra  trade  promotions  or  incentives  in  your  plan  to  encourage  retailers  or

 
Media in the Marketing Context  25
distributors to push your brand further. Pricing discrepancies might be alleviated by
offering a coupon or on-pack premium to offset the lower priced competitors. And if your 
consumers are being faced with a barrage of competitive messages in one medium, then it
might be wise to consider placing your own advertising in completely different media, or 
perhaps  move  to  non  traditional  media  or  special  events  to  raise  your  own  voice
elsewhere.
Finally, if possible, you should try and look at your brand’s geographic strengths and
weaknesses over time to see where the trends are going. Have you always been weaker in 
the Southwest, or does this seem to have started only in the past year? Is the overall 
category development index flattening out across the country, or is it moving to different 
areas? This is especially likely to be true for new product categories when they are first
introduced, as was the case when the low carbohydrate craze started. As always, looking 
at several years of data will help you to avoid acting on “blips” in the numbers that might 
have disappeared without cause within a few months.
CONSUMERS AND MEDIA
Although a successful marketing plan requires a thorough understanding of consumers’
relationships with the brand, increasingly there is the realization that a similarly thorough 
knowledge is needed to learn how consumers interact with media. Subsequent chapters 
explore in greater detail the characteristics of each major media form, but here we
introduce the notion of the value of media context, or environment.
As you start to learn more about the way consumers use and think about your brand, 
you can also begin to investigate how they use and think about media. Do your tractor 
owners, for example, rely on the early morning farming report on the radio? Are they 
going online to check on crop prices? With the Razor Sharp brand, are the men you want
to reach with your message about its reusability interested in men’s health and fitness 
magazines? If so, how do they read them and what do they think about them? And, in
both cases, how do they respond to ads placed in those key media contexts, as compared
to seeing the same message placed elsewhere?
The impact of context has long been explored by the academic community, primarily
by looking at the effects of consumer involvement with the media in which ads appear. 
(Consult selection of articles.3)
The advertising industry has more recently begun exploring media context. Agencies
such as Starcom Mediavest Group, with its consumer context planning (CCP) function, or 
3“Editorial Environment and Advertising Effectiveness,” Valentine Appel, Journal of Advertising
Research, vol. 27, No. 4, August/September 1987, 11–16. “A Cross-Media Study of Audience
Choice:  The  Influence  of  Media  Attitudes  on  Individual  Selection  of  ‘Media  Repertoires,’” 
Elizabeth Gigi Taylor and Wei-Na Lee, Proceedings of the 2004 Conference of the American 
Academy of Advertising, 39–48. “Magazine Reader Involvement Improves ROI,” Britta C.Ware, 
ESOMAR, Print Audience Measurement, LA, June 2003. “The Medium Is Part of the Message,” 
Maria  Christina  Moya  Schilling,  Karin  Wood  and  Alan  Branthwaite,  ESOMAR,  Reinventing 
Advertising, Rio, November 2000, 207–229

 
26  The Media Handbook
Media Kitchen with its communication planning approach are each recognizing that media
should be thought of more from the consumers’ viewpoint, and it is no longer enough  to
know  basic  media  usage  figures  (how  often  a  program  is  watched  or  a magazine read). 
Rather, consumers’ relationships with the media can be critical to the way they respond to
the brand message. The highly positive reaction to General Motors’ Hummer H2 vehicle
when it was introduced in 2003 was attributed in  part  to  the  finding  that  the  consumers
being  targeted  had  an  extremely  strong relationship with news-oriented media. The inclusion 
of more of that genre in the media plan,  instead  of  the  more  traditional  new  vehicle
launch  of  high-profile  network television, helped H2 far surpass its first-year sales goals
We shall return to the CCP concept throughout the discussion of media in this book.
A WORD ABOUT BUDGETS
One of the most important preplanning issues to look at is how much money you are like-
ly to have to spend for media for the coming year. You may be given a specific amount
upfront, or you may have a range within which to work. In many situations, the media specialist
is likely to come up with two or three alternative media plans at different spending levels,
showing what could be achieved with $500,000, versus $1 million, versus $2 million, for
example. We will say more about this in chapter 7. If possible, try to be flexible on the
budget at this point, keeping in mind that if you lock yourself into a set figure from the 
very beginning, then you may limit your creativity later on when you put the plan together
TIMING AND OTHER ISSUES
The last major area to explore in the preplanning phase is that of timing. This may include the 
month of the year, the week of the month, the day of the week, or the hour of the day. Although 
some timing considerations can be rationalized and justified, others may be out of your control. 
Some companies skew their messages toward pay periods, such as the 15th and 30th of the 
month, knowing that people are more likely to spend money on paydays. Packaged-goods
marketers may choose an end-of-week schedule to reflect the increase in grocery store shopping
from Wednesday through Friday. Other considerations may be out of your control. The CEO of
the company that makes your brand  of  sports  drink  may  demand  that  you  purchase
television  time  during  the Wimbledon tennis tournament. He not only likes tennis but wants to 
get tickets to the event. The marketing manager may refuse to have the brand advertised 
in any magazine that accepts cigarette advertisements. Perhaps your candy company has been 
a sponsor of a local parade for the past 50 years and you cannot break with that tradition.
There might also be key timing opportunities that you should consider. If you are going 
into a Summer or Winter Olympics year, then you might want to look for some way to tie
your brand into that. Although this sounds out of the league of any but the largest national
advertisers, there may be an Olympic swim team member in your own town whom your
brand of swim goggles could support in some way. Or, if your city is celebrating its 200th

 
Media in the Marketing Context  27
anniversary and your pen factory has been around for almost as long, then you could get
involved in the preparations for related events. If next year has been designated the Year 
of the Child, then you can look for opportunities to promote your diaper brand. Be alert
and open to new ideas and opportunities such as these that might come along infrequently
and sporadically but could greatly enhance your brand’s profile and help sales locally,
regionally, or even nationally.
SUMMARY
Before getting down to this year’s plan it is important to know as much as possible about 
what has happened in the past. Find out as much as possible about how your company 
has operated in previous years, how your brand has performed, and what the competitors 
have done. Looking at trends in the product category is not only helpful, but might lead to
new ways to define or position what you have to sell. Be aware of cultural, social, and 
economic forces that might impact your performance. As you examine your brand, 
consider who its real competitors are and learn about their past and present marketing 
plans. Determine your brand’s share of market and share of requirements, too.
Preplanning should also include an analysis of geographic variations in sales through 
category and brand development indices. Think about how consumers purchase and use 
your brand, how aware they are of it and its advertising, and when and how much they
actually buy.
As you learn more about consumers’ relationship with your brand and its competitors,
also consider how they respond to the media that are important to their lives. Examining
the context, or environment, of your brand’s messages can provide critical information 
early on in the planning process that will be helpful as you develop your plans. Finally,
keep in mind any budgeting or timing constraints that will affect your media plan.
CHECKLIST—MEDIA IN THE MARKETING CONTEXT
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. 
Have you considered all elements of the marketing mix (price, place, product, and 
promotions)?
How much do consumers know about your brand?
Do you need to conduct research on your consumer through focus groups, 
surveys, or analysis of syndicated data?
When do consumers buy your product? Which time of year, month, day of week, 
or time of day?
How much do consumers buy? Is there a difference by product size or flavor?
Have you analyzed the history of your brand (how long it has been available, how 
successful it has been in the past, how it has been positioned in the past)? Include 
the company’s history here too.
What are your brand’s chief competitors doing?
What are the product category trends?
How is your brand faring compared to competitors in terms of market share and share of 
requirements?

 
28  The Media Handbook
How does each major competitor position its brand and promote it?
Have you calculated the category and brand development indices for your brand?
Are there regional differences for your brand’s sales and market share?
Do your consumers have any special relationships with particular media that 
might affect their response to brand messages?
Have you considered any timing issues for the brand?
10.
11. 
12.
13.
14.

 
CHAPTER 3
Developing Optimal Media Objectives
Setting objectives is something we are all familiar with in our day-to-day lives. “I will get
an ‘A’ on this test;” “I’ll lose 10 pounds by Christmas;” “My goal is to become the CEO
of the company by the time I reach 35.” Whatever the objective may be, if you didn’t
have one, then it would be difficult to know what you’ve achieved!
In the media planning context, you need to establish firm objectives for your plan in
order to demonstrate how it will help your brand achieve its marketing goals. Although
you may feel that in order to execute a media plan you must keep returning to your
starting  point,  moving  one  step  back  for  every  two  you  go  forward,  it  cannot  be
overemphasized that everything you do on the media planning side must be coordinated
with the overall marketing strategy. Therefore, in order to establish your media objectives
(i.e., what you intend the media plan to achieve), you must first reaffirm and clarify the
goals of your complete advertising program to ensure that your media objectives fit in
with the goals set in your brand’s marketing objectives.
HOW THE MARKETING OBJECTIVE LEADS TO THE MEDIA OBJECTIVE
Media specialists are likely to be presented with the marketing objective rather than
having to develop it on their own. It is usually stated in some quantifiable form, such as
“sell x thousand more widgets in 2006 than in 2005,” or “increase awareness of Brand X
to 75% within calendar year 2006.” It may relate to any of the major marketing functions,
such as in-creasing shelf space in the store, or increasing the number of distribution
channels for your product. Frequently, it is expressed in terms of specific volume and
share goals, such as “within calendar year 2006, bring Brand Z’s total volume sold to
25% of the total category, raising its market share from 35% to 38%.”
If the marketing objective is vague or ill-defined, simply “increasing awareness” or
“improving distribution,” then at the end of the year (or whatever time period has been
set to achieve the goal) there is likely to be considerable debate over whether or not the
plan was successful. It is also going to be more difficult for the media specialist to devise
a plan that satisfies those objectives; even if awareness does improve, how much higher
must it go in order for the media plan to be considered a success?
Along with understanding the marketing objective, the media specialist should also
look at how that objective will be achieved, because that will affect what the media plan
is supposed to do. Examples might be to increase product penetration among potential
users by taking sales away from competitors or bringing new users into the marketplace.
Alternatively,  the  strategy  might  be  to  encourage  people  to  use  your  brand  more
frequently, perhaps offering new uses for it. In order to increase the sales of Ragu
Spaghetti Sauce, the marketing objective might be to get current users to buy additional
jars of the product for use in new and different ways besides just pouring it onto
spaghetti. For the media plan, this could lead to an objective of increasing the frequency

 
30  The Media Handbook
with which target users are exposed to the message to remind them of the various ways 
they can use the product.
For a hospital with the marketing objective of introducing a new children’s critical care 
unit and encouraging more people in the community to choose that facility for their pedi-
atric medical needs, the media objective could be to reach 75% of people who live within  
a  10-mile  perimeter  to  inform  them  of  what  is  now  available.  Clearly,  the 
marketing objective has a major impact on how the media plan develops, affecting the 
target audience, communications used, and media selected.
MEDIA AND THE ADVERTISING OBJECTIVE
As noted earlier, the marketing objective may relate to any of the four major areas of the 
marketing mix (product, promotion, distribution, or price). Therefore, before establishing 
specific media objectives, it is also essential to focus on how the media affect your 
advertising goals. Although your ultimate marketing goal for most goods is to sell more 
product (or services or image), unless your audience finds out about the product through 
the media that you use, that goal is unlikely to be reached. You need to be aware, at the 
same time, of the other marketing mix elements. If the product is no good, then your 
media advertising will have little impact. Similarly, if you advertise your product heavily 
but it isn’t available in most stores, then sales will not improve.
Frequently, the objective of your advertising is tied in to the stage at which the target 
audience is in the decision-making process. As noted earlier, this process breaks down in-
to three very broad areas: Think, Feel, and Do (or, in research-speak, the cognitive, affec-
tive, and conative stages). Once you have decided that you need a new TV set, you will 
think about what brands are available. Then you will consider how you feel about each one 
of them. And, finally, you will  select a particular brand and take action (do) and buy it.
This process can be better understood by revisiting the eight main stages of the 
consumer decision-making process introduced in chapter 2:
1. Need.
2. Awareness.
3. Preference.
4. Search.
5. Selection.
6. Purchase.
7. Use.
8. Satisfaction.
Need
Before you can hope to sell any more widgets, people need a reason to buy them. 
Contrary to what many advertising critics maintain, advertising cannot persuade people to 
buy something they do not want. Indeed, it is often easier to think of this first stage in the 
decision process as reflecting people’s wants, because in today’s industrial society most 
people are able to satisfy their basic needs (e.g., food and shelter).

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives  31
Even when people buy products that seem pointless or silly, such as chia pets or hula hoops,
they may feel they have a need to indulge in it just for fun. And although you might argue that 
no one really has a need for a $ 150,000 BMW, the individuals who choose to purchase one 
clearly feel that they deserve this luxury automobile. Defining what the need might be for the 
product helps the marketer to understand the motivations behind why people might buy it,
which in turn may provide some clues as to ways of reaching those people through the media. 
Although everyone buys shampoo, if you can segment the target into different groups according
to their motivation for use, then you could reach each one through a variety of media forms.
People who are most concerned with how their hair looks may be reached in fashion and beauty 
magazines. Those who want a shampoo with built-in conditioner to help in their busy lives 
may respond to ads in women’s maga-zines that offer advice on juggling multiple roles.
For those who need shampoo designed specifically for dry (or oily or easily tangled) hair, 
then print ads explaining the specific benefits might be more appropriate. And all of that is
just within magazines. Research conducted directly with target consumers may reveal that
different segments have different media habits altogether, leading you, as planner, to determine 
what those media options should be. This is covered in greater details in subsequent chapters, 
but  you should understand how different needs can often lead to different media choices.
Awareness
Once consumers have determined that they need a particular product, it is the job of mar-
keting to make them aware of the available choices. For the media specialist, this means
reaching that consumer in the right place and often enough so that your brand’s message 
is the most relevant and convincing. And it is not enough to simply make people aware of
your brand; the real goal here is to make them aware of your brand’s message. You might
well be able to reach 95% of all cat owners to make them aware of the new cat food that 
you sell, but unless they also learn that your product provides 100% of a cat’s daily  nutri-
tional  requirement,  which  is  more  than  any  other  competitor,  then  your advertising 
is unlikely to increase sales. Of course, keep in mind that although you are promoting your
message,  every other cat food company is also trying to boost awareness of its own brand
Preference
Based on the various choices consumers see and hear, they will then develop specific
brand preferences. Ideally, marketers would like a consumer to develop brand loyalty to
their brand so that every time Julie Smith needs to buy more running shoes, for example,
she  always  chooses  Saucony.  A media  plan  to  enhance  preference  might  include
opportunities for the target audience to try your brand at home, perhaps by offering a free 
sample in magazines or via the Internet.
Search
Once the target audience decides it might prefer your brand over others, the audience’s
next task is to find out where to purchase the item. Here, media advertising can be a big 
help by notifying people of the places that sell your  product. You  have probably  seen or

 
32  The Media Handbook
heard this yourself in local or regional TV and radio ads that list which stores in your area 
stock the item. Billboards can be used as well to display the retailer’s or dealer’s name. A 
web ad can link directly to a local seller of your product. If your audience cannot find the 
product when it wants to buy it, then not even the best advertising placed in the most 
appropriate media will help increase sales.
Selection
Brand selection may seem like an easy stage for the consumer. If a woman has decided 
already that she prefers Cover Girl nail polish over others, and has learned that it is sold in 
Wal-Mart stores, then isn’t it obvious that she will buy it? Not necessarily. Today’s consumer is 
faced with so many different brands that, once in the store and standing in front of the shelf, she 
may decide to go with the competitor’s offering, because it is on sale, it is packaged more 
attractively, or it comes in larger bottles. So the selection process is a crucial stage for the 
marketer and the media specialist to consider. From a media perspective, the nail polish 
user may be encouraged by in-store vehicles such as in-pack  premiums  or  point-of-pur-
chase  radio.  Personal  contacts  can  also  be  very important at this stage. Someone who 
has come into the store in order to buy a midrange computer may be encouraged to select 
your more expensive model by being offered one year of free parts and service by the dealer.
Purchase and Use
Clearly, the ultimate goal of marketing and media plans is to persuade consumers to purchase 
the product. But if they buy it and never use it, then there is no reason for them to ever 
buy another one. No marketer can remain successful by continually targeting new product  
users.  Often,  one  marketing  and  media  objective  is  that  of  encouraging consumers 
to use the brand. In media planning terms, this might involve increasing the message frequency 
so that users are reminded of the different ways in which the brand can be used. A good 
example of this, in past years, has been Campbell’s soup, which often places recipes in its 
print ads to encourage people to use more of the product, and hence purchase it more frequently.
Satisfaction
The final stage in the consumer decision process is really a feedback loop into the earlier 
ones. If people come to your restaurant but are dissatisfied with the quality of the food or 
friendliness of the staff, then their dissatisfaction will likely mean they won’t return to 
your venue again. What is worse, they may tell their friends about their bad experience 
and decrease your potential sales even further. So customer satisfaction is extremely 
important for future success. Satisfaction is generally not listed as the primary market-ing 
or media objective of a plan, but it should nonetheless be kept in mind when deciding 
where and when to place an advertising message. It is perhaps harder to achieve through 
the media, because it is ultimately up to the users to decide whether or not they are
satisfied. But many advertisers promise “satisfaction guaranteed or your money back” as 
a way to reassure consumers that they will, indeed, be content if they buy your brand.

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives  33
ADVERTISING OBJECTIVES AND THE CONSUMER DECISION PROCESS
To see how advertising objectives might fit in with each stage of the consumer decision process, 
let’s take an example. If your client is the city’s professional soccer team trying to increase the 
number of people who attend home games, then you may not have to create a “need” for 
your offering, because anyone who likes sports feels like the need to attend live games. It 
is very likely, however, that you would want to increase awareness of your team. So your 
advertising objective might be to boost awareness of the Soccer Stars from a baseline 
measure of 40% to 70% among young people under 25 within a 50-mile radius of the city.
It could be that many people have heard about your team, but they are still choosing to 
attend baseball games instead. Here, your advertising objective would be to improve preference,
so that instead of 2 out of 10 under 25s choosing to go to a soccer game over baseball, 3 
out of 10 do so. Setting advertising objectives for the subsequent stages in the decision 
process is somewhat less common because it is believed that advertising has a less direct 
role to play here. But you still want to encourage your target to use your team by attending 
games. Your advertising objective would be to boost visits to your games from an average of 
one time per year to four, perhaps by promotional tickets or special events at the stadium.
MEDIA AND THE CONSUMER DECISION PROCESS
The advertising media will also affect each of these stages in the consumer decision 
process. To continue with the Soccer Stars example, you might boost awareness of the 
team  through  widespread  local  TV  and  radio  ads  or  outdoor  billboards  in  the 
communities where you believe there are high concentrations of young adults. Consumer 
preference could be encouraged by sending direct mail to potential visitors offering them 
two tickets for the price of one. They could be helped in the search process by putting ads 
that provide maps to your stadium in local newspapers. Selection might be helped by 
bringing some of the bigger soccer stars in from out of town and offering the opportunity 
for fans to meet them. These special events could then be promoted in local media and 
perhaps receive additional publicity through press releases. Finally, to get current team 
supporters to use the team and attend more games, you might create a monthly newsletter 
that tells them about the exciting events coming up at future games.
Let’s take another example. Say you are in the market for a new automobile. That puts 
you in the initial stages of needing a new car. You see some TV ads for various makes 
and models, increasing your awareness of what is available. Three of the cars that interest 
you are the Honda Accord, the Ford 500, and the Chevy Malibu Maxx. You read several 
automotive magazines, check out their resale value on Edmunds.com, and pick up the 
Consumer Reports issue on new cars. You  decide that these models  fit your  needs. Now

 
34  The Media Handbook
you have developed a preference for these particular models out of the hundreds that are 
available. Your next step would be to visit some car dealerships to search out the cars
themselves. Here, your interaction with the salespeople is likely to play a major role in
influencing your decision. You will also probably talk to friends and colleagues and
return to the Internet to look in greater detail at each car’s specifications. Faced with all 
of the information you have gathered, you select the Maxx. You negotiate a deal and 
drive the car home; now you can use it, and based on your experiences, you will develop
a degree of satisfaction with your new purchase. If you are happy with this car, then you
may well buy another Chevrolet the next time you are in the car market.
The media’s role is important at several points in the process. Television advertising is
frequently used to create or enhance awareness, informing people of the qualities of the
brand and what it has to offer. And increasingly, in-program placement of products with-
in TV shows are being used for these same reasons. Both TV and magazines can help
develop consumer preference. Here, you might see ads that compare the Chevy Malibu to
other cars in the same class, or that cite the awards and rankings the car has received in 
automotive competitions. And as already noted, personal contacts and the Internet may be
critical too. Retail or local ads on spot radio, television, and outdoor billboards help reach 
consumers who are searching for your brand; sometimes you will see a brief message
from the local dealership tagged on to the end of a commercial.
To encourage people to select your offering, the media may offer special discounts or
added features, such as a 60,000 mile warranty or $1,000 cash back. Getting people to use
the  product  is  also  important.  Although  this  is  not  an  issue  in  the  case  of  an 
automobile, it can be for other consumer products. Nestle, for instance, uses print ads that 
feature recipes for foods made with its Toll House chocolate chips in order to encourage 
people to take the product off the shelf.
As with the marketing objective, the more measurable the advertising objective, the 
easier it will be to determine whether it has been achieved. This can be done either
through specific testing after the ads have run for a while, or by setting up some kind of
market test and determining the effect of advertising on sales.
CONSUMERS, BRANDS, AND MEDIA
Both advertising and media objectives require a clear understanding of how consumers connect
with brands and with media. This relationship can be thought of as a Venn diagram, or a
series of connecting circles. That is, consumers relate to certain brands, and are more like-
ly to be receptive to those brands’ advertisements when they appear in the media  forms
that  the  consumer  likes  and/or  responds  to.  Exhibit  3.1  displays  this relationship.
What some advertisers and agencies have realized in recent years is that the advertising
industry has typically focused on just two of the three circles at any one time. That is, the 
media department has zoomed in on the relationship of consumers to media, whereas the
agency account planning and client brand management departments have concentrated ef-
forts on exploring consumers’ relationships with brands. To truly fulfill advertising and 
media objectives, however, those three elements must all be examined together.

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives 35
As noted in chapter 2, this practice (known variously as consumer context planning, the
consumer-centric approach, or communications planning) involves in-depth research
(qualitative and/or quantitative) to understand in greater depth who the target audience is,
and how they relate to both the brands they use and the media they consume. The approach
has been embraced by large marketers such  as  General  Motors  and  Procter  & Gamble, 
EXHIBIT 3.1 Relationship of brands, media, and comsumers
who spend significant funds on learning about that relationship of brand-media-consumer
for their products, whether a Cadillac luxury vehicle or Kotex pantyliners. The concept is
examined more closely as we go through the rest of the media planning process.
ESTABLISHING MEDIA OBJECTIVES
Armed with clear and concise marketing and advertising objectives that are in sync with
how your brand’s consumers think about and respond to the brand and to media, you are
now ready for the most important part of the media planning process—setting media
objectives. As with the other goals, once you have a clearly defined course set for you, it
becomes much easier to figure out how to get there. There are three main elements
involved  in  the  media  objectives:  defining  the  target  audience,  setting  broad
communication objectives, and considering creative requirements.
Defining the Target Audience
Although you haven’t yet started to put a plan together, you are probably beginning to
realize that much of the most important work needs to be done beforehand to establish
the media objectives. Defining the target audience is one key step you must take in the
objective-setting process, because only by knowing who you wish to reach through the

 
36  The Media Handbook
media will you be able to put together a schedule that will convey your brand’s message
to the right people.
Ideally, the target audience for your media plan should be identical to the audience for 
the overall marketing plan. Most of a brand’s sales are typically generated by its current
users,  so  the  target  audience  definition  is  likely  to  include  some  product  usage 
qualification.  A  marketing  plan  intended  to  increase  sales  of  Pantene  shampoo-
conditioner  combinations  might  have  as  its  target  audience  “women  25  to  54  who 
currently use shampoo-conditioners, with an annual household income of more than
$50,000.”  Life  stage  can  be  a  crucial  factor  too.  A plan  geared  toward  increasing 
awareness of your new Sony digital camcorder might have as its target “adults 25 to 49 
who have had a child in the past year.”
Often, however, you will find that the media target may be both more and less precise
than the marketing target. This is largely because the media themselves have traditionally
been bought and sold on the basis of fairly basic demographics, such as age, sex, income, 
education, or race. For example, whereas your brand of Carr’s crackers may be aiming to 
sell 20,000 more packets this year by expanding its user base and capturing more sales 
from “young adult gourmet lovers who enjoy entertaining and eating out,” when it comes 
to creating your media objectives, your target may be “adults 18 to 34 with college
education and an annual household income of more than $30,000.” This is a more precise
definition in that it specifies a particular age category as well as particular income and
education levels, but it does not take into account (at least definitionally) the lifestyle
variables (like eating out, entertaining, and fine foods).
It is also worth pointing out that the media target should be identical to the creative
target. Although this may seem blatantly obvious, occasionally the research and account
teams will develop a complex and precise target audience, but the creative team will march
forward with its own ideas of who the message should speak to. That leaves the media
department in confusion. So just as the media specialists should have seen and understood
the marketing objectives, they should also be familiar with the Creative Brief, a document 
that lays out for the copywriter and art director the fundamental information about who or
what the brand is, what the communication goals are for the campaign, and, importantly,
who the message is directed at. Ideally, all of the target definitions will match!
As far as media definitions of targets are concerned, the syndicated data sources of audience 
information are usually the first port of call. Depending on the target, these resources may
provide armloads of information; or they may offer up next to nothing. In particular, if you 
are dealing with a nonconsumer target, such as retailers or dealers, you may find yourself 
without much syndicated information at all, relying more on your experience and judg-
ment. You can assume, for example, that if you are trying to promote your refrigeration
equipment to restaurants, then one place to put your message would be Restaurant News.
One important consideration for defining your media target is whether it should be
broad or narrow. Because everyone in the country uses laundry detergent, does that mean
your media plan should be aimed at “all adults in the United States who use laundry 
detergent”? Increasingly, the answer will be “no.” Today’s brands are becoming more
segmented. So there is not just one box of Tide on the store shelf, but 11 varieties, 
including powder or liquid Tide, Tide with Bleach, or Tide Cold Water Wash. There are 
20 different sizes of Tide Liquid alone, aiming to suit the needs of diverse groups, from

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives  37
singles living alone to large families. Each of these groups is likely to have different media  
habits  and  preferences,  and  trying  to  create  a  media  plan  that  would  reach everyone 
would ignore the needs of different population groups both in terms of product benefits  and  
media  usage.  There  might  be  one  plan  aimed  at  m thers  with  young children, another 
for those with large families, another with an environmental slant, and a fourth promoting 
the smaller size for urban apartment dwellers. Each plan has a different target audience.
There is also the opposite danger, however. That is, you might define your target 
audience so narrowly that it would be almost impossible to reach them. You might, after 
checking  previous  research  into  who  buys  your  large  screen  TVs,  find  that  these 
individuals  are  most  likely  to  be  college-edu-cated  graduates  of  private  colleges, 
professionals working in high-tech industries, living in the western region in A counties 
or suburbs in homes worth $150,000 or more, with 3+ children, and with at least 3 TV 
sets in their homes (see Exhibit 3.2). But there may be only a few hundred of them!
There are two major problems here. First, most traditional media will not only present your 
message to your target, but also to many others for whom the product is probably irrelevant. 
This is a problem that can only be alleviated by careful consideration of exactly who your 
target should be and which media will best reach that audience. Again, thinking of all 
three parts of the connecting circles will help you here, because with a thorough understand-
ing of how your target relates not just to your brand but to the media they consume, your 
media plan is not only more likely to reach that target but it will do so more effectively.
Exhibit 3.2 Profile of big screen TV owner
People who own a big screen TV are:
more likely to 
less likely to
be… 
be…
Age 25–54 
Age 65+
College educated 
High school graduates
Male 
Female
Suburban 
Rural
Living in Pacific region 
Living in Northeast region
read magazines on 
read magazines on
Cars 
Hunting & fishing
Travel 
History & science
listen to… 
listen to…
Adult Contemporary 
Classical
News radio 
Easy listening
watch… 
watch…

 
38  The Media Handbook
College sports 
Movies on TV
Sitcoms 
Sunday morning talk shows
Late night talk shows 
watch pay/digital cable 
watch broadcast TV 
subscribe to digital cable/satellite TV 
not subscribe to additional TV services
A second consideration in establishing media objectives is the cost effectiveness of the 
plan. It may well be the chief concern of you or of the top executives of your company. 
You could come up with an extremely elaborate and highly targeted media plan, with a 
clearly defined target audience and appropriate communication objectives, but if it is 
going to cost twice as much as is in the marketing budget, then you are unlikely to be 
able to execute it. When defining the target audience, you must be sure that the audience 
will be reachable at an affordable cost. The maker of Oral B toothbrushes cannot hope to 
reach everyone who brushes their teeth on a budget of $10 million.
Having defined your target audience, your next step should be to find out as much as 
possible  about  the  individuals  who  make  up  that  audience  through  primary  and/or 
secondary  research.  Ideally,  you  should  not  only  know  their  basic  demographic 
characteristics (age, sex, education level, income, profession, etc.), but also learn more 
about the kinds of products they use and the media they tend to hear or see. Depending on 
the target, you can often obtain this information from syndicated data services. Or you 
may have to rely on your own judgment and experience. So if your target for an iPod is 
young adults between age 18 and 34 who listen to music, then you should also know that 
they are more likely to have a mobile phone and a DVD player, both of which may be 
effective advertising media forms.
Communication Objectives
When it comes to writing down what you expect the advertising message to do for your 
brand, you will start to find that all of a sudden you are dealing with the art, rather than 
the science, of media planning. These objectives are measurable to some degree through 
communications  tests  with  the  target  audience  that  find  out  what  information  the 
audience is taking away from the message. In addition, media calculations can be made to 
estimate what the plan should achieve. But many of the criteria you need to use to 
establish what the goals should be are far more evaluative and rely on your judgment and 
subjective response to everything that you know about the brand, its advertising, and the 
marketplace. These objectives must also be in line with the overall marketing strategy for 
the brand. If you are trying to increase your market share of the athletic shoe category by 
2 percentage points by increasing distribution into mass merchandise outlets, then your 
communication objective might involve increasing awareness of your brand among your 
target audience by 15% within the first 3 months of the campaign.
Communication  objectives  will  vary,  depending  on  the  kind  of  product  you  are 
promoting. For launching a new brand of cat litter, you probably want your advertising to 
generate  awareness  of  the  product.  If  you  are  ad-vertising  Maytag  dishwashers,  in

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives  39
contrast—which have been around forever—your message will more likely serve as a
reminder to consumers of the product’s reliability. These differing objectives will also
affect your reach and frequency goals. For a new product, you would want to establish
some initial awareness levels and then sustain them (e.g., generate awareness of the prod-
uct among 75% of the target group within the first 3 months of the campaign).
Don’t forget to consider your competition too. You might set as your objective to 
achieve, within the first 6 months of your new campaign, awareness levels for your Can-
nondale  mountain  bike  that  are  equal  to  or  greater  than  those  of  your  closest
competitor. Geography is another factor. If your bike is the number one brand in the 
category with the highest awareness levels in the northeast and pacific, but falls to num-
ber two or three in the south, then you might set different objectives in different parts of
the  country, broadening your reach in areas where awareness levels are currently lower.
There are three main factors to consider when developing communication objectives:
campaign timing, category and brand dynamics, and media reach and frequency.
Campaign Timing. This is the point where you should consider the stage of your
campaign: Are you launching a new product, changing the strategy for selling it, or is this
the third or fourth year of an ongoing campaign? Also, think about the specific timing of 
the campaign. Are you trying to communicate a seasonal message to warn young adults 
about drinking and driving during the holidays? Or maybe it’s April and people are start-
ing to think about summer vacation, so it’s the perfect time to begin promoting your park 
district’s swimming pool. Thinking of your communications objectives within a specific
timeframe will help to ensure that your media plan stays focused on that period.
Category and Brand Dynamics. If you study the trends for your brand in particular as
well as trends within the category overall, then your communication objectives will be firmly
fixed in reality. That is, if research shows that users of lawn-care products are extremely 
brand  loyal,  then  it  makes  little  sense  to  say  the  objective  for  Scott’s weed-killer is to gain 
15 market-share points from your competitors in the next 12 months.  Related  to  loyalty,
you  should  also  think  about  what  degree  of  consumer involvement with the category
can be reasonably expected. It’s hard to get people excited about staplers or canned toma-
toes, no matter how wonderful your creative message or media plan. Try to be objective 
about your brand’s positioning too. Is your advertising message really very different from
your competitors’, or is it in fact just another version of the same idea? If you look at the
advertising for most products, you’ll see that the latter is far more common than the for-
mer. Almost all banks tout their low financing rates, nearly all beers talk about great taste,
and most garbage bags emphasize their strength. None of this should be too surprising; 
you wouldn’t want to buy a beer that didn’t taste good or a garbage bag that wasn’t strong
Reach and Frequency. Having stated earlier that communication objectives tend to be
more subjective than objective, more art than science, there is still a role for some
numbers here. But they should only be included if you will have some way of measuring
them. The two key concepts to consider here are reach and frequency. These are the two
most commonly used media terms in the whole planning process. The reach of the plan
refers to the number (or percentage) of the target audience that will be reached by the
brand’s advertising in the media. As is explained in chapter 5, that number is determined 
by calculating what percentage of the target audience will be exposed to the media in 
which your ad appears. Along with knowing how many people will have the opportunity

 
40  The Media Handbook
to see or hear your ad, you also need to state how many times they need to do so in order 
for the message to have some effect. This is the concept of effective frequency. You
should identify some reach and frequency goals as a way of measuring whether or not 
your communication objectives were achieved. If the communication goal is to “increase
awareness of the brand by 10% among the key consumer target,” then that can be 
measured by establishing what percentage of the target was actually reached with the
message and how many times they heard it, and whether brand awareness levels did in 
fact go up. More is said on this topic in chapter 5.
Creative Requirements
The last area that should be considered in preplanning discussions is any special creative 
requirement that will affect the media selected. As noted previously, this should be made
evident in the Creative Brief, and provides another reason why it is critical for media 
specialists to be exposed to that document. If, for example, you are introducing a new 
hybrid car and want to talk about its advanced engineering and environmental benefits 
through long copy and details, then you will have to think in terms of the media that can
allow you to do that. Or, if your task is to promote the Florida Keys as a vacation 
destination for families, then the creative requires media that convey the desired image by 
depicting many different sights or sounds from that area, such as print or the Internet, TV
or radio. The message will, in part, determine where you choose to place it. Yet another
example might be introducing a new Pillsbury cake mix. Your ads will showcase the
delicious results of using the product, so the visual element is going to be particularly 
important. Immediately, this leads you in a certain direction when starting to consider 
your media plan strategies and tactics.
SUMMARY
In order for a media plan to be successful, it must be tied directly to the broad marketing 
objectives for the brand, usually defined in terms of sales and market share. The goals for
media should also be derived from the advertising objectives, which show where the advertising 
fits in to the consumer’s decision process, such as increasing awareness or improving  customer 
satisfaction,  or  generating  additional  use  of  the  product.  Both marketing and adver-
tising objectives are tied to the media objectives by considering the relationship that exists
between consumers, brands, and media. The media objectives state to whom the message
is to be delivered (the target audience), when it is to be distributed (timing specifics), and
how many times a given proportion of the target will, ideally, be exposed (media reach and fre-
quency). Special creative requirements for the brand’s communications should also be taken in-
to account, in part by ensuring that media specialists are able to review the Creative Brief.

 
Developing Optimal Media Objectives  41
Do you know your brand’s marketing objectives?
Are they stated clearly and explicitly, in an actionable way?
What is the advertising objective for the brand?
Have you considered where the advertising might fit in with the eight stages of the consumer 
decision process—need, awareness, preference, search, selection, purchase, use, and 
satisfaction?
What have you learned about how consumers relate to your brand and the media they 
consume?
In which stage of the consumer decision process does your advertising objective fit?
Have you clearly defined your target audience, or audiences?
Are your target definitions in line with those developed by the marketing team and 
the creative team?
What are your communication objectives, in terms of a specific timeframe, given 
the competitive situation?
What are your media reach and frequency goals?
Are there any specific creative requirements for the brand’s message?
Have you seen the Creative Brief?
CHECKLIST—DEVELOPING OPTIMAL MEDIA OBJECTIVES
1.
2. 
3.
4. 
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

 
CHAPTER 4
Exploring the Media
We are all familiar with television, radio, the Internet, newspapers, or magazines from the
consumer’s standpoint. That is, we don’t think twice about picking up the newspaper
every morning, listening to the radio on the way to work, going online to look up a
specific Web site, watching TV when we get home at night, and leafing through a
magazine in bed before going to sleep. For advertisers, each of those points of contact
represents an opportunity to communicate with potential targets for their product or
service. So, for example, the local car dealer will place his ad for a GMC Envoy in the
daily newspaper in hope that you will see it in the morning and stop in at the dealership
on the way home from work or over the weekend. The First National Bank might put an
ad on the radio in the morning hours to reach commuters on their way to work to alert
them to the bank’s favorable interest rates on savings accounts. When you sit back and
relax in the evening to watch television, a wide range of advertisers will remind you of
their brand of beer, cookies, pet food, or coffee, either in traditional commercials or by
placing their products within the programs themselves, hoping that on your next visit to
the grocery store you will select their brand. And, finally, right before you fall asleep,
advertisers in magazines will try to persuade you that their credit card company will be
there when you need it.
MEDIA AS BRAND CONTACTS
The task of today’s media planners has become much broader than in times past. Instead
of  just  considering  the  traditional  media  (i.e.,  TV,  radio,  magazines,  newspapers,
outdoor), the planner now must evaluate all forms of “brand contact,” wherever or
however they occur. Should Kraft Macaroni and Cheese sponsor the local Little League
teams? Can Columbia Sports-wear be the official sponsor of an Olympic ski team?
Would it make sense to put Powerbar ads along running trails? Should the detectives in
Law & Order be shown drinking Coca-Cola? Or could Campbell Soup ads pop up on the
Web site weather.com whenever the temperature falls below freezing in the location
being viewed? The key with all of these communications is that they must be integrated
with the traditional plan. That is, Powerbar’s trails message should look and feel like its
magazine ads, and should appear in the plan as another regular line item, scheduled in
conjunction with all other media. And, as with all media planning elements, the selections
must tie fully into the brand’s marketing and media objectives.
MEDIA CATEGORIES
With the brands perspective in media, and with set media objectives in place, once you
have clearly defined media objectives, the next step will be to decide which media types,
and vehicles within those types, will best help you achieve your goals. Before exploring

 
Exploring the Media  43
that  further,  we  need  to  think  about  what  the  different  media  can  offer  you  as  an
advertiser conveying an advertising message. Here, we will consider the six major media
categories:  television,  radio,  Internet,  magazines,  newspapers,  and  out-of-home.  A
seventh, broader category of “alternative” forms of media will round out the chapter.
As noted in chapter 1 there are various ways of categorizing the media. We can
contrast  the  print  media  of  magazines,  newspapers,  and  outdoor  billboards  with 
electronic media (i.e., radio, Internet, and TV). We can also make an important distinction 
between media that are predominantly local (e.g., newspapers, outdoor billboards, and
radio) and those where most ads are placed on a national basis (e.g., TV, Internet, and 
magazines). And, increasingly, we can classify media based on the level of consumer 
control involved in their use, from magazines, TV via DVRs, and the Internet, which
require  active  involvement,  to  radio  and  traditional  TV,  which  are  more  passively
consumed. Here, we will look at the major characteristics of each media form.
A TELEVISION IN EVERY HOME
Almost every household in America has a television set, and three-quarters (75%) have 
two or more. The average household owns 2.4 TV sets. More than 9 in 10 homes (94%) 
operate their TV sets via remote control. Television is the largest mass medium available 
for advertisers. In 2004, about $68 billion was spent promoting goods and services this
way. People in the United States have their TV sets on, on average, 7! hours each day,
which is one of the highest viewing figures of anywhere in the world. The average
household can receive 93 channels, thanks to cable television. That figure continues to
rise, increasing by 7 channels in just one year from 2003 to 2004.
Broadcast television programming is traditionally divided up in two ways: by daypart
and by format. The daypart refers to the time of day the program airs. There are nine 
standard dayparts, which are shown in Exhibit 4.1. Program formats are also standardized
into 14 main types, which are given in Exhibit 4.2. It is worth emphasizing that these
breakdowns are really only the concern of the programmers and advertisers; you don’t
choose to watch “situation comedies” or “reality-based programs,” but rather decide to 
watch The Apprentice on NBC on a specific night.
EXHIBIT 4.1 Dayparts
Early Morning 
M-F 
7:00–9:00 a.m.
Daytime 
M-F 
9:00a.m.-4:30 p.m.
Early Fringe 
M-F 
4:30–7:30 p.m.
Prime Access 
M-F 
7:30–8:00 p.m.
Primetime 
M-S 
8:00–11:00 p.m.
 
Sun 
7:00–11:00 p.m.
Late News 
M-Sun 
11:00–11:30 p.m.

 
44  The Media Handbook
Late Night 
M-Sun 
11:30 p.m.-1:00a.m. 
Saturday Morning 
Sat 
8:00a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Weekend Afternoons 
Sat-Sun 
1:00–7:00 p.m. 
Source: Nielsen Media Research, 2002.
EXHIBIT 4.2 Television program formats
Animation/children
Daytime serials 
Drama/adventure 
Game shows 
Late-night talk 
Movies 
News 
Newsmagazines 
Reality-based 
Sitcoms 
Specials 
Sports 
Source: Nielsen Media Research, 2002.
The popularity of different program genres changes over time. Typically, the two most popu-
lar types are dramas and situation comedies. In the mid-1990s, newsmagazines (e.g., ABC’s  
20/20  and  NBC’s  Dateline)  became  extremely  popular,  in  part  because  the networks 
realized they were relatively inexpensive to make. The average prime-time drama can cost 
more than a million dollars per episode, as compared to a few hundred thousand for a 
newsmagazine.
More recently, reality programs such as The Apprentice and American Idol took hold, 
leading to many copycat programs and an overabundance of that program type. Although 
those programs continue to do well, viewers were seemingly bored with too much of just 
one format, and so the networks developed more dramas and sitcoms, such as Desperate 
Housewives and Grey’s Anatomy. The challenge for media planners and, particularly, 
media buyers is to predict which shows will be popular several months, or even one year 
from now, buying them at a less expensive cost and enjoying higher-than-predicted 
ratings. We explore this further in chapter 8.

 
Exploring the Media  45
How people watch TV is changing, however, as more viewers acquire digital video 
recorders (DVRs) that allow them, in effect, to become their own program scheduler. By 
making it easy to record favorite shows, and fast-forward or pause both live and recorded 
programming, DVR providers (e.g., Tivo and the cable companies) have helped turn tele-
vision from a passive medium where viewers watch what is shown when it appears, to a 
much more active experience where people can watch whatever they want whenever they 
wish to do so. The consequences of this for advertising is explored further in this chapter.
What people watch is also impacted by who owns the various TV networks. For 
example, Disney’s ownership of ABC, Lifetime, and ESPN networks is not only evident 
in that ESPN announcers appear on ABC sports programming, but leads to Wonderful 
World of Disney on ABC. Likewise, CBS’s Survivor stars appear the next morning on its 
Morning Show. Exhibit 4.3 shows the ownership of the major networks. Note that the 
ownership situation is never static. As this edition was going to press, Viacom spun off 
CBS television as a separate company, and CBS and Time Warner agreed to merge UPN 
and WB networks into a new network called CW, to launch in September 2006.
There are four main types of television to consider: network, syndication, spot (local), 
and cable. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the ownership of these various entities became more 
consolidated so that today just a handful of large media companies has majority control  of  
all  four  types  of  TV,  squeezing  out  the  independents  or  mom-and-pop operations 
that flourished in the first 50 years of television. Viewers are not really aware of who owns 
what and they do not differentiate, for the most part, between network, cable, or syndica-
tion. They choose to watch a certain program, regardless of how or where it airs, or who 
created it or owns it. So the distinctions we draw here are purely for media purposes.

 
46  The Media Handbook

 
Exploring the Media  47

 
48  The Media Handbook
Network Television
Network television consists of four major broadcast networks: ABC, CBS, NBC, and 
FOX. There are also two smaller networks: UPN (now owned by CBS) and WB. A 
“network” is actually made up of hundreds of local stations that become “affiliates” of the 
national organization. There are a total of 1,276 network affiliate stations, about half of 
all TV stations on air (2,482). Each station receives a set amount of money every year 
from the network in return for which they agree to air national programs for a given 
number of hours every week. But, as the networks have looked for ways to cut their costs 
in  recent  years,  they  have  attempted  to  cut  or  eliminate  these  payments.  Network 
programs air at the same time in every market within a given time zone. So CBS’s “60 
Minutes” appears at 7 p.m. on Sunday night in the Eastern zone, 6 p.m. in Central 
markets, and 5 p.m. in the Mountain zone. Programs in the Pacific time zone are shown 
at the same time locally as in the East (i.e., 60 Minutes airs at 7 p.m. Pacific time).
Network  shows  come  with  several  minutes  of  commercial  time  both  within  and 
between programs that are sold by the network. The local station is then able to sell an 
additional 1 to 3 minutes of commercial time in the hour to local or regional advertisers, 
depending on the daypart. Historically, local commercials always had to appear in the 
commercials that aired between programs, but that rule has been relaxed, allowing local 
or regional advertising within the program too. The research findings on the relative 
effectiveness of ads appearing between or within programs has been mixed. The local sta-
tion also decides what to air when it is not showing network programs. This might include 
locally produced shows, such as local news or current affairs programs, or programs pur-
chased from independent producers, known as syndicated programming (see next section).
Stations not affiliated with a network are known as independents. Today, there are only 
88 stations in the United States who are not affiliated with any broadcast network. Sev-
eral  hundred  others  have  part-time  affiliations  with  one  or  more  of  the  
smaller networks  (primarily  UPN  and  WB).  Most  of  these  stations  broadcast  on  
the  lower frequency, locally based UHF signal. Each one decides which programs to air 
throughout the broadcast day, and is responsible for selling its own commercial time.
Syndication
A major program source for independent stations is syndicated programming. Here, an 
individual program (or package of several programs) is sold on a station-by-station basis, 
regardless of that station’s affiliation. It may be of any type or length. There are two main 
types—original shows and off-network fare. The former are filled with game shows, such 
as Wheel of Fortune, and talk shows such as Oprah or Ellen. They are sold either by the 
program’s producers or by syndication companies, such as Viacom’s King World, that put 
together packages of properties. The distinction between syndication and network shows is that 
syndicated programs can air at different times in different markets as well as on different 
different networks. This leads to syndicated shows having to be “cleared” by each local station 
that chooses to buy them. The clearance figure refers to the percentage of markets across 
the country that can view that particular show. So, for example, if a syndicated talk show 
is “cleared” in 70% of the United States, it means that broadcast TV stations seen by 70%

 
Exploring the Media  49
of all TV viewers have purchased that program. Syndication clearances generally range 
anywhere from 70% to 99%. It is worth noting, too, that some network programs do not 
have total (100%) clearance because an affiliate station may refuse to air them, or will put 
them on at a different time than the rest of the network. For example, NBC aired a 
miniseries featuring a priest who is less that perfect. Several of NBC’s affiliate 
stations refused to air it, citing it as an “anti-Christian” program.1
The goal of many network programs is to produce enough episodes to go into the 
syndicated  marketplace  (usually  100  episodes).  This  is  known  as  off-network 
programming, and helps fill up the hours of airtime that stations have when network 
shows aren’t running. Programs that have been popular on the networks can continue to 
air for many years in syndication. Hits from the 1970s and 1980s, (e.g., MASH, Cheers, 
and Cosby) can still be seen on TV during the early evening or late night hours in syndi-
cation. Today, there are nearly 900 hours of syndicated programming produced each year 
for 148 different programs. The top ten programs in syndication appear in Exhibit 4.4.
Spot Television
Spot television is another way to purchase television time. Here, instead of contracting 
with the network to distribute a commercial to all of that network’s affiliate stations 
across the country, an advertiser can pick and choose which programs and stations to use, 
placing the message in various “spots” across the country. As already noted, fewer than 
100 of all TV stations are not affiliated with a network, and this number will continue to 
diminish as networks (and their multimedia conglomerate owners) buy up independents as
1“More NBC Affiliates Drop ‘Book of Daniel,’” Abbey Klaussen, AdAge.com, January 12, 2006.
Exhibit 4.4 Top 10 syndicated shows
Rank Program 
Rating
1 
Wheel of Fortune 
9.0
2 
Jeopardy! 
7.1
3 
Oprah Winfrey Show 
7.6
4 
Everybody Loves Raymond 
6.9
5 
Seinfeld 
5.9
6 
Friends 
5.7
7 
Seinfeld (Weekend) 
5.5
8 
CSI 
5.5
9 
Dr. Phil 
5.2
10 
Entertainment Tonight 
5.2 
Source: Broadcasting & Cable, 3/7/05

 
50  The Media Handbook
regulation is relaxed on station ownership. The spot TV buy could be as small as a single 
station in one market, to a couple of hundred stations across a region. The actual cost of 
placing spots on local stations is lower than a total network buy, but it can become quite 
expensive once you start including a large number of markets.
Spot TV time is sold either by the individual station and/or by station representative 
firms, or rep firms. These firms put together packages of stations, known as unwired 
networks (because they are not physically linked together, or wired). Rep firms can 
usually customize buys for you, allowing you to pick only those stations that interest you 
in a given number of markets.
Cable Television
Cable television is sometimes thought of as a relatively new way to distribute programs 
and commercials, but in fact it has existed as a means of conveying television signals 
since 1948. Because it does not depend on over-the-air signals, but comes into the home 
via wires laid underground (or sometimes on poles on the street), reception is much 
clearer in many areas. That was the original reason behind its growth—so that people in 
Eugene, Oregon, or Lancaster, Pennsylvania could receive the signals of the broadcast 
networks more clearly. Whereas the broadcast networks distribute their programs from a 
central location to each of their affiliates, cable programs are sent via satellite from the 
cable network to individual cable operators (franchises) within each market, who then 
distribute the signals to the subscribers’ homes. There are more than 10,000 separate 
cable systems operating today, although the majority belongs to one of the large multiple 
system operators (MSOs) that have cable systems in numerous markets. In 2004, the top 
three players were Comcast, Time Warner, and Cox. Together, these three operators serve 
36% of all cable viewers in the country.
Another  difference  between  broadcast  TV  and  cable  TV,  from  the  consumers’ 
standpoint, is that they must pay a monthly subscription fee to receive cable service. The 
average monthly cost of cable in 2005 was about $60. For an additional monthly fee,
consumers can receive one or more of the pay cable networks, such as Home Box Office 
(HBO), Showtime, or The Disney Channel, which do not show any advertising at all.
Cable TV is made up of a wide variety of different networks, many of which specialize 
in certain kinds of programs or appeal to certain types of people. This was originally 
called narrowcasting, in contrast to the more diverse or broad-based programming found 
on broadcast TV. Cable News Network (CNN) shows 24 hours of news and information 
programming, whereas ESPN airs sports and Comedy Central has comedy. There are 
several cable networks, such as USA Network and TBS, which are more similar to the 
broadcast networks in their programming, airing a variety of different types of shows, 
from adventures to situation comedies to movies and dramas.

 
Exploring the Media  51
Exhibit 4.5 displays the biggest cable networks currently available, together with the number 
of subscribers to each one. The number of networks available varies by system. In recent 
years, most cable companies have spent large sums of money upgrading their physical plant to 
provide digital cable services that allow them to offer hundreds of different channels, rather than 
the 50–100 that were most common in the 1980s and 1990s. Exhibit 4.6 shows how the 
number of stations and channels available to viewers has increased over the past 15 years.
The development of cable TV as an advertising medium began in the early 1980s and 
has grown steadily ever since. Today, more than $21 billion of total TV advertising 
dollars go to cable television, representing nearly one third of the total amount advertisers 
spend in television. Most of cable’s ad dollars are purchased on a national basis, although 
the medium has been growing rapidly at the local level as well. If you manage a local 
restaurant or a bank, you can run your commercials throughout the area, or you can 
confine your messages to a particular cable system’s area. National advertisers can also 
use local cable, customizing their messages down to the neighborhood (system) level.
Through new technology companies, such as Visible World or Digeo, advertisers are starting 
to test dynamic customization of ads, allowing them to change their messages depending 
on the zipcode or time of day or program. For example, a credit card company could send 
one message  to more affluent areas, talking about the benefits of its Platinum card, and another
EXHIBIT 4.5 Top 15 cable networks and subscribers
Rank Network 
Subscribers (000)
1 
Discovery 
89,900
2 
ESPN 
89,900
3 
CNN (Cable News Network) 
89,400
4 
TNT (Turner Network Television) 
89,400 
5 
USA Network 
89,200
6 
Nickelodeon 
89,100
7 
TBS (Superstation) 
89,100
8 
Spike TV 
89,100
9 
A&E Network 
89,000
10 
Lifetime Television 
88,900
11 
ESPN2 
88,800
12 
The Weather Channel 
88,800
13 
The Learning Channel 
88,700
14 
MTV 
88,500
15 
C-SPAN 
88,400 
Source: National Cable & Telecommunications Association, April 2005

 
52  The Media Handbook
EXHIBIT 4.6 Number of channels and stations received
Number of
Stations
1–14 15–19 20–29 30+ 
Average number of stations 
per household
1985 
78% 
18% 
4% 0% 
11.0
1995 
65% 
25% 
9% 1% 
13.0
2004 
50% 
22% 
24% 4% 
16.4
Number of
channels
1–14 15–19 20–29 30+ Average number of channels per
household
1985 
50% 
15% 
16% 19% 
18.8
1995 
17% 
9% 
6% 68% 
41.1
2004 
6% 
4% 
7% 83% 
92.6
Source: Nielsen Media Research 2005
to  more  downscale  areas,  focusing  more  on  the  company’s  efforts  to  prevent 
identification theft. Ads for a fast food restaurant could be altered for each hour of the 
day  that  they  appear,  without  having  to  create  24  different  versions  in  advance.  A 
computer database is created during commercial production that includes all the possible 
taglines, voiceovers, or footage required, and then the computer program works with the 
cable company’s ad traffic system to send the right commercial to the right home at the 
right time.
Advertisers can also purchase time on several systems at once by going through a 
central sales office, known as an interconnect. This is similar to a rep firm—you select 
the  cable  systems  on  which  your  ad  will  appear.  Most  interconnects  operate  on  a 
metropolitan or regional basis, such as Greater Chicago, or the Bay Area.
Satellite Television
Although  listed  here  as  a  type  of  television,  satellite  TV  is  more  of  a  means  of 
distribution at this point. From being a way for rural inhabitants to receive any kind of 
signal via large C-band dishes, today’s far smaller satellite dishes can be seen perched on 
the outside of houses all across the country, and are as common in urban markets as they 
are in rural or suburban areas. By delivering TV signals directly from the satellite and 
eliminating underground cables or those aboveground on poles, satellite services are able 
to  offer  a  far  larger  number  of  channels  to  viewers.  There  are  two  major  satellite 
providers: Dish Network and DirecTV network. About 22% of the country now receives 
television via satellite, and the battle between that form of distribution and cable is 
increasingly fierce. Without much of the high cost of transmission incurred by cable, 
satellite providers have been far quicker to offer new or high technology services to 
customers, including two-way interaction with the TV set and the functionality of digital 
video recorders (see next section).

 
Exploring the Media  53
NEW FORMS OF TELEVISION
The development of new forms of television began in the early 1990s, but it was not until
the latter part of that decade that technology began to catch up with the pipe dreams of
the inventors. One of the first to be available was pay-per-view (PPV). Here, several
channels are allocated to special programs, such as movies or sporting events, purchased
by the cable subscriber on an individual basis. They may cost as little as a few dollars or
as much as $100 (e.g., for a special boxing match). In order to be able to receive this form
of programming, the cable linking the television to the cable system operator must be
two-way, or addressable, allowing the operator to deliver the program to individual
households on demand. At present, more than half of all homes are addressable.
An extension of PPV is video on demand (VOD). This allows viewers to order up any
program that they want to watch, at any time. Although its availability has become quite
widespread (about 35% of all homes), the number of people using it remains fairly small,
in large part due to the lack of “content,” or programming, that people want to buy. It is
something of a chicken-and-egg situation. Programmers or cable operators do not want to
invest heavily to create programs if there are not enough people willing to pay for it, but
people will not want to buy it until there is a sufficient variety of good programs
available.
VOD’s expansion has occurred largely due to the growth of digital cable, which is now
in about 20 million homes. All of the major cable system operators have been rapidly
upgrading their systems in recent years, seeing great potential in enhancing their revenues
not only by offering more channels to viewers, but also by selling numerous ancillary
services, from Internet access through the TV set to special channels featuring local news
and weather. With some of these enhancements, for example, viewers can call up sports
statistics as an overlay on the screen while viewing a football or baseball game.
Another  way  that  television  is  being  altered  is  through  the  video  recorder.  The
introduction of digital video recorders (DVRs) at the tail end of the 1990s promised to
revolutionize the way people watched TV and, as a result, the advertising business for
that medium. Although its growth has been relatively slow, with about 7% of U.S. homes
owning recorders at the end of 2005, the concept and technology do, indeed, suggest a
radically new way to view television. DVRs, offered by companies such as TiVo and
cable companies like Comcast and Time Warner, put a large computer hard drive onto the
video recorder that allows it to digitize the program as it is delivered to the TV set and,
therefore, give consumers the ability to fast-forward or pause programs as they air and to
skip commercials. At the same time, viewers can program the device to find programs to
record on a regular basis either by title (all new episodes of “Law and Order,” e.g.) or by
actor/director (e.g., find me anything with Brad Pitt). As a result, the official program
schedule evaporates, and consumers become their own program scheduler, watching
whatever programs they want, whenever they choose.
The implications for advertising are potentially huge. As discussed in chapter 6,
television is planned to a large extent based on program dayparts. What happens when
there is no such thing as “prime-time” television anymore? And what if the viewership of

 
54  The Media Handbook
a  program  no  longer  occurs  simultaneously  because  large  numbers  of  people  are
recording the program for viewing at a later date? What would the program rating be
based on? Last but not least, these DVR devices make it easy to fast-forward or skip
commercials, something that the manufacturers have realized is a double-edged sword,
because the possible absence of ads will cut off an important revenue source for networks
and  programmers  alike.  One  analysis  by  Accenture  estimated  the  lost  revenue  to
television due to DVRs and VOD will be a mammoth $27 billion by 2009.2
The use of the TV to connect to the Internet, and the computer to view television, has
been  happening  slowly.  Despite  promises  that  the  two  devices  would  become
interchangeable by the 21st century, consumers have shown that they see them each as
distinct and different from the other. TV viewing tends to be a more passive, “lean back”
experience,  in  contrast  to  the  active  involvement  required  of  the  “lean  forward”
computer/Internet activity. Nevertheless, we are likely to continue to see new attempts to
somehow merge the two media in the future, with more Internet functions (e.g., searching
or pop-up ads) appearing on the TV screen, and more TV offerings (programs and TV
commercials) migrating to the small screen.3 For example, in 2005, Pepsi announced that
its Pepsi Smash TV show would move from the WB broadcast network to Yahoo Music.
This followed the premiere airing of a Showtime pay cable network series, Fat Actress,
which appeared first on Yahoo in March 2005.4 It is also worth noting that both Google
and Yahoo!, two key web-focused companies, are developing the technology to allow for
consumer searching on  TV similar to  the way consumers already conduct Internet
searches (see p. 91 for more on search).
Another  significant  shift  in  the  use  of  television  has  been  taking  place  on  the
advertising side with the growth and development of brand integration (i.e., product
placement). Here, advertisers pay the program producer to put their brands into the
storylines or content of TV shows. Sometimes this is done overtly, like the challenges on
The Apprentice to sell products like Dove soap or create a marketing campaign for
Pontiac’s G6. It was estimated that, in 2005, advertisers would spend $4.25 billion to
place their brands within TV shows. This is more than three times the amount they were
spending  6  years  earlier  ($1.63  billion).  The  difference  between  integration  and
placement is that, in the latter, the product appears more or less as a “prop,” such as a
character being seen to open a box of General Mills’ Wheaties cereal rather than Brand
X. Now, those companies that make cleaning products like Clorox pay to appear in
Lifetime network’s “How Clean Is Your House?” and fashion companies pay to have
their brands given away on Bravo’s Queer Eye for the Straight Guy.5
2“DVRs: A $27B Revenue Killer,” Claire Atkinson, Advertising Age, April 18, 2005, 45.
3“Cross Media Promotion of the Internet in Television Commercials,” Steven Edwards and Carrie
La Ferle, Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 22, no. 1, Spring 2000, 1–12.
4“‘Pepsi Smash’ TV Show Moves to Yahoo,” Kate MacArthur, Ad Age.com, June 3, 2005.
5“Sharing the Spotlight,” Daisy Whitney, New York Times, May 10, 2005, ZX11.

 
Exploring the Media 55
One of the more prominent efforts at paid product integration occurred in September 
2004, when GM gave away its newly launched Pontiac G6 vehicles to every member of 
the studio audience in Oprah Winfrey’s daytime talk show. In keeping with the theme of 
the program, to fulfill people’s “wildest dreams,” Oprah gave away 276 vehicles, each of 
which had an estimated value of $28,400. The event generated enormous publicity for the 
company, most of it favorable, and Pontiac registered a record number of visits to its Web 
site in the days following the show.6 In another case, Burger King paid between $2 
million  and  $3.5  million  to  appear  in  the  hit  TV  show,  The  Apprentice,  with  the 
contestants charged to run a franchise restaurant in New York while a new sandwich was 
being launched. That allowed viewers to see how the restaurant really worked, and to get 
lots of exposure to the new product. In the weeks following the airing of the episode, 
sales of that sandwich rose to 1.2 million, 20% higher than expected. At the same time, 
the promotion was featured on the BK Web site, generating 600,000 visits to find out 
more and enter a sweepstakes.7
BENEFITS OF TELEVISION TO ADVERTISERS
Whichever type of television advertising you choose, you will enjoy a number of benefits 
unavailable from any other media. Among these benefits, television’s ability to imitate 
real-life situations, its pervasiveness, and its broad reach are most noteworthy.
True to Life
The most obvious advantage of television advertising is the opportunity to use sight, 
sound, color, and motion in commercials. This form of advertising is generally considered 
the most lifelike, recreating scenes and showing people in situations with which we can 
all identify. That does not mean we don’t see cartoons or animated commercials, or 
fantasies on the screen; today’s electronic wizardry lets TV ads show us everything 
imaginable. But of all the media available, TV comes closest to showing us products in 
our everyday lives. This is not only important for package goods advertisers (i.e., firms
such as Pillsbury, Anheuser-Busch, or Unilever, who are able to show us what their 
products look like and how they are used or enjoyed) but also for service companies such 
as Marriott Hotels or American Express, which can offer us ways to use their amenities. 
As the Internet continues to expand, and bandwidth grows, more TV-like ads have 
appeared there too. American Express was one of the first advertisers to launch a TV 
ad (starring comedian Jerry Seinfeld) on the Internet before it appeared on television.
6“Pontiac Gets Major Mileage Out of $8 Million ‘Oprah’ deal,” Jean Halliday and Claire Atkinson,
Advertising Age, September 20, 2004, 12.
7“Burger King Cooks Up a Winner: Best Overall,” Amy Johannes, Promo Magazine Web site,
May 3, 2005.

 
56 The Media Handbook
The Most Pervasive Medium
Television advertising is the most pervasive media form available. Several slogans from
TV commercials have entered the mainstream of conversation, such as Bud Light’s
“Whassup?”, or Wisk detergent’s infamous “ring around the collar” line. Characters in
commercials have also become part of our lives, such as the lonely Maytag repairman or
Tony the Tiger for Kellogg’s Frosted Flakes.
Reaching the Masses
Another important advantage of television from an advertising perspective is the wide
reach of people it offers at any one time. Even in programs with ratings of 8 or 10, you
are reaching about 9 million individuals! There is generally a slightly smaller audience
for the commercials than for the programs themselves, nevertheless, television remains a
truly mass medium. Moreover, by buying time on several different programs shown at
different  times  and/or  on  different  days,  it  is  possible  to  reach  a  wide  variety  of
individuals. An individual ad appears for a short time (usually 15 or 30 seconds), but if it
is repeated on several occasions more people are likely to be exposed to it, often more
than once. This helps build brand awareness, which in turn may lead to the formation of
favorable attitudes or intentions to purchase that brand.
DRAWBACKS OF TELEVISION ADVERTISING
Unfortunately, television advertising has unique drawbacks as well as the unique benefits
just discussed. Four of the most commonly encountered drawbacks are cost, limited exposure
time,  cluttered  airwaves,  and  poor  placement  of  ads  within  or  between programs.
Dollars and Sense
Perhaps the biggest disadvantage for advertising on TV, particularly at the national level,
is the high cost. The average 30-second network commercial during prime time in 2005
cost  $200,000.  An  ad  in  the  2005  Super  Bowl,  television’s  most  expensive  ad
opportunity, cost about $2.6 million. For many advertisers, this is way beyond their
budget, leading them to cable or spot TV as cheaper alternatives.
Quick Cuts
Another drawback to this medium is its brief exposure time. Although many ads are seen
several  times  within  a  short  period  of  time,  unless  the  commercial  is  particularly
inventive or unusual it is likely the viewer will ignore it or be irritated by seeing it after the 

 
Exploring the Media  57
first few occasions and deliberately try to avoid the message.8 Controversy remains over 
just how many times people can be exposed to spots without getting bored or annoyed, a 
phenomenon referred to as commercial wearout. In the future, this drawback may be 
avoided through interactive TV, where viewers select the kinds of messages they are more 
interested in, finding out more about a specific brand or product in detail. The key  here  
is  that   this  self-selected  audience  is  more  interested  and  involved  in  the message.
Cluttering the Airwaves
A related factor that is becoming an increasing concern for advertisers is the sheer number 
of ads appearing on TV as seen in Exhibit 4.7. This leads to clutter of spots, again believed 
to reduce the effectiveness of individual commercials.9 There is evidence to support this 
fear. From 1990 to 2000, there was a 31% increase in the number of spots shown on prime-time 
network TV. Part of the explanation for this is the increase in the number of broadcast 
networks (FOX, UPN, WB, PAX). But another major reason is the growth in the number 
of shorter length commercials. For many years, the standard television spot lasted a full 
minute. Then, in the mid-1960s more advertisers started using 30-second commercials and 
found them to be more cost-efficient and no less effective. As costs continued to increase 
during the 1970s and early 1980s, advertisers tried the same tactic, shifting to even smaller
EXHIBIT 4.7 Commercial clutter trend: prime time
 
Number 
Percent Change (Yr on Yr)
1990 
2,059 
 
1995 
3,177 
35.2%
2000 
4,751 
33.1%
2004 
5,264 
9.7%
Source: Nielsen Media Research 2005
8“Predictors of Advertising Avoidance in Print and Broadcast Media,” Paul Surgi Speck and
Michael T.Elliott, Journal of Advertising, vol. 26, no. 2, Summer 1997, 61–76.
9“Does Advertising Clutter Have Diminishing and Negative Returns?” Louisa Ha and Barry
R.Litman, Journal of Advertising, vol. 26, no. 1, Spring 1997, 31–42.

 
58  The Media Handbook
commercial lengths. Today,  the  15-second  spot  accounts  for  37%  of  all  prime-time 
network TV commercials. The result of clutter on consumers is questionable, but research 
suggests that it hinders the communication, sometimes considerably.10
Placing Spots
Another area that has provoked a good deal of discussion is where commercials should be 
placed for optimal effectiveness. For network TV, you can buy time either within the 
program (in-program) or between two shows (break). Whereas some believe there is no 
difference in viewer attention between these two options, others feel that you are likely to 
lose more viewers during the breaks than within the program itself. On spot TV, the break 
position used to be the only timeslot available, although in recent years the “rules” have 
been relaxed. Commercial breaks have slid a few minutes into the program rather than 
appearing only at the top or bottom of each hour.
Related to this issue is where to position your commercial within the series, or pod, of 
spots being shown. Evidence suggests that the first ad to appear will receive the most 
attention, followed by the last one; those in the middle are likely to suffer from viewers 
switching channels, not looking at the screen, or leaving the room. Advertisers, however, 
do not routinely get the choice of where in the pod to air their ad. Some advertisers will 
pay a premium to ensure their ad appears first, but this is not always permitted.
EXHIBIT 4.8 Growth of 15-second commercials in prime time
 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2004
:15 
44% 
44% 
48% 
37%
:30 
51% 
55% 
46% 
59%
:60 
<1% 
<1% 
3% 
3%
Other 
5% 
1% 
2% 
1%
 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100%
Source: Nielsen Media Research 2005
10“Consumer Perceptions of Advertising Clutter and Its Impact Across Various Media,” Michael
T.Elliott and Paul Surgi Speck, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3, May/June 1995,
29–42. “The Antecedents and Consequences of Perceived Advertising Clutter,” Paul Surgi Speck
and Michael T.Elliott, Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 19, no. 2, 1997,
39–54.

 
Exploring the Media  59
RESEARCH ON TELEVISION
Much of the research literature on television has focused on two key issues: the impact of
a lifelike message and the effects of program environment. Buchholz and Smith found
that the more “involved” consumers are in the medium, the stronger their cognitive
responses to ad messages.11 Kamins et al. examined how TV ads are evaluated depending
on the mood created by the program in which the ads appear.12 There are many other
research articles as well.13
RADIO—THE “EVERYWHERE” MEDIUM
Radio is the oldest electronic advertising medium. It first became popular in America in
the early 1920s and since that time has managed to hold its own against all other media
forms. Although families no longer sit around their radios as they once did to listen to the
most popular programs of the day, they still rely on this medium for both information and
entertainment. Indeed, almost every home in America has at least one radio, and most
have several. People listen to the radio, on average, for 3 hours 17 minutes every day, and
the medium reaches 73% of everyone age 12 and older each day (94% each week). Most
listening (84%) occurs between 6 a.m. and 10 a.m. Increasingly, that listening occurs
outside of the home. Almost all cars (95%) are fitted with radios now, and people can
carry the medium with them wherever they go. Nearly half (44%) of radio listening
occurs in the car, and 37% happens at home and 19% is at work or elsewhere.
11  “The  Role  of  Consumer  Involvement  in  Determining  Cognitive  Response  to  Broadcast
Advertising,” Laura M.Buchholz and Robert E.Smith, Journal of Advertising, vol. 20, no. 1, 1991,
4–17.
12“Television Commercial Evaluation in the Context of Program Induced Mood: Congruency
Versus  Consistency  Effects,”  Michael  A.Kamins,  Lawrence  J.Marks,  and  Deborah  Skinner,
Journal of Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, June 1991, 1–14.
13“Multiple  Resource  Theory  and  Consumer  Processing  of  Broadcast  Advertisements:  An
Involvement Perspective,” Robert E.Smith and Laura M.Buchholz, Journal of Advertising, vol. 20,
no. 3, September 1991, 1–8. “Attention Versus Distraction: The Interactive Effect of Program
Involvement and Attentional Devices on Commercial Processing,” Kenneth R.Lord and Robert
E.Burnkrant, Journal of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 1, March 1993, 47–60. “Television Programming
and Its Influence on Viewers’ Perceptions of Commercials: The Role of Program Arousal and
Pleasantness,”  V.Carter  Broach,  Jr.,  Thomas  R.Page,  Jr.,  and  R.Dale  Wilson,  Journal  of
Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4, Winter 1995, 45–54. “Context Is Key: The Effect of Program-Induced
Mood on Thoughts About the Ad,” Andrew B.Aylesworth and Scott B. Mackenzie, Journal of
Advertising, vol. 27, no. 2, Summer 1998, 17–32. “Hearing Versus Seeing: A Comparison of
Consumer Learning of Spoken and Pictorial Information in Television Advertising,” Wendy
J.Bryce and Richard F.Yalch, Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 15, no. 1,
Spring 1993, 1–20. “Program Involvement: Are Moderate Levels Best for Ad Memory and
Attitude Toward the Ad?” Nader T.Tavassoli, Clifford J.Shultz II, and Gavan J. Fitzsimons,
Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 5, September/October 1995, 61–72.

 
60  The Media Handbook
There are nearly 14,000 radio stations across the country. Of those, 4,975 operate on 
the AM (amplitude modulation) wavelength, and 8,863 are FM (frequency modulation) 
stations. The primary differences between them are in reception area and audience. AM 
stations can broadcast over a wider distance, but because the soundwaves are impeded by 
any kind of obstruction (hills, tall buildings) the sound quality is inferior to FM stations, 
which broadcast in a narrower listening area. Older adults listen to more AM radio, 
reflecting the fact that more AM stations offer news and talk programs. FM radio is 
dominated by music formats, which attract younger listeners. Radio stations are either commercial, 
accepting advertising as their chief source of revenue, or noncommercial, funded by public 
monies and/or audience sponsorships. Commercial stations, on average, will air anywhere 
from 9 to 20 ads per hour, frequently concentrated in blocks of 3 minutes or more.
As with television, radio is classified by both daypart and format. The different formats 
that are available for the advertiser are not defined the same way by the listener. Radio 
dayparts and formats are shown in Exhibits 4.9 and 4.10.
EXHIBIT 4.9 Radio formats
Adult Contemporary Adult 
Standards Alternative 
Contemporary Hit Radio 
Classical 
Country 
New AC/Smooth Talk/Jazz 
News/Talk/lnformation 
Oldies 
Religious 
Rock 
Spanish 
Urban
EXHIBIT 4.10 Radio networks
ABC 
Premiere West-
wood One 
American Urban

 
Exploring the Media 61
Today, radio represents a little over 7% of all advertising expenditures. The two main 
types of radio advertising are network (national) and spot (local). The way programs and 
ads are distributed is similar to that of network and spot broadcast TV.
Network Radio
Unlike television, network radio is less important to advertisers than is local radio. It 
currently receives about 4% of all radio dollars. Like TV, however, a message placed on 
network radio is distributed via satellite to each network’s affiliate stations. These stations 
are paid an annual sum to take, or “clear,” the network’s programs. Perhaps surprisingly, 
almost  two  thirds  of  all  radio  stations  are  affiliated  with  a  network.  The  kinds  of 
programs they receive from the network may be aired every day, such as the ABC 
newscast,  or  periodically,  such  as  Casey  Kasem’s  Weekly  Top  40  show.  There  are 
presently  four  major  radio  networks,  each  of  which  has  subdivisions  based  on  the 
programming and the demographic makeup of their listeners. Altogether, there are 47 
different networks. Westwood CBS News Prime time is aimed primarily at listeners from 
25 to 54 years old through news radio. The stations that are part of ABC Young Adult 
Radio tend to be favored by younger adults, under age 35, with contemporary hit radio 
and urban formats. Exhibit 4.11 lists the top 10 networks.
From an advertiser’s perspective, one key benefit of using network radio is that you 
can go through a single source to place your ads across a region or across the country. 
The downside of this form of radio, however, is that you have less flexibility in  choosing 
EXHIBIT 4.11 Top 10 radio networks
Rank Network 
Audience (000)
1 
ABC Daytime Direction 
7,420
2 
Westwood CBS News Primetime 
5,980
3 
Premiere Morning Drive 
5,437
4 
Jones MediaAmerica TWC Radio 
5,318
5 
ABC Morning News Radio 
5,268
6 
Dial-Global Complete FM 
4,477
7 
Premiere Mediabase 
4,003
8 
ABC News/Talk Radio 
3,945
9 
Premiere Emerald Plus 
3,942
10 
ABC Young Adult Radio 
3,556
Note: Data are for Monday-Sunday, 6A-12 Midnight, Persons 12+
Source: Arbitron’s RADAR 84, March 2005

 
62 The Media Handbook
the stations you wish to be in. If you buy the CBS Spectrum Radio Network, you may get the
number one station in Biloxi, Mississippi, but the fourth place station in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Spot Radio
About 96% of radio’s advertising dollars are spent in spot markets, where you buy time
on  individual  stations  on  a  market-by-market  basis.  Here,  if  you  were  placing  the
advertising for Coldwell Banker realtors, you could buy time on individual stations in a
market, regardless of which network they belong to, and choose which markets to target.
The advantage of purchasing radio in this way is that you can select the exact stations and/
or markets in which you wish to advertise your product. This also allows you to customize
the message to each location so that Home Depot home improvement stores, for example,
can mention the address or phone number of different locations in each market’s ad.
Some stations are linked together only for the purpose of selling advertising time. They
constitute an “unwired” network, allowing you to select which stations within the group you
wish to use based on your demographic or geographic preferences. Typically, an advertiser buys
time through a representative, or rep firm, rather than dealing with every station individu-
ally. So if you are trying to target teens with the Sony PSP videogame, then you could go
to a rep firm that offers you stations that do well against that group. Examples of unwired
networks include the Wall Street Journal Radio Network, which offers classical music and
performs well against adults over age 25. Again, for the advertiser, using a network of this
kind provides you with a single invoice for all of the stations. But, as with wired network
radio, you may end up buying time on less attractive stations as part of the package deal.
Satellite Radio
In 2001, satellite radio services were introduced to the U.S. marketplace. XM Radio and
Sirius Radio both deliver about 100 different channels via national satellites. Consumers
need special receivers in order to tune in to these services, and they must pay a monthly
subscription (about $ 10-$ 15/month) for the privilege. There is one incentive to pay
because about half of the stations air without commercials. XM has 71 channels of music
and 29 entertainment/news/sports offerings. One third of the total is without com-
mercials. Sirius has 50 commercial-free music channels and 50 with other content. Even
on those channels that include advertising, the amount will be far less than on regular
radio stations—6 minutes per hour, as compared to 15–20 minutes on terrestrial stations.
The content offered by satellite radio ranges from niche forms of music to college radio 
stations  that  let  alumni  keep  up  with  their  favorite  college  sports  teams  to
syndicated talk show hosts (e.g., Howard Stern or Rush Limbaugh). This type of radio
resembles cable TV in that there  are  so  many  channels,  they  can  afford  to  be  highly

 
Exploring the Media  63
specialized (e.g., a Nascar channel, several baseball channels, or a channel offering
bluegrass music). Both satellite radio companies have deals with the major U.S. auto
manufacturers, who have built satellite radio capability into more of their models and are
offering it as a standard piece of equipment in their luxury vehicles. As of mid-2005,
about 4 million homes had satellite radio service. The jury remains out, however, as to
whether consumers will be willing to pay for something they are used to getting for free.
Although people “learned” to pay for television back in the 1980s, the perceived value of
the radio medium among most radio listeners may not be as high.
Streaming Audio
As  the  Internet  develops  further,  more  people  are  listening  to  the  radio  via  their
computers through a technology generally known as streaming audio. Radio signals are
digitized, and then sent through the Internet. Many traditional, land-based stations offer
simultaneous signals on the Web, whereas other stations have been created solely online.
While still accounting for a small proportion of total listening, surveys suggest that nearly
one third (34%) of the population has at some point tuned in to radio on the Web, with
8% having claimed to do so in the past week.
BENEFITS OF RADIO TO ADVERTISERS
As an advertiser, you cannot afford to ignore the many benefits of radio advertising.
Although it does not offer the visual power of television advertising, it does provide the
opportunity to reach targeted audiences frequently, at a reasonable cost. These and other
benefits of this medium are discussed below.
Local Appeal
As mentioned earlier, most advertising dollars in radio are spent at the local or regional
level rather than on the networks. Radio is therefore listened to primarily as a local
medium, allowing people the opportunity to tie in to local events, news, or celebrities.
Reaching the Right Audience
Because of the way radio stations are formatted, the medium provides you with targeted,
specific audiences. If you run a local health club, then you can reach women from age 25
to 54 by placing your message on light rock stations. Or, as the owner of a religious
bookstore, you can promote your store by advertising on the local religious radio station.

 
64  The Media Handbook
Radio also offers good opportunities for reaching ethnic groups. In areas with sizable
Black or Hispanic populations, you are likely to find at least one station that appeals to
each of these minorities. It will generally have a very loyal following. For a baby clothing
manufacturer, for example, advertising to Hispanics may turn out to be very profitable
because they tend to have larger families than non-Hispanic households. And, in 2005,
radio audience measurement company Arbitron released its first-ever survey results of
Chinese listeners in both New York and Los Angeles. The results showed that 56% of all
listening done by these consumers was to Chinese language radio.
Imagery Transfer
For many advertisers, radio is seen as a secondary medium, used in conjunction with a
major print or television campaign. The good news here is that research has shown the
power of radio ads to create a visual image in listeners’ minds from the TV commercials
they have seen for that same brand.14 This process, known as imagery transfer, gives
radio ads far more impact than the auditory stimulus alone and, therefore, greater
potential influence on consumer response.
Keeping Costs Down
Compared with television, radio is an extremely inexpensive ad medium. A 30-second
spot in prime time on a broadcast TV network may run as high as $500,000, whereas the
price for that same length commercial on a local radio station will be closer to $ 11,000.
Of course, these costs are linked to the number of people you will be reaching.
Building Frequency
With a TV buy, you are usually looking for high reach numbers. In order to gain
frequency, you need either a very large budget or inexpensive dayparts. On radio,
however, because the costs are so low, it makes sense to buy a lot of time and build up
frequency against your target audience. It also makes sense to do this for strategic
reasons; people tend to listen to a particular station for a fairly brief period of time, so
you want to ensure you reach them while they are listening. You should keep in mind that
listening habits are not seasonal, so frequency can be built up year-round.
14Imagery Transfer Study conducted by Statistical Research, Inc., 1999.
Radio and Purchasing
Research shows that the time between media exposure and purchase is shorter for radio
than for any other traditional medium, as shown in Exhibit 4.12. This means that your
potential  consumers  may  well  be  listening  while  they  are  making  their  purchase
decisions.

 
Exploring the Media  65
A 2005 study undertaken by the Radio Advertising Effectiveness Lab (RAEL) on 
behalf  of  the  Radio  Advertising  Bureau  found  that  in  a  controlled  test,  consumers 
exposed to radio ads along with TV were more likely to buy the advertised product than 
those who were only exposed to an equivalent amount of TV ads.15
Flexible Messages
Compared  to  the  high  production  costs  and  long  lead  times  of  television,  radio  is 
extremely flexible. If your ad is read live on the air, as is often done, you can change the 
message at very short notice without much difficulty. You can vary the message for 
different  dayparts  or  station  formats,  perhaps  using  different  music  backgrounds 
depending on the type of music played on that station. Radio also offers the flexibility of 
tie-ins to local retailers or other promotional opportunities, such as local contests or 
events.
EXHIBIT 4.12 Time Between Media Exposure and Purchase
 
Percent exposed to medium within an hour of purchase 
Radio 
59%
Outdoor 
27%
TV 
20%
Magazines 
11%
Newspapers 
10%
Source: Radio Advertising Bureau, 2001
15Radio  Advertising  Effectiveness  Lab  (RAEL)  studies,  as  reported  in  2004–2005  Radio
Marketing Guide & Fact Book, produced by the Radio Advertising Bureau, New York.
DRAWBACKS OF RADIO ADVERTISING
In addition to the numerous benefits of radio advertising, there are a few drawbacks to 
keep in mind as well. Each of these can be seen as a challenge; most can be overcome 
with some planning and creativity.
In the Background
When we listen to the radio, we are usually doing something else at the same time, making it a 
background medium. Ads on radio must therefore work a lot harder to grab—and keep—our 
attention.

 
66  The Media Handbook
Sound Only
Radio can only offer sound, rather than the sight and motion of television. However, the 
medium can still be used to great effect because it offers the possibility of inspiring the 
listener’s imagination. They can hear the waves crashing against rocks, or breaking glass, 
or party chatter, and conjure up images in their mind of what the scene looks like. Radio 
advertisements also tend to feature humor fairly often both as away to get attention and 
because the audience is less likely to be distracted by any visuals and can listen to the 
words. And as already noted, if used in conjunction with similar TV commercials, 
listeners will often transfer the TV images to the radio spot.
Short Message Life
Because people have the radio on in the background, for the most part, ads on this 
medium have a very short message life. Radio is like TV, and unlike newspapers and 
magazines, because once the ad has aired, the opportunity for exposure has disappeared. 
This makes it all the more critical to grab the audience’s attention right away with a 
message that is relevant, involving, and interesting.
Fragmentation
One of the drawbacks for radio is the fragmentation of the medium. We no longer just 
have  “rock”  stations,  but  “active  rock,”  “classic  rock,”  and  “album-oriented  rock” 
formats, among others. Each one appeals to slightly different kinds of people, so if you 
wanted to reach them all, you would have to buy each type of rock station in a market. 
Audience shares, particularly in major markets, may be very small, which makes it hard 
to use the medium as a reach vehicle.
RESEARCH ON RADIO
Although radio is considered a “second cousin” to television in the realm of electronic ad media, 
research has been done to compare the two forms. In addition, the power of sound, and of music 
in particular, has been studied to see how that impacts radio ad effectiveness. Legal issues in the 
radio business are noted here, because the legal policies adopted by radio stations as far as which 
ads are accepted have a direct impact on the kinds of radio commercials that are broadcast.16
16“Information Processing Differences Among Broadcast Media: Review and Suggestions for
Research,” James H.Leigh, Journal of Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, June 1991, 71–76. “Mental Imagery and 
Sound Effects in Radio Commercials,” Darryl W.Miller and Lawrence J.Marks, Journal of Advertising,
vol, 21, no. 4, December 1992, 83–94. “Advertising Clearance Practices of Radio  Stations:  A Model  of  
Advertising  Self-Regulation,”  Avery  M.Abernethy,  Journal  of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 3, September 
1993, 15–26. “Creating the Contrast: The Influence of Silence and Background Music on Recall 
and Attribute Importance,” G.Douglas Olsen, Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4, Winter 1995, 29–44.

 
Exploring the Media 67
In  2003,  the  radio  industry  started  to  fund  significant  research  studies  under  the
umbrella  of  the  Radio  Advertising  Effectiveness  Lab  (RAEL).  This  consortium  of
advertisers, agencies, and radio station groups helped fund and design several major
studies that examined the impact of radio advertising on consumers. Its first work looked
at radio’s psychological role in consumers’ lives. Its study, “Personal Relevance, Personal
Connections,” found that radio listening is considered by people to be a personal and
emotion-driven  experience.  They  listen  for  personal  gratification  more  so  than  for
entertainment or pure information. As noted earlier in this section, another study looked at
the benefits of synergistically mixing radio ads with newspaper or TV ads. It exposed
consumers to two radio ads or one TV plus two radio ads, and did the same substituting
newspaper for TV. What they found was radio ads alone performed better than either the
single exposure to TV or newspapers (in terms of brand recall). When radio was used to-
gether with TV, brand awareness and brand recall were higher than either medium alone.17
ALL THE NEWS THAT’S FIT TO PRINT—NEWSPAPER ADVERTISING
Newspapers are one of the oldest media forms in this country. They were also one of the
earliest  media  to  accept  advertising.  In  fact,  the  first  advertising  agencies  were
established to handle the purchase of space in newspapers. Some of the earliest ads were
for “medicinal” remedies, such as Lydia Pinkham’s Compound.
In contrast to many other countries with national newspapers, the majority of U.S.
newspapers are written for and distributed to a primarily local audience. As a result, most
advertising is placed on a market-by-market basis. You can also choose which section of
the  paper  to  appear  in,  such  as  news  (local,  national,  or  international),  sports,
entertainment, business, fashion, food, home, and travel, among others.
There are currently 2,373 newspapers published in the United States. This figure
includes both weekday and Sunday editions (1,456 and 917, respectively). That number
has remained relatively stable over time. In 1970, for example, there were 2,334 papers
published. Newspaper audiences are measured in terms of circulation, or the number of
people who subscribe to or purchase the newspaper. Exhibit 4.13 shows the top 10 papers
across the country based on their circulation.
The past decade has witnessed a decline in the percentage of the adult population that
admits to reading a paper daily. Currently, about 54% claim they do so, in contrast to the
78% who read a paper back in 1970. What is even more worrisome for the newspaper
industry is that the readership figure is lower  among  younger  people, who constitute the
17Radio  Advertising  Effectiveness  Lab  (RAEL)  studies,  as  reported  in  2004–2005  Radio
Marketing Guide & Fact Book, produced by the Radio Advertising Bureau, New York.

 
68  The Media Handbook
medium’s future readers. Several papers have introduced daily low-priced tabloid papers 
to entice younger people to develop a newspaper reading habit. The Chicago Tribune’s 
Red Eye, for example, sells about 90,000 copies of its daily tabloid, primarily to readers 
under age 40, at the low per-issue cost of $0.25.
Another problem the industry faces is the demise of the two-newspaper town. Most 
large cities used to have at least two competing newspapers; today, due to the high costs 
of running a newspaper, that is the exception rather than the rule. Only the largest cities
EXHIBIT 4.13 Top 10 newspapers by circulation
Rank 
Newspaper 
Circulation (000)
1 
USA Today 
2220.9
2 
Wall Street Journal 
2106.8
3 
New York Times 
1121.1
4 
Los Angeles Times 
902.2
5 
New York Daily News 
715.1
6 
Washington Post 
707.7
7 
New York Post 
686.2
8 
Chicago Tribune 
599.5
9 
Houston Chronicle 
554.8
10 
San Francisco Chronicle 
480.6
Source: Audit Bureau of Circulations, as reported in Ad Age, 11/8/04, 16
(New York, Los Angeles, Chicago) still support two or three daily papers. This not 
only harms the newspaper industry, it is not particularly good news for advertisers 
either. Without competition, the paper can set its advertising rates wherever it wants 
them, as long as it can still compete with other media alternatives.
As major cities have dropped competing papers, some of the readership has moved to 
suburban or weekly newspapers. The growth here is not too surprising, given population 
shifts from city to suburb in the past few decades. The focus of these titles is far more 
local, writing about high school sports scores or local ordinances rather than national or 
regional news. For advertisers, it offers the opportunity to bring the message down to the 
truly local level. National advertisers such as Gap Stores can announce the opening of a 
new store in Arlington Heights, Illinois, in the Arlington Heights Post, instead of a zoned 
or regional edition of the Chicago Tribune.

 
Exploring the Media  69
Newspaper Advertising Revenue
The largest part of newspaper advertising revenue (45%) comes from retailers. This 
includes large companies, such as major national department stores like JC Penney and 
Nordstrom, to regional banks like National City or First National, down to Joe’s shoe 
repair shop around the corner. Second in importance as far as newspaper ad revenues are 
concerned is classified advertising (40%). The most important classified sections are for 
real estate and automotive, which together account for the majority of classified ad 
dollars.
The third type of newspaper advertising is placed on a national basis so that it appears 
in  all  (or  most)  papers  across  the  country.  This  type  represents  only  15%  of  total 
advertising revenues for the medium, despite the efforts of many newspapers to position 
themselves as valuable national vehicles in the face of increased competition with other 
local media, such as spot TV and radio, regional magazines, or billboards. The main 
problem  that  advertisers  have  with  using  newspapers  on  a  national  basis  is  the 
considerable premium that it costs to run their ads in all markets. Most are reluctant to 
pay that premium, which can cost up to 75% more than a local or regional ad.18
Newspapers also offer a medium within a medium, in the form of free-standing inserts 
(FSIs). These are pre-printed sheets that are usually distributed within the Sunday paper. 
Most  carry  coupons.  On  Sunday,  too,  most  newspapers  carry  a  special  magazine 
supplement, either produced by the paper itself or coming from one of the nationally 
syndicated Sunday supplements (i.e., Parade and USA Weekend).
At  one  point,  it  seemed  that  newspaper  classified  advertising  would  be  greatly 
diminished by the Internet. Automotive and real estate classified ad sites were very 
popular at first and threatened to take revenues from the printed newspapers. It did not 
take long for newspapers to set up their own Internet-based advertising sites, either as 
part of their own individual newspaper sites (e.g., bostonglobe.com) or in concert with 
other  newspapers  (e.g.,  careercentral.com).  Today,  about  1,500  North  American 
newspapers have Web sites, as do 5,000 papers globally. Increasingly, however, the 
newspapers’ readers are migrating online instead of picking up the printed copy. Nielsen 
NetRatings calculates that about one in five (21%) of online users who read newspapers 
are reading them on the Web.
One  issue  that  newspaper  advertisers  are  increasingly  trying  to  deal  with  is  the 
“sacred” line between the advertising and editorial departments. General Motors, for 
example, pulled its advertising from the Los Angeles Times newspaper after a journalist 
for the paper wrote a critical review about the automaker’s new Pontiac G6 vehicle. GM 
claimed there were mistakes in the article.19 This may be the start of a trend, with major 
advertisers attempting to put clauses in their contracts that overtly state they will pull 
their ads if unfavorable editorial content appears. This is a slippery slope, potentially 
leading to a blurring of the church and state separation of editorial and advertising 
departments.
18“A Study of National Advertising’s Payout: Image Ads in Newspaper ROP,” Stuart Tolley,
Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 33, no. 5, September/October 1993, 11–20.
19“Advertising,” Stuart Elliott, New York Times, April 7, 2005, p. C3.

 
70  The Media Handbook
BENEFITS OF NEWSPAPERS TO ADVERTISERS
As Exhibit 4.13 illustrated, the top 10 U.S. newspapers reach about 10 million consumers 
every day. Add to that the circulations of the other, smaller, newspapers in the country,
and  you’ll  begin  to  see  just  what  kind  of  exposure  is  possible  with  newspaper
advertisements. But, in addition to reach, newspapers offer advertisers a number of 
important benefits that are discussed below.
Timeliness
The day after the stock market crashed in 1987, ads appeared in many newspapers
reassuring  consumers  and  stockholders  that  everything  was  still  all  right.  Financial
services companies reacted similarly after the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center
in 2001. And McDonald’s quickly responded in newspaper ads when it discovered that
someone  at  one  of  its  agencies  had  stolen  winning  game  cards  to  several  of  its 
“instant-win”  promotions.  The company  immediately  created newspaper and TV ads to
apologize to the public, and then added a new game with daily prizes awarded randomly
to customers in the store.20
Unlike magazines or even television, newspapers are by their very nature filled with 
“news.”  People  turn  to  them  for  the  latest  information  on  products,  prices,  and 
availability. The role that newspaper advertisements play in purchase decisions may be 
critical. A survey found that 70% of all newspaper readers agreed with the following 
statement: “The paper helps me to decide where to shop and buy.” And 65% felt that the
newspaper was more important than television in making purchase decisions. In addition,
electronic scanner devices in most supermarkets and retail stores are now able to assess
the link between advertising and sales more directly and rapidly. Data suggest that
newspaper ads can triple the sales volume for items that are advertised at reduced prices.
Desirable Audience
In the battle to attract advertisers, newspapers can offer highly desirable audiences. A
newspaper reader is more likely to be better educated, have a higher income, and be more 
involved  in  upscale  activities  than  nonreaders.  People  with  a  household  income  of
$75,000 a year or more are more likely to be newspaper readers. Exhibit 4.14 gives a 
profile of the newspaper audience.
In contrast to other media, readers spend a considerable amount of time with the 
newspaper, although that varies by age. Older readers (age 65+) spend about 1 hour a day
with the paper, whereas the youngest adults (age 20–29) read daily for only 20 minutes21
(most likely because they are going online for their news). On average,  about  two  thirds 
20“McSwindle,” Kate MacArthur, Ad Age, August 27, 2001, p. 1/pp. 22–23.
21“Reenergizing  Readership  and  Revitalizing  Newspapers,”  Kubas  Consultants.  Presented  at
Newspaper Association of America conference, November 2003.

 
Exploring the Media  71
EXHIBIT 4.14 Profile of the newspaper reader
Professional/executive
Graduated college/post graduate 
Age 45 + 
Household income $50,000+ 
Married 
Own home 
Northeast region 
Lived at present address 5+ years 
Source: MRI, 2004
(67%) of all newspaper pages are actually opened, a figure that depends in part on the 
number of pages in the issue. In thinner papers (10–32 pages), 78% of all pages are 
opened, but when the paper becomes much bigger (81–204 pages), only 63% are opened.
Another consequence of the time readers spend with the paper is that it offers the 
media specialist more opportunity to provide detailed information. If you are trying to 
sell a new home equity loan program, then you need the space to provide details on the 
terms of the deal—as well as on bank locations so interested consumers can find you. 
Although  you  might  worry  that  so  much  fine  print  will  be  boring  or  encourage 
page-turning, those people who are in your target audience will probably be interested 
enough to read through the entire ad (assuming the copy is inviting and attention-getting).
Impact of Editorial
An obvious advantage of newspaper advertising is that you can choose the section of the 
paper in which your ad will appear, for example, putting food ads in the Food Section or 
offering investment advice in the Business pages. This effectively narrows your reach to 
those consumers most likely to be interested in your product or service.
Local and Regional Possibilities
Although advertisers are reluctant to use newspapers on a national basis, they rely on them 
heavily for local or regional marketing. If Procter & Gamble wishes to test a new detergent 
in Peoria, Illinois, it can advertise in the Peoria Journal Star and feel confident that the 
message will only reach those people able to buy the product, thereby creating awareness 
for the new item. They might also test the effects of advertising on sales this way.  For  regional  
operators,  such  as  Friendly  Restaurants  (located  only  in  the northeastern part of the 
country), ads can be placed in newspapers in the selected markets where the restaurant is found.

 
72  The Media Handbook
Even within a market, an advertiser can buy space in only those papers being sold in a 
certain area. The Chicago Tribune, for example, offers eight zoned editions of its daily 
paper within the Chicago area.
DRAWBACKS OF NEWSPAPER ADVERTISING
As with every medium, newspapers have their own drawbacks as well as benefits. The three  
most  critical  drawbacks  of  newspaper  advertisements  are  short  issue  life,  the challenge of 
grabbing the reader’s attention, and the constraints of using a largely black and white medium.
Today or Never
Whereas magazines can often prolong their issue life and reach more people by being 
passed around or picked up on several occasions, at the end of each day the newspaper is 
usually discarded. If the reader misses your ad that day, you are not given a second 
chance. So, although newspapers are available every day, their issue life is very short.
Active Readers
The issue life of the newspaper is closely linked to how people read it. For although more 
than one half of all pages are likely to be opened, it is up to the reader to actively choose 
what to look at. If your headline doesn’t attract Jane Doe’s attention, then she won’t look 
at it at all; if the copy isn’t intriguing and relevant to her, then she can simply turn to an-
other article or page. It is therefore crucial that newspaper advertisements get the reader’s 
attention. When people sit in front of the television or listen to the radio, they are generally 
a “passive” audience with no choice but to attend to the ad (even if fleetingly) or turn off 
the radio or TV set. Exhibit 4.15 shows how the newspaper advertiser must fight for attention.
Black and White
In the 1980s, it  was rare to find a color ad in a newspaper. Then the Gannett 
Corporation’s national newspaper USA Today began to offer full-color capabilities. The 
quality of newspaper color reproduction has been improving ever since, although it is still 
a long way from looking as sharp as magazine pages (due primarily to the poorer quality 
of the paper it is printed on).
Even so, newspapers charge a premium for use of color, generally about 17% extra for 
a one-page four-color ad.  For  many  advertisers,  particularly  those  who  wish  to  
show “lifelike” qualities such as food manufacturers, it remains more effective to use 
magazine or television ads.

 
Exploring the Media  73
EXHIBIT 4.15 Elements That Get Newspaper Reader’s Attention
Color
Full Page 
Photography and illustrations 
Product in use 
Sale price 
Source: Roper Starch Study conducted on behalf of Newspaper Association of
America, 2001.
Research on Newspapers
Although  the  newspaper  industry,  through  its  trade  association,  the  Newspaper 
Association of America, conducts annual research on the size and strength of the 
industry, and periodic studies on the medium’s effectiveness, academic research has been 
more limited in recent years. Some studies have been done on the impact of ad size on 
consumer responses, including work on different promotional formats for the ads.22
MAGAZINES—AN EXPLOSION OF CHOICE
Although  magazines  have  a  long  history  in  the  United  States,  with  the  earliest 
publications appearing in the middle of the 18th century, they are also a medium that may 
be said to have had two very distinct life stages. Originally, most magazines catered to a 
very general audience, offering a mixture of news, stories, and features aimed either at 
the total population or, in the case of titles such as Ladies’ Home Journal and Good 
Housekeeping,  at  women.  The  strength  of  publications  such  as  Life,  Look,  and  the 
Saturday Evening Post is reflected in the fact that an ad placed in those magazines in the 
1950s would be likely to reach about 60% of the total population.
But with the rise of television in the 1950s, general interest magazines found they could 
not compete effectively either for advertising dollars or for readers. Rather than simply 
disappearing, magazines began to move toward greater specialization in their targeting and their 
editorial content. This trend continues today, with narrowly focused magazines devoted to
22“The Advertising Exposure Effect of Free Standing Inserts,” Srini S.Srinivasan, Robert P.Leone
and Francis J.Mulhern, Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 1, Spring 1995, 29–40. “Ad Size as an 
Indicator of Perceived Advertising Costs and Effort: The Effects on Memory and Perceptions,” 
Pamela M.Homer, Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4, Winter 1995, 1–12. “Predictors of 
Advertising Avoidance in Print and Broadcast Media,” Paul Surgi Speck and Michael T.Elliott, 
Journal  of  Advertising,  vol.  26,  no.  2,  Summer  1997,  61–76.  “Communicating  in  Print:  A 
Comparison of Consumer Responses to Different Promotional Formats,” Kenneth R.Lord and 
Sanjay Putrevu, Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, Fall 1998, 
1–18. “The Information Content of Newspaper Advertising,” Avery M.Abernethy, Journal of of 
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 14, no. 2, Fall 1992, 63–68.

 
74  The Media Handbook
topics  such  as  tropical  fish  (Tropical  Fish  Hobbyist),  cross-stitching  (Simply  Cross 
Stitch!),  or  aircraft  (Affordable  Aircraft).  And  whereas  there  are  still  some  general 
offerings, such as Atlantic Monthly or the New Yorker, their readership is considerably 
lower than the audience of their general interest forebears. Because of this increased 
specialization, today there are more than 6,000 different consumer magazines available. 
In 2004 alone, 480 new titles were introduced.
Magazines Today
Despite this specialization, magazines as a medium reach a broad range of the population. 
Indeed, 94% of all adults read magazines in any one year, buying about six different titles 
in that time period. The places they purchase them include supermarkets (accounting for 
38% of all magazines sold individually), discount stores, book stores, and drug stores. 
Readers look at each magazine copy for an average of 45 minutes.
There are three main types of magazines: consumer, farm, and business-to-business. 
Consumer magazines are usually categorized according to their editorial content, such as 
business, men’s, women’s, sports, news, and entertainment. This category includes titles 
enjoyed  by  all  segments  of  the  population,  from  Time  to  Sports  Illustrated  to 
Cosmopolitan. Farm magazines are geared toward that particular industry. Some may be 
crop-specific, such as Cotton Farming, and others deal with the technical aspects of 
agriculture. The third type, business-to-business, covers all titles aimed at the industrial 
user, everything from Chemical Age to Offshore Drilling to Information Week.
Taken together, magazines account for 5% of all ad dollars spent in the United States. 
Most magazines are considered as national vehicles for advertising, although city or 
regional publications are also classified within the consumer segment, such as Milwaukee 
or  Southern  Living.  More  and  more,  however,  national  magazines  offer  geographic 
breakouts of their circulation allowing an advertiser to place a message that will, for 
example, only reach southerners, or people who live in the northeast states, or in the Los 
Angeles metropolitan area. They are also developing more demographic “splits,” so that 
Fidelity Investments can advertise its mutual funds in the edition of Business Week that is 
read by people earning $75,000 or more per year.
Magazines are sold in one of two ways: at the newsstand or by subscription. For most 
titles, it is the latter that generates the most sales, accounting on average for 86% of a 
title’s  circulation.  As  with  newspapers,  magazines  are  assessed  in  terms  of  their
circulation. Today’s top circulation magazines are shown in Exhibit 4.16.

 
Exploring the Media  75
Rank 
Title 
Circulation
1 
AARP The Magazine 
22,617,093 
2 
Reader’s Digest 
10,081,577
3 
TV Guide 
9,015,544
4 
Better Homes & Gardens 
7,626,088
5 
National Geographic 
5,474,135
6 
Good Housekeeping 
4,639,941
7 
Family Circle 
4,267,535
8 
Woman’s Day 
4,209,130
9 
Ladies’ Home Journal 
4,120,087 
10 
Time 
4,034,061
Source: Adweek Hot List, 3/14/05, SR19
BENEFITS OF MAGAZINES TO ADVERTISERS
To an advertiser, three of the most attractive qualities of magazines are their high-end 
audiences, the enthusiasm of those audiences, and the long issue life of the medium.
Upscale Audiences
One of the incentives to using magazines for your advertising message is the favorable
demographic profile of magazine readers. Similar to newspaper readers, the heaviest
users of this medium are those adults who are age 18 to 44 years, have a college
education and a household income over $75,000, and are employed in a professional or 
managerial job.
Getting Attention
Another benefit of placing your ads in magazines is reader involvement. This concept is
rather difficult to define (and even harder to measure), but it generally refers to the
interest that the reader has in the material, both editorial and advertising. Because most
magazines today focus on a particular subject or interest, they can tie in more readily with
the personal needs and lifestyles of the audience, enabling advertisers to do so as well. In
this way, automakers can target car enthusiasts or prospective buyers in Car and Driver
or Road and Track, detergent manufacturers can promote their new or improved products
EXHIBIT 4.16 Top 10 magazines by circulation

 
76  The Media Handbook
in magazines aimed at homemakers (Better Homes and Gardens, Good Housekeeping, 
Ladies Home Journal), and financial services companies can offer their mutual funds to
interested investors in Fortune or Money.
Consumers also seem less resistant to seeing ads in magazines. One study conducted 
for the magazine industry in 2004 found that whereas 62% of those surveyed agreed that
the advertising on network TV gets in the way of their enjoyment, for magazines the
figure was only 28% of respondents. Moreover, nearly half (48%) said that advertising in 
fact adds to their enjoyment when reading magazines, a proportion that was higher than 
for any other medium. These findings are in part due to the fact that as a reader, you get 
to select what ads you read, whereas with television the ads are more or less forced on 
you (the remote control notwithstanding). Internet advertising is seen, by most users, as 
mere “clutter” on the screen.
Readers react to magazine ads in a different way than to ads on television. People tend 
to retain information seen in magazines longer because they can read up to five times 
faster than they can take in the spoken word. They tend to trust magazine ads more,
placing greater faith in the authority of the printed word. And, in many instances, reading
a magazine can be considered a pre-shopping experience, allowing consumers the chance 
to compare products and services and learn new information about an Apple iPod, for
example, prior to purchasing it.
Hanging Around
Another important, and unique, feature of magazines is their long issue life. Whereas the
television program is over in half an hour, and the newspaper is thrown out after one day, 
you will probably keep a monthly magazine in your home for 4 weeks or longer. This not 
only gives you opportunities for additional or repeat exposures to the advertising, it is
also likely that other people, known as the secondary audience, may see the issue too. 
The importance of this passalong readership is shown by the fact that the average 
magazine is seen by four different readers, with each one spending about 61 minutes with 
the issue.
DRAWBACKS OF MAGAZINE ADVERTISING
Magazines also have their drawbacks. Among the most significant obstacles to keep in 
mind are the considerable lead time necessary and the relatively high cost of reaching 
your targeted audience.
Long Planning Cycle
For most publications, ads have to be completed and at the printer well in advance of 
their  publishing  date,  a  factor  known  as  the  lead  time.  This  makes  it  difficult  for 
advertisers  to  create  particularly  timely  or  newsworthy  ads  of  the  kind  seen  in
newspapers. Moreover, despite the generally excellent color reproduction quality, the 
magazine remains two-dimensional (aside from pop-up displays or inserts, discussed 
further later). This prevents the magazine ad from offering the truly lifelike qualities of a
television spot.

 
Exploring the Media  77
Reaching Readers
The  increasingly targeted nature  of magazines means that the  cost of reaching  one 
thousand members of the audience (the CPM explained in greater detail in chapter 5) is 
higher  than  that  of  a  broader,  mass  medium  such  as  television.  Even  some  of  a 
magazine’s  benefits  can  be  viewed  as  potential  disadvantages  for  you  as  a  media spe-
cialist. The notion of readers’ involvement with the magazine also means that if they are not 
very interested in a particular product or ad they can easily ignore it by turning to the next page.
RESEARCH ON MAGAZINES
Studies on magazines as a medium have focused on similar areas as broadcast research. 
The value of the context in which an ad is seen was found, by Norris and Colman, to 
impact consumer recall and recognition of the ad.23 The same topic was explored further 
by Yi to see what happened when readers were given additional information prior to 
seeing the magazine ad in its context.24 Meanwhile, the magazine industry has itself 
sponsored several studies showing the impact of magazines on sales.25
In  2004,  the  magazine  industry  sponsored  a  study  undertaken  by  Northwestern 
University  to  examine  the  motivations  for  reading  magazines.  The  top  10  reasons 
included statements such as “I get value for my time and money,” “it does not disappoint 
me,” and “it makes me smarter.” Several other studies conducted on behalf of magazines 
have  attempted  to  show  how  magazine  ads  provide  a  better  return  on  advertisers’ 
investment than do other media.
OUTDOOR BILLBOARDS AND BEYOND—FROM CAIRO, EGYPT, TO 
CAIRO, ILLINOIS
There are some in the outdoor industry who like to claim that billboards are the oldest 
medium in existence.They date it back to Egyptian times when hieroglyphics were written
23“Context Effects on Recall and Recognition of Magazine Advertisements,” Claire E. Norris and
Andrew M.Colman, Journal of Advertising, vol, 21, no. 3, September 1992, 37–46.
24“Contextual  Priming  Effects  in  Print  Advertisements:  The  Moderating  Role  of  Prior
Knowledge,” Youjae Yi, Journal of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 1, March 1993, 1–10.
25See Magazine Publishers of America (MPA) Web site at magazine.org for more information on
Millward Brown study on ad effectiveness, the AC Nielsen Sales Scan Study, and econometric 
modeling case analysis, Measuring the Mix.

 
78  The Media Handbook
on roadside stones to give people directions to the nearest town or village. Whether or not 
you agree with that, outdoor billboards are certainly well established, having been around
in this country since the 1800s. At that time, companies began leasing space on boards
for bills to be pasted (hence the term billboard). The two main types of billboard are
poster panels and painted bulletins. Panels come in several sizes, named according to the
number of sheets of paper originally needed to cover them, such as 8-sheets and 30-
sheets. Posters are found mostly in populated areas, in or near cities and towns. Painted
bulletins are larger boards situated along highways and major roads. Their name refers to 
the fact that they were originally painted by hand at the site.
Putting messages on outdoor boards used to be extremely labor intensive. The sheets for
poster panels were pasted onto the board, whereas bulletins were hand-painted. Both were 
created either at the board site or at a central location within the market or region. Because
this had to be done in each market, differences resulted in the look of the message from
one market to another (and even one site to another within the market). Today, thanks to 
computer technology, poster panel messages are created electronically and then shipped either 
in one piece or in sections to the board site. Bulletins still tend to be hand-painted, but computers 
are now used to make sure that the finished product looks identical across boards. Today, 
bulletins are often created using other materials, such as lithography or special stretch vinyl.
In  the  past  40  years,  the  industry  has  come  under  increased  criticism  from environmen-
talists who claim that the boards are a blight on the scenery. Many cities and several states
have introduced bans on putting up new boards and, in certain cases, demanded the removal 
of existing structures. For example, you won’t see any billboards in Hawaii or Vermont.
Unlike other media that have editorial material too, outdoor billboards exist solely for 
advertising messages. They are primarily a local medium, bought on a market-by-market
basis, but are used by both national and local advertisers. The type of business using the medium
has changed considerably in the past 20 years. For many years, the biggest advertiser was
the tobacco industry, but 1999 legislation prohibited the advertising of tobacco messages
on any outdoor billboards. This not only had a significant impact on the tobacco industry, 
it freed up many high-profile and well-positioned billboards across the country for other
advertisers who had never been able to buy that space because the tobacco companies had
long-term deals with the billboard companies. Today, you are far more likely to see billboards
from local retailers, the travel industry, or health care providers than you would have even
5 years ago (see Exhibit 4.17 which shows the top ten outdoor advertising categories).
For many years, outdoor billboard audiences were calculated from manual traffic
counts conducted by each system operator of how many cars passed by a given billboard, 
multiplied by government statistics that are up-dated periodically on how many people
are present in the average car. That became the estimated  audience  viewing  a  billboard.
In  2001,  the  outdoor  industry’s  auditing organization, the Traffic Audit Bureau,
introduced an automated system to count the traffic. It uses special software that looks at
traffic counts by road segments within a market, and uses those to come up with the
audience figures. This avoids inconsistent counting done by different operators within and
across markets, as well as removing some of the human error involved in that process.

 
Exploring the Media  79
Rank 
Category 
Dollars in thousands
1 
Services & amusements 
$449,688.8
2 
Media & advertising 
$323,217.9
3 
Public transportation, hotels & resorts 
$292,744.4
4 
Retail 
$283,351.8
5 
Insurance & real estate 
$247,762.8
6 
Financial 
$220,398.3
7 
Automotive dealers & services 
$210,429.3
8 
Restaurants 
$204,228.6
9 
Automotive, auto accessories & equipment 
$183,123.5
10 
Communications 
$161,654.0
Source: TNS Sofres, 2005
In 2004, outdoor audience measurement took several new strides forward, with the 
testing by both Arbitron and Nielsen of Global Positioning by Satellite (GPS) devices to 
help figure out to which boards consumers had been exposed. Both companies tested this 
approach in selected markets, with the goal of expanding it further if it could be shown to 
provide a more accurate, yet still affordable, alternative means of capturing ad exposure.
The outdoor industry is far more expansive than it used to be. For example, outdoor 
messages are now quite commonly seen painted on the sides of buildings, on telephone 
kiosks and bus shelters, or in sports stadiums. More is said on this in the section, 
Alternative Forms of Communication.
BENEFITS OF OUTDOOR BILLBOARDS TO ADVERTISERS
The advantages of billboard advertising have contributed to the medium’s popularity over 
the past two centuries. Four of the most consistent and important benefits are size, 
mobility, effective reach, and cost. Each of these advantages is discussed next.
Big Is Better
The large size of the poster panel or painted bulletin means that outdoor advertising gets
noticed. In fact, at a typical busy location in the center of a city, more than 10,000 people 
are likely to pass an 8-sheet poster panel within a given month. In addition, the message 
is there constantly for 12 to 24 hours (and many posters are illuminated at night).
EXHIBIT 4.17 Top outdoor advertising categories

 
80  The Media Handbook
Mobility
Not only can painted billboards be moved around an area to expose more of the target to
the message, but the outdoor messages can be designed for specific locations, audiences,
or activities. So you could place ads for Samsonite luggage aimed at businesspeople at
airports to catch them when they travel, or advertise Chiquita bananas near the A&P
supermarket where your target audience shops.
Reaching Ethnic Groups
Outdoor billboards allow you to tailor your message to members of a particular ethnic group 
using their own language or culture yet still reach a mass audience within a specific market. You 
can buy space in areas with heavy concentrations of Hispanic people, for example, reach-
ing them where they live, work, and shop. It is harder to reach a  large  portion  of  these  groups 
with  traditionally  “Anglo”  television  or  magazines. Furthermore, it is valuable to be able to 
reach nonnative English speakers in their first language, whatever language that might be.
Reinforcing the Message
Outdoor  advertising  is  a  good  supplementary  medium,  helping  to  add  reach  and 
frequency to a media schedule at reasonable cost. A fairly typical outdoor buy could
reach over 80% of adults in a given area in a month. In addition, the fact that the 
billboard is there all the time means that frequency builds up and the message can be a 
constant reminder. Because many panels are situated in shopping areas, an advertiser can
present his message very close to the point of purchase.
DRAWBACKS OF OUTDOOR BILLBOARD ADVERTISING
In considering what part of your advertising budget to commit to outdoor billboard 
advertising, you will need to keep in mind the two drawbacks of the medium: short
exposure time and the potential for criticism from environmentalists.
Brief Message Exposure
The average outdoor message is only seen for between 3 and 7 seconds, so the copy
needs  to  be  extremely  concise  and  compelling.  For  products  that  need  a  lot
of explanation, outdoor is clearly not the right medium. One way to gauge whether or 
not there is too much copy on a billboard is to estimate how quickly people are going to
pass by it. You can try the exercise yourself, and see how much of the message you can 
take in as you drive or walk by. Because most of the viewing is done at high speed, es-
pecially for bulletins situated along the highway, the advertisement must also be eye-
catching and interesting enough to attract the driver’s (or passenger’s) attention.

 
Exploring the Media  81
Environmental Criticism
The outdoor industry, as noted earlier, has come under increasing criticism for cluttering
up the environment. Advertisers might shy away from the medium to avoid legal or
ethical disputes, especially in areas with a recent history of environmental controversies.
Research on Outdoor
The outdoor industry is one of the least researched of any mass medium. Studies have 
focused mostly on proving that the medium works, as shown by Bhargava et al.26 More
information on how the medium has been researched can be found on the Web site of the
Outdoor Advertising Association of America (www.oaaa.org).
INTERNET—THE ULTIMATE CHOICE
The rapid growth of the Internet as a consumer medium in the 1990s was unprecedented 
in the history of media. Internet penetration rose faster than any other medium (or 
appliance), reaching the critical mass of 50 million users in 5 short years (it took radio 36
years to get to that point). Today, with nearly three quarters (70%) of the country
accessing the Internet from home, work, school, or some other location, the medium’s 
capabilities continue to expand and develop. That is due, in part, to the ability of users to
access the Web through high-speed (broadband) technology. Today, about half of all 
users can do so, allowing them easier and faster access to full video offerings.
The  Internet  was  first  devised  as  a  means  of  communication  for  the  academic
community, more than 30 years ago. It was a fairly arcane and complex system, relying
on a lot of computer language and processing. The hypertext markup language (HTML) 
that  formed  the  basis  of  the  Web  is  now  seamlessly  (and  invisibly)  connected  to
everything we do on the computer. That was not the case originally. It was not until the 
late 1990s that the Internet came to be seen as a genuine medium (as opposed to
computer tool), and one that offered users far greater control than with any other existing 
medium. Even more so than print media, the Internet lets you select exactly where you 
want to go and what you want to see. You choose where to click, and how long to stay
there. Although you can browse through a magazine or newspaper, you generally have to
look at each page (or a table of contents) to find what you are most interested in. On the
Web, you can type in a web address (www.mediahandbook.com) and be taken straight to
that specific piece of information, without having to wade through other pages in which
26“Improving  the  Effectiveness  of  Outdoor  Advertising:  Lessons  From  a  Study  of  282
Campaigns,” Mukesh Bhargava, Naveen Donthu, and Rosanne Caron, Journal of Advertising 
Research, vol. 34, no. 2, March/April 1994, 46–55.

 
82  The Media Handbook
you have no interest. At the same time, the computer is keeping track of your every
movement, capturing each site you visit, and each page within that site. This information
proved invaluable in the development of the medium for advertising.
Indeed, as companies began setting up Web sites (a fairly inexpensive proposition),
they saw huge potential for advertising to help generate revenues. Analogies to the direct
response industry are common. Companies were immediately able to track visits to their
sites (by computer address only), and offer advertisers more information on who was not
only  visiting  their  sites,  but  also  looking  at  the  ads—and  clicking  through  to  the
advertiser’s site—than any other mass medium. They did so by placing special software,
known as cookies on users’ computers, to monitor the path that users take as they browse
different sites on the Internet. Internet ad revenues doubled each year for several years in
a row in the late 1990s, surpassing total ad revenues for the outdoor and syndicated TV
industries, and by 2004 had reached $6.8 billion.
At first, Internet ads consisted of banners—billboards on the Web—that did little more
than offer a brand name or teaser, and a link to another site. Companies began to consider
using  web  advertising  for  brand-building  purposes,  rather  than  simply  to  offer
information. And before long, the ability to purchase via the Web became mainstream
rather than exceptional. Today, according to e-Marketer, 74% of the online population age
13+ has made a purchase over the Web. Before long, advertisers started to get more
creative,  changing  the  size  of  the  ad  message,  and  incorporating  (as  technology
advanced) more sound, motion, and visual stimulation (e.g., animation), a phenomenon
known as rich media. Not surprisingly, the research findings showed that these kinds of
ads had greater impact (recall, awareness) than the plain-vanilla banners. But it became
more clear that as fast as advertisers moved to surprise consumers, those consumers
became increasingly disenchanted with web ads.
Today, when most consumers are asked about web advertising, their response is
primarily one of irritation. They talk about the “clutter” of Web sites, the irrelevance of
most ads that appear, and their techniques for avoiding them. In particular, annoyance
with ads that pop up, or pop under, a Web site is considerable. At the same time, if an ad
appears on the Web that is relevant and informative, consumers will click on it to find out
more. For many, the line between the “editorial” material and the “advertising” is a
narrow one on the Web, which is viewed by most people as an information cornucopia.
Another Internet phenomenon that has had an increasing impact on how advertisers
think about and use the Web has been the growth of search advertising. Inspired by sites
like Google, which allow users to type in any word and find out what is available
throughout the Web, advertisers started to realize that they could “buy” keywords or
links, and deliver ad messages to consumers when they requested those words. So, for
example, if you do a search on Google for the words “razor blades” to find out if your
product with a built-in counter is available, at the top of the screen you might see
sponsored links from Web sites such as drugstore.com or manufacturers like Gillette or
Braun.
Today, search has become the most popular way for advertisers to reach online
consumers. They now spend more on search than on “regular” display online ads; indeed,
4 in every 10 online ad dollars go toward search.

 
Exploring the Media  83
BENEFITS OF INTERNET TO ADVERTISERS
In many ways, the benefits of this emerging medium for advertisers are still being 
explored.  Four  of  the  current  advantages  are  flexibility,  personalization,  reach,  and
measurability.
Flexibility
There are many forms of Internet advertising. Unlike other mass media, where choices
come down to 15- or 30-second commercials or full page versus half-page ads, the Internet
does not limit the imagination. From traditional banner ads to pop ups to search, ad mes-
sages can appear in numerous forms. Beyond that, advertisers are increasingly trying to
communicate with prospects via e-mail, asking people to opt-in and be willing to receive
messages that way, offering them cut-price travel deals on Travelocity, or the best-seller 
list on Amazon. Advertisers can also engage in affiliate marketing, where one site pro-
motes  another site’s products or services in exchange for some commission on the sale.
Targeted Message
The Internet is the first mass medium able to offer a targeted, personal advertising 
message. Although direct response has been doing so for many years, it was not possible 
in TV, radio, newspapers, magazines, or billboards to talk to anything less than a sizable
audience. With the Internet, however, advertisers are actually able to send messages to 
named individuals (via opt-in e-mail marketing). It is assumed that such messages, by 
being more relevant to that individual, are more likely to be accepted and absorbed.
Reach
Although the Internet does not offer as broad a reach as television, campaigns that appear
on a range of Web sites (particularly the gateway or portal sites many people have as
their home  pages,  (e.g.,  msn.com  or  yahoo.com)  can  indeed  reach  a  high 
proportion  of everyone on the Internet. In addition, the reach on the Internet can be given
against specific advertising messages, not just the sites on which those messages appear 
(i.e., ad exposure not just opportunity to see).
Measurability
For advertisers, the Internet’s ability to measure who is doing what on the Web would 
seem to be answering one of the “holy grail” questions of the industry. But because the 
measurement is computer-based rather than person-based, the measures are in fact not as 
precise and valuable as they might appear. Having said that, Internet measurement is
certainly far more detailed than for any other mass medium, where at best the media 
specialist can look at opportunities to be exposed to the ad, rather than actual viewer, 
reader, or listener behavior. Several advertisers have undertaken cross-media studies of ad 
impact on the Web compared to  other media  (using statistical  modeling) and found that

 
84  The Media Handbook
the Internet ads are usually more effective at enhancing brand image and consideration
than other media types.27 Initially, web advertising was sold based on click throughs 
(users clicking on web ad to link to advertisers’ sites), but it soon became clear that if 
Internet advertising was to be comparable to other ad media, then the cost metric had to 
be the same. Today, most sites price their advertising based on cost per thousand (CPM). 
Web measurement services provide data on the demographics and lifestyles of web users,
as well as web traffic to individual sites and/or ads.
DRAWBACKS OF INTERNET ADVERTISING
As new and exciting as the Internet is, it still cannot provide advertisers with everything
they would want to reach their desired targets. Here is a summary of the downside to
Internet advertising, in terms of consumer irritation, confusion, and nonstandard metrics.
Consumer Irritation
The plethora of advertising on the Internet is not always appreciated by consumers. 
Although users have the option to click on an ad to find out more information, there are
more messages that pop up or “pop under” a site that users have to actively remove if
they do not want to look at them. Moreover, because people tend to use the Web to look
for specific information (rather than passively consuming a TV program or browsing a 
magazine’s pages), the irritation level with the high number of ad messages on a web 
page (banners, buttons, sponsorships) can become overwhelming, detracting from the
impact of any one particular message.
Confusion
Although this particular drawback reflects, to a large extent, the newness of the medium,
many Internet users remain fairly unsophisticated in how they use the Web, uncertain of
what will happen if they click on an ad, for example (“Will I get back to the page that I 
really wanted to be on?”). There is also a more generalized confusion among many users
about what in fact constitutes a web advertisement. Is it a company’s Web site (e.g.,
nike.com)? Or, are the pages that pop up in moving from one page to another (so-called
interstitials) ad messages or actual sites? Although some of this confusion may benefit
advertisers (putting out messages that users see as information rather than advertising),
the confusion is as likely to lead to avoidance as interaction.
Nonstandard Metrics
As a relatively new ad medium, the Internet has not yet developed fully standardized
measurement metrics. Each measurement service uses slightly different methods (not
27“How the Internet is Reshaping Advertising,” Rex Briggs, Admap, Issue 560, April 2005, 59–61.

 
Exploring the Media  85
always fully revealed) to measure a different list of Web sites. Some sites try to sell 
advertising based on audience impressions, others on site visits (clicks), and yet others on 
actual sales. As the medium matures, it is likely that more standardization will be put in 
place, especially to make it more comparable to traditional mass media.
RESEARCH ON THE INTERNET
A study conducted on behalf of the Online Publishers Association (OPA) in 2005 found 
that when Internet users were more engaged in the content, they not only spent more time 
with a site, but also were more likely to recommend it to their friends. Through both qual-
itative and quantitative studies, and segmentation of the data, the OPA uncovered 22 dis-
tinct online user experiences, ranging from “connection with others” to “worth saving and 
sharing.” The experiences most likely to increase online usage included content that was 
entertaining and absorbing, and content that was personalized (“looks out for people like me”).28
Others have started to try to model the uses and gratifications of Internet use, finding that 
those looking for information tend to interact more with messages on Web sites, whereas  those  
looking  for social interaction  turn  to  the  Web  for  human-to-human communication.29
There is an abundance of additional research on the Internet.30
ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF COMMUNICATION
As the traditional media forms already outlined grow increasingly cluttered, advertisers 
are looking for new and different ways to present their messages to the target audience. 
Some of the most important means available are Yellow Pages, in-store advertising, 
sponsorship, and word of mouth.
Yellow Pages
Although  placed  under  nontraditional  media,  Yellow  Pages  advertising  has  been  in 
existence for almost as long as the telephone directory itself. Offering advertisers (and 
consumers) another type of classified advertising, the Yellow Pages generated $14 billion
28“Online User Experience Study,” Online Publishers Association, 2005.
29“Internet  Uses  and  Gratifications,”  Hanjun  Ko,  Chang-Hoan  Cho,  and  Marilyn  S.Roberts,
Journal of Advertising, vol. 34, no. 2, Summer 2005, 57–70.
30See, e.g., “Displacement and Reinforcement Effects of the Internet and Other Media as Sources
of Information,” Stanley D.Sibley and James C.Tsao, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 44, no. 
1, March 2004, 126–142. “Changing Fortunes for Internet Advertising,” Chris Dobson, Admap, 
Issue 448, March 2004, 32–33. “Determinants of Internet Advertising: An Empirical Study,” 
George  Baltas,  International  Journal  of  Market  Research,  vol.  45,  no.  4,  505–513.  “Banner 
Advertiser-Web Site Context Congruity and Color Effects on Attention and Attitudes,” Robert
S.Moore, Claire Allison Stammerjohan, and Robin A.Coulter, Journal of Advertising, vol. 
34, no. 2, Summer 2005, 71–84.

 
86  The Media Handbook
People use the Yellow Pages to look up information and services. More than one fifth 
of the time, the search is related to business needs. The top three categories that people 
turn to are food, dining out and entertainment, and automotive. The top three headings in 
Yellow Pages directories in terms of the number of listings are restaurants, physicians 
and surgeons, and auto parts.
According to Mediamark Research, Inc. (MRI), about one quarter of the population has 
used the Yellow Pages in the past 7 days, and nearly two thirds (63%) have done so 
within the past 12 months. But 60% of the 3% of the country who moved in the past year 
used the Yellow Pages, as did 19% of the 99% of the country who ordered a pizza. The 
“average” profile is someone who is between age 25 and 49, has been to college, and has 
an annual household income of $60,000 or more.
Within the past few years, there have been some new developments in Yellow Pages 
advertising. First, the industry has attempted to attract more national advertisers, who 
accounted for just 15% of total revenues in 2004. For most consumers, the Yellow Pages 
are usually considered a means of finding local information. In 2004, the Association of 
National Advertisers (ANA) hired one company to provide measurement for a new 
syndicated yellow pages service that uses telephone surveys to estimate usage of the 
medium and recall overall and in key product categories.31
Today, there are other places to go for Yellow Pages information. Most prominent among 
these is the Internet, where sites like switchboard.com or 411.com let people search for what or 
who they want online. For most people, however, the Internet and printed copies of the Yellow 
Pages are not mutually exclusive. One survey found that 80% of the people who had shopped 
online in an average month had also looked at the printed version in that same timeframe.
The  availability  of  color  in  the  Yellow  Pages  has  helped  some  advertisers  gain 
additional attention from consumers. In a study conducted by Fernandez and Rosen, ads were 
seen as more informative and noticeable when color was included.32 Research by Laband 
and Abernathy looked at the impact of different sized Yellow Pages ads, and as expected, 
larger size ads generate more response, although not in an exponential fashion, whereas the 
number of competitive advertisers under the same heading has a negative impact on response.33
in advertising revenues in 2004. There are nearly 7,000 different Yellow 
Pages directories in the United States, distinguished not just by location (Chicago 
vs. New York) but also by target (the “silver” pages targeting senior citizens or the 
gay/lesbian directory for that consumer group). This can sometimes make it harder 
for advertisers because of the lack of standardization in terms of ad sizes or guidelines.
31“Putting a 21st-century Spin on a Powerful Selling Vehicle,” Burt Michaels, Know Magazine,
51–58.
32“The Effectiveness of Information and Color in Yellow Pages Advertising,” Karen V. Fernandez
and Dennis L.Rosen, Journal of Advertising, vol. 29, no. 2, Summer 2000, 59–72.
33“The  Customer  Pulling  Power  of  Different-Sized  Yellow  Pages  Advertising,”  Avery
M.Abernathy and David N.Laband, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 42, no. 3, May/June 
2002, 66–72.

 
Exploring the Media  87
In-Store Advertising
Just like Yellow Pages advertising, the notion of placing advertising messages inside
stores is not especially new. Signs and promotions have been available in stores for more 
than 25 years. Today, however, more advertisers are including in-store media explicitly in 
the media plan, acknowledging this as advertising rather than simply a promotional 
expense. In 2004, advertisers spent an astonishing $18.5 billion in this venue. One of the 
main reasons for its increased popularity is that it is the most measurable of all media.
Thanks to electronic scanning at the cash register, advertisers are able to see what
happens at the checkout counter when their messages are in the store. Some of the most 
popular locations for in-store messages are on the shelf displays, on TV screens at the
checkout,  or  “floor  signs”  next  to  the  freezer  cabinet  or  in  the  aisles.  In  addition,
messages or coupons can be generated at the checkout counter when people pay for their
goods, tailored to the purchases that have just been made. This form of advertising has 
moved from grocery stores to a wide variety of retail outlets, including Wal-Mart and 
Circuit City.
In-store advertising effectively eliminates the time between seeing the message and 
buying the item. Drawbacks include the possibility that the target misses the ad somehow,
either by not paying attention or by its being covered up in some way. In addition, 
in-store advertising is not especially cheap. It tends to have its greatest effect among 
current brand users rather than persuading buyers of the competitor’s brand to switch. 
The time for message exposure is very short, so messages tend to focus on price and be
extremely brief.
Sponsorship
As advertisers have had to work harder to reach their target consumers, one of the non-
traditional forms of communication they have turned to is sponsorship. This involves paying an 
organization a fee to put a company or brand name at the head of an event or as the key sponsor
of that event. Examples include State Farm Insurance’s sponsorship of an ice skating competi-
tion, to Visa’s sponsorship of the U.S. Olympic team, to the renaming of sports stadiums after
companies (e.g., American Airlines Center in Dallas, Philips Arena in Atlanta, and SBC
Center in San Antonio). The practice of sponsorship is now estimated to be worth $9.5 billion.
The  majority  of  sponsorship  spending  (69%)  goes  toward  sports-related  events, 
followed by entertainment tours and attractions (9%), and festivals, fairs, and annual
events  (8%).  A rapidly  growing  area  within  the  sponsorship  area  is  cause-related
marketing, where companies link up with non-profit groups and become “sponsors” of
their causes. Examples include Avon’s support of an annual 3-day walk to raise funds for 
breast cancer research, and Tanqueray’s sponsorship of a bike ride each summer to raise 
money for AIDS. Even though sponsorship is generally considered to be undertaken to
reach a national audience, there are often significant local opportunities too. Sponsorship
of local sports teams can enhance a company’s reputation in those particular markets; and 
companies that choose to sponsor a local annual festival often receive positive coverage 
in the local media. There are also benefits to be gained by sponsoring grassroots or
community festivals and fairs, especially among ethnic audiences.

 
88  The Media Handbook
The reasons companies choose sponsorship instead of (or more likely in addition to)
traditional advertising are many. They include the opportunity for heightened visibility for  their
brand  name,  thereby  increasing  the  chances  of  shaping  positive  consumer attitudes
(“I like ice skating, therefore since State Farm sponsors a skating competition, I like State
Farm more too”). Sometimes, sponsorship works well for smaller companies. Although  they
may  have  smaller  ad  budgets  compared  to  bigger  competitors,  their sponsorship of a
key event or attraction can make them seem an equal in consumers’ eyes. Coors Brewing
Company spends far less on advertising than either Anheuser-Busch or Miller Beers, but
when all three companies are sponsoring race cars at NASCAR events, the viewer or attendee
does not see one company as a better or necessarily bigger sponsor than another. One of
the potential downsides of sponsorship was seen in 2002 when the giant energy trading
company, Enron, found itself bankrupt and subject to numerous  criminal  investigations  for
its  financial  practices.  The  company’s  earlier purchase of the naming rights for Hous-
ton’s arena, which they called Enron Field, no longer seems as smart a decision as before.
The media are getting more actively involved in creating sponsorships for advertisers. 
Cooking Light magazine created a “healthy” house filled with products of its sponsoring
companies, such as Reebok (exercise equipment), Lennox Industries (air conditioning), 
and Whirlpool (appliances). The magazine promoted the house in its pages and attracted
thousands of visitors to its Birmingham, Alabama, location. After the promotion ended,
the magazine was able to sell the home privately. Sponsorships are not only aimed at 
adults these days. Mattel, the company that makes Barbie dolls, took part in a shopping
mall  tour  with  Better  Homes  &  Gardens  magazine,  sponsoring  a  girl’s  bedroom
showcasing Barbie-themed products such as furniture and bedding.
Word of Mouth
Although considered by many to not be a true “medium,” per se, word of mouth is
becoming an increasingly popular way for advertisers to promote their brands. It is
sometimes referred to as “viral” marketing, using the metaphor of spreading good words
about a brand the way that a virus can spread among people. In particular, products that
are new or are targeting specific groups may lend themselves to this form of promotion. At its
simplest, word of mouth involves getting the (positive) word out to people who are considered
opinion leaders in a particular category, so that they will then influence others to consider
the brand. Some marketers take it further, and plant people in key venues where the brand
is either used (e.g., a new vodka in a bar), and have them talk to the people around them about
the wonders of this product. Those consumers are unaware that the individual has been paid to
promote the brand, so critics have complained that this is a deceptive, or even unethical, practice.
The use of word of mouth marketing has also spread to cell phones. The goal of viral
mobile messages is to have the message spread from person to person as they pass it 
along  to  their  family  and  friends.  Some  ringtones  have  become  popular  this  way,
particularly among teens and young adults. However, there is the danger that these
messages will be considered “junk” or “spam,” and ignored or discarded.

 
Exploring the Media  89
WHICH MEDIA SHOULD YOU USE?
Now that you have some basic information on each major media category, we can start to
consider why you might or might not wish to include them in your media plans. To make 
this process less cumbersome, we’ll need to recap some of the most important advantages 
and disadvantages that each medium offers. These are summarized in Exhibit 4.18.
SUMMARY
Before deciding which media might best be suited to achieving your plan objectives, it is
important to consider the advantages and disadvantages that each type of media can offer.
Issues to be included in your analysis include the reach and/or frequency of the medium, 
length of message exposure, audience involvement, clutter, targetability, and cost. For 
each media category, an examination of the benefits and drawbacks will help determine 
whether, and to what extent, it should be included in the final plan. Nontraditional
alternatives should be considered too, along with the mass media forms.
CHECKLIST—EXPLORING THE MAJOR MEDIA
EXHIBIT 4.18 Pros and cons of major media
 
Pros 
Cons
TV 
True to life; pervasive; high reach 
Expensive; brief message; 
clutter; ad positioning
Radio 
Local appeal; targeted reach; imagery 
transfer; low cost; high frequency; 
flexibility
Background; short message 
life; fragmentation
Newspaper Timeliness; desirable audience; editorial 
impact; local/regional benefits
Short issue life; attention 
span; black and white
Magazine 
Upscale audience; selective exposure; 
long issue life
Long lead time; high targeted 
cost
Outdoor 
Large size; mobility; low cost; ethnic 
reach; complement to other media
Brief exposure; 
environmental issue
Internet 
Flexibility; reach; personalization; 
measurability
Consumer irritation; 
confusion; non-standard 
metrics
1. Do you want primarily national or local media in your plan, or a combination of both?

 
90  The Media Handbook
Other Media
Yellow Pages
In-Store/Marketing At-Retail 
Sponsorship 
Word of Mouth
Will the benefits of television (mass reach, closeness to reality, 
and pervasiveness) help achieve your media objectives?
Have  you  considered  the  drawbacks  of  television  (cost,  brief  
exposure  time, advertising clutter, and uncertain pod positioning)?
Should  you  use  traditional  TV  ads  or  explore  some  of  the  new  forms  
of  TV advertising, such as on DVRs, PPV, or brand integration?
Will the benefits of radio (local appeal, targeted formats, low cost, high frequency, 
and message flexibility) help achieve your media objectives?
Have 
you 
considered 
the 
drawbacks 
of 
radio 
(its 
background 
nature, audio-only message, brief exposure time, and fragmented market)?
Will  the benefits of  newspapers  (timeliness, editorial affinity,  local and  
regional capabilities, and upscale audiences) help achieve your media objectives?
Have you considered the drawbacks of newspapers, such as brief exposure, poor 
color capabilities, and selective readers?
Will 
the 
benefits 
of 
magazines 
(upscale 
audiences, 
involved 
and 
interested readers, and long issue life) help achieve your media objectives?
Have you considered the drawbacks of magazines (long lead time, two-
dimensional message, and higher costs per thousand)?
Will the benefits of outdoor billboards (large message size, rotating message, 
ethnic targetability) help achieve your media objectives?
Have you considered the drawbacks of outdoor billboards (brief message 
exposure and environmental impact)?
Will 
the 
benefits 
of 
the 
Internet 
(flexibility, 
targeted 
message, 
reach, measurability) help achieve your media objectives?
Have  you  considered  the  drawbacks  of  the  Internet  (irritation,  
confusion,  and nonstandard metrics)?
Are there opportunities to use Yellow Pages, in-store advertising, sponsorship, or 
word of mouth in your media plan, to increase the impact of and audience for your 
message?
2.
3.
4. 
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

 
CHAPTER 5
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations
Just as computer programmers talk about bits, bytes, and RAM, and car enthusiasts dwell
on RPM, jerk, and lateral acceleration, so do media specialists converse in their own
language. Before moving on to the actual media plan development, it is helpful to review
some of these definitions.
UNDERSTANDING RATINGS
Most of you are probably already familiar with the weekly release of the Nielsen ratings,
which identify the most popular television programs. The size of the audience is usually
given in absolute terms (i.e., millions of people) and as a percentage of the population. It
is this latter figure, known as the rating, that is used as the baseline measure for all media
concepts.
Rating Point
One rating point equals 1% of a particular target group. That audience can be defined in
various ways—by household, by geographic market, or by a given demographic group
(e.g., men from 18 to 49 or women from 25 to 54), or by product usage or ownership
(e.g., people who own a digital camera). The television program “Survivor” might
receive a household rating of 15.3 in Memphis, which means that 15.3% of homes in that
city watched the show. The magazine Entertainment Weekly might get a rating of 10.2
among females from age 18 to 34, meaning that 10.2% of all women in that age group
read that particular issue of the magazine.
Gross Rating Points
By adding up all the rating points we wish to achieve, we end up with a concept known
as gross rating points (GRPs). For media planning purposes, we set as our goal a given
number of total, or “gross,” rating points to achieve and then figure out which vehicles to
use to obtain that number. We might want our plan to have a total of 100 gross rating
points each week against our target of working women. These could come from any
media.
The reason these rating points are considered “gross” is that they do not take into
account any duplication of exposure. That is, there are probably many people within our
target who see an ad for Slim Fast in Fitness and also hear the same message on the local
morning talk show. So although our total number of rating points placed in the media
each week is set at 100, each person will be exposed to a different number of them and in
different vehicles. This is shown in the diagram below.
In today’s complex media world, where our targets are becoming more narrowly
defined, the term GRP is often altered to TRP, or “target rating point.” This makes

 
92  The Media Handbook
explicit the fact that we are planning our ratings against a specific target, rather than the 
whole world. The concept is the same, however.
Gross Impressions
This term simply converts the gross rating points into a number by dividing the number 
of rating points by 100 and multiplying that figure by the size of the target audience. So if 
our plan calls for obtaining 200 GRPs against a target audience of  500,000  people,  then  
we  are  aiming  to  achieve  1  million  gross  impressions (200/100"500,000).
EXHIBIT 5.1 Diagram of GRPs and Duplication
REACH AND FREQUENCY
Although many would argue that advertising is more art than science, we still need some 
way to assess whether or not the messages we place in the media are having any impact. 
It  is  not  enough  to  know  how  many  impressions  are  made  with  one  ad,  or  what 
percentage of the target audience is exposed to a given program or magazine. As media 
specialists, we also need an estimate of the cumulative effect of our media plan. That is 
provided by the concepts of reach and frequency.

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  93
media habits, then there are many intervening variables that easily prevent you from
seeing or hearing an ad. You might deliberately ignore it, turning the page of the
magazine or changing the TV channel or avoiding the Web pop-up when it appears. You
could be doing something else at the same time, such as talking to a friend or cooking
dinner, therefore not paying attention to the message. Or you could find the ad boring,
irrelevant, or uninteresting, and see or hear it but not really absorb the contents. So when
we talk about the reach of a plan, we are really talking about the opportunity-for-exposure
(sometimes called opportunity-to-see, or OTS).
And, of course, we should also emphasize that reach, like all media terms, is merely an
estimate. We will never know exactly how many people were reached or how they
reacted. But, if we are trying to reach women from age 25 to 54 to persuade them to try
our new brand of body wash, then by using syndicated data sources we can find out how
many women of that age watch “The View” or read Redbook. To reach a target audience
of men from age 18 to 49 to increase the number of inquiries for Fidelity Investment’s
pamphlet on investing wisely, we can learn how many men of that age read a daily
newspaper or watch CNN.
The difference between reach and GRPs is that reach concerns the number of different
people in the audience you are trying to communicate with through advertising. For
media schedules that try to maximize reach, you would place ads in several different
media vehicles to reach different people through each one. Complicated formulas are
used to calculate the numbers, requiring the speed and power of computers. Here, we
look at a simple example.
If the rating for People against our target of 18- to 49-year-olds is 20 and for Time
magazine it is 10, then one ad placed in each magazine will deliver a total of 30 GRPs
(20+10). However, if we know from research that 6% of the target audience will see both
ads (the duplicated audience) then the reach, or unduplicated, audience for this schedule
is 30–6, or 24%. That is, 24% of our target of adults from age 18 to 49 will be exposed to
our ad in People and/or our ad in Time. Even if they see both ads they will only be
counted in our audience one time. Exhibit 5.2 depicts this situation. So reach=GRPs
—duplication.
Frequency
It is not enough to know who our media plan is intended to reach. We must also set goals
of how many times we wish to reach them with our message. As with the concept of
reach, the notion of frequency, although it ultimately refers to message frequency, in
reality is based on the frequency of exposure to the media vehicle rather than to the
advertisement. A media plan will typically establish the desired number of times that the
audience should be exposed to the message, based on past experience, judgment, or
previous research into how long it takes for the audience to comprehend and remember
the message.
Reach
Reach refers to the number or percentage of people in the target audience who will be 
exposed to the medium where the message appears. You should note that we can only 
media vehicle, not to the ad itself. If you think about your own
to the 
estimate exposure 

 
94  The Media Handbook
EXHIBIT 5.2 Example of Duplication
A simple way to back in to the frequency number is from the following equation:
Reach"Frequency=Gross Rating Points 
 
So if you know your reach goal, and you have established the number of GRPs you will 
be buying, then it only requires simple mathematical division (GRPs/Reach) to figure out 
how many times, on average, the target will be exposed to the media vehicle(s).
BEYOND REACH AND FREQUENCY
If you think about the commercials that you can remember, what most likely comes to 
mind are those that you have seen or heard more than once. That is, for a message to be 
truly effective in terms of communicating with the target audience, it generally has to be 
conveyed more than one time. Now, of course, this is not a hard-and-fast rule. If your 
bathroom drain gets blocked up, then you only need one exposure to an ad for Drano 
drain cleaner at the right moment in time, and that message will be extremely effective. 
But, for the most part, given the limited attention we pay to commercial messages, we 
need to see or hear them several times before the information is properly absorbed. And, 
even then, it is most likely filed away somewhere in memory for use on a future occasion.
Effective Frequency
The key here is to determine how many times an ad has to be received for it to be deemed 
effective.  What  we  mean  by  effective  is  that  the  target  receives  the  desired 
communication message. A considerable amount of research was done on this topic 
during the 1970s and 1980s, following a landmark study by Colin MacDonald, a British 
researcher. After looking at the relationship between opportunities to see ads for laundry

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  95
detergent and sales of the product, he concluded that the optimal number of exposure 
opportunities was three. This was later explained by breaking down what happens with 
each exposure. The first time someone sees an ad, his reaction is “what is it?” On the 
second exposure, he asks “what of it?” or “so what?” It is only on the third occasion that 
the person will start to process the information and decide whether or not the message is 
relevant and interesting.1
Since those research studies were first published, there has been much controversy 
over their accuracy. Many have argued that it is impossible to set an arbitrary number for 
effective frequency. Some believe that rather than having a single figure, the most effec-
tive frequency lies within a range, typically set between 3 and 10. And others claim that 
only one exposure is needed, as long as it is placed at the right time. This is discussed 
further in chapter 6. The answer, probably, is “it depends.” As with the aforementioned 
drain cleaner example, sometimes a single exposure is sufficient. On the other hand, you 
might need to see an ad for a breakfast cereal 15 times before it has any real impact. 
What it ultimately depends on is the relevancy and impact of the message.2
The key point to remember here is that when establishing your media objectives and deciding 
on the strategy to fulfill them, you must keep in mind that your message should probably 
be heard, read, or viewed several times in order for it to have an effect on the audience.
Exposure Distribution
Most media plans involve placing multiple ads in many different media vehicles so it is 
important to know how many people are reached how many times (once, twice, three 
times,  etc.).  We  find  this  by  creating  an  exposure  distribution,  which  shows  the 
percentage of the target exposed to a given schedule at each level of frequency. The 
method  used  to  calculate  it  is  fairly  complex,  based  on  mathematical  theories  of 
probability, and today it is generally done by computer. At a basic level, a media model 
estimates the likelihood of being exposed to a given number of ads together with the 
number of different ways you can be exposed to those messages.
1“Memory  Without  Recall,  Exposure  Without  Perception,”  Herbert  E.Krugman,  Journal  of
Advertising Research, vol. 40, no. 6, November/December 2000, 49–54.
2“Effective Frequency—Then and Now,” Michael J.Naples, Journal of Advertising Research, vol.
37,  no.  4,  July/August  1997,  7–13.  “If  Not  Effective  Frequency,  Then  What?”  Kenneth  A.
Longman, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 37, no. 4, July/August 1997, 44–50. “What Can
One  Exposure  Do?”  Lawrence  D.Gibson,  Journal  of  Advertising  Research,  vol.  36,  no.  1,
March/April 1996, 9–18. “Effective Frequency: One Exposure or Three Factors,” Gerard Tellis,
Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 37, no. 4, July/August 1997, 75–80. “Effective Reach and
Frequency: Does It Really Make Sense?” Hugh M.Cannon and Edward A.Riordan, Journal of
Advertising Research, vol. 34, no. 2, March/April 1994, 19–28.
For example, if you placed one ad in Time and one in People, the reader might see 
anywhere from zero to two ads total—they might not see either ad, or they could see one 
of  the  two,  or  they  might  see  both.  Looking  at  Exhibit  5.2,  we  already  know  the 
percentage of the target exposed two times (the duplication figure) is 6%. In addition, we 

 
96  The Media Handbook
EXHIBIT 5.3 Exposure distribution
Frequency (f) 
Percent reached (%) 
0 
76
1 
18
2 
6
Total 
100
Frequency Planning
In the late 1990s, research evidence became available suggesting that reach was a more 
important determinant of media effectiveness than frequency. Based largely on the work 
of John Philip Jones and Erwin Ephron, the analysis of sales and TV viewing data from 
the same households suggested that short-term advertising sales were driven largely by 
exposure to a TV commercial within 7 days prior to purchase. Because we as media 
specialists never know precisely when that sale might occur, this suggests that it is more 
important to maintain a lower level of media weight across more weeks than to place 
sporadic, albeit larger, flights of advertising throughout the year.3 We revisit this in 
Chapter 6.4
can easily figure out those not exposed at all (the total, or 100%, minus those exposed 
one or more times)—100–24=76%. So to estimate what percentage is reached exactly 
once you subtract the duplication figure from the number reached one or more times 
(reach  1+)—24–6=18.  You  should  notice  that  the  final  exposure  distribution  must 
account  for  everyone  in  the  target  audience  and  therefore  sum  to  100%.  The  final
exposure distribution is shown in Exhibit 5.3.
3The Ultimate Secrets of Advertising, by John Philip Jones, Sage Publications, 2002; When Ads
Work, by John Philip Jones, Lexington Books, 1995.
4“Recency Planning,” Erwin Ephron, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 37, no. 4, July/August
1997, 61–65. “Single Source Research Begins to Fulfill Its Promise,” John Philip Jones, Journal of
Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3, May/June 1995, 9–17. “More Weeks, Less Weight: The Shelf
Space Model of Advertising,” Erwin Ephron, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3,
May/June 1995, 18–24.
CALCULATING COSTS
It is highly unlikely that you will have carte blanche to spend however much money you 
want or need. You will have to provide some kind of financial explanation of how 
efficiently  your  plan  will  spend  your  client’s  money.  And  because  there  are  many 

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  97
Cost per Thousand (CPM)
Different media are bought in different ways (a 30-second spot on radio or TV, or a 
one-page ad in a magazine, or a 30-sheet poster for a billboard), so we need some way to 
compare media in  terms of cost. To do so, media specialists turn to the cost per thousand 
(CPM). This shows the cost of reaching 1,000 of the target audience either with an 
individual media vehicle or the complete media schedule. It puts all media on a level 
playing field and is calculated as follows:
CPM=Total Schedule Cost/Gross Impressions (000) 
 
Let’s use an example of 132 million adults from age 18 to 49 and assume that an ad in 
Time costs $235,000, whereas one in People costs $215,000. A total of 39 million 
impressions would be generated (300 TRPs/100"132 million adults). At a total cost of 
$450,000, the cost per thousand would be $11.36. This means it costs $11.36 to reach 
1,000 adults from age 18 to 49 with one ad in Time and one in People in a given month. 
By  using  this  formula,  you  can  compare  the  cost  efficiency  of  one  vehicle,  media 
category, or schedule against another.
Cost per Point (CPP)
Another useful media tool is the cost per rating point (CPP), which offers a different way 
of comparing media schedules. Here, you find the cost of one rating point for each media 
vehicle against your target by dividing the total schedule cost by gross rating points:
CPP=Total Schedule Cost/Gross Rating Points 
 
With our total cost of $450,000 and total rating points of 30, the cost per point comes out 
to be $15,000. It therefore costs $15,000 to obtain one rating point against adults from 
age 18 to 49 using one ad in Time and one in People. If you know the cost per point 
against a particular target group and the approximate number of rating points you wish to 
buy, then you can then calculate an approximate total schedule cost, using the same 
formula.
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC CRITERIA
In addition to knowing the general terms that are used in media planning, it is helpful to
be familiar with some of the other criteria that are used in selecting each major media
category. The rest of this chapter outlines these considerations.
different media types and vehicles that could, potentially, be included in the plan, it is up 
to  the  media  specialist  to  rationalize  and  explain  the  financial  reasoning  behind 
selections.

 
98  The Media Handbook
Nielsen Media Research, for both national and local markets. Ratings are collected on a
minute-by-minute basis, but until recently, were reported for programs based on the
audience size at the mid-minute of the quarter hour. Outside of the United States, viewing
data is usually collected every second and reported for each minute. The U.S. viewing
data will likely be gathered at this level of detail too, because the digital set-top boxes are
capturing that anyway. At the end of 2005, Nielsen Media Research, the company that
provides the industry with TV ratings, began releasing actual minute-by-minute data to its
clients.
The U.S. TV marketplace operates based on the laws of supply and demand. The more
people who watch a particular show, the more expensive it is to advertise within it. The
ranges are enormous. You might pay $500,000 or more for a 30-second commercial on
network television during prime time, but only a few hundred dollars to have your ad
appear on your local TV station during the night. That cost will correspond to the number
of people exposed to your ad—millions, versus a few hundred.
In addition to the costs and ratings, it can be helpful to look at the viewers per viewing
(or tuning) household, or VPVH numbers (sometimes called VPTH). This figure provides
you with an assessment of the concentration of a given demographic group in a program’s
audience, showing how many people in every thousand viewers fall into that particular
category. If the VPVH among women from age 25 to 54 for “All My Children” is 535,
and for the “Masters Golf Championship” it is 155, that indicates you will reach more
than three times as many women from age 25 to 54 with an ad placed in the soap opera
than you will with the golf tournament.
What  you  should  be  most  interested  in,  as  a  media  specialist,  is  finding  which
programs are going to best reach your target audience. As we noted in chapter 3, although
you may have a fairly detailed description of your customer, when it comes to getting
data on TV audiences you will end up looking primarily at age and gender. Those are
very powerful determinants of product purchase and behavior, so for many goods and
services those numbers will suffice. Until the industry finds an affordable and reliable
way of measuring TV viewing according to product usage patterns, it is likely that
program ratings among broad demographic groups will remain the norm.
One other way to analyze TV viewing behavior in a more in-depth manner is by
combining the TV ratings data with lifestyle and other media use information from
another source. This process, known as data fusion, has been successfully used in many
countries. It has been discussed extensively in the research community for many years,
and used in the marketplace in many European countries, but only now, in the first decade
of the 21st century, are advertisers starting to explore it here in the U.S. What the process
involves is “matching” respondents from two different databases, linking them on a
number of common variables (gender, age, geographic location, ethnicity, etc.), and then
“fusing” the data so that the information unique to one dataset can be used to describe or
explain the behavior of all the respondents. It is a complex and intricate process,
however, requiring statistical expertise and understanding.
Considerations for Television Advertising
The chief currency for a television plan is the program rating. As we do not measure
audience exposure to the actual commercial, we have to rely on the surrogate number of
how many people watched the program in which it ran. That data is available from

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  99
In selecting your TV programs, keep in mind that the list may be changed when the
commercial time is bought. The plan is just that—a plan of which media vehicles are
desired. When negotiations take place, it may be that other programs are included, or
some of your recommendations rejected, based on other considerations such as cost and
availability. What you should emphasize, however, is the daypart that you wish your ads
to appear in, because although people do tend to watch individual programs rather than
time periods, there is more similarity in the kinds of programs watched within time
periods than across them. Alternatively, you may wish to specify the program type, or
genre  so  that  the  buy  focuses  on  comedies,  for  example,  or  news  programming,
regardless of when it airs.
The criteria you use to evaluate which programs to use for television do not vary
whether you are planning to use network, spot, syndication, or cable. If you are planning
on a local level, however, there is additional work to be done. You must select the
markets to advertise in (if you have not done so already) and, more particularly, the
stations within those markets that you want to use. That will depend in part on the
negotiations that are done by the media buyer. That process is explained more fully in
chapter 8.
For cable TV, you may have to rely on broad network information rather than specific
programs. Individual cable shows tend to have much smaller audiences (ratings) than do
shows on network or spot TV. But those audiences may be more finely targeted due to the
nature of this form of television (see chap. 4). Increasingly, cable networks are airing
programs multiple times and offering an aggregated rating to advertisers, so that across
all showings of an episode of “Biography” on A&E, for example, you will reach 3% of
the viewing audience even if that audience is spread across three different airings.
Considerations for Radio Advertising
Radio uses the same principal term as television for planning and buying purposes. That
is, you purchase time based on audience ratings. The main difference here is that the
rating is based on a time period, rather than on a program. For the most part, you plan
radio by dayparts (which were given in chap. 4), although it is possible, for an additional
cost, to specify selected, narrower time periods. For example, if you operate a number of
McDonald’s franchises and only want to advertise in the hour before lunch (which
technically falls in Morning Drive), then you could request the noon-to-l:00 p.m. hour,
and most stations will sell that time to you, although perhaps at a premium.
Radio  audiences  are  measured  by  the  Arbitron  Company,  and  reported  on  a
quarter-hour basis, so you can look at the average quarter hour (AQH) rating for each
station in a market. This is the average number of people listening to an individual station
for at least 5 minutes within the quarter-hour period, expressed as a percentage. In many
larger advertising agencies, the media planner only specifies the markets to be used,
leaving it up to media buyers to choose the actual stations, based on their own knowledge
of those markets.
The  radio  market  can  be  defined  (and  measured)  in  several  ways.  The  largest
geography is called the designated market area (DMA). It is defined as the viewing or
listening area in which the counties that have the stations of the originating market get the
largest share of household viewing or listening. Every county in the United States is
assigned to just one DMA.

 
100  The Media Handbook
A smaller  geography  for  radio  is  the  total  survey  area,  which  consists  of  the
metropolitan area, plus outlying additional counties that listen to the major metro stations.
In Chicago, the total survey area would not only include the Chicago metropolitan area,
but also the rest of Cook, Lake, and DuPage counties, which can also receive Chicago
radio station signals. The most narrowly defined measure is the metro survey area. This
is, in fact, defined by government according to the city and surrounding counties that are
closely linked economically to the central city area.
The total radio listening figure is provided in the persons using radio (PUR) measure,
which is equivalent to TV’s persons using television (PUT) number. This tells you what
percentage of a given audience listens to radio at a particular time.
If you are purchasing radio time yourself, then a measure that is worth considering is
the time spent listening (TSL). This gives an indication of how much time people are
spending with an individual station in a daypart, day, or week. The calculation is as
follows:
 
The more time people spend listening to that particular station, the greater the chance of
reaching them with your message. On the other hand, if your goal is to reach as many
different people as possible, then the TSL may be of less concern.
The media specialist should also consider the cume rating, which is the total number of
people listening to a particular daypart, expressed as a per-centage. To find out how
quickly a station’s audience changes, you can calculate or ask for the audience turnover
figure, which is the ratio of total number of people listening to a particular station in a
daypart to the average number listening to that station in a quarter-hour. If the turnover is
high, meaning that people don’t listen to the station for very long at any one time, then
that would suggest you would need to air your ad fairly frequently in order to reach more
people.
An  increasingly  important  area  of  consideration  for  radio  is  merchandising  and
promotion. Many stations are very willing to organize special contests or announcements,
or “added value,” events if you buy time from them. If you own a Baskin-Robbins ice
cream store, for instance, perhaps you could arrange for the station to hold a contest, with
the prize being an ice cream party for the winner and his family. For a local Comcast
cable operator, a radio station could agree to air additional announcements and public
service messages, in return for being mentioned on the local access cable channel. A
Toyota car dealership might provide the perfect venue for the radio station to send some
of its disk jockeys on the road for an afternoon, airing the program from the actual
showroom. All of these “extras” can be negotiated for little or no additional cost, yet they
provide valuable “free” advertising for you and your company. Moreover, because they
are organized on a local basis, they help to enhance your firm’s place in the community,
offering you some image-building public relations too.

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  101
For network radio, the terms used are the same, but here you must consider which of
the networks to include in the plan. At larger agencies this is often left up to the buyer
(where planning and buying are separate functions), based on demographic or format
specifications.
Radio audience measurement, which currently relies on samples of people in each
market  to  complete  a  7-day  listening  diary,  is  moving  forward  to  develop  and
commercialize a passive means of collecting radio listening activity. Arbitron’s portable
passive meter (PPM), has been in test markets during the past couple of years. It is a
pager-size device worn by a sample of people wherever they go during the day. The
meter passively picks up inaudible codes that have been inserted into the broadcast.
These codes are used to identify which station was being listened to, by whom, and for
how long. In effect, the PPM measures listening activity, and does so with far greater
accuracy for radio than the listening diary, which requires people to actively remember
and write down everything they were tuned to. The technology is able to collect codes
from anywhere, including television, sports stadia, or retail stores. Arbitron is using these
meters to measure radio listening in 15 different countries outside of the United States. At
this time, the PPM is being tested in Houston, Texas. Arbitron is hoping it will become
the new currency measurement for radio and, potentially, for other media too.
Considerations for Magazine Advertising
Some  of  the  criteria  to  consider  when  planning  for  magazines  include  coverage,
composition, circulation, subscription, rate base, readership, positioning, and discounts.
Coverage. Just as for the other media forms, the coverage tells you the proportion of a
given target group that saw (were “covered” by) the publication in the past month, or
whatever is the relevant publication period. The magazine’s coverage is similar to a rating
in the electronic media.
Composition. This number will show you how concentrated a magazine’s audience is
with a particular target group. It can be useful in providing the media specialist with some
idea  of  how  well  the  publication  will  reach  your  particular  audience.  If  you  are
advertising baby formula to new mothers, then it would be important to know what
proportion of the readers of Baby Talk and Parents have a newborn. Although the
one-page cost or the CPM may be cheaper in Parents than in Baby Talk, you may reach
more new mothers in Baby Talk making the cost of reaching one thousand of those
individuals less expensive.
Circulation. It is important to look at how many copies of the magazine are circulated
for each issue. This information is either provided by the magazine itself in an audit
report or can be obtained from the Audit Bureau of Circulation, the premier source for
circulation data. New or very small magazines may not be audited by this independent
organization; if that is the case, be wary of relying on the estimates the publisher provides
because they cannot be verified. When looking at circulation, the media specialist should
also find out what proportion of that figure is controlled, that is, distributed free of charge
to potentially interested parties. They are usually not the main target audience for the
publication and, therefore, would be less interested in seeing the ads that appear. In

 
102  The Media Handbook
addition, you should look at the net paid circulation figure, which gives you the number
of  copies  sold  at  no  less  than  half  of  the  basic  newsstand  or  subscription  price.
Circulation  is  usually  broken  out  by  geographic  area,  which  can  be  very  helpful,
particularly for products that have regional skews.
Subscription or Single Copy. Another valuable number is the percentage of copies
sold by subscription versus on the newsstand (single copies). If people are getting their
copies sent to them every month, that might suggest they are particularly keen to keep
receiving and reading the magazine; on the other hand, the argument could be made that
single copy readers renew their commitment to the publication every time they purchase
an issue. Whichever side you believe, it is worth finding out how the subscriptions are
sold, and at what price. Publishers used to be able to discount subscriptions very heavily
(up to 50%) and still consider them a full subscription. Beginning in 2002, magazines
must  report  the  net  average  subscription  price  paid  by  consumers,  and  reveal  the
proportion of subscriptions sold at 35% less than that average. This is to counter the
belief that, when the price is very low or there are enticing premiums offered to those
who buy a year’s worth of the magazine, the subscriber is more interested in receiving the
free personal stereo or CD than in looking at your ads.
Rate Base. Finally, you should find out how many times in the past 6 months or 1 year
the publisher has not met the guaranteed audience size, or rate base. This is the number of
copies that publishers promise the advertiser they will sell. Although the advertiser does
not get anything back if that number is not reached, a magazine that consistently fails to
meet its rate base is probably one you should avoid. This information is provided by
companies such as the Audit Bureau of Circulation that measure circulation on a regular
basis. The magazine publisher should also release that data upon request.
Readership. For those who have access to syndicated services, there is a wealth of
additional information available on reading habits for individual consumer magazines.
This includes factors such as the average number of days a title is read, the average
number of minutes spent with the publication, where it is read, what actions were taken
after reading it, and how many readers saw each copy. These qualitative data are
summarized in Exhibit 5.4. They may be provided by the individual publication.
EXHIBIT 5.4 Qualitative magazine data
Where read
Bought versus obtained
Days spent reading
Time spent reading
Actions taken (e.g., clipped coupon, called toll free number)
Rating of publication
Interest in advertising
Attitudes toward advertising in specific publication
One of my favorites

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  103
page will also be a crucial factor in determining which individual titles are selected.
Positioning. There is conflicting evidence concerning where it is best for your ad to be
in a magazine. Some studies have shown a clear advantage for being at the front of the
issue or on the cover page, whereas others suggest there is little difference in terms of
likelihood of being seen. Positioning will also depend on the publication. For some
magazines, such as Cosmopolitan or Newsweek, most of the feature articles appear in the
first two thirds of the book. But for more specialized magazines, such as Network
Computing or Info World, readers may also be extremely interested in the smaller ads at
the back of the issue that feature products or services for the computer enthusiast.
Discounts. A few years ago, all magazine ads were bought off a rate card that specified
exactly how much an ad would cost per issue. Although discounts were given for placing
ads  in  several  issues,  there  was  little  room  for  any  negotiation.  In  today’s  highly
fragmented media world, magazines have been forced to become more competitive, both
between titles and against other media. One positive result of this, for the advertiser, is
that magazines are far more willing to negotiate discounts or special deals now than they
were previously. An advertiser who places a large volume of ads (and, therefore, dollars)
in a magazine will get a special deal, as will advertisers who build up frequency or
continuity with the publication. There is also a slight discount for cash payments. It is
always worth checking with the magazine’s representative to find out if there are ways to
lower the unit cost.
Considerations for Newspaper Advertising
If newspapers are to be included in the media plan, the first consideration is which
markets are to be used. The list of markets can be developed based on population or
household size, on sales data of the product, or on GDIs and BDIs. A list created
according to population may be a simple ranking of the markets (top 10, top 20, etc.), or
it could be a ranking based on the target audience (top 10 markets where the target is
located). Market lists based on sales data will tend to emphasize those places where
current sales are occurring, while one derived from GDI or BDI figures will also factor in
potential future opportunities.
In looking at the individual markets, the media specialist needs to have a clear
understanding of the product’s distribution within those areas. Is it available primarily
within certain parts of the market, or DMA? Is it found more in the metro area or the
suburbs? Are there any major ethnic areas of the market that could play a role in product
or media usage?
Once you have determined which markets to use, there are three main criteria to
consider for newspaper planning: circulation, coverage, and readership.
Circulation. As with magazines, the newspaper circulation figure tells you the number
of actual copies that are distributed. This figure is used to compare one paper with
Armed with all of this information, the media specialist can then compile a list of
preferred magazines to use in the plan. Clearly, the cost of the ad
another, as well as give some idea of how many coupons might potentially be distributed.
Circulation is often broken out into counties or city zones, depending on the size of the
market. Whereas one newspaper might have a larger overall circulation, another might

 
104  The Media Handbook
deliver more readers in the particular zone where your retail outlet is located and
therefore be a more appropriate vehicle to use.
Coverage. The coverage number, also called the newspaper penetration, is the print
equivalent of a TV rating. That is, it shows the percentage of households reached by a
given  newspaper.  As  with  the  circulation  figure,  the  numbers  might  look  different
depending on how the coverage is defined. Take Boston as an example. If you only
consider the overall market, or DMA household penetration, then you might choose the
Boston Globe, but if you are interested in reaching singles, or Blacks, the Boston Herald
has greater coverage.
Readership. Newspaper readership figures provide more detailed information about
the  paper’s  readers  according  to  standard  demographic  breaks  or,  where  available,
product  usage  data.  Using  these  numbers,  the  media  specialist  can  find  out  what
proportion of the readership is between ages 18 and 49, for example, or how many
readers are working women. One newspaper may reach more men than women, or more
younger adults than older ones.
The media specialist can use all three criteria to compare different newspapers both
within and between markets, as well as help determine which individual papers will do
the best job of reaching the given target audience. In markets where there is more than
one newspaper available, it is also important to find out how much duplication there is of
readers to both vehicles. It could be that one is aimed primarily at the city and the other is
read mostly in the suburbs, or that Paper A reaches the northern section and Paper B is
preferred in the southern section. Your selection of individual or multiple newspapers will
depend to a large degree on the geographic areas that you wish to cover.
Considerations for Outdoor Advertising
As with newspapers, the main decision to be made when including outdoor boards in a
media plan is which markets to select. Once that is known, the media specialist must
determine which kind of outdoor board to use—poster panels or bulletins. In either case,
the unit of sale is the showing. It is typically sold as a 25, 50, 75, or 100 GRP showing.
The number refers to how many panels or boards are required to reach that proportion of
the market. A 50 GRP showing, for example, means that your ad will appear on enough
boards to reach 50% of the total population daily. This is completely market specific.
Generally, the outdoor company will provide you with the information on how many
boards make up each showing size.
Audience delivery estimates are usually also made available by the company that owns
the boards, or can be obtained from the Traffic Audit Bureau, which conducts the
independent measurement of traffic past those sites. Outdoor billboard measurement in
the United States is being revolutionized, thanks to technology. As noted in chapter 4,
both Nielsen and Arbitron, the primary TV and radio research suppliers, respectively,
have tested new outdoor audience systems that rely on global positioning systems, or
GPS, to track consumers as they drive around a city. These satellite systems can pinpoint
with far greater accuracy which boards the driver had an opportunity to see. Through

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  105
statistical  algorithms,  it  is  then  possible  to  model  (approximate)  actual  billboard 
exposure, something that was previously unavailable at all. Nielsen has tested this service
in Chicago, following its introduction into the South African marketplace. It plans on
rolling it out to the top 10 markets in the near future.
Considerations for Internet Advertising
Advertising on the Internet is still developing, so the considerations a media specialist 
needs to be aware of today may well have changed by tomorrow. But several of the basic
considerations are comparable to those of other media.
Position. When Internet advertising was first developed, it didn’t matter too much where your 
ad appeared. It was assumed that it would be enticing and involving enough to attract attention 
anywhere on the site. Soon, however, advertisers realized that position was as important on the 
Web as in any other medium. Today, advertisers not only have to select the type of ad to
use (banners, buttons, pop-ups, etc.), but also when and where those ads will appear. The cheap-
est form is run of site (ROS), but most advertisers prefer to pay for a fixed position on a specific
page within the site, to have greater control over who will be exposed to that ad message.
Type of Ad. Initially, the most popular kind of ad on the Internet was the banner. This
appeared as a rectangle at the top or bottom of the screen or web page. Over time, however, sites 
introduced a wide variety of alterna-lives, including the “skyscraper” (going down the left 
or right hand side of the screen), the button (a small icon or message that links to the advertiser’s
own site), or an interstitial (a mini-site that appears when the user clicks on the ad). An
increasingly powerful form of Internet advertising is search. Here, on Web sites such as Google 
or Yahoo Search consumers type in what they are looking for on the Internet and a list of
possibilities comes up. Advertisers can pay the site to have their product or service appear
as a sponsored link. Research has shown that, as long as the link is relevant to what consumers 
are looking for, they will generally not object to the fact that the search result has been paid for.
Metric. Because the Internet is a more “measurable” medium than any other (except
direct response), the metric used can vary. Advertisers can pay for their web ads based on
a simple cost per thousand (CPM), or can be more specific and agree to a contract that
allows them to pay on a cost-per-click or even cost-per-sale basis.
Considerations for Alternative Forms of Communications
For the myriad of alternative media forms available, the considerations for a planner
focus on two key areas: traffic and cost relative to value.
Traffic. For sponsorships, sporting events, or other location-based opportunities, the 
planner should try to estimate, in advance, how many people will be in attendance. Even 
for skywriting above a popular beach, the vendor is likely to know approximately how 
many sunbathers typically come there on a weekend, for example. Attendance to sports
stadiums is easy to capture, as are the number of people at a rock concert or movie 
theater, if your product is the concert sponsor or is being given away as samples in the 
theater lobby. Although not a substitute for actual impact, traffic measures at least give an 
indication  of  how  many  people, in theory, will  have the  opportunity  for exposure. For

 
106  The Media Handbook
word-of-mouth efforts, the number to determine is how many people could potentially be 
influenced by the viral efforts.
Cost/Value. Given that it is not enough for marketers to have their name placed in front 
of hundreds, or thousands, of warm but disinterested bodies, the planner should also try to 
assess the value of those expected impressions relative to the cost of obtaining them. Here, 
it is probably good to consider the contextual relevance of the impact. That is, it might make 
good sense to have Adidas be a featured sponsor at sports stadiums when soccer matches are 
played, but less so for a prescription drug such as Paxil to be present at those same events.
SUMMARY
This chapter has covered some of the basic terms and features of media planning. In order 
to understand media, it is essential that the media specialist be familiar with the concepts 
of reach, frequency, gross rating points, and gross impressions. Beyond these, it is also 
helpful to understand the notion of effective frequency, which assumes that in order for 
an ad to be effective, the target audience has to be exposed to it more than one time. 
Frequency planning forces you to think about exposure within the purchase cycle. An ex-
posure distribution lets you know the number of people who are exposed a given number 
of times to an individual vehicle or a complete media schedule. Media costs are 
accounted for by calculating the cost per thousand (CPM) and cost per rating point (CPP).
The remainder of the chapter looked at various considerations for each major media 
category. For television, this includes the program rating, audience composition, viewers 
per viewing household (VPVH). Radio plans need to examine the time spent listening, 
cumulative rating, and audience turnover. When magazines or newspapers are included in 
a media plan, it is important to know the publication’s circulation, rate base, and actual 
readership. The main consideration for outdoor is planning the appropriate showing level 
to reach a given proportion of the target audience with the correct number of billboards. 
For  Internet  advertising,  the  specialist  should  consider  position,  type  of  ad,  and 
measurement metric. Finally, for alternative forms of media, planners should assess the potential 
traffic for an event or location, as well as the cost relative to the value of the spending.
CHECKLIST—TERMS, CALCULATIONS, AND CONSIDERATIONS
Have you figured out how many gross rating points your schedule will deliver?
What is the reach, effective reach, and average frequency of that schedule?
If you plan to include television in the schedule, have you looked at 
both program ratings and viewers per thousand viewing household (VPVH)?
If  you  plan  to  include  radio  in  the  schedule,  have  you  looked  at  the  average quarter-hour 
(AQH) ratings, cume audience, time spent listening, and turnover for each station?
If you plan to include magazines in the schedule, have you looked at 
the coverage, composition, circulation, rate base, ad positions, and discounts?
1.
2. 
3.
4.
5.

 
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations  107
If you plan to include newspapers in the schedule, have you looked at the 
coverage, circulation, and audience composition figures for each paper?
If you plan to include outdoor billboards in the schedule, have you looked at the 
GRPs available in each market being considered?
If you plan to include the Internet in the schedule, have you thought about the ad 
type, position, and measurement metric you want?
If you plan to incorporate alternative media formats in the schedule, have you thought 
about the traffic to be generated, and the cost of the efforts relative to their impact?
6.
7. 
8. 
9.

 
CHAPTER 6 
Creating the Plan
Putting together a media plan represents the culmination of all the thinking, planning, and 
organizing  discussed  in  earlier  chapters.  That  is,  with  sound  advertising  and  media
objectives, a knowledge of who it is we wish to reach with our messages, and a clear idea 
of what different media can offer us, we are now in a position to start assembling the
plan. The key idea to keep in mind when doing this is your media strategy. What is it you 
are hoping to achieve by using media vehicle X as opposed to Y? How  will your 
combination of media categories and vehicles help fulfill your advertising and media 
objectives? As with any process, there are several steps to the creation of the plan. These
are outlined in this chapter.
TARGET AUDIENCE’S USE OF AND RELATIONSHIP TO MEDIA
The first step in building the media plan is finding out which media your target audience
uses and what their relationship is with those media. There is not much point in putting 
your message about Swiffer mops on hundreds of radio stations across the country if the 
25- to 54-year-old adults you are trying to reach tend to be heavy television viewers. You 
can discover the media habits of your potential customers through syndicated services
such as Mediamark Research, Inc. (MRI) or Simmons, or through custom studies that you
conduct or solicit on your own. The third alternative, which is the cheapest but may be
less accurate, is to do some mini-research on your own. You might want to start asking
your clients or customers where they have seen your ads; if you have been advertising in 
the local newspaper for years but nobody mentions it, then that might indicate the need 
for a different medium.
By this point, given what you now know about what each media type can offer (and what it
can’t), you are probably starting to see how the various me-dia will fit in to your particular strat-
egy. So if your goal is to increase awareness of your beauty salon’s new manicure and massage
treatments, then you might turn to the media best suited to that awareness goal—television and
the Internet. On the other hand, if you want to increase the frequency of visits to Pizza Hut
restaurant, then local radio might be a better bet because you can place a large number of ads at
a  reasonable cost and keep repeating the message to remind listeners of that establishment.
Once you think you have a handle on which media are used, then you should consider 
more closely the relationship of those people with their media. This notion, as explained
in chapter 2, explores the relationship of consumers to media in order to understand how
and why they use the media they select.
For example, the 25- to 54-year-old Swiffer mop users, mentioned earlier, might watch 
more television than average, according to the syndicated audience measurement data. 
But, do they do so as an escape from their routines, because they are constantly looking 
for new information, or because they cannot afford other forms of entertainment? By
understanding the target’s motivations for media use, the planner will be better able to
select the right media types, and vehicles, to communicate the advertiser’s message.

 
Creating the Plan  109
As you start to assemble your media categories and vehicles you also need to think 
about  several  other  considerations—the  timing  of  the  plan,  its  scheduling,  and  its
geographic variations. We consider each of these in the following section.
TIMING OF THE PLAN
For many products, the timing of the plan is self-evident. That is, you want to advertise snow-
blowers in winter and sunscreen in summer. Other items are tied in to specific days or weeks of 
the year, such as Valentine’s Day candies or Thanksgiving turkeys. But, for the majority of
goods and services, you would ideally want to promote them continually, getting your message
out on a very regular and frequent basis to reach as many people as you can as often as possible.
There are two obvious drawbacks here. First, for most advertisers, particularly small
businesses, they simply cannot afford to do this. And second, there are good reasons not
to bombard the media constantly with your message. People are going to tire more 
quickly of your ads, making them tune out or ignore them sooner. They may even grow 
so  irritated  by  seeing  or  hearing  them  all  the  time  that  they  actually  develop  less 
favorable opinions of your brand or company. Most of all, there is no point advertising
something unless you have something worth saying. Remember, an advertising message
has got to tell consumers about something that will interest them. If all you did was place 
a message in the paper or on the radio 365 days of the year saying “I’m here,” you would
be unlikely to see much effect, if any, on your sales.
You need to focus your efforts on particular months, weeks, or days. Deciding when to 
do so is not all that difficult. Most businesses have some seasonality to them, even those that are
used or frequented all the time. You probably know, for example, that people stock up on office 
supplies at the end of the financial period (quarterly or semiannually); they flock to health clubs
at the start of the New Year and when the weather begins turning warmer. Apartment leases 
tend to be signed in May and October, making the rental business busy just prior to those dates.
You might want to use one of two tactics here. Either you could focus your efforts on
promoting your product right before the peak period, reminding people of your existence 
and trying to take additional share points away from your competitors. Or you could try
to build up sales at other times of the year. Or you could try a combination of the two,
maintaining a strong presence during the height of your “season,” but also keeping a high 
profile at a couple of other times during the year too. If you do choose to advertise when 
people may not be thinking about your product, then it is even more important that you
tell them something new and interesting. Perhaps you lower your membership rates to the
health  club  in  March  or  October  and  you  announce  that  in  local  newspapers  and 
magazines. You need not be confined to “typical” seasonal patterns either. Maybe you can
“create” an event for your business. Cooking Light magazine sponsors an annual bus tour
across the country, promoting the products of its advertisers while offering healthy recipes to 
those who visit the tour bus. CBS promotes its daytime soap operas through a special mall tour, 
where some of the programs’ stars sign autographs and meet local citizens.  These  kinds 
of  special  events  not  only  provide  excellent  opportunities  for self-promotion in the media,
they can also generate additional coverage through public relations efforts and publicity.

 
110  The Media Handbook
It is also worthwhile considering the seasonality of the media you are planning to use.
Most media categories have seasonal variations—the fourth quarter is often very tight, for 
example, because of pre-holiday advertising. For media sold on a supply-and-demand basis 
(radio and television), this can affect prices considerably. There are only a fixed number 
of minutes of commercial time available. Even for those media that can expand to accommodate 
more pages, such as magazines and newspapers, heavy media demand for space during those 
months may mean it is especially important to place orders well in advance. Other events 
happen less frequently but have a predictable impact on media buys. Congressional elections 
every other year, and presidential elections every 4 years, mean that the spring primaries
and fall elections can have a significant impact on media availability and pricing in those 
time periods. In the sporting world, the winter and summer Olympics, alternating with each 
other every 2 years, affect national media buys around the time of those special events.
BALANCING REACH AND FREQUENCY
As you develop your media plan, it is important to keep track of how well it will perform. 
That is, you need to keep calculating your reach and frequency measures to compare one 
potential plan against another. The goal is to find the right medium, or combination of 
media, that will achieve your media objectives given the amount of money you have to
spend. You can do so using the simple calculations shown in chapter 5, based on the size 
of your target audience and the ratings of the individual media vehicles.
It may turn out that you will not be able to achieve the specific number you set as your
goal for reach and/or frequency. In that event, you need to consider several possibilities. 
It may be that a 55% reach of the target is acceptable, even though you had originally 
planned to reach 65%, or that a frequency of three is all right when four was the ideal.
And, keep in mind that we are dealing here with plan estimates rather than actual reach
figures. You may be restricted in the actions you can take. If your client demands that his
message is seen on television, then that medium must remain in the plan. But perhaps you 
can opt for cable TV instead of broadcast, and, by reducing the cost, you will be able to 
place the message more frequently and across more channels, thereby increasing the reach
Alternatively, you might want to rethink your timing and scheduling strategies. Maybe
instead of advertising every 2 weeks for 6 months, you could place your message every
week for 3 or 4 months, concentrating your efforts on the most important period and 
increasing your reach and frequency within that timespan. Or maybe the addition of a 
third Web site will help boost the numbers by reaching additional target members who 
are not going to see your ad in the two sites you had first selected.
ROI AND MEDIA MODELS
Whereas media planners should have a good understanding of all the media concepts
outlined in chapter 5, today’s advertisers and agencies rely heavily on media models to
perform the calculations. A media model is a statistical routine performed by computer

 
Creating the Plan  111
software  packages  that  goes  through  the  data  and  manipulates  it  to  project  the ef-
fectiveness and efficiency of a plan. Various kinds of models are used, all with the overall
goal of providing numbers to support the plan. The models are usually based on original
numbers  of  actual  audiences  to  a  media  type  (magazine  readership,  TV viewership,
etc.). They then rely on statistical techniques (e.g., regression) to project out from that data
to other demographics, time periods, or markets (depending on the scope of the model).
More recently, marketers have started looking closely at econometric modeling, where 
statistics are used to try and figure out what marketing (and media) elements are driving 
actual sales. In so doing, they attempt to measure the media’s return on investment (ROI). 
Although the techniques used are fairly complex, the idea of holding advertising media 
more accountable for their performance is one that has found favor among high-ranking 
executives at many corporations. Some find it difficult to believe that any kind of model
can truly determine the proportion of sales delivered by any form of indirect and/or brand
image  advertising  (as  opposed  to  truly  measurable  direct  response,  promotional,  or
Internet advertising). But, as marketing budgets are increasingly scrutinized, it is likely
that these types of models will only gain in popularity and use.
One  problem  with  ROI  is  deciding  how  to  define  it.  For  many,  it  has  become
synonymous  with  accountability  of  media  spending.  That  is,  in  an  increasingly cost-
conscious world, marketers want to know precisely what they get back in return for each 
dollar that they spend in media. The goal is to receive at least $1 of net profit for each
dollar that they invest. If they obtain much less than that, then some argue the money is 
being wasted. Conversely, if the ROI is much higher than $ 1, it can suggest they are not
spending enough because if the advertising and media are having such an impact,  then
they  should  be  spending  more  to  make  the  most  of  that  effect.  Most accountability 
studies, however, focus on the short-term impact of the advertising. Did it generate 
immediate sales of the brand? It is much harder to measure precisely the long-term im-
pact. Let’s say your ad for Razor Sharp razors appears in a magazine in one month. Your
target does not need any razors for the next 3 months, but in the fourth month, when he is 
at the store, he sees the product, remembers the ad, and decides he will try it.
Many accountability models would not be able to capture that kind of longer term effect.
Another typically unmeasured effect is what is called the halo effect of advertising.
You might see an ad campaign for Fantastik cleaning spray that talks about how SC
Johnson, its manufacturer, cares about keeping families healthy by removing germs from 
their homes. Your favorable impression of the brand may be transferred to other cleaning
products made by the same company, such as RAID or Pledge, even if they are in other
cleaning product categories. That “halo” is very hard to capture in statistical models, 
simply because it is hard to measure. How much of the sales results for Raid, for 
example, can be attributed to consumers’ reaction to the Fantastik advertising?
Indeed, advertising’s impact is not always reflected solely in terms of sales. Many
brands use the media to convey a message that is designed to improve awareness, enhance
brand loyalty, or increase brand consideration. If every ad was supposed to generate an
immediate sale, then companies that make cars or computers or other high ticket  items
would  be  wasting  the  vast  majority  of  their  ad  dollars!  Despite  these reservations,
more  advertisers  are  asking  questions  about  the  ROI  of  their  media spend-ing. As a
media specialist you may not have simple answers, but you should at least be aware of
the discussions going on around the topic.

 
112  The Media Handbook
One of the biggest companies in accountability measurement, Marketing Management
Analytics, created a “scorecard” of how accountable each media type is. They gave each
medium a rating between 1 and 5 in terms of how easy it was to measure the impact of that 
medium on consumers. So, for example, they rated outdoor billboards as quite hard, while  they
considered  direct  response  and  the  Internet  easier  to  measure  for accountability purposes.
SCHEDULING YOUR ADS
You may have a good idea about when to start running your ads. The next question to 
think about is how to schedule them. Do you want them running each week for 6 weeks
(continuity),  or  twice  a  month  all  year  (bursts),  or  for  alternating  6-week  periods
(flighting)? The answer to this question will depend primarily on two interrelated factors:
your media objective and your sales pattern. There should always be a timing component 
stated in your objective, which will give you some guidance for the scheduling of the 
plan. If you hope to reach 60% of your target during the next 6 months with the message
that your hospital was rated the number one pediatric hospital in the city by a U.S. News
and World Report survey, then you may want to disperse your ads throughout the period
to reach as many different people in your audience as possible. H&R Block wants to 
expose people to its message about its electronic tax filing capabilities, so there would be 
good reason to schedule most of the ads in the 3 months prior to the April 15 tax deadline,
building up the frequency of the message at the time of year when it is most appropriate.
You should also think about the scheduling of different media and their combination.
Perhaps you could advertise your Subway store in the local newspaper every week of the 
year, then supplement it with local cable ads around the time of each special promotion.
Much of what we know about scheduling tactics comes from our general knowledge on 
reach and frequency. That is, if you wish to reach as many different people as possible in
your target audience, then you want to disperse your messages across media, vehicles, or
days and dayparts, for example. On the other hand, if you want to ensure that your audi-
ence  hears  or  sees  your  ads  several  times  in  a  given  period,  then  you  would
concentrate them in fewer media, vehicles, and days or dayparts.
The pattern of scheduling does not seem to make a difference, however, in terms of
total reach. So whether your ads appear in two sequential weeks or alternate weeks (one 
week on, one week off), or are placed 1 week a month over 4 months, the final reach will
be approximately the same. Of course, the timing element could be critical, depending on
your product. It would not make much sense to spread ads for a highly seasonal item like
suntan lotion or Christmas decorations across many months; but, if you are promoting 
your Charles Schwab office through newspaper ads and on the Internet, then there is
something to be said for having a fairly constant presence during the year (perhaps
changing the message to tie in to the financial cycle).

 
Creating the Plan  113
Two television scheduling tactics that are sometimes used among major advertisers are 
double-spotting and roadblocking. Double-spotting refers to placing two spots within the
same program. The effect of this technique is to increase the likelihood of multiple
exposure to your ad message (i.e., increased frequency). Roadblocking means placing the
same ad across as many channels as possible at the same time, so that when Joe Smith is
watching television at 8:06 p.m. on a Friday night, whichever channel he turns to, he’ll 
see the same ad. That is becoming more difficult for advertisers to do as the number of
available  channels  grows  higher,  making  it  a  much  more  expensive  proposition  to 
undertake. The impact, however, is going to be an increase in reach, because your spot 
will be  seen by Joe and by everyone else who was watching all those channels at 8:06 p.m.
In  the  1990s,  considerable  research  was  conducted  on  how  best  to  schedule  ad
messages to impact sales. A study was done by John Philip Jones that examined the pur-
chase records of households who also had their TV viewing captured via TV set meters
(to record what channels were viewed). The results of the study clearly showed that to achieve
the greatest “short-term advertising strength” (STAS), the best scheduling tactic was to place at 
least one message per week across as many weeks as possible. In this way, the plan could
impact more people closer to the time of purchase. Although the study had several signif-
icant limitations (it only looked at packaged goods, only dealt with television advertising,
and only examined households rather than people), its impact was profound. Advertisers
began switching their scheduling, moving away from trying to achieve a 3+ reach in a
month. Instead, they began looking at a 1+ reach per week, a strategy known as frequency
planning. Here, the schedule calls for fewer GRPs per week, spread across more weeks of
the year. This doesn’t make sense in many categories, especially those that require lengthy
or high involvement decisions by consumers (cars, houses,  financial  services),  but  for
many  packaged  goods  manufacturers,  frequency planning has now become the norm.
COST-EFFICIENCIES
Costs are obviously very important for the media plan. So, in addition to keeping track of
reach and frequency figures as you create the plan, you must also consider the costs 
involved. Of course, these are closely related. If you need to increase the frequency of
your message, it is going to require more media time or space, which means more money.
 
 
But as already noted, it might be possible to find a cheaper medium or vehicle to help your 
funds go further. Cost-efficiencies can be calculated in terms of cost per thousand of the 
audience reached (CPM) and through cost per rating points (CPP). These were explained 
in chapter 5. The more “mass” the medium, the cheaper it will be on a CPM basis, but the 
less targeted it will be for your situation. That is, there will be a lot of “waste” exposures 

 
114  The Media Handbook
 Exhibit 6.1

 
Creating the Plan  115
of people who are probably not interested in what you have for sale. For a widely used product 
or service, such as car tires or a muffler shop, that might not be a bad thing. But if you are trying 
to reach a narrower group of people, such as Corvette car owners, to offer them a specially 
designed luggage rack that sits on the roof of the car, then you would be better off with a 
higher CPM in a more targeted environment, such as car magazines or car enthusiast Web sites.
TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
As  you  develop  your  plan,  there  are  probably  going  to  be  numerous  additional 
considerations that are specific to your product or service. These might include trade 
merchandising, consumer merchandising, national-local integration, and testing.
Trade Merchandising
For many goods and services, the trade plays a critical role in the brand’s development and 
sales. Many media plans that are geared primarily to the consumer market also have some 
side benefits for the trade. When Frito-Lay promotes its Doritos corn chips, it is telling its 
distributors and retailers that it is pushing the brand and helping to increase their revenues 
too. A national ad for McDonald’s restaurant is also designed to help the local franchisee.
In  putting  the  plan  together,  therefore,  it  is  important  to  look  at  what  trade 
merchandising elements may be attached to it. Perhaps for a chain of Jiffy Lube oil lube 
shops, you can bring all the operators together for a kick-off party when the media 
campaign begins. Even something as simple as buttons with your new campaign slogan 
can help give the trade a sense of being part of the picture. Sending them copies of the 
new ads and/or materials lets them know what message is being promoted to customers. 
The media can help here as well, particularly if you are one of their valued customers. 
They may be willing to co-sponsor an event for your distributors or retailers, for example.

 
116  The Media Handbook
Consumer Merchandising
Although we focus here almost exclusively on advertising media, it is important to keep
in mind many of the other ways in which you can gain additional exposure for and
mileage out of your media plan. There are a multitude of communications possibilities
available, from coupons or sam-pling to press releases and exhibitions and displays. If
you are promoting a line of gourmet preserves, then perhaps in addition to the magazine
ads that you run, you can talk to the local grocery stores to set up sampling booths in their
stores, and feature the dates and locations in the ads. For an internet services provider
(ISP) promoting the latest high-speed Internet access, you could arrange to visit local
schools and let the children go online, then call the local TV station and arrange for them
to film it. The possibilities for these kinds of tie-ins, or integrated marketing, are almost
endless. Whatever you do, however, should remain within the overall communications
objectives  of  your  plan—increasing  awareness,  obtaining  customer  preference,
encouraging brand selection, and so on.
To gain as much advantage as possible from consumer promotions, you might also
consider increasing other media weight when a coupon is dropped, or placing more
newspaper ads the week that you are holding the promotion.
National-Local Integration
Whereas some products (e.g., new movies or product introductions) are advertised solely
on a national level, and others (e.g., the local coffeehouse) appear only in local ads, the
majority of name brands include both national and local advertising in their media plans.
If that is the case, then you need to ensure not only that the message is consistent
(something handled by the creative team), but also that the media placements are aligned.
There are different ways of doing this. For some, particularly the bigger spending
advertisers, the local media weight is added to make an even greater impact on the
national spending, such as buying spot TV on top of network, or local newspapers in
addition to national ones. For others, typically with smaller budgets, the addition of local
media helps to stretch the media dollars further, creating the illusion (in selected markets)
that the advertiser has a constant presence. In either situation, you should ensure that
there is not unwanted duplication, the messages do not drown out each other to the point
of irritating the consumer, and they are not so inconsistent with each other that the
consumer is faced with competing messages.
Testing
For smaller advertisers, the notion of testing a plan may seem unnecessary. If you only
have a few thousand dollars to spend, then it doesn’t seem worthwhile. However, if you
are about to change your entire marketing and media strategy, it is a good idea to see
first—on a small scale—whether your new approach is likely to increase sales or harm
them.  For  example,  Toys  R  Us,  which  traditionally  advertised  primarily  in  local
newspapers to announce whatever was on sale that week or month, changed its strategy
to in-crease awareness of the wide range of items by moving into national television
(broadcast and cable). The potential impact of such a media move could be estimated by
placing a few of these ads and including some kind of response mechanism, such as a

 
Creating the Plan  117
toll-free number or Web site address. That way, the company could test the effectiveness
of the TV ads.
Testing is also a good idea for making changes in media weight (GRPs). If you are
trying to persuade your client to increase annual spending from a few hundred dollars to
several thousand, and you face resistance to the idea, then you might suggest a test of the
proposed strategy in one or more markets, to see what impact those added dollars would
have to the bottom line.
PRESENTING THE PLAN
Whenever you present your completed plan, whether it is to upper management at your
own company or to your client, you need to keep three points in mind. First, be visual.
Most people either hate or fear media because they believe it is a morass of numbers,
most of which they don’t understand. So the more you can do to present the information
in ways that they can see what is going on, the better off you will be. That means using
charts, graphs, pictures, photos, or video to liven things up and bring the numbers to life.
For instance, if you are presenting the demographic statistics on your target, then perhaps
you can make a short video that depicts these people in real life, or present charts or
photos that demonstrate who they are.
Second, be brief. Although you want to have all of the back-up materials and numbers
to support what you are doing, when you make a presentation you should focus on the
key points. Assuming you have an interested audience, they will look at the details
afterward or ask you questions as you go along. Again, the common perception of media
is that it is a mind-numbing experience, filled with mathematical formulas and statistics
that are, quite simply, boring.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, remember the consumer. Ultimately, your plan is
designed to help your client sell more widgets to the consumer. So if your plan simply
recites a hundred different statistics and presents all of the numbers in charts, tables, and
flowcharts, it may be totally accurate but will seem totally removed from the marketing
reality that your client lives in.
Fortunately, there are ways around these problems. The first, keeping it visual, can be
accomplished through the use of a flowchart. This can, at a glance, show when the ads
will run, in which media and vehicles, at what cost, and to what effect (reach and
frequency). It can be done for each target in a given plan and can be broken out by
medium, if desired. An example is shown later in this chapter. There are numerous ways
of creating a flowchart. You can simply draw one yourself, or you can use a spreadsheet
computer program or a custom media flowchart package (see Appendix A for details).
Being brief is harder to do. It usually comes down to practice. Running through your
presentation with a friend or colleague and asking for their advice can be useful. It is
particularly helpful to present your work to someone outside of your area—if they can
understand  your  concise  explanations  of  media  terms,  then  you  are  doing  fine!
Remember, however, to include all of the pertinent information (including calculations
for how you arrived at your conclusions) in the deck of materials you leave behind. In
addition, you have to show how your media plan fits in with and enhances the brand’s
marketing and advertising objectives and strategies.

 
118  The Media Handbook
Learn as much as possible about the end-user of your product, and include some of those 
findings in your presentation. You might want to spend some of your own money, for 
example, to survey some of the customers or do a couple of focus groups to find out how 
they currently use media and advertising in your category. Include a few of the verbatims 
(what consumers actually said, in their own words), or even some video of your conversations 
with customers, to remind your client that you know you are, in the end, dealing with people
Last but not least, it is crucial to remind your audience that you are dealing with esti-
mates. Some of those may be informed by years of experience, but many are based either
on your best judgment, syndicated data sources, or mathematical reasoning. People tend to
believe that because you, as the media specialist, have placed a number on something that
turns it into “reality.” If that were so, media planning would be completely automated and 
done by rote, a pure science, rather than the combination of art and science that it remains today.
A MEDIA PLAN EXAMPLE
Let’s go through an example for a fictitious brand of breakfast cereal, Fresh Flakes. It
plans to launch a new line extension, Fresh Berry Flakes, in 2006. It was first introduced 
in 2000 and competes primarily with Kellogg and Post cereals.
All the data presented here are fictitious.
Situation Analysis
Through the end of calendar year 2005, Fresh Flakes sales are up 3% versus a year ago, a 
slower rate of growth than seen in the first four years of the brand’s existence. It therefore 
plans to launch a line extension, Fresh Berry Flakes, in June 2006.
Marketing Objectives/Strategies. Maintain penetration among Fresh Flakes users and launch 
Fresh Berry Flakes as a new, more exciting addition to the Fresh Flakes line, appealing to
existing Fresh Flakes users while drawing new users into the franchise from competitive brands.
The  business  goal  is  to  increase  sales  volume  of  the  Fresh  Flakes  franchise 
(Original+Berry) by 10% by year-end 2006. It will do so by increasing Fresh Flakes 
penetration among frequent cereal eaters in two ways:
•   Heavy marketing and promotion during launch period and throughout summer months
•   Attracting new, especially younger cereal eaters with the Berry Flakes extension
Advertising Time Period: January through December 2006.
Media Budget: $21 million (For Fresh Flakes and Fresh Berry Flakes).
Promotional Activity: Checkout coupons in June-July; product placement on ABC and
Lifetime Networks in August-September.

 
Creating the Plan  119
Kelloggs:  Total  spending:  $275  million.  25%  network  TV;  25%  cable  TV; 
10% syndication TV; 5% Spanish language network TV; 5% spot TV; 15% 
magazines; 5% Internet; 10% nontraditional.
General Mills: $250 million. 25% network TV; 30% cable TV; 35% spot TV; 
5% magazines; 5% Internet.
Post: Total spending: $120 million. 10% network TV; 20% cable TV; 45% 
magazines; 5% Sunday magazines; 10% Internet; 10% nontraditional.
Quaker: Total spending: $75 million. 40% network television; 20% cable TV; 
25% magazines; 5% Internet; 10% nontraditional (sponsorship, placement, etc.)
Total Category: 20% network TV; 5% Spanish language TV; 25% cable TV;
5% syndication TV; 15% spot TV; 20% magazines; 2%  Sunday magazines; 1% 
newspapers; 2% Internet; 5% nontraditional.
Seasonally: Cereal usage tends to peak in spring/summer months, but the product is used 
throughout the year.
Fresh Flakes
 
Cereal Category
 
Advertising Objective.
Media Objectives.
Generate awareness among current users of Fresh Flakes cereal and its 
competitors. The demographics and psychographics of this target are:
Women 18–49, Household income $50,000+
Well educated, nutrition oriented, diet/figure conscious
The target consists of 15 million women who can be defined as heavy cereal 
users. They represent 19% of all women.
Marketing Background.
Category Competitive Analysis:
•
•
•
•
•
Generate awareness of the enhanced flavor and taste of new cereal, Fresh Berry 
Flakes cereal among target with goal of achieving 40% awareness of the brand 
among the target during calendar year 2006.
1.
1.
•
•
•

 
120  The Media Handbook
Women 18–49 with HHI $50,000+ 
40% 
3
3.  Provide  full  year-round  media  support  to  stimulate  usage  throughout  year,  with 
additional weight starting in June to support the launch of the brand extension.
4. Schedule advertising run Wednesday-Sunday to complement key grocery shopping 
days.
5. Provide national advertising support.
Media Strategies
Following  the  success  of  the  brand  during  the  past  5  years,  the  2006  media  plan 
recommends a continuation of the media strategy for Fresh Flakes, us-ing television as 
the primary medium with magazines as the secondary medium. For the launch of Fresh 
Berry Flakes, a significant portion of that brand’s media dollars will be allocated to 
outdoor. The Internet will be a prominent part of both brands’ plans.
Television. As the primary medium, television provides:
•   High reach/awareness builder
•   Sight, sound, and motion
•   Immediacy of message
•   Targetability (niche networks)
•   Continuity (lower cost cable networks)
•   Added value programs (product placement, contests, etc).
The following cable networks are more likely to be viewed by the target:
•   E! Entertainment
•   MTV Networks
•   Comedy Central
•   Food Network
•   Nick-at-Nite
•   HGTV
One quarter of the television weight will be in broadcast prime time for the launch of 
Fresh Berry Flakes.
•   Prime time offers higher ratings, greater reach
Magazines. As the secondary medium, magazines provide:
•   Long message life
•   Repeat exposure
•   Targetability—ability to provide contextually relevant and engaging message
•   Editorial compatibility
•   Inserts (coupons, advertorials)
2. Achieve the following communication goals:
•   Average 4-week delivery:
Reach 
Frequency

 
Creating the Plan  121
titles. Preferred positions will be:
•   Health and fitness: Fitness section
•   Fashion and beauty: Fitness section
•   Entertainment: News section
•   Food: Front of book
The recommended magazines will include:
•   Cosmopolitan
•   Entertainment Weekly
•   Essence
•   Martha Stewart Living
•   Self
•   Glamour
•   Marie Claire
•   Cooking Light
•   Bon Appetit
•   Fitness
Internet. A combination of portals, Web sites, and key word searches will be utilized.
The following sites and portals will be included:
Portals
Sites
Yahoo Health 
Cookinglight.com
AOL Health 
Fitness.com
Google (search on health, fitness, cereal, breakfast, diet) 
Self.com
All Web site ads will be rich-media, and use behavioral targeting to come up based on the
pathways taken by users.
Outdoor. A combination of outdoor billboards, bus shelters, and health club advertising will
be used during the Fresh Berry Flakes launch period (June-August). The advantages of outdoor 
include:
•   Broad reach, particularly to mobile younger population
•   Target selectivity (e.g., health clubs)
•   Multiple exposure/high frequency
The flow chart on pp 140–141 depicts how the plan would be laid out during the year.
Although this is a very generalized and simple version of what to include in a plan, it 
provides the basic information that has been covered earlier in this book. You should note
Magazines will be divided between health and fitness (30%), fashion and beauty (20%), 
entertainment (20%), and food (30%). Most magazine ads will be 1P4C (one-page, 
four-color). For the Fresh Berry Flakes launch, 1 1/3 pages will be added in selected

 
122  The Media Handbook
•   Media usage
•   Cable TV network comparisons
•   Magazine comparisons
•   Web site comparisons
•   CPM comparisons (e.g., cable vs. broadcast vs. online)
•   Daypart/program rankings by target
•   Detailed reach and frequencies by medium
•   Media quintiles
•   Purchase volume for brand and category
•   Demographic/lifestyle analysis of users
•   Brand geographic analysis (BDI vs. GDI by DMA)
•   Seasonality analysis
•   Grocery shopping patterns
•   Historical media plans
SUMMARY
When creating a media plan it is crucial to consider first the target audience’s use of 
media, in terms of which categories and vehicles they use. You then must determine the 
plan’s timing, if there are seasonal sales or other elements of the marketing mix (pricing, 
promotion,  distribution  or  product  changes)  that  will  affect  the  plan’s  timing.  For 
scheduling of your chosen vehicles, financial considerations and reach and frequency 
goals will help determine when, and how often, your ads appear. Tactical elements are 
important, too, particularly trade and consumer merchandising, to receive maximum sup-
port  from  dealers,  distributors,  and  retailers,  and  maximize  the  impact  of  the 
advertising. If funds permit, or major changes to the plan are being contemplated, it is 
recommended that the plan be tested on a small scale before being launched in its entirety.
CHECKLIST—CREATING THE PLAN
Have you found out as much as possible about your target audience, either 
through syndicated services or primary research you have conducted?
Have you determined the appropriate timing for your messages?
How will your messages be scheduled—continuously, in flights, or in bursts?
Will your reach and frequency goals be met by your timing and scheduling strategies?
Are there merchandising possibilities for your brand with either the trade or with 
consumers?
Do you need to test the plan first in a smaller location before rolling it out?
Can you present your plan in a visually interesting and succinct fashion?
that  all  of  the  recommendations  need  to  be  backed  up  by  research  data,  wherever 
possible, beyond simple tables showing indices or coverage for individual media vehicles 
or gross expenditures for the year. Here is a brief list of the kinds of analyses that could 
be included in the “back-up” for this plan:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

 
CHAPTER 7
Offering Alternatives
Once you have completed your media plan, you might think your task is over. But like
the Energizer bunny in the popular battery commercials—created in the early 1990s, and
reintroduced periodically thereafter—it keeps going, and going, and going. In fact, even
as you are creating the plan, you should be starting to think about various alternatives.
Although you might be convinced that you have created the perfect, biggest sales-
generating, best objectives-meeting media plan ever conceived, the chances are fairly
good that it will not be accepted at face value. So rather than going into your presentation
believing that your job is over and the client will immediately accept everything you are
recommending, you will be in a much stronger position if you prepare some alternatives
beforehand. This chapter considers some of those options.
SPENDING MORE MONEY
The opportunity to gain a larger budget than you were originally expecting does not
happen very often, and certainly not as often as a media specialist might like! However,
there are several good reasons for being prepared to spend more on advertising media
than was originally proposed. The first, from an agency perspective, is that if you are
being paid a commission on the media you buy, the more money you spend, the more you
will make. But second, and perhaps more importantly today when fewer advertisers are
paying a 15% commission rate, it is your job as the media specialist to prove to the client
how much more effective the media plan could be if there were more dollars available.
Some people might find this purely wasteful. There is evidence, after all, to indicate
that spending more on advertising may actually result in a decrease in sales! But, for the
most part, research supports the notion that placing more dollars in advertising media to
reach more people on more occasions (assuming, of course, they are the right people for
your product) will increase sales. That won’t occur in a vacuum; the other “Ps” of the
marketing mix have to be working in your favor too. The product must be one that the
marketplace needs, there has to be good distribution, and the price must be appropriate.
But given those factors, increasing media dollars will tend to increase sales.
So, given those circumstances, how do you best prepare to offer the alternative of
spending more? In many situations, the best way is to simultaneously create a second
media plan that has a larger budget allocated to it. If your primary plan has an annual
media budget of $2 million, then you might consider creating an additional one at the $3
million level to see how that would perform. In doing so, you should not simply throw
extra media weight around randomly. Instead, you should revisit your advertising and
media objectives and consider what you might set as your goals if you had that extra
money to spend. If, for instance, your original goal was to boost awareness of the latest
Best Buy store to open in Chicago, then perhaps if your budget was to be 20% larger, you
might think about setting your objectives higher also, proposing that with the additional
funds you could increase awareness to 40% in that same time period.

 
124  The Media Handbook
Another option with increased funding is to disperse your message across a wider area. If you 
have coffee stores located primarily in three states, but are starting to expand into five additional 
states, then perhaps by spending more money on advertising media you could afford to put your 
messages into those new areas to let people know of your upcoming  presence.  Having  more 
money  might  also  allow  you  to  branch  out  into additional media vehicles or forms. If
your basic media plan for Tropicana Orange Juice for kids consists of network television
and  magazine ads, then perhaps the extra dollars could be spent on radio or Internet ads.
Of course, in suggesting where and how this extra money could be spent, you must always 
show what will be achieved in return. That is, you need to quantify, wherever possible,
the positive impact those dollars will have. This can be done through reach and frequency 
calculations  that  show  how  many  additional  people  in  the  target  will  be reached,
and how many more times they will have the opportunity to be exposed to the message. 
Supplementary funds may also end up lowering the cost of individual ads, either through 
volume or frequency discounts, or by reducing the cost per thousand (CPM). So although
the  bottom-line cost of the plan may go up, the cost efficiency may actually improve.
Another advantage to spending more media dollars is that they may allow you to reach 
a secondary target more readily. If you are putting a plan together for the Beef Council, 
where the primary target audience is women who like to cook, then perhaps expanding the
plan will allow you to address more clearly a secondary target audience of restaurant chefs. You 
might also think about using additional dollars to reach people who can influence your primary
target. For a media plan aimed at parents offering a college fund, you might spend the extra
monies to promote your company to financial planners to whom the parents will turn for advice.
It is also important to think beyond media when considering how additional dollars might be 
spent. You might want to recommend undertaking some custom research of your proposed
target audience, especially if that target has changed in some way from previous plans. Or
research could be done to gain a greater understanding of how the target you are trying to 
reach uses the media in your plan, or where they turn to for information about the product
or service that could, in turn, greatly enhance your media plans  in  the  future.  The  latter  could 
be  particularly  valuable  if  there  is  very  little syndicated data currently available, or if
you are in a very specialized or new field, such as biotechnology or wireless web devices.
And, of course, the people who actually create the ads would also like to have more 
money to spend on their work. Production quality could be improved, commercials length-
ened, or better talent hired if more dollars were made available. You could make your
direct mail piece look far more professional, or enhance the design on your Web site, or
distribute more samples to individuals visiting your exhibit at a trade show. The possibili-
ties  are  almost  endless.  But  whatever  you  recommend  for  your  increased-spending
scenario, you must justify it in terms of the objectives and strategies that you have stated 
upfront (even if you propose modifying those objectives  if you get additional funds).
SPENDING LESS MONEY
Unfortunately, for most media specialists, the more common case is that you will end up 
having to spend less than originally proposed. And although it is generally not a good idea 
to present to your client or boss a reduced-spending  alternative  at  the same  time  as you

 
Offering Alternatives  125
present your main media plan (unless that has been specifically requested), you would be 
well advised to start thinking about how you would spend less money as you are
developing the basic plan.
There are numerous reasons why you might end up having less money than you antici-
pated available for your plan. It could be that sales of Pepperidge Farm cookies fell more 
than expected this year, so marketing budgets for the coming year had to be cut (and,
remember, advertising is usually the first item to be cut when sales go down, despite the 
fact  that  those  dollars  will  typically  help  increase  sales).  New  management  or
ownership will often result in budgetary changes, and again, more often than not these
changes are in a negative direction. It could be that the company decides to speed up the
introduction of a new brand and decides to take money away from the established product
for which you are preparing a plan. Or the marketer has decided to deliver a corporate 
message featuring all of its brands in one ad, reducing the amount to be spent on the plan.
Whatever the reason, as you are preparing an alternative plan, think carefully about how you 
can put together a media schedule that will come as close as possible to meeting your original 
objectives. There may be several ways to cut corners without decimating the plan. Perhaps you 
can shorten the flight times, running TV ads for 2 weeks at a time instead of 4, or cut the number 
of Web sites you are on, or only place ads in magazines every other month instead of monthly
Many  advertisers  today  are  pulling  dollars  out  of  regular  national  television  and
switching it into product placement deals that have a lower out-of-pocket cost. Both
General Motors and Procter & Gamble spent less in the 2005 network TV upfront buying
season and switched those funds to “alternative” media, including product placement. P
& G’s Crest toothpaste, placed in “The Apprentice,” generated more than 3 million Web
site hits in one day. A total of $4.25 billion was expected to be spent in this nontraditional
advertising form in 2005, up 23% from the year before. In the 2004–2005 television
season, there were about 7,500 product placements captured in prime time in the six
broadcast networks. This activity was not undertaken by a handful of advertisers; rather,
more than 1,500 of them placed their brands within the programs themselves.1
Creating a reduced-spending scenario should not be a case of simply cutting spots or
pages arbitrarily. It must be done with strategic reasoning in mind. For instance, let’s say 
you have a media plan to get more parents in your area to consider sending their children
to your client’s preschool program, but instead of having $300,000 to spend, you end up
having only $240,000. You had originally intended to send direct mailings to all parents
of young children in the vicinity, inviting them to visit the school, as well as placing
newspaper  ads  in  community  papers.  Now, with  less  money  to  spend,  you  must
reconsider how best to allocate your dollars yet still achieve your objective. Perhaps 
instead of using direct mail, which tends to be very expensive, you could try to get free 
publicity by sending a video news release to the local TV stations and media kits to other 
local  media.  An  open  house  would  be  an  inexpensive  way  of  offering  parents  the 
opportunity to visit the school. In addition, getting your school’s Web site up and
running, and linked to local or regional sites that deal with education, would also be fairly 
simple and inexpensive. But, in order to reach a broad cross-section of people, sustaining 
a minimum  level  of  newspaper  ads  would  probably  remain  an  efficient  and  effec-
tive approach.
1 Nielsen Media Research, 2005.

 
126  The Media Handbook
When considering which ads or insertions to remove, you must also keep in mind that 
a reduction in frequency may result in the loss of some volume discounts with the media
involved. Reducing the number of places your message appears in or on will also impact
your  reach.  So  reductions  will  likely  mean  you  come  up  short  on  your  reach  and 
frequency goals.
Sometimes there is no alternative but to cut one or more media forms from the plan. 
Before doing so, it is important that you consider each one in turn, deciding what would 
be the result of eliminating that medium on the overall plan’s objectives. This should not
be limited to reach and frequency considerations, but also thought of in terms of what the 
medium can do for your ad and how important that medium is in consumers’ lives. If you 
take out all TV from a plan, then remember that you are losing a key medium that offers 
sight, sound, and motion and the opportunity to deliver the message to a large audience.
That  might  be  less  important  for  a  Ford  dealership,  but  critical  for  a  Red  Lobster
restaurant where you want to showcase the food. It also depends on how consumers relate
to their media. For example, if you know from your communications planning research
that your working mother target for Welch’s juice boxes has a strong relationship with 
magazines, then removing them from your plan, even if they represent a higher CPM, is
likely to be detrimental to the plan’s impact and its ability to engage your audience.
Another way to reduce media spending is to use briefer or less expensive ads. Instead
of 30-second commercials, maybe you could make do with half that time; instead of a 
full-page ad, perhaps a half-page ad will suffice. Once again, however, this must be 
considered not simply in numerical terms (e.g., reach, or CPM), but also in terms of the 
impact  on  consumers  seeing  or  hearing  that  commercial  message.  Although  some
research evidence suggests that many consumers cannot tell the difference between a
15-second and a 30-second commercial, there is obviously less time available in the
shorter unit to tell the complete story, so you are missing out on the chance to reinforce
your message as thoroughly.
It might seem appropriate, given a reduced media budget, to cut the size of your target 
audience and plan to reach fewer people. In fact, in many situations that can turn out to 
be more costly, because the more narrowly you try to target your media, the more
expensive it becomes to try and reach them. If your original plan for a new Pillsbury cake
mix is aimed at all women from age 18 to 49 and uses a mix of magazines and TV, then
by trying to narrow it further to reach only those women in that age group who have 
household incomes of more than $75,000 and have three or more children you will
probably end up looking at more expensive media vehicles. Instead of picking a broadly
popular woman’s service magazine, such as Good Housekeeping or First for Women, you
might end up with magazines that have a smaller circulation and cost more per ad page, 
such as Gourmet or Bon Appetit. Now admittedly, they will reach more of your more
narrowly defined target, but the cost may be correspondingly higher, too.
One way you could consider making cutbacks on your targets is by eliminating any
secondary targets you had planned to reach through separate media. A plan that was intended to 
increase awareness of an environmentally friendly detergent might be aimed at both envi-
ronmentally aware consumers and opinion leaders. Faced with a cutback in media dollars,
you might consider targeting only one of those groups initially, rather than both of them at once.

 
Offering Alternatives  127
It is extremely important to outline the implications and results of spending less on advertising 
media. This should not be done in a gloom-and-doom fashion, portraying a picture of complete 
failure if $50,000 is removed from the budget, but neither should it be taken lightly and 
happily accepted without a fuss. If for no other reason, explaining what you believe might 
happen if those media dollars are removed will show to your client  that  you  have  thought  
through  in  a  strategic  way  the  possible  outcomes  of alternative plans. Keep in mind 
that your ultimate goal is to get those media dollars restored as soon as it is feasible to do so.
CHANGING TARGETS
Sometimes after you have presented a complete media plan to the client and 
have apparently won approval for it, a little voice in the back of the room will speak 
up and say, seemingly casually, “But what would happen if we targeted X instead?” 
That simple sentence can send the alarm bells flashing and blood pressure soaring 
for the media specialist. It is important not to panic at that point, but rather to think 
carefully about whether or not there is real merit to the question.
First of all, you must ensure that the media target is in line with the brand’s marketing target, 
otherwise it will be hard for the media plan to fully achieve the overall marketing objectives. 
Although you may feel indignant that anyone is questioning your plan’s target, particularly after 
all the work you have put into it, you need to step back and take a careful, considered look 
at the proposition. For as much as you may be reluctant to admit it, it could be that the 
person making the suggestion has actually hit on a potentially valuable target that you had 
simply not considered or thought to be very important. Sometimes it takes so long for the 
client and agency to agree on a single target that once a definition has been pinned down, 
there is a tendency for the media specialist to put on the blinders  and  work  feverishly  to  
deliver  a  plan  with  the  agreed-on  target.  Any considerations of alternatives have been 
set aside out of gratitude that the client has finally accepted at least one customer group. But as 
you are increasingly wrapped up in that target audience, the client may have time to sit back and 
ponder other possibilities, and may come up with one that is more appropriate, or equally so.
In the best scenario, that alternative target is in fact one that you had considered and re-
jected, either because of strategic or financial reasons. You can then explain why the dif-
ferent target would not be appropriate or feasible. If you had not already done so, then it 
is in everyone’s interest to look more carefully at the proposed alternative (unless it seems 
so outlandish and unreasonable that you are certain there is no merit to it). It could be that 
a simple discussion then and there will be enough to determine whether this option should 
be investigated further. Or, you may have to go back to syndicated research or whatever 
sources you were using to define the target and examine the proposed alternative more closely.
There are other situations where it is incumbent on you, as the media specialist, to con-
sider different targets as you are developing the primary plan. As already noted, this could 
be  because  you are  creating  alternative spending scenarios  with  more or fewer dollars 

 
128  The Media Handbook
available. But it might also arise because of disagreement or uncertainty over the best 
target for the product. Perhaps your bank client has always targeted its media plan to 
promote its mortgages at young couples looking for their first home. You, as the media
specialist, might put together a second plan that targets older couples whose children have 
left  home  who  want  to  move  to  a  smaller,  but  more  elegant,  home  for  their 
retirement, or are perhaps contemplating buying a second weekend home. Clearly, the 
media that you would use to reach each target group would be very different.
It could also be important to include different targets in a plan, or to create a separate plan for 
those targets when you think that there are critical secondary audiences who need to be
addressed. This is highly dependent on the product category. For medicines or health care items, 
for example, it is often essential to communicate with the medical profession as well as
consumers, because they are the ones who influence which brands are selected. With the
removal in the late 1990s of restrictions on television advertising of prescription drugs,
there has been an enormous increase in the amount pharmaceutical companies are
spending on that medium. Even though consumers must still ask their doctors  to 
prescribe  these  specialized  drugs  (e.g.,  Prozac,  Paxil,  or  Lipitor),  the advertising is 
aimed at influencing the consumers to ask their physicians for a specific brand-name
medication, rather than simply something to help with depression, arthritis, or allergies.
More recently, there have been calls for such pharmaceutical advertising to be re-
regulated out of concern that the ads are working too well, encouraging doctors to 
prescribe more drugs (and more name-brand drugs) than they would otherwise have
done. Merck went as far as announcing that it would refrain from consumer ads for any
new product that it launched for the first year the drug is in the marketplace.
Another area where critical secondary audiences exist is with children’s products. 
When they are targeted, it is frequently advisable to have a separate target of moms or 
parents  because  they  typically  hold  the  purse-strings.  It  is  estimated  that  children
influence tens of billions of dollars worth of spending each year. In many countries around
the world, there are strict limits on which products, and how products, can be advertised
directly to children, out of concerns that they are more easily misled by advertising.
Whoever the different target is, the media specialist must determine which different 
media are needed to reach those people. That, in turn, will depend on the marketing and
advertising objectives for that distinct audience: Are they identical to the main target’s 
goals, or do they differ in some way? How much do the two targets overlap, both in terms
of those objectives and in their media usage patterns? It could be, for example, that if you
are trying to encourage both consumers and contractors to select your Grohe faucets, then 
certain ads placed in home decorating magazines would reach both groups, but more spe-
cialized trade publications will do a better job at convincing contractors of the merits of  your 
brand,  whereas  TV  ads  could  help  enhance  your  brand’s  image  among consumers.
CHANGING MEDIA
As the media specialist, your job really entails considering different media from the 
beginning to the end of media plan development. You are doing so as you assess your 
media  strategy  and   tactics  and  as  you  create  the  plan.  However,   it  is  sometimes

 
Offering Alternatives  129
worthwhile to make a special effort to consider how the plan would turn out if different media 
were used. Again, this could be in reaction to a change in the media budget, or a response  to 
a  client’s  question.  Or  you  could  take  it  upon  yourself  to  investigate alternative media options.
In some cases, this could involve looking at different media vehicles within the same 
media form. If you are recommending magazines, then perhaps you might look at more
specialized publications to reach your target. For TV, reconsider whether you should use 
broadcast, spot, or cable TV to convey your messages, or maybe even switch to product
integration. With a radio plan that uses spot markets, perhaps a network buy would be
more efficient and appropriate. With Internet buys, you may want to think about whether
to buy ads on broad-based portals (Yahoo, MSN, etc.) or pay to be a sponsored link on a 
search page. If your media plan makes heavy use of newspapers, then think
about whether you should move from small town local newspapers to those that are 
distributed across broader regions, such as the Boston Globe in the New England area,
the Chicago Tribune in the Midwest, and the Los Angeles Times in California.
The  use  of  different  media  vehicles  will  depend  primarily  on  two  factors: cost-
efficiency and targetability. It may be cheaper to use cable rather than spot TV, for
instance, but if cable penetration in your area is only at 60%, then you are missing out on
the 40% of the homes who could potentially be exposed to your message. Switching from 
smaller local papers to bigger, more regional ones may bring you a larger audience, but
those people may not be close enough to your chain of Chipotle Grill casual Mexican 
restaurants to be worth reaching with your message.
The bigger change when thinking about different media is a switch in media forms
altogether. Instead of recommending newspapers, what happens if you use local cable TV
instead? How about using the Internet instead of magazines? Or what would be the result
of switching dollars out of magazines and into television? And how much would that
change be affected by the relationship of your target with the media you are considering?
The media specialist must think through these scenarios both from the point of view of
strategy and of cost. How would a move from newspapers to cable TV affect your overall
objective of boosting awareness of your health food store? Would the same number of people
be reached? Would they be the same people? What is the cost difference? And how would
message frequency be impacted? What are the creative implications of such a change?
All of these questions need to be answered as you develop a plan using different media.
One of the tools used in helping determine alternatives for a plan is the optimizer. 
Developed in the United Kingdom in the 1980s, these computer systems were first
designed to select the optimal mix of national TV dayparts or types against a specific 
target. They use algorithms that balance the reach of a plan against its cost to arrive at a
solution that maximizes one or the other (cost or reach). Although they are models based 
on historical data (ratings), they are now routinely used predictively to help media plan-
ners  and  buyers  determine  what  TV  dayparts  or  specific  programs  to  include. 

 
130  The Media Handbook
Following their introduction, multimedia optimizers were created that include
television, radio, and print, although with varying degrees of success, due to the fact that 
the ratings data for each medium are collected and reported differently.2
The main idea to keep in mind when offering media alternatives is that your original
plan  is  not  the  only  way  to  schedule  media  to  meet  your  client’s  marketing  and
advertising objectives. Here again we see that media planning is both art and science.
There are potentially tens, if not hundreds, of different ways that you could plan your 
media to obtain the designated goals. Your job as the media specialist is to come up with
the  one  that  you  believe  will  do  the  most  effective  and  efficient  job,  while  fully
understanding that there are alternatives available that might achieve the same ends.
TESTS AND TRANSLATIONS
There are two common ways to conduct tests of a media plan on a local or regional basis. 
They are known as As It Falls and Little America. Here, we consider the basic concepts 
for each one, rather than going through all of the mathematical calculations needed to 
prepare such a plan. Although this procedure is really a test, it is also sometimes referred
to as a “test translation” to reflect the fact that a national or bigger plan is being recreated
in some fashion on a smaller scale. And even though, as media specialists, we are most
concerned with testing the media plan itself (increasing GRPs, trying different scheduling
strategies, etc.), tests are also often conducted to determine the impact of new creative, or 
to see how a new product fares in the marketplace.
As It Falls
This type of test is most often used for brands in existing product categories, where the 
competitors are well known. The main premise of this method is that the rating points are 
allowed to occur as they normally would in each market, or as it falls. So rather than have
the same GRPs across all test markets, the plan’s goals would vary somewhat from
location to location, depending on how well the individual vehicles perform in each
place. That also means that the budgets will vary by market too. It may cost $5,000 to
buy 100 radio GRPs in Boise, Idaho, but it may cost $ 10,000 to get the same GRP level
in Madison, Wisconsin. The main advantage to this testing system is that it provides a
realistic scenario for assessing the impact of the test plan. If the plan were expanded to a
national level, there would still be market-by-market differences similar to those seen in 
the as-it-falls test situation.
Little America
This test market procedure is used more often with new brands or products where there is 
no existing competition. What it sets out to do is recreate a national plan in one (or a few) 
markets, or get as close to that as is feasible. It usually involves more complex planning,
first to determine how individual media categories perform in the markets you choose,
and then to figure out how to adjust the test plan so that it matches the national delivery.
2“Point  of  View:  Optimizers  and  Media  Planning,”  Erwin  Ephron,  Journal  of  Advertising
Research, vol. 38, no. 4, July/August 1998, 47–56.

 
Offering Alternatives  131
SUMMARY
While creating a media plan, the true media specialist is already considering various alternatives. 
One that should always be included is a “what-if” scenario of the effect on the  plan’s  outcome  
if  more  dollars  were  available,  looking  at  the  impact  on  cost efficiency, reach, and 
frequency, and the marketing and advertising objectives. Increased funding could also be 
allocated to gain additional reach of the brand against its users, or improved  production  
quality  of  the  ads  themselves.  This  chapter  also  examined  a reduced-spending scenario, 
which must be undertaken with a strategic focus in mind, considering alternative media 
forms or vehicles, or fewer messages or targets. Indeed, plan alterations will frequently 
look at different targets or different media and estimate the  impact  those  might  have  on  
the  plan’s  effectiveness  and  its  ability  to  engage consumers with your brands’ mes-
sages through the right media. All of these potential changes can be tested by translating 
the plan into a local or regional test market situation and seeing what happens there first.
CHECKLIST—OFFERING ALTERNATIVES
Have you prepared a second media plan at a higher budget level?
Have  you  considered  how  extra  funds  would  be  spent—longer  flights,  wider geogra-
phies, secondary targets—and how those would impact your media (reach and frequency) 
goals?
Are there nonmedia needs that require additional funds (creative  requirements, 
consumer research, trade allowances)?
Do you know the impact of spending fewer media dollars on your plan—(fewer media cat-
egories or vehicles, reduced number of targets, reduced schedule, lower reach and frequency 
results)?
Are there other target audiences you should consider?
Are there other media categories to be considered?
Is it necessary to test your media plan first, either “as it falls” (existing brands) 
or in a “little America” (new products) test?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

 
CHAPTER 8
Making the Media Buys
Even the most impressive media plan will not satisfy the client until the time and space
have actually been bought. The role of the media specialist may involve none, some, or
all of the media buying functions. This chapter provides a brief overview of how print
and electronic media are purchased. The subject really requires book-length treatment on
its own; the goal here is to show how media buying fits in with the planning process,
rather than explain the many details and intricacies of the buys themselves.
MERCHANDISING A MAGAZINE BUY
It is fairly common in many smaller or midsize advertising agencies for media planners to
be  responsible  for  magazine  buys,  although  at  larger  agencies  there  is  usually  a
specialized staff of print buyers who focus solely on the negotiations. It used to be that all
magazines worked off a rate card, listing the cost of buying various page sizes, with or
without color or other special features. Additional charges were also made for preferred
positions, such as the inside front or back covers and the back cover itself, which are
believed to be read by more people.
Although the extra costs remain, today’s magazine buys are far more likely to be made
by negotiating. That is, the rate card is usually the starting point, but then it is up to the
media specialist and the magazine’s representative (or rep) to discuss the final cost for the
client. Discounts may be offered for volume buys if, for example, the client purchases ads
in multiple issues, or buys several pages in one issue, or increasingly, buys space in
several magazines owned by the same publisher. As we learned in chapter 3, the cost of a
magazine ad will depend on the size and nature of the magazine’s readership. Obviously,
you will pay more to reach more people. It would cost you about $213,000 for a
full-page, 4-color ad in Ladies Home Journal, which has a circulation of 4.1 million,
whereas the same ad placed in Vanity Fair, which has a circulation of 1.1 million, will
cost less than $110,000.
At the other end of the spectrum, however, you may also have to pay more to reach a
highly specialized audience. Although both First for Women and Bon Appetit have
circulations of 1.3 million, the one-page ad will cost $52,000 in the former and $92,000
in the latter because it is assumed that the more focused material of articles about food is
reaching a more interested, involved audience that is more likely to pay attention to the
ads in that publication. There have been research studies both supporting and rejecting
this hypothesis, with the dissenters claiming that if readers are more involved in the
subject matter, they are in fact less likely to pay attention to the ads. For the media
specialist, the main focus should be on the suitability of each individual magazine to the
media objectives, and how efficiently and effectively each vehicle can be used.
When the magazine space is negotiated, the specialist will usually request certain
positioning preferences. As already noted, for some of these a premium must be paid.
Aside from covers, the specialist may want a Kraft cheese ad, for example, placed near or

 
Making the Media Buys  133
within the food editorial, or a Cover Girl cosmetics ad to appear in that section of the
magazine. Sometimes it is enough to simply request that the ad is in the first third of the
issue, under the assumption that those pages are more likely to be seen. The willingness
and ability of the magazine to fulfill these requests will vary, depending on who the client
is and how many ad pages it needs to fill. One of the important things to remember about
magazines is that, unlike electronic media, which have a finite amount of airtime, printed media
(including  newspapers)  can  simply  add  pages  if  they  can  attract  additional advertisers.
In addition to the increased willingness of magazines to negotiate off the rate card, 
more publications are also offering additional benefits to their advertisers. These might
include special promotions, editorial features, bonus circulation, web links, or trade deals.
These are usually offered at little or no extra charge, but obviously the cost is built into
the amount the specialist pays for the ad pages. These extras reflect the extremely com-
petitive media landscape, with an increasingly fragmented marketplace not only within
the magazine industry, but also across different media. Good Housekeeping does not only
compete with the other women’s service books (Better Homes and Gardens, Ladies Home
Journal, Family Circle, and Woman’s Day), it must also fight for dollars with television,
radio, newspapers, outdoor billboards, direct mail, the Internet. The list is almost endless.
Once the magazine space has been agreed on, in terms of price, special features, and 
positioning, it is time to make the actual buy. At larger agencies this is accomplished through a
magazine authorization, which sets out the terms of the contract to which both parties must
agree. Some clients may like to see this first to be sure they know what they are getting. If 
everyone accepts these terms, then the media specialist can go ahead and authorize the buy.
GETTING NEWS INTO NEWSPAPERS
The purchase process for newspapers is similar to that of magazines. First, buyers must
analyze all possible newspapers available in each designated market, looking at factors such 
as circulation, coverage, audience composition, color possibilities, and zoning (the ability 
to customize ads to different areas of the paper’s coverage area, or only appear in selected
editions).  Thanks  to  technological  advances,  newspaper  ad  inserts  can  be distributed in a
more targeted fashion than previously. Today, most newspapers can vary the inserts by zip code.
Then, they must negotiate with each newspaper to obtain the best rate. Newspapers are
purchased in terms of standard ad unit sizes (SAUs), so that although the size of the
newspaper itself may vary, its ad sizes are standardized. Just as with magazines, the
newspaper buyer will usually want to specify the section of the paper in which the ad will 
appear—an ad for Hellman’s salad dressing in the food section, an ad for Universal
Studio’s latest movie in the entertainment section, and an Ethan Allen furniture store ad
in the home section. Sometimes, that decision is made based on what the target audience 
is more likely to read, so an ad for Verizon’s PDA service might appear in the business
section to reach professionals who are more likely to be interested in that item.

 
134  The Media Handbook
Once the deal has been negotiated and agreed on, an insertion order is placed
with the newspaper. At the same time, the agency will issue a Newspaper Authoriza-
tion that sets out all of the specifications for the ad, such as whether it will be black
and white or color, whether or not it includes a coupon, and if there are any special in-
structions. Then all the print details must be confirmed, including the insertion dates,
closing dates, ad size, column inches, inch rate, gross cost, contract rate, and position
in the newspaper. This is done for every newspaper in which the ad will appear.
After that has received approval, the insertion order goes ahead and the buy is made.
BUYING TIME ON TELEVISION
There are three ways that national television is bought, for both broadcast and cable TV
and syndication—long term, short term (“scatter”), and opportunistic. The first, and most
intense, is what is generally known as the “upfront” marketplace. This usually takes place
for broadcast TV in late-May after the networks present their new programming slate to adver-
tisers, whereas for cable it runs from May to July. With either television form, the media
specialist negotiates time with the major networks well in advance of the actual air dates. Most
typically, these fall during the following TV season that starts in September and runs through to 
the following May. The time purchased is usually over three to four quarters of the year.
When TV advertising was initiated in the late 1940s, all commercial time was, in effect,
bought “upfront”. That is because programs were fully sponsored by advertisers, so the
negotiations for which companies would put their names in front of new programs’ names
occurred as those same programs were being developed (the Philco Theater Hour). After quiz
show scandals in the late 1950s, where contestants were secretly fed the right answers  in  order
to  maintain  viewer  suspense,  the  networks  took  back  control  of programming from
advertisers (who had sponsored those unfair quiz shows). In 1962, ABC became the first
TV network to air all of its new programming in one week, right after Labor Day, and the “new
fall season” was born. From then on, the annual schedule was born. The network marketplace is
a modified version of supply and demand, with TV ratings (viewers) acting as the supply,
and advertiser budgets providing the demand. However, given that the networks have cer-
tain profit goals to meet, they will only offer programs at a price that is in line with those
goals, therefore diminishing the dynamics of a true supply-and-demand market. In 1967,
ABC also became the first network to offer the “guaranteed” program rating, to advertis-
ers who agreed to buy upfront. Although this meant the advertiser had to commit to a buy
in advance, the advantage was that “hit” programs  might  be  purchased  at  a  relatively
inexpensive  cost.  Today,  upfront  buys account for from 80% to 85% of all network prime-
time sales. In 2004, about $9.2 billion worth of network TV ad time was sold this way.1
When you buy long-term, you receive a guaranteed rating, along with the opportunity
to set up cancellation options. Typically, the options decelerate over the future quarters. For 
instance, in the first quarter, you might buy all of the spots confirmed; in the second quarter, 
three quarters, or  75%  might be firm,  with the option to cancel the  remaining  25% by an
1“How the TV Nets Got the Upfront,” Erwin Epron, Ad Age Special Report on TV’s Upfront, May
14, 2001, p. S2/22; Advertising Age, June 20, 2005.

 
Making the Media Buys  135
agreed-on date. Then for the third or subsequent quarters, only half of the spots you 
negotiate are firm, and half (50%) are cancellable by a certain date. One advantage of
buying time this way is that more favorable rates may be offered up front, because the  networks 
like  to  lock  in  the  advertisers  to  their  shows  (both  new  and returning series). Also,
advertisers are more likely to get a better mix of programs and to ensure they get their spots in
the time periods and/or shows they want. The disadvantage, from the buyers’ standpoint,
is that there may be less room for negotiation because everyone is trying to buy from a limited
amount of inventory. That is, the networks can choose how much of the available airtime
they wish to sell up front, manipulating the demand for that time. The buyers also don’t
know  how  well  the  new  programs  will  perform,  basing  their  judgment  on  brief
promotional excerpts the networks release, along with their historical experience of 
similar shows from the past.
The commercial minutes the networks hold back or don’t sell then form the bulk of the
second type of national television time, which is known as the scatter market because it is
scattered throughout the broadcast day across months. Buyers typically purchase this type
of commercial time on a quarterly basis, usually 2 to 3 months in advance of the quarter, 
unless demand is soft. Prices in scatter will vary, depending on the supply and demand,
and what happens in scatter tends to impact the long-term, or upfront, marketplace too. In
boom years when the economy is thriving, advertiser demand during the upfront period is
high, but when a recession hits, advertisers are loathe to commit large funds in advance 
and so upfront deals tend to decrease while scatter buys rise.
Advertisers who purchase spots in the scatter market may or may not get guaranteed
ratings, depending on the supply and demand. Those spots are usually purchased by 
advertisers who are unable or unwilling to commit to a schedule a year in advance. If
demand for scatter time is high, the network can “close” a particular daypart on very 
short notice, pulling it out of sale and then repricing it for future buyers. Advertisers who
do not move quickly enough may find themselves shut out of the daypart completely.
Finally, the third way to buy time in national television is the opportunistic buy. Here,
the advertiser chooses to purchase at the last minute, picking up whatever remains
available. The advantage here is that the rates are usually most favorable to the buyer 
because the network wants to sell that time. The obvious drawback, however, is that there
is less choice and little or no flexibility in the deal. Spots can be purchased as late as the
day before airtime. Several sports events are sold this way.
Deciding how to purchase TV time depends on many factors, not the least of which is 
the size of the advertising budget. The number of quarters in which the commercial is to
run also plays a key role here, as does the type of programming mix desired. First and 
foremost,  however,  should  be  strategic  considerations  regarding  the  impact  of  the
decision on the marketing, advertising, and media goals.
How Television Time Is Bought
The way the process of buying television time works is as follows. The buyer requests a
package of programs from the seller (broadcast, syndication, or cable). The package may

 
136  The Media Handbook
be based on costs or on ratings, but ultimately it is based on the goals of the plan. The
sellers submit their inventory, and the buyer chooses the package that best meets the
client’s needs and negotiates the price. Instead of purchasing them immediately, however,
buyers “go to hold,” which means buyers are almost certain they will buy that time but
have not fully committed to it yet. Both sides agree on how long that “hold” will last;
generally, it is 3 to five days in the scatter market, and 4 to 8 weeks in the long-term
market. After that period, the buyer will either purchase the time or drop out. Once the
deal is finalized, however, the buyer effectively owns that time. If, later on, buyers want
to get rid of the commercial time they bought, the network may try to sell it to a different
advertiser, if the marketplace demand is strong. On the other hand, if for some reason the
spot does not run as promised, the buyer is given the option of a comparable spot on the
program schedule. This is known as a make-good. That might mean moving with a
program to another day or time, if the network decides to reschedule it, or staying in the
same daypart but switching programs. When programs do not achieve the audience rating
that the network had guaranteed to the advertiser, the network will then provide, over the
course of a year, audience deficiency units (ADUs). These no-charge units are provided
in same or comparable programs to the advertiser.
All national television time is priced based on a 30-second spot. For advertisers
wishing to buy more or less time than that, the rates are adjusted accordingly. Hence, a
60-second  spot  costs  twice  as  much,  and  a  15-second  spot  is  half  the  full  rate.
Negotiations are conducted based on costs-per-thousand (CPMs) for the target, defined in
terms of age and sex. For example, it could be the CPM for reaching women from age 18
to 49 or adults from age 25 to 54.
Buying Time on Syndication and Cable
Buying national television time on syndication and cable is not that different from the
broadcast network marketplace. That is, there are long-term, scatter, and opportunistic
buys available in each television form. Additional considerations need to be given,
however, to the individual buys. With syndication, for example, coverage is critical.
Because syndicated programs are sold to individual stations in each market, they may not
be seen in every market across the country. The buyer therefore has to know what percent
of stations in the United States will air a given program. It may be as low as 60%, or as
high as 99%. The day and/or time of airing will also vary by town or city, and although
people do watch programs rather than dayparts, it may well make a difference to the
effectiveness of a media schedule if you are trying to reach women from age 25 to 54
with “Oprah” and find that it airs at 9:00 a.m. in Chattanooga, Tennessee, but at 3:00 p.m.
in Gary, Indiana. The audience delivery and composition could be quite different in those
markets because of that airtime variation.
Syndicated programs are guaranteed, but the syndicator may overstate the ratings
estimate. That means the buyer then has to be given make-goods, either in the form of
bonus units or cash back. Although this may seem easy to resolve, the syndication
marketplace has been like this since its inception, and despite a decline in ratings
beginning in the late 1990s, the marketplace still operates this way. Many packaged
goods advertisers still rely on syndication to reach their “average” American consumers.

 
Making the Media Buys  137
guaranteed ratings. Cable is bought either by individual program or by daypart rotation. A
few networks, such as Nick-at-Nite and Headline News, largely sell time this way
because there is strong enough advertiser demand for their units that they do not need to
sell individual programs. This might appear to be a big problem for advertisers, but it is
less  critical  on  certain  cable  networks,  where  the  programming  is  “vertical,”  and
advertisers know that their spot will most likely air, for example, between music videos
on MTV or in classic sitcoms on Nick-at-Nite. Most others have moved to program-based
buys, because they have worked to create brand images for themselves based on their
well-known personalities or, increasingly, their original programming. Examples here
include Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show” and ESPN’s “Sports Center.”
LOCAL TV AND RADIO BUYS
The  purchase  of  time  on  spot  television  and  spot  radio  has  both  similarities  and
differences to the network process. Local television buyers usually buy time on shorter
notice than for national television. They also have to deal with individual stations in each
market, rather than buying a complete network, unless they make a buy across various
stations that are linked together into an ad sales network. The planner provides the buyer
with the details of the specifications, which include the marketing and media objectives, a
demographic and psychographic description of the target, the desired dayparts and flights,
the number of ratings points per market and/or time period, the total budget, and the mix
of commercial lengths (15, 30, and 60 seconds).
Armed with this information, the buyer can then start negotiating with stations in those
markets. Rather than discuss the cost of an individual spot or the cost per thousand used
in national television buys, both of which will vary considerably by market, buyers
typically negotiate the cost per rating point (CPP). That way, they ensure that the
appropriate number of rating points are purchased, at or below the amount budgeted. The
negotiating process is quite subtle. The buyer does not want the seller to know how much
money is available (as the station would want to get all of it!), and the seller does not
want the buyer to know how much inventory is available (as that would let buyers know
how low a price they could get). The buyer will usually talk to all of the stations in the
market that have programs or formats appropriate for the target in the desired daypart and
ask each of them to submit prices. For some advertisers, price is the most important
criterion, so the buyer looks to purchase “tonnage,” that is, lots of media weight at the
lowest price available. For others, the program or format is key; they may be willing to
pay slightly more to get a closer fit between target and vehicle. It depends on the strategy
outlined in the media plan.
Once  buyers  have  received  submissions  from  each  station,  they  can  then  start
negotiating to see if any of the sellers are willing to lower their price any further. Whereas
this used to take several days, in today’s competitive climate buyers are less likely to give
the stations much time to come in with a lower bid, and will usually decide fairly quickly
which stations to purchase. Having made that decision, the final prices and terms are
agreed to and the buy is made.
In theory, local television and radio buys are fixed; that is, the time is bought on a
given daypart and/or program (unless the buyer purchases “run-of-schedule,” or ROS,
Cable television also sells a good deal of its commercial time in advance, usually with

 
138  The Media Handbook
which means that the station can air the spot at any time). In practice, however, stations
may preempt a spot if another advertiser comes in who is willing to pay more for that
time slot. If this happens, the first advertiser will usually request a make-good or
compensation if the station airs their spot at a less favorable time.
While buying local radio is similar in many respects to buying television, there are two
opportunities for advertisers that are commonly made available in the audio medium. The
first  is  merchandising  and  promotions.  This  has  become  an  extremely  important
consideration for many companies that use spot radio, particularly national advertisers.
Local radio stations may be willing, as part of the deal, to run special contests for
listeners or set up a remote site broadcast or hold a special event for the trade, for
example. The Scion car dealership could offer a new car as the grand prize in an on-air
contest; the afternoon music show could be aired from the dealer’s showroom, or a
cocktail reception for all new Scion owners could be held at the radio station one
evening. Such promotions need to be negotiated as part of the buy, but they may add
considerably to the efficiency of the purchase.
The second difference that local radio can offer advertisers is the chance for live
commercials.  In  the  earliest  days  of  radio,  all  commercials  were  spoken  live  by
announcers on-air. Today, that is only possible at the local market level. Some advertisers
believe that having a local radio personality deliver the message adds greater authority
and credibility to the product, giving it an implied endorsement. Although this is not in
fact true (the station never officially endorses any individual brand), it can be beneficial
for the advertiser. In addition, because relatively few commercials are presented this way
anymore, it offers another way to stand out from the crowd.
THE GREAT OUTDOORS
Because outdoor billboards are bought on a market-by-market basis, the buying process
is, in some ways, akin to local TV and radio buying. Here, instead of dealing with
individual TV or radio stations (or rep firms that put stations together into a network), the
media buyer must either deal with individual outdoor plant operators, or with networks of
plants that are available through large outdoor companies such as Clear Channel or
Viacom.
Negotiations for outdoor billboards focus on several key elements: size, location,
showing, and cost/CPM. The first criterion to consider is the poster or panel size—from
an 8-sheet to a painted bulletin. As explained in chapter 4, different boards are purchased
for different timeframes, with posters typically being sold on a 30-day basis and bulletins
sold in a much longer term deal, such as 6 months or one year.
Location is really the key as far as outdoor is concerned. For certain products, such as a
local restaurant, you might want to be on smaller posters in the city to remind people of
your address; for hotels or gas stations, putting ads along highways to reach drivers as
they are passing through your area would make more sense. And today, many advertisers
place  their  billboards  strategically  close  to  their  competitors’ locations.  CVS,  for
example,  looks  for  boards  that  are  near  its  key  competitor,  Walgreen’s,  reminding
consumers as they get close to Walgreen’s why they might want to reconsider that
decision.

 
Making the Media Buys  139
It is important, too, to know on which side of the street the board is located and
whether there are any potential blockages that could get in the line of sight for the board,
such as a tall building or tree. This kind of information can best be gained by actually
going to the location to look at the board. The operator can provide you with a complete
inventory of addresses for both bulletins and poster panels. In the case of posters, you can
also find out if the poster is in an ethnic neighborhood and/or restricted location (no
alcohol), and whether it is on a wall or a pole.
The outdoor showing that you buy will tell you what the number of daily exposures are
to your message as a percentage of the total market size. A #100 showing, therefore,
means that 100% of the audience will pass that board in a 30-day period; a #50 means
50% will do so, and so on. Showings are calculated based on traffic patterns, however,
which means that not everyone who physically goes by the location will necessarily see
your ad (just as a TV program rating does not mean the viewer will watch your
commercial). Poster panels are generally bought at the 25, 50, or 100 showing level,
whereas bulletins are purchased at 5, 10, or 15 showing increments. Each showing size in
a market will have associated with it the number of poster panels utilized. This is known
as the allotment.
Last, but not least, comes the cost of the buy. Outdoor is bought and sold on the basis
of the cost of reaching 1,000 of the target audience, or CPM. Unlike TV or radio,
however, there are usually only a couple of operators to choose from in a given market,
which limits the flexibility that the buyer has to negotiate. With considerable industry
consolidation in recent years, many markets are now dominated by a single outdoor
company that is part of a multimedia conglomerate. Even where there is more than one
company to choose from, one will typically have better locations for a particular size
board, whereas the other will have better offerings in a different size or location.
Once all of the negotiations have taken place, the media specialist will issue an outdoor
authorization, laying out all of the details, or specifications, of the buy. These are then
confirmed with the client and the seller, and the purchase can proceed.
IMPLEMENTING AN INTERNET BUY
Given the relative newness of the Internet as an advertising medium, the buying process
for it continues to evolve. As with most other media forms, media specialists have the
choice of working directly with individual Web sites, or placing buys with networks of
aggregated sites, such as advertising.com. In either case, the media buyer negotiates the
ad placement (fixed position or rotation) and cost, along with any special considerations,
such as affiliate marketing or opt-in e-mails. Affiliate marketing involves a deal with the
Web site whereby sales generated from a user who reached the sales site from your Web
site receives a percentage of the revenue. Opt-in e-mails involve soliciting consumers to
sign  themselves  up  for  e-mails  from  marketers  based  on  the  individual’s  declared
interests. A newer type of buy is based on behavioral targeting, which targets users based
on their prior behavior. For example, if you visit Amazon.com on a regular basis to look
at the latest DVDs on sale, then you might be sent an ad from a Hollywood studio or
Blockbuster, because your behavior indicates you have an interest in movies. The benefit
for advertisers is that they can find their target audience in places where they might not

 
140  The Media Handbook
have expected them to be. Companies such as Revenue Science and Tacoda work heavily
in this area. The overall goal of these approaches is to find sites that the target considers
contextually relevant. This may mean relevance to the campaign, such as an ad for
Kellogg’s Special K cereal that touts its value in a dieting plan on e-diets.com. Or, it can
be relevance to the target’s mind-set, such as ads that include JD Power award rankings 
appearing when a user is clicking on an automotive Web site searching for new car
information.
In addition, the buyer has to determine with the seller the basis for the sale—cost per 
thousand impressions, cost per click, or cost per transaction, for example. Research of 
those who come to the site is often included as a “value added” bonus, although the
drawback here is that it could be biased in favor of the site if they are conducting or
hosting the survey. An alternative is to pay for “neutral” third-party research through 
companies such as Dynamic Logic and Insight Express. In either case, the idea is to
sample every n-th person who comes to the site and offer that person a survey that can 
include questions about advertising recognition or brand attitudes.
BUYING NONTRADITIONAL MEDIA
For advertisers looking to create an integrated marketing plan, the buys may be as varied as the
media elements themselves. Sponsorships, for example, are usually sold by the venue (sports
stadium, concert stadium). Direct mail is purchased by buying mailing lists and working through 
a mailing house to execute the campaign. Brand integration into TV shows and movies is
currently offered by the producers of the entertainment, although some believe that in the
case of television, the networks themselves will want to enter into  this  highly  profitable  arena,
especially  as  they  lose  revenues  from  traditional commercial sales. And for public re-
lations or viral marketing, there is likely to be no official “buy” made at all. There may be
some out-of-pocket costs (e.g., creation of a video news release to send to TV stations, or
payment of the people who are “planted” in a  social  scene  to  promote  your  product).
Whichever  the  method  used  to  make  the nontraditional  buy,  it  is  the  media  special-
ist’s  job  to  negotiate  the  price  (wherever possible), and determine the metrics against
which the cost of the program will be evaluated (traffic, impressions, clicks, etc). The goal
should be to try to make these buys as comparable as possible to the other media in the plan.
SUMMARY
Even the most impressive media plan will not achieve its goals if the buys are not made 
effectively. That means the time and space need to be purchased in accordance with the 
plan’s specifications, in terms of criteria such as timing, ad size, and placement or 
position within the media vehicle. For magazines and newspapers, editorial adjacencies
may be key, so that the ad message is seen in an appropriate context, such as an ad for
Verizon cellular phone service targeting business people in the Business section of the
Wall Street Journal or an Olay antiwrinkle cream targeting women in the Beauty section 
of Marie Claire magazine. The costs for print media may be negotiable, off the rate card,
depending on the competitiveness of the magazine category.

 
Making the Media Buys  141
Buying time on electronic media is always done through negotiations, either with a network 
or individual stations. TV buys may be long term (purchased upfront) or short term (in the
scatter market). The guarantees and costs of those buys will vary accordingly. For radio,
where most time is pur-chased locally, buyers deal with stations or rep firms that sell them
a package of stations across the markets in which the buyer is interested. Deals are usually made 
based on the cost per rating point. For outdoor billboards, the key buying criterion to consider is 
the location of the board, whether a poster or a bulletin. Buyers negotiate the cost to reach
a given proportion of the market, estimated using showings.  The  process  can  be  han-
dled  with  individual  plant  operators  or  through networks. For the Internet, the buys are 
made with individual sites or networks that aggregate those sites. The buys are based on
placement, rotation, and metrics. With nontraditional media, it is the specialist’s job to negotiate 
fair market value and determine the metrics against which to evaluate the media impact.
CHECKLIST—MAKING THE MEDIA BUYS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
 
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Do you have all the necessary specifications regarding the objectives, the target audi-
ence, vehicle preferences, GRP needs, and budget limitations to proceed to the buys?
Does the client have to approve the buys before they are finalized?
For magazines, is a discount available for a volume buy?
Do you want a preferred position for your magazine ad?
Are you trying to reach a more specialized or generalized audience with 
magazines (priced accordingly)?
Are any special promotions, editorial features, bonus circulation, or trade deals 
being offered by any of the magazines?
Do you want your newspaper ad to appear in a special section?
Are there any special instructions needed for your newspaper ad, such as a 
coupon or inclusion of color?
Do you want to buy time on network, cable, or syndicated TV?
Is your national television buy going to be made for the long term (up-front) or 
short term (scatter)?
Can you get ratings guarantees for your national TV buy?
For a syndicated TV buy, what is your clearance?
With a cable TV buy, do you want a specific time period or will a rotation suffice?
For a local TV buy, is media weight (tonnage) more important than specific program 
selection?
For local radio or local TV, do you want to deal directly with each station, or do 
you prefer to use a rep firm?
Are your outdoor billboards’ locations satisfactory?
Do you have enough billboards in each market to generate sufficient showings?
Have  you  negotiated  ad  placement  and  type  with  individual  Web  sites,  
search engines, or networks?
What are the terms of negotiation for your nontraditional media?
What are the metrics you are using for the nontraditional media against which 
you will evaluate its cost efficiency and impact?

 
CHAPTER 9
Evaluating the Media Plan
One  of the most often-repeated quotations about advertising was attributed to  John Wanamak-
er, Philadelphia department store magnate, who said that he knew half of the money he spent on 
advertising was wasted; he just didn’t know which half. Your job, as a media specialist, is 
to try to ensure that your client’s dollars are not wasted. One way to achieve that is by 
evaluating the media plan before it is executed, and then again once it is up and running.
It is no longer true that an annual plan is left unchanged for a whole year; it is more
common for advertisers to make changes to at least some part of the marketing plan while 
the campaign is running. This may be in response to changes in any part of the marketing
mix. Consumer response could end up being greater or less than anticipated; product im-
provements  could  necessitate  additional  promotional  efforts;  new  channels  of distribution
could  become  important;  or  competitive  pricing  strategies  may  require alterations to
the original, approved plan. And, beyond that, economic trends can affect almost all mar-
keting efforts. For example, in recessionary times, most “experts” tend to predict  that  the
economic  hard  times  will  be  over  soon,  suggesting  that  consumer spending will improve. 
What often happens is that consumer confidence in the economy remains low for longer 
than such optimistic forecasts, leading people to continue their restrained purchasing habits. This 
has a marked effect on the manufacturers of high-ticket items such as cars and electronics.
It also impacts general eating habits, causing people to eat out less and stay home more.
This chapter presents four of the ways that a media plan can be evaluated, before and after it
begins running. We have explained the concepts of reach and frequency. With today’s
sophisticated  computer  tools,  syndicated  data  on  past  purchase  and  media consumption can 
be analyzed to give a “best guess” estimate of how well a medium, or total plan, will reach the 
cho-sen target audience. This can later be compared with actual results on reach and frequency,
to see how well the plan actually performed, which is crucial information for preparing 
next year’s plan. The second type of evaluation is to check that your ads actually run as
scheduled, a practice known as post-buy analysis. It is up to the media specialist to make
sure that if, for some reason, the ad did not run as scheduled or was not positioned in the 
agreed-on place, that some form of compensation is given, either monetary or in time or 
space. Thirdly, it may well be worthwhile spending additional dollars to research the con-
sumer impact of the media (and/or marketing) plan. After you doubled the spending levels
in television, are your brand’s awareness levels considerably higher? How well is your commer-
cial message being recalled now that you have switched dollars out of magazines and into
radio? These kinds of questions can best be answered by talking to some of the consumers 
you were trying to reach. Last but not least, in the weeks and months after your plan is executed, 
you can hire econometricians to assess the return on investment, or payout, of your plan.

 
Evaluating the Media Plan  143
The first time to evaluate the impact of the media plan is before it is presented to the 
client. That is, in selecting the media vehicles you think will best meet the advertising and 
marketing objectives, the media specialist needs to figure out which combination of vehicles 
will do the best job of reaching the target an acceptable number of times. Computer 
systems and tools are readily available to help make these kinds of analyses simple and fast.
For example, let’s say you were considering two alternative combinations for your 
media plan for Pillsbury cake mix. The first combination would use monthly insertions in 
Redbook magazine, along with periodic commercials in prime time on the Lifetime cable 
television network. Another possibility would be to place continuous messages on cable, 
with occasional  ads in the magazine. Here is how the two schedules might look for the year:
Schedule 1 
Schedule 2
10 insertions in Redbook 
4 insertions in Redbook
(50 GRPs) 
(20 GRPs)
400 GRPs in Lifetime 
1,000 GRPs in Lifetime
And here is how the two schedules would perform against your target of women from age 
25 to 54:
 
Schedule 1 
Schedule 2
Total GRPs 
450 
1,020
Reach 1+ 
34.1 % 
32.6%
Reach 3+ 
25.2% 
22.7%
Frequency 
13.2 
31.3
So, even though you are using far more cable in Schedule 2, the impact on the overall 
reach is actually less than if you used more magazine advertising, as in Schedule 1.
POST-BUY ANALYSIS
What the media specialist must find out once the plan is running is whether the ads ran as 
scheduled, and how well the plan actually delivered. For the first part, determining that 
the ads did in fact run as scheduled, you can turn to various sources, depending on the 
medium.  For  newspapers,  there  are  tear  sheets,  which  are  provided  by  commercial
PRE-PLAN ANALYSIS
TABLE 9.1
TABLE 9.2

 
144  The Media Handbook
services, to show you examples of the actual ad in the newspaper. Magazines will usually
provide copies of the issues in which your ad appears. For television and radio, you
should receive affidavits confirming when your spot aired. And, increasingly, as the buys
become wholly electronic, advertising agencies are starting to be able to monitor ad
executions within hours or days of their airing (rather than the weeks or months it used to
take). With the Internet, you can easily go online to make sure your ad appears, or use a
third-party service to verify its location and rotation. In each case, the media specialist
must check that the terms of the contract were adhered to. If you requested being in the
food section of the paper, or the first third of the magazine, is that where your ad was
placed?
For broadcast media, the task is usually more complicated because program schedules
are far more prone to being changed. You might have arranged for your radio spot to air
between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., only to find that it came on at 5:30 p.m. or 8:20 p.m.
Or, you could have bought a rotation of spots (ROS, or run of schedule), which in theory
means that your spots will run equitably in all day parts. In analyzing the affidavits or
electronic reports you might discover that more than one half of the messages were aired
between midnight and 6:00 a.m., or some other inappropriate time. It is then incumbent
on the station to explain what happened and, in all likelihood, offer some type of
make-good,  either  in  the  form  of  free  ads  or  financial  compensation  for  the  cost
differences between ROS and the overnight period.
In larger agencies or organizations, this postanalysis checking is typically done by the
media buyers or business service department. It is more of an accounting than a media
function, but ultimately, the media specialist should know what happened, and why.
Later on, additional information becomes available to show how your ad schedule
delivered. This is in the form of syndicated data, such as Nielsen for television, Arbitron
for radio, Mediamark Research, Inc. (MRI) for print media, and Nielsen NetRatings for
the Web. Each service provides the ratings and audience delivery of media vehicles to
help you determine whether, in fact, you met the goals of your plan. Other companies can
access this data also, acting as third-party vendors of the information.
The kinds of questions the data can help you answer include what percentage of the
target was reached by the media (and vehicles) that you used (reach), and how often, on
average, was the target exposed to them? It is worth emphasizing again that these terms
refer only to media exposure, and not to actual exposure to the ads themselves. They
should therefore be thought of as opportunities to see your message. Many advertisers
will discount, or “weight,” the exposure levels to account for this distinction, assuming,
for example, that only half of the people reached by the media vehicle will actually see
the ad. Or, they may only look at the proportion of the target that is exposed a certain
number  of  times  (effective  reach),  assuming  here  that  people  will  require  several
opportunities to see your message before they in fact will do so.
CUSTOM CONSUMER RESEARCH
The importance of evaluating the plan’s impact on consumers once it has gone into effect
cannot be underestimated. By doing so you will find out, first, whether you got what you
(or your client) paid for, and second, whether or not the plan worked as you intended. It

 
Evaluating the Media Plan  145
will provide invaluable help in preparing for next year’s plan too. This may be by 
undertaking surveys of consumers before and after their exposure to your ads, to assess
their  brand  recall  and  any  brand  attitude  shifts.  Or,  it  could  be  through  qualitative
research, such as focus groups or in-depth interviews, where consumers are asked to
explain their feelings about their media exposure in greater detail. Why did they pay
attention to the TV ads but ignore the radio ads, for example? How were the Internet ads 
effective (or not) in influencing their purchase decision? Although, ultimately, the impact 
of the media plan, and the other elements of the marketing mix, is determined at the cash
register, it is helpful to be able to analyze the individual parts to find out what is, or is not,
working.  Having  said  that,  and  acknowledging  the  truth  to  this  chapter’s  opening 
comment by John Wanamaker, you should keep in mind that it is difficult to determine 
the precise effect of advertising media messages on consumers. We know when it is 
working, but we may not always know how.
ROI IMPACT
For more sophisticated analyses of media’s impact, econometric modeling can provide 
the answer. Here, as noted in chapter 6, complex statistical models analyze as many of the
marketing  mix  variables  as  possible  (depending  on  the  category)  to  see  what  role 
advertising media play in generating sales (or other goals, e.g., awareness, consideration,
or purchase intent). The models can look at everything from GRPs to distribution to
weather patterns, and attempt to isolate the part that each plays in the mix.
Without evaluating how a media plan performs, we are left even more in the dark than
when we began. In effect, it means that each time we create a plan, we end up recreating
the wheel. This can lead you down two paths. Either the same plan is reproduced because
it “seemed to work” (or at least, didn’t cause any disasters). Or, the plan is completely
changed to see if that makes a difference in sales, awareness, or attitudes. Both of these
options are flawed. To continue doing exactly the same thing as before without knowing
whether it is working, or if it could possibly be improved, is detrimental to your product
and client, keeping them from performing at their best. Similarly, to overturn the plan
without analyzing how it worked (or didn’t work) means that you run the risk of losing
the momentum your ads might have started to build, and jeopardizes your chances for
success.
So although there is a strong temptation, once the media plan is completed and the ads
are running, to file it away and move on to the next stage, true media specialists will carry
on the task through to the end. They are responsible for ensuring not only that the ads  run
as  intended,  but  that  they  have  delivered  what  was  planned.  If  these  two evalua-
tion tasks are carried out successfully, then you will have a more satisfied client and you 
will have already taken an important step forward in preparing for next year’s media plan.

 
146  The Media Handbook
SUMMARY
A completed media plan is really not final until it has been evaluated to see how it has 
performed. This should be done both before the plan is executed, by calculating estimates 
of reach and frequency that the plan should achieve, and afterward, through post-buy 
analyses to ensure that the ads ran as scheduled. If the messages did not air as intended and 
specified in the buys, then it is up to the media specialist to obtain some type of compen-
sation. Consumer research and ROI analysis can provide further evidence of how well the 
plan delivered. Without these checks, there is no way of knowing whether this year’s plan 
should be continued into the following year with or without modifications. And, although 
it is always difficult to pinpoint precisely the impact of advertising on sales, the process 
of evaluat-ing the success or failure of the media plan in achieving the media, advertising, 
and marketing objectives will help the brand and the client know how to do better next year.
CHECKLIST—EVALUATING THE MEDIA PLAN
Have you performed reach and frequency analyses of the media plan before 
presenting it to the client?
Have you contacted clipping services or the print media themselves to determine 
that your ads ran as scheduled?
Are the post-buys for electronic media available to ensure that your ads ran as 
scheduled?
Do you have access to syndicated data (e.g., Nielsen, Arbitron, MRI, and SMRB) 
for future analysis of how your media vehicles performed against your target?
Do you have a plan in place to conduct consumer research to understand how 
or whether the plan worked?
Are you able to perform ROI analysis of the plan’s impact on sales?
Do you have ideas on how your media plan can be improved for next year?
1.
2. 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7. 

 

 
Appendix A:
Key Research Resources
Advertising Age 
l711 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10017–4036 
(212) 210–0100 
www.adage.com 
Industry trade journal, published weekly.
New York, NY 10022 
(212) 751–5656 
www.arfsite.org 
Industry research organization.
Adweek 
770 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
(646) 654–5117 
www.adweek.com 
Industry trade journal, published weekly.
Arbitron 
142 West 57th Street 
New York, NY 10019–3300 
(212) 887–1300 
www.arbitron.com 
Radio audience measurement company, using weekly listening 
diaries and testing personal portable meters (PPM).
Audit Bureau of Circulations 
900 N.Meacham Road 
Schaumburg, IL 60173 
(847) 605–0909 
www.accessabc.com 
Circulation auditing company for magazine and newspaper industry.
Claritas 
5375 Mira Sorrento Place, Suite 400 
San Diego, CA 92121 
(800) 866–6520 
www.claritas.com 
Company offers computerized mapping system to display consumer, 
media, and lifestyle traits by geography.
Advertising Research Foundation 
641 Lexington Avenue 

 
Appendix A:  Key Research Resources  149
New York, NY 10017 
(212) 991–6000
www.tns-mi.com
Measures advertisers’ media spending across 20 media types.
Donovan Data Systems 
115 West 18th Street 
New York, NY 10011 
(212) 633–8100 
www.donovandata.com 
Third-party processor of Nielsen TV audience data; also, major bill 
Information Resources Inc. 
150 N Clinton Street 
Chicago, IL 60661–1416 
(312) 726–1221 
www.infores.com 
ket checkout data.
Interactive Market Systems 
770 Broadway, 15th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
(646) 654–5900 
www.imsms.com 
Third-party media software company that provides media 
planning tools to assess multimedia audiences.
Intermedia Advertising Group 
345 Park Avenue 
New York, NY 10013 
(212) 871–5200 
www.iagr.net 
Company measures audience ad recall and ad likability of prime-time 
TV ads via consumer web panel, Reward TV.
JD Power & Associates 
2625 Townsgate Road, Suite 100 
Westlake Village, CA 91361 
(805) 418–8000 
www.jdpa.com 
Provides annual demographic, lifestyle, and media information 
linked to automotive industry.
TNS Media Intelligence (formerly CMR) 
100 Park Avenue, 4th Floor 
pay ment system for advertising agencies.
Collects and reports consumer package goods, sales using 
supermar

 
150  Appendix A:  Key Research Resources
Kantar Media Research 
230 Park Avenue South, 5th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
(212) 548–7250 
www.kmrgroup.com 
Parent company to several audience research companies (TGI), as well 
as software provider of media optimization systems (X-Pert, Supermi
Mediamark Research, Inc.
75 Ninth Avenue
New York, NY 10011 
(212) 884–9200 
www.mediamark.com 
Measures demographic, media, and lifestyle information among 40,000 
adults per year. Used for target and audience analysis.
Monroe Mendelsohn Research 
841 Broadway 
New York, NY 10003–4704 
(212) 677–8100 
www.mmrsurverys.com 
Nielsen Media Research 
770 Broadway 
New York, NY 10003 
(646) 654–8300 
www.nielsenmedia.com 
Main provider of national and local television viewing information. 
Na tional service based on national panel of 10,000 adults using 
people me ters; local service based on local people meters in top 10 
markets by 2006; household set meters (top 55 markets), and 
additional weekly viewing diaries (all remaining non-LPM markets).
Scarborough Research 
770 Broadway 
New York, NY 10003 
(646) 654–8400 
www.scarborough.com 
Measures demographic, media, and lifestyle information in 75 
local markets.
das).
 Owned by WPP.
Provides media, demographic, and lifestyle information for 
upper-in come adults.

 
Appendix A:  Key Research Resources  151
Simmons 
230 Park Avenue South, 5th Floor 
New York, NY 10003–1566 
(212) 598–5400 
www.smrb.com 
Collects demographic, media, and lifestyle information on 40,000 
adults each year. Also offers special annual studies on children, teens, 
and His panics.
Spectra Marketing 
200 West Jackson, Suite 
Chicago, IL 60606–6910 
(312) 583–5100 
www.spectramarketing.com 
Marketing analysis.
www.srds.com
Provides databases of media rates and information on all major media 
categories.
Telmar Information Services 
470 Park Avenue South, 15th Floor 
New York, NY 10016 
(212) 725–3000 
www.telmar.com 
Third-party media software company that provides media 
planning tools to assess multimedia audiences.
Yankelovich Partners 
400 Meadowmont Village Circle, Suite 431 
Chapel Hill, NC 27517 
(919) 932–8600 
www.yankelovich.com 
Consumer research company that offers annual trend studies on vari-
ous demographic or lifestyle segments.
2800
 
Standard Rate & Data Service 
1700 Higgins Road 
Des Plaines, IL 60018–5605 
(847) 375–5000

 
Appendix B:
Key Media Organizations
Advertising Council 
261 Madison Avenue, 11th Floor 
New York, NY 10016 
(212) 922–1500 
www.adcouncil.org 
Organization sponsoring and promoting public service advertising.
New York, NY 10003 
Forum for ad professionals.
Advertising Educational Foundation 
220 East 42nd Street, Suite 3300 
New York, NY 10017 
(212) 986–8060 
www.aef.com 
Distributes educational content to enrich understanding of advertising.
Advertising Research Foundation 
641 Lexington Avenue 
New York, NY 10022 
(212) 751–5656 
Industry organization focused on Advertising and Media Research.
Advertising Women of New York
25 West 45th Street, Suite 1001 
(212) 221–7969 
www.awny.org 
Forum to advance women in the field of communications.
American Association of Advertising Agencies (AAAA) 
405 Lexington Avenue 
New York, NY 10174 
(212) 682–2500 
American Advertising Federation (AAF) 
1101 Vermont Avenue NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 898–0089 
www.aaf.org 
Advertising Club of New York 
235 Park Avenue South, 6th Floor 
(212) 522–8080 
www.theadvertisingclub.org 
www.aaaa.org 
Main trade organization of advertising agencies.

 
Appendix B:  Key Media Organizations  153
Protects and promotes advertising. Sponsors annual National 
Student Ad Competition (NSAC) and has 210 college chapters 
opportunities.
American Business Media
675 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10017 
(212) 661–6360 
www.americanbusinessmedia.com 
Association for business-to-business information providers.
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312) 542–9000 
www.marketingpower.org 
Professional association for marketers.
Art Directors Club 
106 West 29th Street 
New York, NY 10001 
(212) 643–1440 
www.adcglobal.org 
International group focused on the creative product.
Association of Hispanic Advertising Agencies 
8201 Greensboro Drive, 3rd Floor 
Mclean, VA 22102 
(703) 610–9014 
www.ahaa.org 
Trade group for Hispanic advertising agencies
New York, NY 10017 
(212) 697–5950 
www.ana.net 
Main trade organization for national advertisers.
Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau (CAB) 
830 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10022 
(212) 508–1200 
www.onetvworld.org 
Trade organization for the cable TV industry.
with 6,800 under graduate members. Offers 1,000+ internship 
American Marketing Association 
311 South Wacker Drive, Suite 5800 
Association of National Advertisers (ANA) 
708 Third Avenue 

 
154  Appendix B:  Key Media Organizations
Direct Marketing Association (DMA) 
1120 Avenue of the Americas 
New York, NY 10036 
(212) 768–7277 
www.the-dma.org 
Trade organization for the direct marketing industry.
Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) 
116 East 27th Street 
New York, NY 10016 
(212) 380–4700 
www.iab.net 
Trade group promoting interactive advertising on the Web.
International Advertising Association (IAA) 
521 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1807 
New York, NY 10175 
(212) 557–1133 
www.iaaglobal.org 
Professional group focused on advertising as a global industry. Has 
chapters in several U.S. universities.
New York, NY 10022 
(212) 872–3700 www.magazine.org 
Trade group promoting magazines.
National Advertising Review Council
70 West 36th Street, 13th Floor
New York, NY 10018 
(866) 334 NARC (6272) 
www.narcpartners.org 
Provides guidelines and sets standards of truth and accuracy for national 
advertisers.
National Assocation of Broadcasters (NAB) 
1771 N Street NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 429–5300 
www.nab.org 
Trade group promoting the broadcast television industry.
Newspaper Association of America (NAA) 
1921 Gallows Road, Suite 600 
Vienna, VA 22182 
(703) 902–1600 
www.naa.org 
Trade group promoting newspapers.
Magazine Publishers of America 
810 Seventh Avenue 

 
Appendix B:  Key Media Organizations  155
The One Club
21 East 26th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10010 
(212) 979–1900 
www.oneclub.org 
Organization to promote excellence in advertising through an annual 
creative awards show.
Online Publishers Association (OPA) 
500 Seventh Avenue, 14th Floor 
New York, NY 10018 
Trade group for online content providers.
Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA) 
1850 M Street NW, Suite 1040
Washington, DC 20036 
(212) 833–5566 
www.oaaa.org 
Trade group promoting the outdoor advertising industry.
Point of Purchase Advertising Institute (POPAI) 
1660 L Street NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 530–3000 
www.popai.org 
Trade group promoting the “marketing at-retail” industry.
Promotion Marketing Association (PMA) 
257 Park Avenue South, 11th Floor 
New York, NY 10010 
(212) 420–1100 
www.pmalink.org 
The voice of the promotion industry.
Irving, TX 75038 
(800) 232–3131 
www.rab.com 
Trade group promoting radio advertising.
Syndicated Network Television Association (SNTA) 
630 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2320 
New York, NY 10011 
(212) 259–3740 
www.snta.org 
Trade group promoting television syndication.
(212) 600–6342 
www.online-publishers.org 
Radio Advertising Bureau (RAB) 
1320 Greenway drive, Suite 500 

 
156  Appendix B:  Key Media Organizations
Television Bureau of Advertising (TVB)
3 East 54th Street, 10th Floor
New York, NY 10022 
(212) 486–1111 
www.tvb.org 
Trade group promoting the broadcast television industry, with 
Traffic Bureau of Advertising for Media Measurement (TBA) 
420 Lexington Avenue, Suite 2520 
New York, NY 10170 
(212) 972–8075 
www.tabonline.com 
Audits circulation of out of home media and supports other out of 
home research initiatives.
Word of Mouth Marketing Association (WOMMA) 
333 West North Avenue, #500 
Chicago, IL 60610 
(312) 335–0035 
Trade association for the word of mouth marketing industry.
Yellow Pages Integrated Media Association
Two Connell Drive, 1st Floor 
Berkeley Heights, NJ 07922 
(908) 286–2380 
www.ypima.org 
Trade group promoting yellow pages marketing, both in print and 
on line.
particu lar focus on spot TV.

 

 
References
Abernathy, Avery M. “The Information Content of Newspaper Advertising,” Journal of
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 14, no. 2, Fall 1992, 63–68.
Abernathy, Avery M. “Advertising Clearance Practices of Radio Stations: A Model of
Advertising Self-Regulation,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 3, September 1993,
13–26.
Abernathy, Avery M., and David N.Laband. “The Customer Pulling Power of Different
Sized Yellow Pages Advertising,” Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 42, no. 3,
May/June 2002, 66–72.
Appel, Valentine. “Editorial Environment and Advertising Effectiveness,” Journal of
Advertising Research, vol. 27, no. 4, August/September 1987, 11–16
Atkinson, Claire. “DVRs: A $27B Revenue Killer,” Advertising Age, April 18. 2005, 45
Aylesworth,  Andrew  B.  and  Scott  B.  MacKenzie.  “Context  is  Key:  The  Effect  of
Program-Induced Mood on Thoughts About the Ad,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 27,
no. 2, Summer 1998, 17–32.
Baltas,  George.  “Determinants  of  Internet  Advertising:  An  Empirical  Study,”
International Journal of Market Research, vol. 45, no. 4, 505–513.
Bhargava, Mukesh, Naveen Donthu, and Rosanne Caron. “Improving the Effectiveness
of  Outdoor  Advertising:  Lessons  from  a  Study  of  282  Campaigns,”  Journal  of
Advertising Research, vol. 34, no. 2, March/April 1994, 46–55.
Broach Jr, V.Carter, Thomas R.Page, Jr, and R.Dale Wilson. “Television Programming
and Its Influence on Viewers’ Perceptions of Commercials: The Role of Program
Arousal and Pleasantness,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4, Winter 1995, 45–54.
Briggs, Rex. “How the Internet is Reshaping Advertising,” Admap, Issue 560, April
2005, 59–61.
Bryce,  Wendy  J.  and  Richard  F.Yalch.  “Hearing  Versus  Seeing:  A Comparison  of
Consumer Learning of Spoken and Pictorial Information in Television Advertising,”
Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol. 15, no. 1, Spring 1993,
1–20.
Buchholz,  Laura  M.  and  Robert  E.Smith.  “The  Role  of  Consumer  Involvement  in
Determining Cognitive Response to Broadcast Advertising,” Journal of Advertising,
vol. 20, no. 1 1991, 4–17.
Cannon, Hugh M. and Edward A.Riordan. “Effective Reach and Frequency: Does It
Really Make Sense?”, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 34, no. 2, March/April
1994, 19–28.
Dobson, Chris. “Changing Fortunes for Internet Advertising,” Admap, Issue 448, March
2004, 32–33.
Edwards,  Steven  and  Carrie  La  Ferle.  “Cross  Media  Promotion  of  the  Internet  in
Television Commercials,” Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, vol.
22, no. 1, Spring 2000, 1–12.
Elliott , Michael T. and Paul Surgi Speck. “Consumer Perceptions of Advertising Clutter
and Its Impact Across Various Media,” Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3,
May/June 1995, 29–42.

 
References  159
Ephron, Erwin. “More Weeks, Less Weight: The Shelf Space Model of Advertising,”
Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3, May/June 1995, 18–24.
Ephron, Erwin. “Recency Planning”, Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 37, no. 4,
July/August 1997, 61–65.
Ephron, Erwin. “Point of View: Optimizers and Media Planning,” Journal of Advertising
Research, vol. 38, no. 4, July/August 1998, 47–56.
Ephron, Erwin. “How the TV Nets Got the Upfront,” Ad Age Special Report on TV’s
Upfront, May 14, 2001, p S2/22, Advertising Age, June 20, 2005.
Fernandez, Karen V. and Dennis L.Rosen. “The Effectiveness of Information and Color
in Yellow Pages Advertising,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 29, no. 2, Summer 2000,
59–72.
Gibson, Lawrence D. “What Can One Exposure Do?”, Journal of Advertising Research,
vol. 36, no. 1, March/April 1996, 9–18.
Ha, Louisa, and Barry R.Litman. “Does Advertising Clutter Have Diminishing and
Negative Returns?” Journal of Advertising, vol. 26, no. 1, Spring 1997, 31–42.
Halliday, Jean, and Claire Atkinson. “Pontiac Gets Major Mileage Out of $8 Million
‘Oprah’ Deal,” Advertising Age, September 20, 2004, 12.
Homer, Pamela M. “Ad Size as an Indicator of Perceived Advertising Costs and Effort:
The Effects on Memory and Perceptions,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4,
Winter 1995, 1–12.
Johannes, Amy. “Burger King Cooks Up a Winner: Best Overall,” Promo Magazine
Website, May 3, 2005.
Jones, John Philip. When Ads Work, Lexington Books, 1995.
Jones, John Philip. “Single Source Research Begins to Fulfill Its Promise,” Journal of
Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 3, May/June 1995, 9–17.
Jones, John Philip. The Ultimate Secrets of Advertising, Sage Publications, 2002.
Kamins, Michael A., Lawrence J.Marks, and Deborah Skinner. “Television Commercial
Evaluation in the Context of Program Induced Mood: Congruency Versus Consistency
Effects,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, June 1991,1–14.
Klaussen, Abbey. “More NBC Affiliates Drop ‘Book of Daniel’,” AdAge.com, January
12, 2006.
Ko,  Hanjun,  Chung-Hoan  Cho,  and  Marilyn  S.  Robinson.  “Internet  Uses  and
Gratifications,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 34, no. 2, Summer 2005, 57–70.
Krugman, Dean M., Glen T.Cameron, and Candace McKearney-White. “Visual Attention
to Programming and Commercials: The Use of In-Home Observations,” Journal of
Advertising, vol. 24, no. 1, Spring 1995, 1–12.
Krugman, Herbert E. “Memory Without Recall, Exposure Without Perception,” Journal
of Advertising Research, vol. 40, no 6, November/December 2000, 49–54.
Kubas Consultants. “Reenergizing Readership and Revitalizing Newspapers,” Presented
at Newspaper Association of America conference, November 2003.
Leigh, James H. “Information Processing Differences Among Broadcast Media: Review
and Suggestions for Research,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, June 1991,
71–76.
Longman, Kenneth A. “If Not Effective Frequency, Then What?”, Journal of Advertising
Research, vol. 37, no.4, July/August 1997, 44–50.

 
160  References
Lord, Kenneth R. and Robert E.Burnkrant. “Attention Versus Distraction: The Interactive
Effect of Program Involvement and Attentional Devices on Commercial Processing,” 
Journal of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 1, March 1993, 47–60.
Lord,  Kenneth  R.  and  Sanjay  Putrevu.  “Communicating  in  Print:  A Comparison  of
Consumer Responses to Different Promotional Formats,” Journal of Current Issues and
Research in Advertising, vol. 20, no. 2, Fall 1998, 1–18.
MacArthur, Kate. “McSwindle,” Ad Age, August 27, 2001, p 1/pp 22–23.
MacArthur, Kate. “Pepsi Smash TV Show Moves to Yahoo,” AdAge.com, June 3, 2005. 
Magazine  Publishers  of  America  (MPA)  Website  at  www.magazine.org  for  more 
information on Millward Brown study of ad effectiveness, the AC Nielsen Sales Scan 
study, and econometric modeling case analysis, Measuring the Mix.
Michaels, Burt. “Putting a 21st Century Spin on a Powerful Selling Vehicle,” Know
Magazine, p51–58.
Miller, Darryl W. and Lawrence J.Marks. “Mental Imagery and Sound Effects in Radio
Commercials,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 21, no. 4, December 1992, 83–94.
Moore,  Robert  S.,  Claire  Allison  Stammerjohan,  and  Robin  A.Coulter.  “Banner 
Advertiser-Web Site Context Congruity and Color Effects on Attention and Attitudes,” 
Journal of Advertising, vol. 34, no. 2, Summer 2005, 71–84.
Moya Schilling, Maria Christina, Karin Wood, and Alan Branthwaite. “The Medium is Part  of 
the  Message,”  ESOMAR,  Reinventing  Advertising,  Rio,  November  2000, 207–229
Naples,  Michael  J.  “Effective  Frequency—Then  and  Now,”  Journal  of  Advertising 
Research, vol. 37, no. 4, July/August 1997, 7–13.
Norris, Claire E. and Andrew M. Colman. “Context Effects on Recall and Recognition of
Magazine Advertisements,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 21, no. 3, September 1992, 37–46.
Olsen, G. Douglas. “Creating the Contrast: The Influence of Silence and Background Music on 
Recall and Attribute Importance,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 4, Winter 1995, 29–44.
Online Publishers Association. “Online User Experience Study,” 2005.
Osborne,  Lawrence.  “Consuming  Rituals,”  New  York  Times  Magazine,  January  13, 
2002, 28–31.
Radio  Advertising  Effectiveness  Lab  (RAEL)  studies,  2004–2005  Radio  Marketing 
Guide & Fact Book, produced by the Radio Advertising Bureau, New York.
Roper Starch Study, on behalf of Newspaper Association of America, 2001.
Sibley, Stanley D. and James C.Tsao. “Displacement and Reinforcement Effects of the 
Internet and Other Media as Sources of Information,” Journal of Advertising Research,
vol. 44, no. 1, March 2004, 126–142.
Smith, Robert E. and Laura M. Buchholz. “Multiple Resource Theory and Consumer
Processing of Broadcast Advertisements: An Involvement Perspective,” Journal of 
Advertising vol. 20, no. 3, September 1991, 1–8.
Srinivasan, Srini S., Robert P.Leone, and Francis J.Mulhern. “The Advertising Exposure 
Effect of Free-Standing Inserts,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 24, no. 1, Spring 1995, 29–40.

 
References  161
Stapel, Jan. “Recall and Recognition: A Very Close Relationship,” Journal of Advertising
Research, vol. 38, no. 4, July/August 1998, 41–46.
Surgi Speck, Paul, and Michael T.Elliott, “Predictors of Advertising Avoidance in Print 
and Broadcast Media,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 26, no. 2, Summer 1997, 61–76. 
Surgi  Speck,  Paul,  and  Michael  T.Elliott.  “The  Antecedents  and  Consequences  of
Perceived Advertising Clutter,” Journal of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 
vol. 19, no. 2, 1997, 39–54.
Surgi Speck, Paul, and Michael T.Elliott. “Predictors of Advertising Avoidance in Print 
and Broadcast Media,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 26, no. 2, Summer 1997, 61–76. 
Tavassoli, Nader T., Clifford J.Shultz II, and Gavan J.Fitzsimons. “Program Involvement:
Are Moderate Levels Best for Ad Memory and Attitude Toward the Ad?”, Journal of
Advertising Research, vol. 35, no. 5, September/October 1995, 61–72.
Taylor, Elizabeth Gigi, and Wei-Na Lee. “A Cross-Media Study of Audience Choice: The
Influence  of  Media  Attitudes  on  Individual  Selection  of  Media  Repertoires,”
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference of the American Academy of Advertising, 39–48. 
Tellis,  Gerard.  “Effective  Frequency:  One  Exposure  or  Three  Factors?”  Journal  of
Advertising Research, vol. 37, no. 4, July/August 1997, 75–80.
Tolley, Stuart. “A Study of National Advertising’s Payout: Image Ads in Newspaper ROP,” 
Journal  of  Advertising  Research,  vol.  33,  no.  5,  September/October  1993, 11–20.
Ware,  Britta  C.  “Magazine  Reader  Involvement  Improves  ROI,”  ESOMAR,  Print
Audience Measurement, LA, June 2003.
Whitney, Daisy. “Sharing the Spotlight,” New York Times, May 10, 2005, ZX11.
Yi, Youjae. “Contextual Priming Effects in Print Advertisements: The Moderating Role 
of Prior Knowledge,” Journal of Advertising, vol. 22, no. 1, March 1993, 1–10.

 
Index
A
Addressable TV, 59 
Accountability, 126 
Advertising 
message, 1 
objective, 35 
objective, and the consumer decision process, 38 
scheduling, 126–27 
Advertising, television 
benefits of, 62 
drawbacks, 63 
research, 66 
Advertising-to-sales ratio, 20 
Affective stage, 35 
Affidavit, 166 
Affiliate, 55 
Affiliate marketing, 91, 160 
Aided survey, 13 
Allotment, 159 
Allowance, 7 
Alternative forms of communication, 94 
Alternative media plan 
increased-spending, 140 
reduced-spending, 142 
changing media, 144 
changing targets, 145 
AM (Amplitude Modulation), 67 
Analysis 
pre-plan, 165 
post-buy, 166 
Annual report, 22 
As It Falls, 149 
Audience.
See also Target Audience 
for magazine, 113 
for newspaper, 116 
in radio, 111 
for television, 109 
Audience Deficiency Unit (ADU), 156 
Audit Bureau of Circulation, 113 
Average circulation, 111 
Average Quarter Hour (AQH), 111 
Awareness, 36

 
Index  163
Banners, 90, 117
Behavioral targeting, 160 
BDI (Brand development index), 26 
Billboard advertising, 85 
benefits to advertiser, 87 
buy, 159 
considerations, 116 
drawbacks, 88 
research, 89 
Brand, 11 
as contacts, 48 
dynamics, 45 
integration, 61 
loyalty, 36 
message, 36 
search, 37 
selection, 37 
trend, 22 
Brand-media-consumer relationship, 40 
Brand development index (BDI), 26 
Brand-awareness research, 13 
Break time, for placing spot, 65 
Budget.
See also Cost. 30
Burst, 128 
Business-to-business magazine, 82 
Buy
Internet, 160 
magazine, 151 
newspaper, 153 
outdoor, 159 
radio, 157 
television, 153 
television, local, 159 
Buying function, 8 
cable television, 56 
buying time on, 156 
system, 56
C
Campaign timing, 45 
Category and brand dynamics, 45 
Category development index (GDI), 26 
Category trend, 21 
CDI (Category development index), 26 
Cause-related marketing, 97 
Checklist 
Creating the Plan, 138
Developing Optimal Media Objectives, 47
Evaluating the Media Plan, 169
B

 
164  Index
Exploring the Major Media, 98
Making the Media Buys, 162
Media in the Marketing Context, 31
Offering Alternatives, 150
Terms, Calculations, and Considerations, 119
Checkout counter, 96
Circulation
of magazine, 113
of newspaper, 75, 116
Clearance, 55
Clipping service, 23
Click-through, 92
Clutter, of spots, 64, 91
Cognitive stage, 35
Commercial, 109
Communication key channels, 9
Communication objective, 44
Comparison advertising, 12
Competition, 18–31
TNS-Sofres, 23
Composition, in magazine, 113
Conative stage, 35
Consumer
definition, 4
preference, 36
Consumer context planning (CCP), 29, 40
Consumer decision-making process, 14, 38
Consumer magazine, 81
Consumer merchandising, 130
Consumer research, 167
Consumer Reports, 3
Contest, 29
Contextual relevance, 29, 162
Continuity, 126
Cookie, 90 Controlled circulation, 113
Corporate sponsor, 96
Cost, 30
of plan, 127
in radio, 71
of TV advertising, 63
Cost effectiveness, 44
Cost efficiency, 127–30
Cost per rating point (CPP), 108, 130, 157
Cost per thousand (CPM), 107, 130, 156, 159
Coverage,
in magazine, 113
of newspaper, 116
of television, 156
CPM (Cost per thousand), 107, 130, 156, 159
Creative, requirements, 46
Cultural change, 21

 
Index  165
Cume rating, 110
D
Data fusion, 109
Data source, 43
Daypart, 50, 67, 110
Decision-making process, 14, 35
Definition, of key terms, 101–20
Demographic, 41
Designated Market Area (DMA), 111
Development index, 26
Digital cable, 60
Digital video recorder (DVR), 51, 60
Direct mail, 22
Discount in advertising, 115, 152
Distribution, 9
DMA (Designated Market Area), 111
Double-spotting, 127
Duplication figure, 104
Dynamic customization, 57
E
Econometric modeling, 168
Editorial, 77
Effective frequency, 46, 104
Electronic media, 2
Ethnography, 14
Evaluation, of media plan, 164–69
Exposure distribution, 106
Exposure time, in TV, 64
F
Farm magazine, 81
Federal Communications Commission, 20
Flighting, 124
FM (Frequency Modulation), 67
Focus group, 13
Format, 50, 67
Four Ps, 9
Fragmentation, 73
Free-standing insert (FSI), 76
Frequency, 46
in radio, 71, 104, 126
Frequency planning, 106, 121
Funding, government, 7
G
Geographic media decision, 27
Geographic skew, 26
Goal, marketing, 34

 
166  Index
Government funding, 7
Gross impression, 102
Gross rating point (GRP), 102
showing, 117
GRP. See Gross rating point. 102, 117
Guaranteed rating, 154
H
Halo effect, 125
Historical data, 17
HTML, 90
I
Imagery transfer, 71
Incentive, 28
Independent television station, 51
Inflation, 21
In-program time, 65
Insertion order, 153
In-store advertising, 96
Integration, 131
Interactive TV, 61
Interconnect, 59
Internet
benefits of, 91
buy, 160
drawbacks, 93
research, 94
Interstitial, 93
Issue life, 84
K
Keyword, 91
L
Lead time, in magazine, 84
Little America, 149
Live commercials, 158
Local radio buy, 157
Local television buy, 157
Location, for billboard, 86
Long-term buy, 154
M
Magazine, 81
benefits to advertiser, 83
buy, 151
drawbacks to advertiser, 84
research, 85

 
Index  167
Magazine Authorization, 152
Make-good, 156
Market share, 28
Marketing, goal of, 9
Marketing mix, 9
Marketing objective, 35
Marketplace, and relationship to brand, 17–18
Media
as brand contacts, 48
as communication, 44
categories, 49
objective, 34–35
objectives, establishing, 41
preference, 17
role in business, 3
strategy.
See also Media plan, 121–37
target, 41
tasks in, 8
types of, 2
vehicle, 104
versus communications, 5
working with advertising, 6
Media buy, 151–62
Media buyer, 8
Media plan,
example, 133–38
Media planner, 8, 10
Media seller, 8
Media weight (GRP), 102
Medium, definition of. See also Media, 1
Merchandising, 151
Message life, in radio, 73
Metro Survey Area, 111
MSO (Multiple System Operator), 57
Multiple System Operator (MSO), 57
N
Narrowcasting, 57
Need, 35
Negotiating process, for local TV, 157
Network (national) advertising, in radio, 68
Network television, 54
Newspaper, 76
benefits to advertiser, 77
buy, 154
drawbacks, 79
research, 81
Newspaper Authorization, 153
Nielsen Monitor Plus, 23

 
168  Index
O
Objective, for media plan, 34–35
Off-network program, 55
Oligopoly, 22
Opportunistic buy, 155
Opportunity to see, 117, 167
Opt-in email, 160
Optimizer, 148
Outdoor advertising, 85
benefits to advertiser, 87
buy, 159
drawbacks, 88
research, 89
Outdoor Authorization, 160
Outdoor showing, 117, 159
P
Painted bulletin, 86
Panel, size considerations, 86, 159
Passalong readership, 84
Pay-per-view (PPV), 59
Persons Using Radio (PUR), 111
Persons Using Television (PUT), 111
Place (distribution), 9
Pod, 65
Pop-up ads, 91
Positioning, in magazine, 115, 152
Post-buy analysis, 166
Poster panel, 86
size considerations, 159
PPM, 112
PPV (Pay-per-view), 60
Pre-plan analysis, 165
Preference, for brand, 36
Presentation, of media plan, 132
Press release, 7
Price, 9
Print media, 2
Product
awareness, 36
category, 9, 18
category trends, 18–19
size, 16
usage qualification, 41
Production, 16
Promotion, 9
in radio, 158
Promotional message, 31
Psychographics, 42

 
Index  169
Public broadcasting, 3
Public Broadcasting Marketing, 7
Public relations, 6
Publicity, 6
Purchase behavior, 37
Purchase cycle, 15
R
Radio, 66
benefits to advertisers, 70
buy, 157
drawbacks, 73
research, 74
Rate base, 114
Rate card, 152
Rating, 101
of Internet, 92
of magazines, 85
of outdoor, 88
of radio, 70
of television, 63
Reader involvement, 84–85
Readership
of magazine, 114
of newspaper, 116
Reduced spending, 142
Rep firm, 56
Research, brand-awareness, 12
Rich media, 90
Roadblocking, 127
ROS (Run of schedule), 157, 158, 166
S
Sales trend, 19, 21
Satisfaction, 37
Satellite radio, 69
Satellite TV, 59
SAU, 153
Scatter market, 155
Scheduling, 126
Search Internet, 91
Search process, 36
Secondary target audience, 141, 143
Selection process, 37
Share of market, 23
Share of requirements, 23
Showing, 117, 159
Single copy, 113
Size, of product, 16
Rating, aggregate, 110 
Reach, 103, 124

 
170  Index
Social change, 21
Specialization, in magazines, 82
Sponsorship, 96
Spot advertising
in radio, 69
in television, 55
Standard Ad Unit (SAU), 153
Station representative firm (rep firm), 56
Strategy, for media, 121–39 Streaming audio, 70
Subscription, 113
Super Bowl, cost of advertising in, 63
Survey, unaided and aided, 13
Syndicated program, 54
Syndication,
buying time, 156
program clearance, 55
T
Target audience, 41
Target rating points (TRP), 102
Television, 49
benefits to advertiser, 62
buy, 155
drawbacks, 63
research, 66
Television, forms of,
cable, 56
network, 54
new forms, 59
satellite, 59
spot, 55
syndication, 54
Test
translation, 149
Testing, 149
Time Spent Listening (TSL), 111
Timing, 30
of campaign, 45
Tonnage, 158
Total Survey Area, 111
Trade association, 19
Trade merchandising, 130
Trend, of product category, 18
Turnover, 112
U
Unaided recall, 13
Unwired network, 56
Upfront marketplace, 153–55
Use, 37

 
Index  171
V
Vertical programming, 157
Viewers per viewing household (VPVH or VPTH), 109
Volume, in advertising, 118
W
Wearout, 64
Y
Yellow Pages, 94

