
THE COMPLETE 
PLANT BASED DIET 
COOKBOOK
Easy, Healthy and delicious Plant Based Recipes for Beginners Everyone Will.
 
 
 
 
Camila Davis

TABLE OF CONTENTS
AN OVERVIEW OF THE PLANT-BASED DIET
What Is a Plant-Based Diet?
The 5 Plant-Based Food Groups
Vegetables
Fruits
Whole Grains
Legumes
Nut And Seeds
Benefits Of A Plant-Based Diet
Planet-Friendly
Save Money
Health Benefits of a Plant-Based Diet
TIPS FOR STARTING A PLANT-BASED DIET
Education
Kitchen Equipment
Stock Up On Vegan Foods
Eat Sufficient Food
Meal Plan
Consume Vegetables and Healthy Fats
Eat Whole Grains for Breakfast
Choose Fruits for Desserts
Keep It Fun
SHOPPING LIST

BREAKFAST
Fig Smoothie
Banana Berry Muffins
Zucchini Bread Oatmeal
Chickpea Omelet
Applesauce Fig Nut Muffins
Carrot Cake Overnight Oats
Black Bean Sweet Potato Hash
French Toast
Matcha Blueberry Muffins
Oat Flour Peach Pancakes
Blueberry Thyme Scones
LUNCH
Spicy Harissa Potato Salad
6 Bean Salad
Collard Green Wraps
Mango Pineapple Fried Rice
Slow Cooker Stuffed Peppers
Roasted Sweet Potato Tacos
Meditteranean Enchilada Casserole
Avocado Chickpea Cups
Chickpea Noodle Soup
Creamy Coconut Lentil Curry
Spinach Quesadillas
SNACKS
Smoky Eggplant Dip
Baked Root Vegetable Chips With Herb Dipping Sauce

Rosemary Chickpea Crackers
Apple Pizzas
Savory Spiced Roasted Nuts
Dried Fruit Chewy Oat Bars
Baked Zucchini Chips
Brown Sugar Carrot And Broccoli Chips
Baked Cucumber Chips
Quinoa Sticks
Spiced Gluten-Free Crackers
Gooseberry Granola
DINNER
Vegan Jackfruit Pulled Pork
Chimichurri Cauliflower Steaks
Buffalo Cauliflower Brown Rice Meatballs
Burrito Bowl
Greek Eggplant
Mushroom Fennel Risotto
Lentil Loaf
Roasted Vegetable Curry
Peanut Butter Asian Noodles
Sweet Potato Kidney Bean Burgers
Pumpkin Cannelloni
DESSERT
Berry Quinoa Parfait
Indulgent Dark Chocolate Truffles
Berry Walnut Crisp
Chocolate Coconut Walnut Tart

Lemon Raspberry Bars
Peach Tahini Caramel Cups
Pistachio Ice Cream
Cashew Butter Quinoa Bark
Raw Blueberry Mango Tart
Zucchini Brownies
Olive Oil Orange Pistachio Cake
REFERENCES

AN OVERVIEW OF THE 
PLANT-BASED DIET
Most people assume a plant-based diet is filled with boring salads. However,
this statement is nothing more than a myth. Yes, plant-based diets may feature
a salad here and there. However, salad is not the only thing vegans eat. Plant-
based diets are filled with various delicious foods, from olive oil cake to burrito
bowls and Greek eggplant.
WHAT IS A PLANT-BASED DIET?
In simple terms, a plant-based diet consists of foods derived from plants.
Products from animals, including meat, eggs, honey, dairy products, and eggs,
are excluded from this diet. Nevertheless, some people interpret the terms
plant-based and vegan differently. For example, some people subscribe to a
flexitarian diet which allows small amounts of meat or fish but consists mainly
of vegetarian foods. Diets that exclude meat and consume fish are called
pescatarian, while those that exclude meat and fish and eat eggs and dairy are
called vegetarian. Persons who exclude all animal-based products such as dairy,
honey, and gelatin are called vegans.
THE 5 PLANT-BASED FOOD GROUPS
Most people are unaware of the 5 food groups they should consume on a
plant-based diet. They include vegetables, fruits, tubers, whole grains, and
legumes.
Vegetables
Like fruits, vegetables contain several beneficial compounds such as
antioxidants, minerals, and vitamins. Antioxidants are particularly important as

they can help prevent cell damage and specific illnesses. Most vegetables are
low-calorie, so you can eat a healthy serving of vegetables. Some popular
vegetables include carrots, bell peppers, onions, spinach, lettuce, and kale.
Serving sizes for vegetables include 1/2 cup of cooked vegetables or vegetable
juice and 1 cup of raw vegetables.
Fruits
Most people assume fruits are filled with sugar. This assumption would be
correct to some degree. However, fruits contain several other beneficial
ingredients such as minerals, phytochemicals, fiber, and vitamins. These
chemicals slowly release glucose into the bloodstream, giving us a sustainable
energy source. Any fruit, such as apples, mangoes, peaches, berries, and
plums, can fulfill the fruit requirements. Serving sizes of fruits include 1
medium whole fruit or 1 cup of chopped fresh fruit.
Whole Grains
Grains contain complex carbohydrates, which are slowly digested by the body,
keeping blood sugar levels under control. Therefore, grains are an excellent
source of energy. It is best to choose whole grains as they contain greater
minerals, protein, vitamins, fiber, and other beneficial compounds. Whole
grains include bulgar, barley, quinoa, and whole wheat products. Serving sizes
for whole grains include 1 medium sweet potato, 1/2 cup of cooked pasta, rice,
bulgar, or barley, a slice of whole grain bread, or 1/4 cup muesli.
Legumes
Legumes are a rich source of protein, minerals, fiber, and vitamins. Legumes
can also stimulate healthy gut bacteria, prevent and treat chronic diseases, and
manage blood sugar levels. Legumes include beans, lentils, pulses, and soy
products such as tofu or soy milk. Serving sizes for legumes include 1/2 cup of
tofu, tempeh, cooked beans, and 1 cup of soy milk.
Nut And Seeds

Nuts provide a valuable source of energy and nutrients. They contain minerals,
vitamins, protein, and fiber. Additionally, nuts have essential fatty acids,
including omega-3 fatty acids. These fatty acids play an important role in hair
and skin health and producing hair and hormones. Nuts can be added to
meals to provide texture or be consumed as a snack. They can be used to
make non-dairy milk, nut butters, and even pie or tart crusts. Popular nuts and
seeds include almonds, chia seeds, pecans, flaxseeds, peanuts, cashews,
pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds, and sunflower seeds. The serving size of nuts
and seeds in 1/4 cup.

BENEFITS OF A PLANT-BASED DIET
There are many benefits associated with a plant-based diet. For example,
subscribing to a plant-based diet can help you save money and is
environmentally friendly.
Planet-Friendly
Plant based-diets have a substantial environmental impact in the best way
possible. Raising animals as a food source is unsustainable because of the
number of resources used to produce the animal product. Plants are grown to
feed animals. This is a form of waste since a human being could have eaten the
plants that were used to feed the animal. Additionally, replacing animal
products with plant-based foods can slow the rate at which the earth's resources
are exhausted. Furthermore, a vegan lifestyle can decrease the threat of climate
change and protect the planet for future generations.
Save Money
Most people believe it is expensive to lead a plant-based lifestyle. However, a
plant-based lifestyle can be pretty affordable. Legumes, including lentils and
kidney beans, as well as whole grains like brown rice, are relatively inexpensive.
In addition to this, you can look for fruits and vegetables that are on sale. You
can purchase the fruits in vegetables and freeze them for a later date.
Purchasing produce on sale will provide you with a steady supply of fruits for
your smoothies and crisps.
Health Benefits of a Plant-Based Diet
Plant-based foods contain less saturated fats. Animal products are notoriously
associated with saturated fat. Furthermore, saturated fats are associated with
conditions such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and cancer. Plant-based diets
can help prevent and manage nutrition-related chronic health conditions
(Mullins, & Arjmandi, 2021). Long-term consumption of plant-based foods can
also decrease obesity and improve conditions associated with obesity.

Legumes contain rich levels of protein, iron, and zinc. Protein consists of
amino acids. Amino acids play a role in producing proteins, neurotransmitters,
and hormones. In contrast, iron is needed for growth and development. The
consumption of beans, legumes, and pulses has been associated with improving
conditions such as cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. For example, the
Lifestyle Heart Trial discovered 82% of heart disease patients who subscribed
to a plant-based diet experienced a reduction in atherosclerosis. Moreover,
91% experienced a decreased rate in which angina episodes occurred. In
contrast, 53% of the control group who subscribed to the American Heart
Association diet experienced an advancement in atherosclerosis (Tuso, Stoll,
and Li, 2015). They can also stimulate weight loss as fiber keeps you fuller for
longer.
Plant-based diets do not just consist of salads. They consist of versatile,
delicious foods that are healthy for you. Plus, you will be saving money and
helping save the planet.

TIPS FOR STARTING
A PLANT-BASED DIET
Although transitioning to a vegan lifestyle sounds easy, it is very challenging.
Becoming a vegan is a process that will not happen overnight. Some days it will
be easy to resist temptation. However, it will be hard to refrain from
consuming non-vegan products on other days. Use these tips to help you start
your vegan journey and maintain your vegan lifestyle.
EDUCATION
There are so many myths about veganism. For example, some people believe
vegans do not receive enough protein. Some people believe veganism is a fad
or trend. Some information even suggests that veganism is an unhealthy diet
void of benefits. However, this is very untrue. A vegan lifestyle has several
health benefits. Therefore, education is the best way to start your vegan
journey. Knowing the facts will help you determine fake news from true facts.
KITCHEN EQUIPMENT
Just like plant-based ingredients are needed to prepare vegan meals, you need
kitchen equipment to prepare the food. Cutting boards, knives, cooking
spoons, pots, pans, blenders, whisks, and blenders are essential tools that help
you create several dishes.
STOCK UP ON VEGAN FOODS
You can't eat vegan foods if you do not have them in your kitchen.
Furthermore, if you do not have animal products in your house, you will be
less likely to consume them. Therefore, it's best to stock your kitchen with
vegan foods. Search your kitchen for any non-vegan ingredients and give them
to someone else. You could even donate them to a homeless shelter if you

have a lot of animal products.
Next, write a list of all the vegan foods you will need and head to the store to
purchase them. For example, you can stock up on brown rice, bulgar, canned
beans, vegetables, and fruits. You can also buy frozen fruits to minimize the
chance of wastage.
EAT SUFFICIENT FOOD
Everyone reacts to a plant-based diet differently. Some people may feel like
they are eating sufficient food. However, others may always feel hungry,
especially if their previous diet consisted of processed foods and animal
products. Therefore, your body may not feel great if you consume less or the
same amount of food that was consumed in your previous diet. Plant-based
foods are relatively low in calories and high in fiber, so you can add a few extra
veggies to your plate. Consuming grains like rice, bulgar, quinoa, tofu, nuts,
and seeds is another way to combat hunger. Remember, you need to eat
adequate food to have the energy to get through your day.
MEAL PLAN
Meal planning is, simply as it sounds, planning your meals in advance. Often,
we can get so caught up in what to make for dinner that we settle for takeout or
another food that may not align with a vegan diet. Meal planning will make
your life so much easier. You can plan your menu, write a grocery list, and
prepare the food. Once the food is cooked, you can place it into airtight
containers and store it in the fridge. You can also store sauces, soups, or stews
in the freezer. After a long tiring day of lunch, you can pop your food in the
microwave, and dinner will be ready. Meal prep once or twice a week on days
when you are not as busy. Additionally, choose foods that will last longer, such
as bulgur, rice, and legumes, if you are meal planning once a week.
CONSUME VEGETABLES AND HEALTHY FATS
Eat your fair share of vegetables. Half of your plate, especially lunch and
dinner, should contain vegetables. Eat colorful vegetables and leafy greens.
Colorful vegetables are known to have more vegetables. You can eat vegetables
with salsa, hummus, and guacamole. Leafy greens such as Swiss chard, kale,

spinach, and collards can be grilled, steamed, and braised. You can even add
leafy greens to your stir-fries. You can also use salad greens as the base of your
meal. For example, you can add spinach, kale, butter lettuce, mixed greens, or
romaine lettuce to a bowl and top it with raw, sauteed, or roasted vegetables,
herbs, beans, legumes, whole grains, peas, and tofu.
In addition to this, consume healthy fats. Fats such as olive oil, seeds, nuts,
avocadoes, coconut oil, and nut butters contain healthy fats. However, these
foods contain more calories. Therefore, it may be best to consume these fats in
moderation as they may contribute to weight loss over time.
EAT WHOLE GRAINS FOR BREAKFAST
Breakfast is important. Therefore, you need to eat a filling breakfast to keep
you focused until lunchtime. Whole grains will keep you fuller longer.
Oatmeal, quinoa, buckwheat, and barley are all excellent options for breakfast.
You can add fruit and nuts to your whole grain breakfast.
CHOOSE FRUITS FOR DESSERTS
It's easy to purchase a tub of store-bought vegan ice cream. However, you can
eat a cup of strawberries or a peach for dessert. You can also use fresh fruits to
make desserts such as peach tahini cups or berry walnut crisp. Either way,
eating fruit for dessert won't add too many calories to your diet.
KEEP IT FUN
Once you've been on your vegan journey for a few weeks or months,
experiment with different vegan foods. Create vegan versions of your favorite
meals or try a new dish. You can easily test any recipe in this book or find a
new recipe online. Browse the fruit and vegetable aisle of your local grocery
store to see if there are any new fruits or vegetables. Look for new whole
grains, nuts, fruits, seeds, and vegetables.
Switching to a plant-based diet is not as easy as it seems. However, these tips
will make your journey much easier. Remember, it will be easier to adhere to
your vegan diet. However, when you are faced with temptation, remember
your motivation. In addition to this, follow these tips to commit to a vegan

lifestyle.
Before we get to the recipes, I have created a grocery list of all of the items you
will need to make the delicious recipes in this book.

SHOPPING LIST
Apple Juice
Chia Seeds
Coconut Yogurt
Cinnamon
Whole-Wheat Flour
Old-Fashioned Rolled Oats
Baking Powder
Salt
Cardamom
Agave Nectar
Coconut Oil
Bananas
Vanilla Extract
Fresh Or Frozen Raspberries
Fresh Or Frozen Blackberries
Zucchini
Steel-Cut Oats
Flaxseed Meal
Cloves
Unsweetened Coconut Milk
Pecans
Olive Oil
Red Onions
Button Mushrooms
Spinach
Chickpea Flour
Garlic Powder
White Pepper
Black Pepper

Nutritional Yeast
Cumin
Coriander
Baking Soda
Cassava Flour
Oat Flour
Brown Rice Flour
Coconut Sugar
Apple Sauce
Oat Milk
Vanilla Extract
White Vinegar
Apples
Dried Dates
Date syrup
Carrots
Figs
Ground Ginger
Chia Seeds
Unsweetened Cashew Milk
White Onions
Red Bell Pepper
Garlic
Chili Powder
Cumin
Harissa
Smoked Paprika
Sweet Potatoes
Low-Sodium Vegetable Broth
Black Beans
Scallions
Parsley
Ground Flaxseed Meal
Unsweetened Oat Milk
Brown Sugar
Vegan Bread

Date Syrup
Vanilla Almond Milk
Peaches
Oat Flour
White Rice Flour
Brown Rice Flour
Matcha Powder
Stevia
Fresh Or Frozen Blueberries
Unsweetened Oat Milk
Gluten-Free All-Purpose Flour
Coconut Sugar
Fresh Thyme
Baby Potatoes
Lemons
Capers
Fresh Cilantro
Mixed Greens
Cucumber
Pitted Black Olives
Black Pepper
Canned Black Beans
Canned Chickpeas
Canned Broad Beans
Canned Kidney Beans
Canned Cannellini Beans
Canned Great Northern Beans
Cherry Tomatoes
Frozen Corn
Fresh Parsley
Italian Seasoning
Balsamic Vinegar
Rice Wine Vinegar
Maple Syrup
Dijon Mustard
Collard Leaves

Pinenuts
Coconut Aminos
2 garlic cloves, minced
Ginger
Extra Virgin Olive Oil
Avocados
Carrots
Alfalfa Sprouts
Lime
Curry Powder
White Onions
Scallions, diced
Green Bell Peppers
Mangoes
Pineapple
Brown Rice
Frozen Green Peas
Tamari
Sesame Seed Oil
Bulgur
Salsa
Chilis In Adobo Sauce
Chili Powder
Smoked Paprika
Bell Peppers
Sweet Potatoes
Vegetable Oil
Dried Basil
Chili Powder
Coleslaw Mix
Shallots
White Sugar
Vegan Sour Cream
Dried Dill
Dried Chives
6-inch Corn Tortillas

Yellow Onion
Ancho Chili Powder
San Marzano Tomatoes
Fire-Roasted Diced Tomatoes
Low-Sodium Vegetable Broth
6-Inch Corn Tortillas
Canned No Salt Added Black Beans Serrano Pepper
Artichoke Hearts
Green Onions
Low-Sodium Black Olives
Zaatar
Fresh Arugula Leaves
Fennel
Yellow Bell Pepper
Celery
Corkscrew Pasta
Low-Sodium Vegetable Broth
Red Chili Paste
Green Lentils
Roma Tomatoes
Full-Fat Coconut Milk
Whole-Wheat Tortillas
Jalapeno
Fresh Spinach Leaves
Cashews
Vegan Mayonnaise
Nutritional Yeast
Eggplant
Tahini
Fresh Dill
Pita Chips or Whole Wheat Crackers
Fresh Chives
Dried Rosemary
Turnip
Parsnip
Golden Beet

Red Beet
Chickpea Flour
Baking Powder
Garlic Powder
Onion Powder
Dried Rosemary
Apples
Peanut Butter
Strawberries
Granola
Hemp Seeds
Raw Unsalted Almonds
Raw Unsalted Cashews
Raw Unsalted Hazelnuts
Raw Unsalted Pecan
Raw Unsalted Pistachios
Raw Macadamia Nuts
Fresh Thyme
Brown Sugar
Dried Cherries
Nutmeg
Sumac
2 Large Broccoli Stems
Fresh Rosemary
Sesame Seeds
Chia Seeds
Hemp Seeds
Dried Oregano
Sea Salt
Ground Caraway Seeds
Ground Cumin
White Vinegar
Dried Gooseberries
White Cabbage
Red Cabbage
Canned Young Green Jackfruit

Brown Rice Flour
Liquid Smoke
Barbecue Sauce
Hamburger Rolls
Cauliflower
Red Pepper Flakes
Vegan Butter
Hot Sauce
Brown Rice
Breadcrumbs
Dried Basil
Oat Flour
Bay Leaves
Sliced Black Olives
Button Mushrooms
Arborio Rice
Dry White Wine
Vegan Parmesan Cheese
Avocado Oil
Butternut Squash
Brown Lentils
Tomato Paste
Gluten-Free Breadcrumbs
Sugar-Free Ketchup
Broccoli
Ground Turmeric
Red Curry Paste
Brown Rice Noodles
Peanut Butter
Cannelloni
Tomato Sauce
Pumpkin Puree
Vanilla Oat Milk
Cashew Butter
70% Cacao or Higher Vegan Dark Chocolate
Coffee Extract

Orange Zest
Unsweetened Cocoa Powder
Almond Flour
Roasted Walnuts
Blackberries
Arrowroot Starch
Unsweetened Coconut Flakes
70% Cacao or Higher Vegan, Bittersweet Chocolate
Cornstarch
Pitted Dates
Peaches
Toasted Pistachios
Unsweetened Oat Milk
Medjool Dates
Dried Blueberries
Unsweetened Shredded Coconut
Cacao Powder
Frozen Blueberries
Coconut Sugar
Unsweetened Applesauce
All-Purpose Flour
Baking Soda
Oranges
Powdered Sugar
 

BREAKFAST

FIG SMOOTHIE
Smoothies are the perfect breakfast. All you have to do is add figs, apple
juice, chia, seeds, yogurt, and a little cinnamon to a blender, and blend it until
smooth, and you've got a fig smoothie in less than 5 minutes.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 5 minutes| Total Time: 10 minutes|
Servings: 2| Calories: 113 kcal
Ingredients
2 ripe figs, roughly chopped
1 cup apple juice
3 tablespoons chia seeds
3 tablespoons coconut yogurt
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
1/2 cup ice
Instructions
1. Place most of the figs, apple juice, chia seeds, coconut yogurt, cinnamon,
and ice into a blender and blend it until smooth.
2. Pour the fig smoothie into 2 glasses and top with the remaining figs.
3. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 113 | Carbohydrates: 25.3g | Fiber: 2.2g | Protein:1.7g | Fat: 1.5g |
Saturated Fat: 1g | Cholesterol: 1mg | Sodium: 13mg | Potassium: 246mg |
Sugar: 20.9g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 52mg | Iron: 2mg

BANANA BERRY MUFFINS
These banana berry muffins are absolutely delicious. They are made with
whole wheat flour, raspberries, and blackberries and sweetened with maple
syrup. These banana berry muffins are moist and delicious.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 30 minutes| Total Time: 40 minutes|
Servings: 12| Calories: 218 kcal
Ingredients
1 1/4 cups whole wheat flour
3/4 cup old-fashioned rolled oats
1 teaspoon baking powder
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon cardamom
1/2 cup agave nectar
1/2 cup coconut oil, melted
3 ripe bananas, mashed
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1/2 cup fresh or frozen raspberries
1/2 cup fresh or frozen blackberries
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then line a muffin pan with muffin liners.
2. Whisk the whole wheat flour, old-fashioned rolled oats, baking powder,
salt, cinnamon, and cardamom in a bowl.
3. Whisk agave nectar, coconut oil, bananas, and vanilla extract in a
separate bowl.
4. Add the agave nectar mixture to the whole-wheat flour mixture and stir
just until combined.
5. Fold in the raspberries and blackberries into the batter, then scoop the
banana berry muffin into the prepared pan.
6. Bake the berry banana muffins for 20-30 minutes until a toothpick
comes out clean.

7. Let the banana berry muffins cool in the pan for 5 minutes, then place
them onto a wire rack.
8. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 218 | Carbohydrates: 32.8g | Fiber: 2.2g | Protein: 2.9g | Fat: 9.5g |
Saturated Fat: 7.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 52mg | Potassium: 195mg |
Sugar: 16.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 28mg | Iron: 1mg

ZUCCHINI BREAD OATMEAL
There's no doubt that zucchini bread is delicious. However, it can take an
hour to bake zucchini bread. Luckily, you don't have to wait nearly an hour to
bake zucchini bread. You can make zucchini bread oatmeal in 20 minutes.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 557 kcal
Ingredients
1 cup steel-cut oats
1/4 cup ground flaxseed meal
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon cloves
2 1/2 cups unsweetened coconut milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 medium zucchini, grated
1/4 cup pecans, roughly chopped
Instructions
1. Place the steel-cut oats, flaxseeds, cinnamon, and cloves and mix to
combine.
2. Stir the coconut milk and vanilla extract into the overnight oats until
combined.
3. Place the steel-cut oats over medium-high heat and let them come to a
boil.
4. Stir in the grated zucchini, decrease the heat to medium-low, and cook
the steel-cut oats for 15-20 minutes, often stirring until the liquid is
absorbed.
5. Divide the oats between 4 bowls and top with the pecans.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 557 | Carbohydrates: 26.2g | Fiber: 10.6g | Protein: 10g | Fat: 49.6g
| Saturated Fat: 32.5g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 38mg | Potassium:

692mg | Sugar: 7.5g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 78mg | Iron: 4mg

CHICKPEA OMELET
Chickpeas are a godsend for plant-based diets. They are a versatile source of
plant-based protein, and you can use them to make so many things, including
this Spinach mushroom chickpea omelet. First, a seasoned chickpea is
cooked, then it is stuffed with a spinach mushroom filling. In as little as 25
minutes, you will have a delectable omelet.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 25 minutes|
Servings: 3| Calories: 281kcal
Ingredients
For the sauteed vegetables:
2 tablespoons olive oil
1/4 cup red onions
1 cup button mushrooms
2 cups spinach
1 teaspoon salt
For the chickpea omelet:
1 cup chickpea flour
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon white pepper
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1/3 cup nutritional yeast
1/8 teaspoon cumin
1/8 teaspoon coriander
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1 cup water
Instructions
1. Place the olive oil into a skillet and set it over medium-high heat.
2. Add the red onions and mushrooms and cook them for 5-8 minutes
until the mushrooms are tender.

3. Add the spinach and salt and cook it for 2-3 minutes until the spinach
wilts. Turn off the heat and cover the mushroom spinach mixture warm.
4. Whisk the chickpea flour, garlic powder, white pepper, black pepper,
nutritional yeast, cumin, coriander, and baking soda in a bowl until it
combines.
5. Add the water and mix until the chickpea batter is smooth.
6. Place a clean non-stick skillet over medium-high heat and add the
chickpea batter to the skillet and cook it for 2-3 minutes.
7. Flip the chickpea omelet over and cook it for 1 minute.
8. Add the spinach mushroom to one side of the omelet and fold the free
half of the omelet over the filling.
9. Place the omelet onto a plate and cut it into 3 pieces using a sharp knife.
10. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 281| Carbohydrates: 29.5g | Fiber: 9g | Protein: 16.7g | Fat: 12.6g |
Saturated Fat: 1.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 1037mg | Potassium: 903mg
| Sugar: 4.5g | Vitamin D: 84mg | Calcium: 56mg | Iron: 7mg

APPLESAUCE FIG NUT MUFFINS
Rich, moist applesauce muffins that are studded with sweet bits of apples,
dates, and crunchy pecans? Yes, please. These applesauce fig muffins are the
perfect way to start your morning. Best of all, they are gluten-free, and no
one will ever suspect that these applesauce fig nut muffins are flourless.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 12| Calories: 244kcal
Ingredients
1/2 cup cassava flour
1/2 cup oat flour
1 cup brown rice flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon cardamom
1/2 cup coconut sugar
1 1/2 cups apple sauce
1/2 cup oat milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 teaspoon white vinegar
1/2 cup apples, peeled, diced
1/2 cup dried dates, pitted, chopped
1/4 cup crushed pecans
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then line a muffin pan with muffin liners and
spray them with non-stick cooking spray.
2. Whisk the cassava flour, oat flour, brown rice flour, baking powder,
baking soda, salt, cinnamon, and cardamom in a mixing bowl.
3. Whisk the coconut sugar, apple sauce, oat milk, vanilla extract, and
white vinegar in a separate bowl.

4. Whisk the apple sauce mixture into the dry ingredients until it is
combined.
5. Fold in the apples, figs, and pecans, then scoop the muffin batter into
the prepared muffin pan.
6. Bake the applesauce fig nit muffins for 20-25 minutes until a toothpick
inserted into a muffin comes out clean.
7. Let the applesauce fig nut muffins cool in the pan for 5 minutes, then
place them on a wire rack to cool.
8. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 244| Carbohydrates: 50g | Fiber: 3.1g | Protein: 2.2g | Fat: 4g |
Saturated Fat: 0.4g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 207mg | Potassium: 164mg
| Sugar: 16.2g | Vitamin D: 4mg | Calcium: 45mg | Iron: 1mg

CARROT CAKE OVERNIGHT OATS
Rolled oats, carrots, date syrup, carrots, figs, spices, vanilla extract, chia
seeds, and cashew milk are all you need to make these carrot cake overnight
oats. This sweet breakfast treat tastes just like a slice of moist, delicious
carrot cake.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes| Total Time: 15 minutes|
Servings: 1| Calories: 224kcal
Ingredients
1/2 cup old-fashioned rolled oats
1 tablespoon date syrup
2 tablespoons carrots, grated
1 small fig, minced
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
1/4 teaspoon cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon nutmeg
1/4 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 teaspoon chia seeds
1/2 cup unsweetened cashew milk
Instructions
1. Place the oats, date syrup, carrots, fig, ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg, vanilla
extract, chia seeds, and cashew milk into a mason jar or bowl and stir to
combine.
2. Cover the overnight carrot oats and place them into the refrigerator for
at least 4 hours or overnight until the oats soften and absorb.
3. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 224| Carbohydrates: 46.8g | Fiber: 6.1 | Protein: 6.3g | Fat: 4.2g |
Saturated Fat: 0.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 93mg | Potassium: 303mg |
Sugar: 23.5g | Vitamin D: 1mg | Calcium: 310mg | Iron: 2mg

BLACK BEAN SWEET POTATO HASH
There is no breakfast without a hash, and this sweet potato black bean hash is
simply amazing. As the name implies, this hash is made with sweet potatoes
and black beans. However, it's also made with spices such as cumin, chili
powder, and smoked paprika, and aromatic vegetables like onions, bell
peppers, and garlic. You can even eat this black bean sweet potato hash for
breakfast, lunch, dinner, or as a side dish.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 196kcal
Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 small white onion, diced
1 red bell pepper, diced
2 cloves garlic, minced
2 teaspoons chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon harissa
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
2 medium sweet potatoes, peeled, cut into 1/2-inch pieces
1/3 cup low-sodium vegetable broth
1 cup canned black beans, drained, rinsed
1/4 cup chopped scallions (green parts only)
1 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons freshly chopped parsley
Instructions
1. Place the olive oil into a non-stick skillet and set it over medium-high
heat.
2. Add the onions and bell peppers and cook them for 2-3 minutes until
they soften.
3. Add the garlic, chili powder, cumin, harissa, and smoked paprika and
cook it for 1 minute until fragrant.

4. Add the sweet potatoes to the onions and bell peppers and stir to coat
them in the spices.
5. Stir in the vegetable broth and cook it for 12 minutes, periodically
stirring until the sweet potatoes are tender.
6. Stir in the black beans, scallions, and salt and cook it for 1-2 minutes
until the beans are hot.
7. Garnish the black bean sweet potato with the chopped parsley.
8. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 196| Carbohydrates: 28.4g | Fiber: 5.5 | Protein: 4.8g | Fat: 8.5g |
Saturated Fat: 1.3g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 632mg | Potassium: 230mg
| Sugar: 6.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 410g | Iron: 2mg

FRENCH TOAST
French toast is a classic breakfast dish that everyone should enjoy, including
vegans. Luckily with a little oat milk, flaxseeds, cinnamon, brown sugar, and
vanilla extract, you can enjoy French toast any time you like.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 2| Calories: 292kcal
Ingredients
3 tablespoons water
1 tablespoon flaxseed meal
1 cup unsweetened oat milk
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 teaspoon brown sugar
1/8 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract
4 slices of vegan bread
2 tablespoons of coconut oil
Instructions
1. Whisk the water and flaxseed mixture in a bowl and set it aside for 5
minutes.
2. Place a non-stick skillet over medium-high low heat and let it heat up.
3. Whisk the unsweetened oat milk, cinnamon, brown sugar, salt, and
vanilla extract in a bowl.
4. Add the flaxseed mixture and whisk until combined.
5. Add 1 tablespoon of coconut oil to the skillet, then dredge two slices of
bread in the oat milk mixture and let it side for 30 seconds on both
sides, then place them into the skillet.
6. Cook them for 3-4 minutes per side until they are golden brown, then
place them onto a plate.
7. Repeat steps 5-7.
8. Garnish the French toast with fresh fruit, shredded coconut, or nuts.
9. Serve and enjoy!

Nutrition Info
Calories: 292| Carbohydrates: 30.5g | Fiber: 5.6 | Protein: 6.7g | Fat: 17g |
Saturated Fat: 11.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 297mg | Potassium: 217mg
| Sugar: 13.2g | Vitamin D: 1mg | Calcium: 210g | Iron: 3mg

MATCHA BLUEBERRY MUFFINS
Matcha is a fine powder that is cultivated in East Asia. In short, it is simply
ground green tea leaves. Matcha powder has many health benefits, including
protecting the liver, enhancing brain health, and preventing certain forms of
cancer. Therefore, these muffins are healthy, but they are also super
delicious. The blueberries provide a burst of sweetness and add some texture
to the muffins making these gluten-free muffins extremely addicting.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 12| Calories: 148kcal
Ingredients
1 cup oat flour
1/2 cup white rice flour
1/2 cup brown rice flour
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon baking powder
1/4 teaspoon salt
tablespoon matcha powder
1/2 cup stevia
1/4 cup coconut oil, melted
3 medium ripe bananas, mashed
1/3 cup coconut yogurt
1/2 cup applesauce
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 cup fresh or frozen blueberries
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then line a muffin pan with muffin liners and
spray them with non-stick cooking spray.
2. Whisk the oat flour, white rice flour, brown rice flour, baking soda,
baking powder, salt, and matcha powder in a bowl until combined.
3. Whisk the stevia, coconut oil, ripe bananas, coconut yogurt, applesauce,
and vanilla extract in a bowl until combined.

4. Fold in the blueberries.
5. Scoop the matcha blueberry muffin into the prepared muffin pan and
bake it for 15-20 minutes until a toothpick inserted into a matcha
blueberry muffin comes out clean.
6. Let the matcha muffins cool in the pan for 15 minutes, then place them
onto a cooling rack to cool completely.
7. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 148| Carbohydrates: 21.6g | Fiber: 7.2 | Protein: 2.3g | Fat: 5.7g |
Saturated Fat: 4.4g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 106mg | Potassium: 211mg
| Sugar: 6.2g | Vitamin D: mg | Calcium: 30g | Iron: 1mg

OAT FLOUR PEACH PANCAKES
Oat flour pancakes are light, fluffy, and so darn delicious. The addition of
peaches makes these pancakes even better. They add a fresh sweet fruity
flavor which pairs perfectly with the cinnamon in the pancake batter.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 25 minutes|
Servings: 12| Calories: 111kcal
Ingredients
6 tablespoons water
2 tablespoons ground flaxseed meal
1 3/4 cups oat flour
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
1 tablespoon baking powder
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1 tablespoon date syrup
1 cup vanilla almond milk
2 tablespoons coconut oil
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3 peaches, halved, pit removed, diced
Instructions
1. Whisk the water and flaxseed meal in a bowl and set it aside for 5
minutes.
2. Whisk the oat flour, cinnamon, baking powder, and sea salt in a bowl.
3. Whisk the date syrup, almond milk, coconut oil, and vanilla extract in a
separate bowl, then add it to the oat flour and whisk just until combined.
4. Heat a griddle to medium-high heat or set a skillet over medium-high
heat.
5. Spray the griddle or skillet with olive oil spray, and add 1/4 cup of the
oat flour pancake batter to the griddle or skillet.
6. Add 2-3 more pancakes to the griddle or skillet and cook them for 3-4
minutes until bubbles appear on top of the pancakes.
7. Add some of the peaches to the top of each pancake and flip it over.

8. Cook the oat flour peach pancakes for 2-3 minutes until golden brown.
Remove the oat flour peach pancakes from the griddle or skillet and
place them on a plate.
9. Continue cooking the oat flour peach yogurt pancakes until all of the
batter is gone.
10. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 111| Carbohydrates: 16.7g | Fiber: 2.7g | Protein: 2.9g | Fat: 4.1g |
Saturated Fat: 2.2g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 54mg | Potassium: 259mg |
Sugar: 5.7g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 105g | Iron: 1mg

BLUEBERRY THYME SCONES
Scones are buttery, light, and fluffy, and these blueberries thyme scones are
no different. The blueberries add a burst of sweetness, while the thyme adds a
woodsy robust, savory flavor making these scones perfectly savory, sweet,
and tasty.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes| Total Time: 3 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 247kcal
Ingredients
2 1/2 tablespoons water
1 tablespoon flaxseed meal
3/4 cup unsweetened oat milk
2 cups gluten-free all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1/4 cup coconut sugar
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1 tablespoon fresh thyme
6 tablespoons coconut oil, room temperature
1/3 cup frozen blueberries
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 400°F, then line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
2. Whisk the water and flaxseed mixture in a bowl and set it aside for 5
minutes.
3. Whisk the gluten-free all-purpose flour, baking powder, cinnamon,
coconut sugar, sea salt, and fresh thyme in a bowl.
4. Add the coconut oil to the dry ingredients and rub it into the gluten-free
all-purpose flour mixture using a fork until only small pieces of coconut
oil remain.
5. Add the flaxseed mixture and oat milk and mix it gently into the dry
ingredients until a soft dough forms.
6. Add the blueberries and stir it again to incorporate the blueberries into

the dough.
7. Place the blueberry thyme scone dough onto a floured surface and pat it
out into a circle that is 1-inch in thickness.
8. Cut the scone dough into 8 triangles, then place them onto the prepared
baking sheet.
9. Bake the blueberry thyme scones for 22-27 minutes.
10. Let the blueberry thyme scones sit on the pan for 10 minutes, then place
them on a wire rack to cool slightly.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 148| Carbohydrates: 34.7g | Fiber: 3.9g | Protein: 3.6g | Fat: 11.3g
| Saturated Fat: 8.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 71mg | Potassium: 217mg
| Sugar: 10.4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 124g | Iron: 1mg

LUNCH

SPICY HARISSA POTATO SALAD
Spicy harissa paste meets tender, red potatoes to make a unique yet tasty
potato salad. The harissa is combined with coconut yogurt, salt, pepper, and
lemon juice which adds a refreshing tart flavor. The harissa salad is served on
a bed of mixed greens and topped with refreshing cucumber and salty olives,
which helps balance out the flavors of the potato salad.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 25 minutes|
Servings: 6| Calories: 230 kcal
Ingredients
1 1/2 lbs baby potatoes, cut in half or in quarters if they are big
4 cups water
2 tablespoons harissa paste
6 oz. non-fat coconut yogurt
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
Juice of 1 lemon
1/4 cup red onion, minced
1/4 cup capers
1/4 cup fresh cilantro, roughly chopped
6 cups mixed greens
1 cucumber, diced
1/4 cup black olives, pitted diced
Instructions
1. Add the red potatoes to a pot along with the water and a generous pinch
of salt and set it over medium-high heat.
2. Let the red potatoes come to a boil and cook them for 8-12 minutes
until they are fork-tender.
3. Drain the red potatoes in a colander and let them cool slightly.
4. Whisk the harissa, coconut yogurt, salt, pepper, and lemon juice in a
large bowl until smooth.
5. Add the red potatoes and gently fold them to coat them in the dressing.

6. Add the red onions, capers, and cilantro, fold them into the potato salad
and set the potato salad aside.
7. Place the mixed greens onto a serving platter.
8. Add the harissa potato salad and top with the cucumbers and olives.
9. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 230 | Carbohydrates: 44g | Fiber: 12g | Protein: 10.4g | Fat: 2.6g |
Saturated Fat: 1.4g | Cholesterol: 1mg | Sodium: 552mg | Potassium: 887mg
| Sugar: 8.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 121mg | Iron: 6mg

6 BEAN SALAD
This 6 bean salad is an ode to a classic bean salad. It contains black beans,
chickpeas, broad beans, kidney beans, cannellini beans, and Great Northern
beans. The savory yet tangy dressing is made with olive oil, vinegar, a little
maple syrup, and lemon juice.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes | Total Time: 15 minutes|
Servings: 6| Calories: 274 kcal
Ingredients
1 cup canned black beans, drained, rinsed
1 cup canned chickpeas, drained, rinsed
1 cup canned broad beans, drained, rinsed
1 cup kidney beans, drained, rinsed
1 cup cannellini beans, drained, rinsed
1 cup Great Northern beans, drained, rinsed
1-pint cherry tomatoes, halved
1 cup frozen corn, thawed
3/4 cup diced red bell pepper
1/2 cup diced red onion
1/4 cup chopped parsley
2 cloves garlic minced
1 teaspoon Italian seasoning
1/4 cup olive oil
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar
Juice of 1 lemon
1 tablespoon maple syrup
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
Instructions

1. Place the black beans, chickpeas, broad beans, kidney beans, cannellini
beans, Great Northern beans, cherry tomatoes, corn, red bell pepper,
red onion, parsley, and garlic in a bowl and toss to combine.
2. Whisk the Italian seasoning olive oil, balsamic vinegar, rice wine vinegar,
lemon juice, maple syrup, Dijon mustard, ground cumin, salt, and black
pepper ids a separate bowl.
3. Add the dressing to the 6 bean salad and toss to combine.
4. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 274 | Carbohydrates: 37.3g | Fiber: 10g | Protein: 11.2g | Fat: 10g |
Saturated Fat: 1.4g | Cholesterol: 1mg | Sodium: 923mg | Potassium: 510mg
| Sugar: 7.9g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 75mg | Iron: 4mg

COLLARD GREEN WRAPS
These aren't your ordinary collard green wraps. These collard green wraps
feature a rich and delicious nutty pine nut mixture consisting of tahini,
coconut aminos, maple syrup, garlic, and pinenuts. Red bell peppers, red
onions, carrots, and alfalfa spirits.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes | Total Time: 15 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 383 kcal
Ingredients
4 large collard leaves
1 cup raw pinenuts
1 tablespoon coconut aminos
1 tablespoon maple syrup
2 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon ginger, grated
1 teaspoon extra virgin olive oil
1 red bell pepper, sliced into 1/4-inch strips
1 red onion, cut into 1/4-inch strips
1 avocado, sliced thinly
1 carrot, cut in half horizontally, cut into 1/4-inch strips
3 oz. Alfalfa sprouts
1/2 lime
Instructions
1. Wash the collard leaves and slice the white stem of the base of each
collard leaf.
2. Place 2 cups of warm water and the juice of half a lemon into a bowl.
Add the collard leaves to the lemon water and let them sit for 1o
minutes.
3. Dry the collard leaves using paper towels. Using a knife, make a shallow
cut into the main root.
4. Place the pine nuts, coconut aminos, maple syrup, garlic, ginger, and
extra virgin olive oil in a blender and blend until the nut mixture clumps

together.
5. Arrange a collard leaf on your workstation and add 1/4 of the nut
mixture along with some of the red peppers, red onions, a squeeze of
lime juice, and alfalfa sprouts.
6. Fold the top and bottom of the cauliflower leaves over the filling and
fold it into a wrap.
7. Repeat steps 5-6 until you have 4 collard green wraps.
8. Cut each wrap n half and arrange them on a platter.
9. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 383 | Carbohydrates: 31g | Fiber: 12.6g | Protein: 8.8g | Fat: 27g |
Saturated Fat: 6.3g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 34mg | Potassium: 448mg |
Sugar: 7.9g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 137mg | Iron: 2mg

MANGO PINEAPPLE FRIED RICE
Mango pineapple rice is loaded with bold flavors. Unlike traditional fried
rice, which contains white, this version is made from cold brown rice. The
tamari and sesame seed oil provides the classic fried rice flavor, while the
mangoes and pineapples provide a fruity burst of sweet flavor, which rounds
out the salty flavor of the rice.
Prep Time: 20 minutes| Cook Time: 10 minutes | Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 327 kcal
Ingredients
2 tablespoons coconut oil
1/2 teaspoon curry powder
1 medium white onion, diced
3 small scallions, diced
3 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon ginger, grated
1 small red bell pepper, sliced into 1/2-inch pieces
1 small green bell pepper, sliced into 1/2-inch pieces
1 large mango, peeled, diced
1 cup pineapple, diced
3 cups cooked brown rice, cooled
1/2 cup frozen green peas
1 tablespoon tamari
1 1/2 teaspoons sesame seed oil
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon kosher salt
Instructions
1. Set a deep skillet on the stove, turn it to medium-high heat and add the
coconut oil.
2. Add the curry powder and cook it for 15 seconds, then add the onions,
scallions, garlic, and ginger and cook it for 1 minute, constantly stirring,
until the onions soften.

3. Add the bell peppers, and cook them for 2 minutes until they soften.
4. Add the mango, pineapple, brown rice, and green peas to the skillet and
stir to combine until the rice develops a yellowish tint from the curry
powder.
5. Add the tamari, coconut oil, pepper, and salt, and stir to combine.
6. Cook the mango pineapple fried rice for 3-5 minutes until everything is
heated.
7. Stir and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 327 | Carbohydrates: 55g | Fiber: 5.2g | Protein: 6.3g | Fat: 10.3g |
Saturated Fat: 7.1g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 839mg | Potassium: 461mg
| Sugar: 14.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 38mg | Iron: 3mg

SLOW COOKER STUFFED PEPPERS
Stuffed peppers are usually filled with white rice. However, this version
features chewy yet tender bulgar and several Mexican ingredients such as
cumin, coriander, chilis in adobo sauce, salsa, corn, and black beans. All in
all, these Mexican-style slow cooker stuffed peppers will make the most
delicious lunch.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 3 hours | Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 390 kcal
Ingredients
2 cups cooked bulgur
2 1/2 cups salsa
1 cup corn kernels
1 15 oz. can black beans, drained, rinsed
1 white onion, diced
2 cloves garlic, diced
1/4 cup chilis in adobo sauce, drained diced
1 teaspoon coriander
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
1/2 teaspoon smoked paprika
1/4 teaspoon salt
4 large bell peppers tops, seeds, and veins removed
For the avocado sauce:
1 large avocado
Juice of 1 lime
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 garlic clove grated
2 tablespoons of water
Instructions
1. Lightly spray the slow cooker with oil or non-stick cooking spray to

prevent the peppers from sticking.
2. Combine the bulgur, salsa, corn kernels, black beans, white onion,
garlic, chilis in adobo sauce, coriander, cumin, chili powder, smoked
paprika, and salt in a bowl until well incorporated.
3. Stuff the bulgur mixture into each pepper and place them into the slow
cooker.
4. Cook the peppers for 3 hours on high.
5. In the meantime, place the avocado into a large bowl and mash it with a
fork.
6. Add the lime juice, garlic, and salt and mix to combine.
7. Add the water to the avocado sauce a tablespoon at a time and mix until
it reaches your desired consistency.
8. Place the stuffed peppers onto a platter in drizzle the avocado sauce over
each pepper.
9. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 390 | Carbohydrates: 64.3g | Fiber: 18.8g | Protein: 12.6g | Fat:
12.8g | Saturated Fat: 2.3g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 1829mg |
Potassium: 1334mg | Sugar: 16.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 119mg |
Iron: 5mg

ROASTED SWEET POTATO TACOS
Sweet potatoes are coated with chili powder oil and salt, then roasted to
perfection before being added to a warm corn tortilla. The sweet potato tacos
are topped with a zesty sweet coleslaw, fresh mangoes, creamy black beans,
and a smoky paprika herb sauce.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 3 hours minutes | Total Time: 30
minutes| Servings: 4| Calories: 469 kcal
Instructions
2 medium sweet potatoes, peeled, diced into 1/2-inch pieces
1 1/2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 teaspoons dried basil
1 tablespoon chili powder
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
8 oz. coleslaw mix
1 shallot minced
2 tablespoons white sugar
Juice of 1/2 lime
1/4 cup vegan sour cream
1 teaspoon dried dill
1 teaspoon dried chives
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
4 6-inch corn tortillas
1 15 oz. can black beans
1 large mango, peeled, diced
4 tablespoons freshly chopped cilantro
Instructions
1. Set your oven to 450°F.
2. Put the sweet potatoes onto a baking sheet and add the vegetable oil,
basil, chili powder, salt, and black pepper. Toss to coat the sweet
potatoes in the seasoning.

3. Roast the sweet potatoes for 10-15 minutes until they are tender.
4. Add the coleslaw mix, shallot, white sugar, and lime juice to a bowl and
toss to combine.
5. Mix the sour cream, dill, chives, and smoked paprika in a bowl until
combined.
6. Wrap the tortillas with foil and let them warm in the oven for 2-3
minutes.
7. Remove the sweet potatoes from the oven and let them cool slightly.
8. Arrange the tacos on a taco stand and divide the roasted potatoes
between each tortilla.
9. Top with the black beans, mangoes, coleslaw, and sour cream mixture.
10. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 469 | Carbohydrates: 82.1g | Fiber: 16.1g | Protein: 13.9g | Fat:
12.1g | Saturated Fat: 4g | Cholesterol: 5mg | Sodium: 677mg | Potassium:
757mg | Sugar: 23.8g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 110mg | Iron: 4mg

MEDITTERANEAN ENCHILADA
CASSEROLE
This healthy Meditteranean spin on enchiladas features olives and artichokes
as well as the characteristic red-brown enchilada sauce. Tortillas, avocados,
green onions, artichokes, and olives, are layered together and smothered with
enchilada sauce, and baked until the tortillas soften and the casserole is nice
and hot.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 1 hour 15 minutes| Total Time: 1 hour
15 minutes| Servings: 6| Calories: 396kcal
Ingredients
For the enchilada sauce:
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium yellow onion, diced
1 red bell pepper, diced
2 garlic cloves, minced
1 serrano pepper, seeded, diced
1 teaspoon Ancho chili powder
1 14.5 oz. can San Marzano tomatoes
1 14.5 oz can fire-roasted diced tomatoes
2 cups low-sodium vegetable broth
1/4 cup parsley, chopped
For the casserole:
8 6-inch corn tortillas
2 15 oz. cans no salt added black beans (about 3 cups) drained, rinsed
1 serrano pepper, seeds removed, thinly sliced
1 cup artichoke hearts, drained, chopped
2 large avocados, cut in half, seed removed, diced
1 cup green onions
3/4 cup low-sodium black olives drained, sliced

Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F.
2. For the enchilada sauce, add the olive oil to a skillet and set it over
medium-high heat.
3. Next, add the diced onions and diced bell peppers to the skillet and
cook them for 5-6 minutes, frequently stirring, until the onions start to
brown.
4. Add the garlic cloves, serrano pepper, Ancho chili powder, San
Marzano organic tomatoes, fire-roasted tomatoes, vegetable broth, and
parsley, and stir to combine.
5. Turn the fire down to medium-low heat and cook the enchilada sauce
for 30 minutes until it thickens slightly.
6. Remove the enchilada sauce from the stove and let it cool slightly.
7. Carefully add the enchilada sauce to a blender and blend it until
smooth.
8. Place the black beans into a bowl and mash them slightly with a fork,
and set them aside.
9. Add a some of the enchilada sauce to a 9 by 13 baking dish and spread
it into an even layer.
10. Add a layer of tortillas to the pan, breaking them up into smaller pieces
if necessary.
11. Add another ladle full of enchilada sauce to the tortillas, then top with
some of the black beans, serrano pepper, artichoke hearts, avocados,
black olives, and green onions.
12. Repeat steps 8-10, then add a final layer of tortillas and the remaining
ranchero sauce.
13. Cover the Mediterranean enchilada casserole with foil and bake it for 30
minutes.
14. Remove the foil from the Mediterranean enchilada casserole and bake it
for another 5 minutes.
15. Top the Mediterranean Enchilada casserole with more sliced black
olives and green onions if desired.
Nutrition Info
Calories: 396| Carbohydrates: 46.5g | Fiber: 17.7 | Protein: 11.4g | Fat: 19.7g

| Saturated Fat: 3.6g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 683mg | Potassium:
734mg | Sugar: 7.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 134g | Iron: 4mg

AVOCADO CHICKPEA CUPS
Fresh avocados, chickpeas, arugula lime zest, and juice, along with
several other ingredients, are tossed together to make a fresh, zesty
salad that's served in a cup. These avocado chickpea cups are the
perfect light yet filling salad.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes| Total Time: 15 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 457kcal
Ingredients
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 tablespoon shallots, minced
2 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon grated ginger
Zest of 1 lime
Juice of 1 lime
2 tablespoons freshly chopped cilantro leaves
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
2 1/2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon zaatar
1 teaspoon Italian seasoning
1 15 oz. can chickpeas, drained, rinsed
8 ounces artichoke hearts, chopped
1/2 cup cucumber, diced
2 small avocados, peeled, seed removed, diced
2 cups fresh arugula leaves
Instructions
1. Whisk the Dijon mustard, shallots, garlic, ginger, lime zest, lime juice,
cilantro leaves, apple cider vinegar, extra virgin olive oil, salt, black
pepper, zaatar, and Italian seasoning in a bowl until well combined.
2. Add the chickpeas, artichoke hearts, cucumber, avocados, and arugula

leaves and mix gently to combine.
3. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 457| Carbohydrates: 43.2g | Fiber: 15.5 | Protein: 9.9g | Fat: 30.4g
| Saturated Fat: 5.6g | Cholesterol: 1mg | Sodium: 1005mg | Potassium:
995mg | Sugar: 2g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 103g | Iron: 3mg

CHICKPEA NOODLE SOUP
When it comes to hearty, healthy soups, look no further than chickpea noodle
soup. It is the perfect soup if you feel under the weather or it's a cold day
outside.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 427kcal
Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 bulb of fennel, diced
1 yellow bell pepper, diced
3 large carrots, peeled, diced
3 stalks celery, diced
1 tablespoon Italian seasoning
2 15 oz. cans chickpeas, drained, rinsed
1 lb. corkscrew pasta
12 cups low-sodium vegetable broth
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
Juice of 1 lemon
Instructions
1. Place a soup pot over medium-high heat and add the olive oil.
2. Add the fennel, bell pepper, carrots, celery, and Italian seasoning and
cook it for 5-6 minutes, often stirring, until the vegetables start to soften.
3. Stir in the chickpeas, corkscrew pasta, vegetable broth, salt, and pepper,
and let the chickpea noodle soup come to a boil.
4. Cook the chickpea noodle soup for 6-7 minutes until the corkscrew
pasta is al dente.
5. Add the lemon juice to the chickpea noodle soup and stir to combine.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info

Calories: 427| Carbohydrates: 76.9g | Fiber: 9.4 | Protein: 16.9g | Fat: 4.8g |
Saturated Fat: 0.5g | Cholesterol: 1mg | Sodium: 802mg | Potassium: 491mg
| Sugar: 4.6g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 70g | Iron: 4mg

CREAMY COCONUT LENTIL CURRY
Nothing hits the spot like like a delicious lentil curry. This lentil curry
contains spices like cumin, curry powder, smoked paprika, aromatic veggies
like onions and garlic, and protein-packed chickpeas. The curry is cooked
until the lentils are tender, then coconut milk is stirred in at the last second to
give the spicy curry a creamy texture and slightly sweet coconut flavor.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 40 minutes| Total Time: 55 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 312kcal
Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 medium white onion
1 carrot, peeled, diced
4 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon ginger, minced
1 teaspoon ground cumin
2 teaspoons chili powder
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon curry powder
1 teaspoon red chili paste
1 cup green lentils
3 cups low-sodium vegetable broth
3 Roma tomatoes, diced
1/2 cup full-fat coconut milk
Instructions
1. Place the olive oil into a deep pot and set it over medium-high heat.
2. Add the onions and carrots to the pot and cook them for 3-5 minutes
until the onions are translucent.
3. Add the garlic, ginger, cumin, chili powder, smoked paprika, salt, curry
powder, and red chili paste and cook it for 30 seconds until fragrant.
4. Add the tomatoes and cook them for 3-4 minutes until the tomatoes

soften.
5. Add the green lentils and vegetable broth and cook it for 15-20 minutes,
covered until the lentils are tender.
6. Decrease the fire to low and stir in the coconut milk and cook it for 2
minutes.
7. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 312| Carbohydrates: 41.5g | Fiber: 17.8 | Protein: 16g | Fat: 9.8g |
Saturated Fat: 2.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 685mg | Potassium: 851mg
| Sugar: 6g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 68g | Iron: 5mg

SPINACH QUESADILLAS
At first glance, a spinach quesadilla sounds boring/ However, there is nothing
boring about this spinach quesadilla. It features sauteed spinach, a creamy,
cheesy cashew sauce, and crunchy pine nuts. It is cooked in a skillet until it is
golden brown, and the spinach filling is warm, delicious, and gooey.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 10 minutes| Total Time: 20 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 341kcal
Ingredients
4 6-inch whole-wheat tortillas
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 onion, minced
1 tablespoon jalapeno, diced
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 cups fresh spinach leaves
1/2 cup cashews soaked in water for at least 2 hours, drained
1/4 cup water
3 tablespoons vegan mayonnaise
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1/4 cup pinenuts
Instructions
1. Place the 1 tablespoon of vegetable oil into a skillet and set it over
medium-high heat.
2. Add the diced onions, jalapeno, and garlic and cook it for 2-3 minutes
until the onions soften.
3. Add the spinach and cook it for 2-3 minutes until it wilts. Remove the
spinach from the heat and set it aside.
4. Place the cashews, water, vegan mayonnaise, and nutritional yeast into a
blender and blend until it is smooth and creamy.
5. Add the cashew mixture to the spinach and stir to combine.

6. Add the pine nuts, salt, and pepper and stir to combine.
7. To make the spinach quesadillas, add a tablespoon of vegetable oil to a
clean skillet.
8. Add a whole-wheat tortilla to the skillet and spread half of the spinach
cashew mixture over the tortilla.
9. Top with another tortilla, press it down slightly and cook it for 1-2
minutes. Flip the spinach quesadilla over and cook it for another 1-2
minutes until golden brown.
10. Remove the spinach quesadilla from the skillet and repeat steps 7-9 with
the remaining ingredients.
11. Let the quesadillas rest for 2-3 minutes, then cut each quesadilla in 4.
12. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 341| Carbohydrates: 24.3g | Fiber: 4.7 | Protein: 7g | Fat: 25.5g |
Saturated Fat: 4.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 693mg | Potassium: 338mg
| Sugar: 2.6g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 55g | Iron: 3mg

SNACKS

SMOKY EGGPLANT DIP
Eggplants are roasted till they fall apart, tender and smoky, then combined
with tahini and spices. The dip is topped with fresh cherry tomatoes,
cucumbers, fresh lime juice dill, and toasted pine nuts. This fancy dip is
extremely delicious, especially when paired with crackers, pita bread, or even
crostini.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 55 minutes| Total Time: 1 hour 5
minutes| Servings: 6| Calories: 113kcal
Ingredients
1 large eggplant
2 tablespoons tahini paste
1 1/2 tablespoons coconut yogurt
1 garlic clove, chopped
2 shallots, diced
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
3/4 teaspoon chili powder
1 cup cherry tomatoes
1 cup cucumbers, diced
juice of 1 lemon
1/4 cup fresh dill, chopped
1/4 cup toasted pine nuts
pita chips or whole wheat crackers for serving
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 400°F.
2. Place the eggplant onto a sheet pan and use a fork to poke holes in the
eggplant.
3. Roast the eggplants for 45-50 minutes, turning them over every 20
minutes.

4. Let the eggplant cool until it is cool to the touch.
5. Peel the skin off and place the eggplant into a colander and let it sit for 3
minutes.
6. Place the eggplant into the food processor and add the tahini paste,
coconut yogurt, garlic, shallots, apple cider vinegar, salt, black pepper,
smoked paprika, and chili powder and blend until combined.
7. Place the eggplant dip into a bowl and top with the tomatoes and
cucumber, and squeeze the lemon juice over the dip.
8. Add the fresh dill and pinenuts.
9. Serve the dip with pita chips or whole wheat crackers, and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 113 | Carbohydrates: 11.4g | Fiber: 4.4g | Protein: 3.7g | Fat: 7.2g |
Saturated Fat: 0.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 408mg | Potassium: 455mg
| Sugar: 4g | Vitamin D: 9mg | Calcium: 80mg | Iron: 2mg

BAKED ROOT VEGETABLE CHIPS
WITH HERB DIPPING SAUCE
Turnips, parsnips, sweet potatoes, and beets are baked until they are nice and
crisp. The chips are served with herb sauce made from coconut milk, coconut
yogurt parsely, chives, and dill.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 30 minutes| Total Time: 40 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 251kcal
Ingredients
For the herb dipping sauce:
7 oz. (7/8 cup) cup coconut yogurt
6 tablespoons full-fat coconut milk
2 tablespoons freshly minced parsley
2 tablespoons freshly minced dill
2 tablespoons freshly minced chives
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 teaspoon lemon zest
1 teaspoon maple syrup
1 teaspoon salt
For the root vegetable chips:
2 tablespoons olive oil
1/2 teaspoon dried rosemary
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon onion powder
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander
1/4 teaspoon kosher salt
1 medium turnip, peeled, sliced into 1/4-inch thick slices
1 large parsnip, sliced into 1/4-inch thick slices
1 medium sweet potato, sliced into 1/4-inch thick slices
1 medium golden beet, sliced into 1/4-inch thick slices
1 medium red beet, sliced into 1/4-inch thick slices

Instructions
1. To make the herb sauce, whisk the coconut yogurt, coconut milk,
parsley, dill, chives, garlic, lemon zest, maple syrup, and salt in a small
bowl until combined.
2. Cover the herb sauce and chill it in the fridge until you are ready to serve
the beet chips.
3. To make vegetable chips, set the oven to 400ºF.
4. Whisk the olive oil, rosemary, garlic powder, onion powder, ground
coriander, and kosher salt in a large bowl.
5. Add the turnips, parsnips, sweet potato, and beets to the bowl and toss
to coat them in the oil and seasoning.
6. Arrange the vegetables on two wire racks set on two baking sheets. Bake
the vegetable chips for 20-30 minutes until they are crisp.
7. Let the vegetable chips cool completely before serving with the herb
sauce.
8. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 251 | Carbohydrates: 27.3g | Fiber: 5.4g | Protein:6.1g | Fat: 15.7g
| Saturated Fat: 8g | Cholesterol: 2mg | Sodium: 1267mg | Potassium: 652mg
| Sugar: 13.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 112mg | Iron: 3mg

ROSEMARY CHICKPEA CRACKERS
Made with 8 simple ingredients, these rosemary chickpea crackers are simply
amazing. Made with chickpea flour, seasoning, rosemary, and water, these
chickpea crackers are easy to make and full of plant-based protein, which
keeps you satiated.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 35 minutes|
Servings: 5| Calories: 125kcal
Ingredients
1 cup chickpea flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon sea salt
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon onion powder
1 teaspoon dried rosemary, chopped
3 tablespoons water
2 tablespoons olive oil
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F.
2. Whisk the chickpea garbanzo bean flour, baking powder, 1/2 teaspoon
sea salt, garlic powder, onion powder, rosemary, water, and olive oil in a
bowl until a dough forms.
3. Place the chickpea dough onto a sheet of parchment paper. Flatten the
chickpea dough slightly and cover it with another sheet of parchment
paper.
4. Roll the chickpea dough out until it is 1/8-inch in thickness. Rome the
top parchment paper and use a knife to cut the dough into squares.
5. Poke each chickpea cracker with a fork and sprinkle the remaining 1/2
teaspoon of salt.
6. Carefully place the crackers onto parchment-lined baking sheets and
bake them for 20 minutes until they are golden brown.
7. Let the chickpea crackers cool completely.

8. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 125 | Carbohydrates: 12.1g | Fiber: 2.2g | Protein: 4.3g | Fat: 6.9g |
Saturated Fat: 1g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 201mg | Potassium: 270mg |
Sugar: 2.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 57mg | Iron: 1mg

APPLE PIZZAS
Apple pizzas are a simple, quick healthy snack that only takes 10 minutes to
make. Best of all, you can customize your apple pizzas. You can use fruits
such as berries, chia seeds, hemp seeds, raisins, coconut, granola, or any
topping you desire.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes| Total Time: 10 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 229kcal
Ingredients
2 cups water
1 tablespoon lemon juice
2 apples
2 tablespoons peanut butter
1 banana, sliced
5 blueberries
5 strawberries
1/4 cup granola
4 teaspoons hemp seeds
Instructions
1. Place 2 cups of water into a bowl and add the lemon juice.
2. Core the apples, then cut them into 1/4-inch slices and put them into the
lemon water for 4 minutes.
3. Next, take the apple slices out of the lemon water and dry them with
paper towels.
4. Spread 1 teaspoon of the peanut butter onto each apple slice.
5. Top with the banana, blueberries, strawberries, granola, and hemp
seeds.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 229 | Carbohydrates: 45.7g | Fiber: 7.8g | Protein: 7.2g | Fat: 10.5g |
Saturated Fat: 1.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 47mg | Potassium: 497mg |

Sugar: 28.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 24mg | Iron: 4mg

SAVORY SPICED ROASTED NUTS
Roasted nuts are the ideal snack. Nuts are filled with healthy fats and filling
protein, making them a popular snack option. This version features savory
herbs like thyme, spices such as smoked paprika, and sweet flavors from
maple syrup and coconut sugar.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 20 minutes|
Servings: 12| Calories: 187kcal
Ingredients
1 cup raw unsalted almonds
1 cup raw unsalted cashews
1/2 cup raw unsalted hazelnuts
1/2 cup raw unsalted pecan
1/2 cup raw unsalted pistachios
1/2 cup raw macadamia nuts
2 tablespoons pure maple syrup
2 tablespoons fresh thyme, minced
1 tablespoon brown sugar
1 teaspoon salt
3/4 teaspoon onion powder
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
1/4 teaspoon smoked paprika
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 325°F, then line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment
paper.
2. Place the almonds, cashews, hazelnuts, pecan halves, pistachios,
macadamia nuts, and the maple syrup and toss to coat the nuts with the
maple syrup.
3. Whisk the thyme, brown sugar, salt, onion powder, black pepper, and
smoked paprika in a small bowl, then add it to the nuts and toss to coat
them evenly in the spices.
4. Place the nuts onto the prepared baking sheet and bake them for 12-15

minutes, stirring them every 5 minutes until they are fragrant.
5. Let the nuts cool completely.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 187 | Carbohydrates: 8.8g | Fiber: 7.8g | Protein: 3.5g | Fat: 15.8g |
Saturated Fat: 1.6g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 196mg | Potassium: 93mg |
Sugar: 4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 56mg | Iron: 2mg

DRIED FRUIT CHEWY OAT BARS
Sweetened with maple syrup, these oat bars are healthy and delicious. They
are studded with dried currants, dried cherries, and coconut flakes, providing
added texture and sweetness.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 20 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 200kcal
Ingredients
2 ripe bananas, mashed
2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats
1/2 cup unsweetened coconut flakes
1/4 cup dried currants
1/4 cup dried cherries
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon nutmeg
4 tablespoons maple syrup
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then line an 8 by 8 square baking dish with
parchment paper.
2. Whisk the ripe bananas, oats, coconut flakes, currants, cherries, vanilla
extract, sea salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and maple syrup until combined.
3. Pour the oat bar batter into the prepared pan and press it into an even
layer.
4. Bake the oat bars for 22-27 minutes until they firm up, and the edges
start to turn brown.
5. Let the oat bars cool completely before slicing them into 8 bars.
Nutrition Info
Calories: 200 | Carbohydrates: 33.9g | Fiber: 4.5g | Protein: 2.8g | Fat: 6.8g |
Saturated Fat: 5.2g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 61mg | Potassium: 205mg |

Sugar: 17.5g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 21mg | Iron: 1mg

BAKED ZUCCHINI CHIPS
Thinly sliced zucchini are tossed with olive oil, sea salt, sumac, and
nutritional yeast and baked until they are crisp and delicious. Best of all,
zucchini is a low-calorie vegetable. One cup of sliced zucchini is 19 calories,
while one serving of these zucchini chips contains 41 calories.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 3 hours| Total Time: 3 hours 10
minutes| Servings: 6| Calories: 41kcal
Ingredients
2 medium zucchini, cut into 1/4-inch slices
1 tablespoon olive oil
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sumac
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
Instructions
1. Place the zucchini onto sheets of paper towels and cover them with
another layer of paper towels and let them sit for 2 hours.
2. Set the oven to 225°F.
3. Whisk the olive oil, salt, sumac, and nutritional yeast in a bowl and toss
to coat the zucchini chips in the oil mixture.
4. Arrange the zucchini chips onto a par5chment-lined cookie sheet and
set.
5. Bake the zucchini chips for 2-3 hours until they are crisp.
6. Let the zucchini chips cool completely.
7. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 41 | Carbohydrates: 3.4g | Fiber: 1.4g | Protein: 2.1g | Fat: 2.6g |
Saturated Fat: 0.3g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 201mg | Potassium: 171mg
| Sugar: 1.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 10mg | Iron: 0mg

BROWN SUGAR CARROT AND
BROCCOLI CHIPS
Sweet carrots pair well with the subtle flavor of broccoli stalks in chip form.
The carrots and broccoli chips are tossed in oil, salt, black pepper, brown
sugar, and rosemary, creating a savory-sweet chip with a herbaceous flavor.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 40 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 70kcal
Ingredients
2 large broccoli stems, cut into 1/2-inch slices
2 raw carrots, peeled, stems removed, cut into 1/2-inch slices
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 tablespoon brown sugar
1 tablespoon fresh rosemary, minced
Instructions
1. Set oven to 400°F, then line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
2. Place the broccoli stems, carrots, olive oil, salt, black pepper, brown
sugar, and rosemary in a bowl. Toss to coat the carrots and broccoli
stems in the seasoning.
3. Arrange the carrot and broccoli chips onto the prepared baking sheet in
an even layer and cook them for 30-40 minutes, turning them over every
5-10 minutes.
4. Let the carrot and broccoli chips cool completely.
5. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 70 | Carbohydrates: 8.9g | Fiber: 2.4g | Protein: 2g | Fat: 3.8g |
Saturated Fat: 0.2g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 619mg | Potassium: 297mg
| Sugar: 4.5g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 51mg | Iron: 1mg


BAKED CUCUMBER CHIPS
Who needs salt and vinegar chips when you've got salt and vinegar cucumber
chips. Thinly sliced cucumbers are tossed with oil, vinegar, salt, dill, and
onion powder, then baked until they are nice and crispy.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 3 hours| Total Time: 3 hours 10
minutes| Servings: 4| Calories: 85kcal
Ingredients
2 medium cucumbers, cut into 1/4-inch slices
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 teaspoons apple cider vinegar
1/2 teaspoon sea salt
1 teaspoon fresh dill minced finely
1 teaspoon onion powder
Instructions
1. Place the cucumber onto sheets of paper towels and cover them with
another layer of paper towels and let them sit for 15 minutes to remove
excess moisture.
2. Set the oven to 175°F.
3. Place the cucumber chips into a bowl, add the olive oil, sea salt, dill, and
onion powder, and toss to coat.
4. Place the cucumber chips onto parchment-lined baking sheets and bake
them for 2-3 hours until they are crispy.
5. Let the cucumber chips cool completely.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 85 | Carbohydrates: 6g | Fiber: 0.8g | Protein: 1.1g | Fat: 7.2g |
Saturated Fat: 1.1g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 238mg | Potassium: 237mg
| Sugar: 2.7g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 27mg | Iron: 0mg

QUINOA STICKS
These quinoa tics are the perfect snack. They are made with filling whole
grain quinoa, seeds like flax seeds, sesame seeds, chia seeds, hemp seeds, and
almonds. The ingredients are blended into a paste-like dough, spread onto a
baking sheet, and baked until they are golden brown, crunchy, and delicious.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 1 hour 10 minutes| Total Time: 1 hour
25 minutes| Servings: 25| Calories: 89kcal
Ingredients
2 cups cold cooked quinoa
1/2 cup raw unsalted almonds
1/3 cup flaxseeds
1/4 cup sesame seeds
1/4 cup chia seeds
2 tablespoons hemp seeds
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1/2 tablespoons sea salt
4 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons agave nectar
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 370°F.
2. Place the quinoa, almonds, flaxseeds, sesame seeds, chia seeds, hemp
seeds, oregano leaves, sea salt, olive oil, and agave nectar into a food
processor and blend until it is a smooth paste.
3. Place the quinoa mixture onto a sheet of parchment paper and spread it
into a thin, even layer.
4. Cover the quinoa paste with another sheet of parchment and roll them
out until they are 1/4 inch in thickness.
5. Cut the quinoa mixture into 1/2-1-inch strips using a pizza cutter or
sharp knife.
6. Lift the top parchment paper off of the quinoa mixture and baking
sheet.ff

7. Bake the quinoa sticks for 15 minutes.
8. Decrease the oven's temperature to 300°F and bake the quinoa sticks for
50 minutes.
9. Remove the quinoa sticks and cut them quinoa sticks using a pizza
cutter, following the initial lines you made before you baked them.
10. Let the quinoa sticks cool completely before you break them into sticks.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 89 | Carbohydrates: 7.1g | Fiber: 2.2g | Protein: 2.5g | Fat: 5.9g |
Saturated Fat: 0.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 116mg | Potassium: 54mg |
Sugar: 1.4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 36mg | Iron: 3mg

SPICED GLUTEN-FREE CRACKERS
These spiced crackers are crunchy and tasty. They are flavored with cumin,
caraway seeds, turmeric, and smoked paprika. Best of all, these spices are
gluten-free and vegan.
Prep Time: 25 minutes| Cook Time: 10 minutes| Total Time: 25 minutes|
Servings: 6| Calories: 175kcal
Ingredients
1 1/4 cups gluten-free all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons ground caraway seeds
2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
2 teaspoon sea salt
1/2 teaspoon baking powder
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
1/2 cup water
1/4 teaspoon white vinegar
4 tablespoons olive oil
Instructions
1. Whisk the all-purpose gluten-free flour, ground caraway seeds, ground
cumin, smoked paprika, ground turmeric, sea salt, baking powder, and
black pepper in a bowl until it is combined.
2. Whisk the water, white vinegar, and 2 tablespoons in a separate bowl
until combined, then add it to the dry ingredients.
3. Mix until a soft yet smooth dough forms. Shape the spiced cracker
dough into a ball, wrap it with plastic wrap, and chill it in the fridge for
30 minutes.
4. Set the oven to 425°F, then line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
5. Remove the spiced cracker dough from the fridge and divide it into 4
portions.
6. Place one of the spiced cracker dough balls onto 2 parchment paper

sheets and roll them out until it is 1/4-inch thick.
7. Lift the top layer of parchment paper off of the spiced cracker dough
and cut it in to cut the dough into crackers.
8. Place the chickpea crackers onto a parchment-lined baking sheet and
repeat until all of the spice cracker dough has been rolled out.
9. Brush the spiced cracker dough with olive oil and bake them for 10
minutes until the edges start to brown and the crackers are firm.
10. Let the spiced crackers cool completely.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 175 | Carbohydrates: 19.7g | Fiber: 2.8g | Protein: 2.7g | Fat: 10g |
Saturated Fat: 1.4g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 626mg | Potassium: 74mg |
Sugar: 0.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 27mg | Iron: 1mg

GOOSEBERRY GRANOLA
Gooseberries have a sweet, sour, and robust flavor that works by making a
simple granola recipe pop with color and flavor. You can eat this gooseberry
granola on its own with milk or add it to a bowl of vegan yogurt. Either way,
this gooseberry granola will be delicious.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 40 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 254kcal
Ingredients
2 1/2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats
7 tablespoons agave nectar
3 tablespoons coconut oil
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon cardamom
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
1/2 cup raw unsalted pecans, roughly chopped
1/4 cup raw macadamia nuts, roughly chopped
1/2 cup dried gooseberries
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 275°F, then line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
2. Place the oats into a bowl and set it aside.
3. Place the agave nectar, coconut oil, cinnamon, cardamom, and sea salt
in a small saucepan, whisk to combine, and set it over medium-low.
4. Cook the agave nectar for 1-2 minutes, constantly whisking until it is
heated through, then add it to the oats and stir to coat the oats in the
mixture.
5. Place the oats onto the prepared pan and spread it into an even layer.
6. Bake the gooseberry granola for 30 minutes.
7. Remove the gooseberry granola from the oven and add the pecans and
macadamia nuts.
8. Bake the granola for an additional 8 minutes.
9. Remove the gooseberry granola from the oven and add the

gooseberries; bake the granola for another 2 minutes.
10. Remove the gooseberry granola from the oven and let it cool
completely.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 254 | Carbohydrates: 32.6g | Fiber: 4.3g | Protein: 2.9g | Fat: 13.8g
| Saturated Fat: 6.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 79mg | Potassium: 118mg
| Sugar: 18g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 19mg | Iron: 1mg

DINNER

VEGAN JACKFRUIT PULLED PORK
Typically, ripe jackfruit has a sweet flavor. However, young green jackfruit
has a subtle flavor that is perfect for pulled jackfruit. It soaks up the BBQ
sauce creating a delicious meal that's served on a bun and topped with creamy
coleslaw.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 25 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 320 kcal
Ingredients
For the coleslaw:
1/3 cup vegan mayonnaise
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1 tablespoon white sugar
1teaspoon salt
1/8 teaspoon black pepper
1 1/2 cups white cabbage, sliced thinly
1/4 cup red cabbage, thinly sliced
1 small carrot, thinly sliced
For the pulled pork:
2 14 oz. cans of young green jackfruit (about 3 cups of jackfruit) in water,
drained, rinsed
2 tablespoons brown rice flour
1/4 cup yellow onion, minced
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon liquid smoke
1/2 teaspoon smoked paprika
3/4 cup barbecue sauce
1/4 cup water
4 hamburger rolls

Instructions
1. To make the coleslaw, whisk the vegan mayonnaise, apple cider vinegar,
Dijon mustard, sugar, salt, and black pepper in a bowl until combined.
2. Add the shredded white cabbage, red cabbage, and carrots and toss to
coat them in the dressing. Cover the coleslaw and place it in the fridge
until the pulled jackfruit is ready.
3. Place the jack fruit onto the cutting pork and pull it apart into strips that
look like pulled pork.
4. Place the pulled jackfruit into a skillet and set it over medium-high heat.
5. Sprinkle the brown rice flour over the jack fruit and stir to combine.
6. Add the yellow onion, garlic powder, chili powder, liquid smoke,
smoked paprika, barbecue sauce, and water, and stir to combine.
7. Turn the flame to medium-low and cook the pulled jackfruit for 10-15
minutes, periodically stirring until it is thoroughly heated.
8. Add the pulled jackfruit to the bottom bun, then add the coleslaw and
the top bun.
9. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 320 | Carbohydrates: 57.4g | Fiber: 8.3g | Protein: 6.2g | Fat: 7.1g |
Saturated Fat: 0.4g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 1552mg | Potassium: 278mg
| Sugar: 20.4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 90mg | Iron: 5mg

CHIMICHURRI CAULIFLOWER STEAKS
First, a large head of cauliflower is cut into slices, brushed with oil, and
seasoned before it is roasted until golden brown. It is slathered with freshly
made chimichurri sauce before it is served, resulting in the perfect low-carb
dinner.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 20 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 278 kcal
Ingredients
For the cauliflower:
1 large head cauliflower, sliced into 1-inch slices
2-4 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon back pepper
1/4 teaspoon cumin
For the chimi churi sauce:
1/4 cup olive oil
2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
2 garlic cloves
1/2 cup fresh parsley
1/4 cup fresh cilantro
1/4 teaspoon smoked paprika
1/4 teaspoon cumin
1/2 teaspoon red pepper flakes
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 400°F.
2. Place the cauliflower steaks onto a baking sheet, brush them with olive
oil, and sprinkle them with salt, black pepper, and cumin.
3. Bake the cauliflower steaks for 15-20 minutes until the cauliflower is
golden brown.

4. Meanwhile, place the olive oil, apple cider vinegar, garlic cloves, parsley,
cilantro, smoked paprika, cumin, and red pepper flakes into a blender
and blend until it is smooth.
5. Place the cauliflower steaks onto a plate and serve them with the
chimichurri sauce.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 278 | Carbohydrates: 12.6g | Fiber: 5.7g | Protein: 4.6g | Fat: 25.6g
| Saturated Fat: 3.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 650mg | Potassium:
709mg | Sugar: 5.2g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 64mg | Iron: 2mg

BUFFALO CAULIFLOWER BROWN
RICE MEATBALLS
Everyone craves a juicy meatball, and these buffalo cauliflower brown rice
meatballs are spicy, delicious, and juicy. They are made from fresh Buffalo
sauce, steamed cauliflower, and brown rice, then seared and coated with more
spicy Buffalo sauce before being baked until the meatballs are soft on the
inside and form on the outside.
Prep Time: 30 minutes| Cook Time: 30 minutes| Total Time: 1 hour|
Servings: 4| Calories: 446 kcal
Ingredients
For the Buffalo sauce:
1/4 cup vegan butter
1/2 cup hot sauce
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1/4 teaspoon smoked paprika
1/4 teaspoon chili powder
For the cauliflower barley meatballs:
1 cup brown rice
2 cups + 2-3 tablespoons of water
1 medium head of cauliflower, cut into florets
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 shallots, minced
3/4 cup breadcrumbs
1/2 teaspoon dried basil
2 tablespoons oat flour
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 tablespoon olive oil
Instructions

1. To make the buffalo sauce, place the vegan butter into a microwave-safe
bowl and heat it in the microwave for 1-2 minutes until it's melted.
2. Add the hot sauce, garlic powder, smoked paprika, and chili powder to
the melted vegan butter and whisk to combine. Set the buffalo sauce
aside.
3. Set the oven to 375°F.
4. To cook the brown rice, add 2 cups of water into a saucepan and set it
over medium-high heat.
5. Add the brown rice, once the water comes to a boil. Let it come to a
boil.
6. Decrease the flame to medium-low, cover the brown rice, and cook it
for 30 minutes.
7. Remove the brown rice from the stove and let it sit covered.
8. Fluff the brown rice with a fork and set it aside.
9. Add the cauliflower florets to a bowl and add 2-3 tablespoons of water
into a bowl.
10. Set a large plate over the cauliflower and heat the cauliflower in the
microwave for 3-4 minutes.
11. Let the steamed cauliflower sit in the microwave for 1 minute before
removing it.
12. Drain the cauliflower, add half of it to a food processor along with the
garlic, and pulse it for 5-10 seconds until smooth.
13. Add the cauliflower mixture to a bowl, add the remaining cauliflower to
the food processor, and pulse it for 5-10 minutes.
14. Add the brown rice, bread crumbs, basil, oat flour, salt, black pepper,
and half of the buffalo sauce and mix until combined.
15. Chill the buffalo cauliflower brown rice batter in the fridge for 15
minutes.
16. Remove the buffalo cauliflower brown rice batter from the fridge and
shape the batter into golf-sized meatballs.
17. Place the buffalo cauliflower brown rice meatballs onto a parchment-
lined baking sheet.
18. Place a tablespoon of olive oil into a large skillet and set it over medium-
high heat.
19. Add the buffalo cauliflower brown rice meatballs and cook them for 3-4
minutes per side until they are golden brown.

20. Pour 1 tablespoon of the remaining buffalo sauce over each buffalo
cauliflower brown rice meatball. Do not add too much buffalo sauce, or
the meatballs will get soggy.
21. Place the buffalo meatballs onto a rimmed baking sheet and bake them
for 15 minutes until the buffalo sauce starts to carmelize.
22. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 446 | Carbohydrates: 63.9g | Fiber: 6.8g | Protein: 10.2g | Fat:
17.4g | Saturated Fat: 6.1g | Cholesterol: 15mg | Sodium: 1539mg |
Potassium: 711mg | Sugar: 5.3g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 98mg | Iron:
3mg

BURRITO BOWL
Burrito bowls usually consist of rice. However, this burrito bowl is made
with hearty bulgur instead of rice. Cilantro and lime juice are added to the
bulgar to give it more flavor; then it is topped with sauteed bell peppers,
onions, corn kernels, and beans, then topped with a spicy cream sauce.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 2| Calories: 753 kcal
Ingredients
For the spicy cream sauce:
2 tablespoons vegan mayonnaise
2 tablespoons vegan sour cream
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
1/2 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon white sugar
1 teaspoon hot sauce
1 teaspoon salt
For the cilantro lime bulgar:
2 cups water
1 bulgur
1/4 teaspoon salt
Juice of 1 lime
1/4 cup freshly chopped cilantro
For the burrito bowls:
2 tablespoons of oil
1 bell pepper, deseeded, sliced into 1/4-inch pieces
1/2 cup red onion, sliced into 1/4-inch pieces
1/4 teaspoon chili powder
1/2 cup frozen corn, thawed
1/2 cup black beans, drained, rinsed

1 avocado, cut in half, seed removed, sliced
2 tablespoons freshly chopped cilantro
Instructions
1. To make the creamy, spicy sauce, whisk the vegan mayonnaise, vegan
sour cream, smoked paprika, chili powder, sugar, hot sauce, and salt in a
bowl.
2. Cover the spicy cream sauce with plastic wrap, and chillin the fridge until
you are ready to assemble the burrito bowls.
3. To make the cilantro lime bulgar, place the bulgar, water, and salt into a
saucepan and set it over medium-high heat.
4. Let the bulger come to a boil, then cover it, decrease the heat to
medium-low heat and cook it for 12 minutes until it is tender.
5. Remove the bulgar from the heat and let it stand for 10 minutes.
6. Fluff the bulgar, add the lime juice and cilantro, and stir to combine.
7. To make the burrito bowl, place the olive oil in o a skillet and set it over
medium-high heat.
8. Add the bell peppers and cook them for 2 minutes.
9. Add the onions and chili powder and cook them for an additional 2
minutes.
10. Add the beans and corn and cook it for 1-2 minutes until everything is
heated through. Remove the bell pepper mixture from the stove.
11. Divide the cilantro-lime bulgar between 2 bowls and top with the bell
pepper mixture. Drizzle the burrito bowls with the spiced sauce.
12. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 753 | Carbohydrates: 86g | Fiber: 22g| Protein: 14.5g | Fat: 42g |
Saturated Fat: 8.8g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 1976mg | Potassium:
1098mg | Sugar: 10g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 86mg | Iron: 5mg

GREEK EGGPLANT
Greek-style eggplant is an experience. It contains chickpeas, olives, eggplant,
spices, as well as other flavorful ingredients. The eggplant is cooked partially
on the stove; then, it is allowed to cook in the oven for 45 minutes until it is
tender and delicious.
Prep Time: 20 minutes| Cook Time: 55 minutes| Total Time: 1 hour 15
minutes| Servings: 6| Calories: 209 kcal
Ingredients
3 large eggplants, cut into 1/2-inch cubes
1 tablespoon Kosher salt
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1 large yellow onion, diced
1 red bell pepper, seeds removed, diced
1 carrot, peeled, diced
6 garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons ginger, minced
2 dry bay leaves
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon basil
1/8 teaspoon nutmeg
1/4 teaspoon curry powder
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
1 28 oz. can fire-roasted diced tomatoes
1/2 cup sliced black olives
2 15 oz. cans chickpeas, save the liquid
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 400°F.
2. Place the cubed eggplant into a colander and sprinkle the kosher salt
over it. Let the eggplant sit for 20 minutes, then rinse it with cold water
and pat it dry using paper towels.

3. Place the olive oil into a deep oven-safe skillet and set it over medium-
high heat.
4. Add the onions.,red bell peppers and carrots and cool it for 2-3 minutes,
frequently stirring until the onions soften.
5. Add the garlic, ginger, bay leaves, smoked paprika, cumin, basil, nutmeg,
curry powder, and black pepper and cook it for 1 minute until fragrant.
6. Add the eggplant, tomatoes, olives, chickpeas, and the chickpea liquid
and stir to combine.
7. Cook the Greek eggplant for 10 minutes, often stirring.
8. Cover the Greek eggplant, then transfer it to the oven and cook it for 45
minutes.
9. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 209 | Carbohydrates: 30.3g | Fiber: 9.5g| Protein: 7.1g | Fat: 7.1g |
Saturated Fat: 0.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 1448mg | Potassium: 494mg
| Sugar: 7.1g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 152mg | Iron: 3mg

MUSHROOM FENNEL RISOTTO
Most people think of risotto as a fancy dish that's extremely hard to make.
However, risotto is pretty easy to make. This version features sauteed
mushrooms and fennel, which takes plain old risotto to the next level by
elevating its flavor!
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes| Total Time: 35 minutes |
Servings: 4| Calories: 253 kcal
Ingredients
4 cups low-sodium vegetable broth
2 tablespoons olive oil
8 oz. button mushrooms, cleaned, sliced
3/4 cup fennel, minced
3/4 cup red bell peppers, minced
2 garlic cloves
1 cup arborio rice
1/4 cup dry white wine
1 tablespoon vegan butter
1 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons nutritional yeast
2 tablespoons vegan parmesan cheese
2 tablespoons freshly chopped parsley
Instructions
1. Place the vegetable broth into a medium saucepan and set it over
medium-high heat.
2. In a separate saucepan, add 1 tablespoon of olive oil and set it over
medium-high heat.
3. Add the button mushrooms and cook them for 3-4 minutes, often
stirring, until they are slightly browned.
4. Place the mushrooms onto a plate and add the remaining tablespoon of
olive oil to the same skillet.

5. Add the fennel and cook it for 1-2 minutes until it softens.
6. Add the bell peppers and garlic and cook it for another 1-2 minutes.
7. Add the arborio rice and cook it for 1 minute, periodically stirring to
coat it in the oil.
8. Add the dry white wine, stir to combine, and cook it for 1-2 minutes
until most of the liquid evaporates. Decrease the heat to medium-low.
9. Add 1/2 cup of the warm vegetable broth and stir it often until most of
the liquid evaporates.
10. Repeat, adding the vegetable broth a 1/2 cup at a time until the arborio
rice is al dente (it will take about 15-20 minutes for the risotto to cook).
11. Remove the risotto from the heat and stir in the mushrooms, salt,
pepper, vegan butter, nutritional yeast, and vegan parmesan cheese.
12. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 253 | Carbohydrates: 22.7g | Fiber: 4g| Protein: 9.7g | Fat: 14g |
Saturated Fat: 3.8g | Cholesterol: 4mg | Sodium: 828mg | Potassium: 324mg
| Sugar: 2.3g | Vitamin D: 204mg | Calcium: 28mg | Iron: 4mg

LENTIL LOAF
Lentils make the best meatloaf. However, this is no ordinary lentil loaf. First,
mushrooms and butternut squash are cooked until tender, then combined with
walnuts, pecans, almonds, and lentils to make the best lentil loaf on the
planet.
Prep Time: 30 minutes| Cook Time: 1 hour | Total Time: 1 hour 30 minutes
| Servings: 8| Calories: 462 kcal
Ingredients
For the mushrooms:
1 teaspoon avocado oil
24 oz. (3 cups) button mushrooms, thinly sliced
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
1 1/2 tablespoons coconut aminos
For the butternut squash:
1 tablespoon avocado oil
2 cups butternut squash, peeled, cut into 1/4-inch cubes
1/4 cup water
For the lentil loaf:
1 cup raw unsalted walnuts
1/2 cup raw unsalted pecans
1/2 cup raw unsalted almonds
2 tablespoons fresh rosemary
2 cups cooked brown lentils
1/2 teaspoon sea salt
1/2 teaspoon black pepper
4 tablespoons tomato paste
1/2 cup gluten-free bread crumbs
1/2 cup sugar-free ketchup

Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then line a loaf pan with parchment paper and set
it aside.
2. To make the mushrooms, place a skillet over medium-high heat and
add the avocado oil, mushrooms, salt, pepper, and coconut aminos and
cook it over medium-high heat, often stirring, for 5-8 minutes. Set the
mushrooms aside.
3. To make the butternut squash, add the avocado oil to a skillet and set it
over medium-high heat.
4. Add the butternut squash once the skillet is hot and stir to coat the
squash in the oil.
5. Decrease the heat to medium-low, cover the butternut squash and cook
it for 4 minutes.
6. Turn the squash over, add the water, cover it and cook it for another 5-8
minutes until it is tender.
7. To make the lentil loaf, add the walnuts, almonds, and pecans to a food
processor and pulse the nuts a few times until it resembles a coarse
meal.
8. Add the butternut squash, mushrooms, and rosemary and pulse until
combined.
9. Add the lentils, salt, and pepper, and pulse just until it comes together.
The lentil loaf batter should be coarse, not fine.
10. Place the lentil mixture into a bowl, and add the tomato paste and
coconut aminos.
11. Add the breadcrumbs and mix until a thick dough forms.
12. Plate the lentil loaf into the prepared pan and press it into an even layer
using your hands.
13. Brush the ketchup onto the lentil loaf and bake it for 45 minutes until it
is golden brown. Let the lentil loaf sit for 10-15 minutes before slicing it.
14. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 462 | Carbohydrates: 46.7g | Fiber: 11.1 g| Protein: 15.9g | Fat:
26.6g | Saturated Fat: 3.7g | Cholesterol: 10mg | Sodium: 735mg |
Potassium: 801mg | Sugar: 6g | Vitamin D: 306mg | Calcium: 77mg | Iron:

6mg

ROASTED VEGETABLE CURRY
First, butternut squash, broccoli, and turnips are roasted to perfection, then
added to a rich red curry sauce made with turmeric, red curry paste, and
creamy coconut milk. While you can eat this roasted veget5able curry on its
own, it pairs well with cauliflower rice, bulgar, brown rice, quinoa, or any
other grain.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 25 minutes | Total Time: 30 minutes |
Servings: 4| Calories: 694 kcal
Ingredients
For the roasted vegetables:
1 butternut squash, peeled, cut into 1/2-inch pieces
1 large head of broccoli, cut into florets
1 large turnip, peeled, cut into 12-inch pieces
1 tablespoon avocado oil
1 tablespoon agave nectar
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
For the curry:
2 tablespoons avocado oil
2/3 cups red onions, diced
6 cloves garlic, minced
1/4 cup ginger, minced
6 tablespoons red curry paste
2 14-ounce cans full fat coconut milk
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon ground turmeric
2 tablespoons agave nectar
2 tablespoons tamari
2 tablespoons lime juice
Instructions

1. Set the oven to 375°F, then line a baking sheet with parchment paper
and set it aside.
2. Add the butternut squash, broccoli, turnip, avocado oil, agave nectar,
turmeric, and sea salt to a bowl and toss to combine.
3. Place the butternut sqaush mixture onto the prepared baking sheet and
bake it for 22-25 minutes until the butternut squash and turnips are
tender.
4. To make the curry, add the oil to a deep skillet and set it over medium-
high heat.
5. Add the red onions, garlic, and ginger and cook it for 3 minutes,
constantly stirring.
6. Stir in the red curry paste. Cook it for 2 minutes, periodically stirring
until fragrant.
7. Add the coconut milk, sea salt, turmeric, agave nectar, and tamari and
mix to combine.
8. Allow the curry sauce to come to a boil, then decrease the heat to low
and cool it for 10 minutes.
9. Stir in the lime juice.
10. Add the roasted butternut squash mixture to the curry sauce and cook it
for 1 minute.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 694 | Carbohydrates: 52.9g | Fiber:6.6 g | Protein: 8.2g | Fat: 50.8g
| Saturated Fat: 41.2g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 2012mg | Potassium:
706mg | Sugar: 24.5g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 96mg | Iron: 4mg

PEANUT BUTTER ASIAN NOODLES
These simple Asian noodles are the easiest noodles you will ever cook. They
literally come together in less than 10 minutes. All you have to do is cook the
veggies and brown rice noodles in boiling water and toss them with peanut
butter and coconut aminos.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 8 minutes | Total Time: 13 minutes |
Servings: 4| Calories: 398 kcal
Ingredients
4 cups water
2 teaspoons kosher salt
1 lb. brown rice noodles
3 carrots, sliced into 1/2-inch strips
3 bell peppers, sliced into 1/2-inch strips
3 red onions, cut into 1/2-inch strips
1 cup frozen green peas
1/2 cup peanut butter
2 tablespoons coconut aminos
Instructions
1. Add the water to a large pot and set it over medium-high heat and add
the salt.
2. Place the carrots into the water once it comes to a boil and cook them
for 2-3 minutes.
3. Add the brown rice noodles, bell peppers, onions, and green peas and
cook them for 5 minutes.
4. Drain the brown rice noodles and vegetables in a colander and place
them into a serving dish.
5. Add the peanut butter and coconut aminos and toss to coat the noodles
in the peanut butter until it melts.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info

Calories: 398 | Carbohydrates: 50g | Fiber: 8.4g| Protein: 13.8g | Fat: 18.2g |
Saturated Fat: 3.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 128mg | Potassium: 723mg
| Sugar: 16.8g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 74mg | Iron: 2mg

SWEET POTATO KIDNEY BEAN
BURGERS
Sweet potatoes and kidney beans are the base of this great burger. Best of all,
the sweet potato kidney bean burgers are seared in a skillet, so they will
develop a crispy crust creating a soft interior and crunchy exterior.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 10 minutes | Total Time: 25 minutes |
Servings: 6| Calories: 203 kcal
Ingredients
1 tablespoon ground flaxseed meal
3 tablespoons water
1 15 oz. can kidney of beans, drained, rinsed
2 medium sweet potatoes, cooked, mashed
1/2 cup cooked quinoa
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 shallots, minced
1/4 cup freshly chopped parsley
1 teaspoon chili powder
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander
1/2 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon lime juice
1 tablespoon olive oil
Instructions
1. Mix the ground flaxseed meal and water in a bowl and set it aside for 5
minutes
2. Add the kidney beans to a large bowl and mash them with a fork until
they have a coarse texture.
3. Add the flaxseed mixture, sweet potatoes, quinoa, garlic, shallots,
parsley, chili powder, coriander, basil, salt, and lime juice to the kidney
beans and mix until combined. Form the sweet potato kidney bean
mixture into 6 patties.

4. Place the oil into a skillet and set it over medium-high heat.
5. Add the sweet potato kidney bean burgers to the skillet and cook them
for 5 minutes per side until golden brown.
6. Serve the sweet potato kidney bean burgers on burger buns along with
your favorite burger toppings.
7. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 203 | Carbohydrates: 35g | Fiber: 7.5g| Protein: 7.7g | Fat: 4.4g |
Saturated Fat: 0.6g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 648mg | Potassium:327mg |
Sugar: 4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 54mg | Iron: 2mg

PUMPKIN CANNELLONI
This pumpkin cannelloni is sweet yet savory. A mild sweet filling is stuffed
into partially cooked cannelloni tubes and baked in tomato sauce and a
homemade cashew sauce. This pumpkin cannelloni is utterly delicious!
Prep Time: 20 minutes| Cook Time: 45 minutes | Total Time: 1 hour 5
minutes | Servings: 4| Calories: 603 kcal
Ingredients
For the cashew cream:
1/2 cup raw cashews
1 cup water boiling water
2 garlic cloves
2 shallots
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 14. oz box cannelloni
2 cups tomato sauce
For the pumpkin filling:
1 15 oz. can of pumpkin puree
1 teaspoon nutritional yeast
2 garlic cloves, minced
1/4 cup white onion, minced
1/4 cup vegan sour cream
1/2 teaspoon salt
Instructions
1. To make the cashew cream sauce, place the cashews in a bowl, add the
hot water and let them soak for 30 minutes.
2. Reserve 1/2 cup of the soaking liquid, then drain the cashews.
3. Place the reserved 1/2 cup of soaking liquid, cashews, garlic, nutritional
yeast, and salt into a blender. Blend the cashew mixture until it is

smooth.
4. Place the cashew cream into a bowl, cover it, and chill it in the fridge
until you are ready to assemble the cannelloni.
5. Cook the cannelloni in a pot of salted boiling water according to the
manufacturer's instructions.
6. Meanwhile, to make the pumpkin filling, mix the pumpkin puree,
nutritional yeast, garlic, onion, vegan sour cream, and salt in a bowl until
combined.
7. Drain the cannelloni in a colander and run cold water over the pasta. Set
the cannelloni aside.
8. Set the oven to 375°F.
9. Add the tomato sauce to the bottom of an oven-safe casserole dish.
10. Drop spoonfuls of the cashew cream sauce over the tomato sauce. Use
about half of the cashew cream sauce.
11. Place the pumpkin filling into a piping bag and carefully pipe the filling
into the cannelloni tubes.
12. Place the cannelloni into the baking dish and cover them with the
remaining cashew cheese.
13. Cover the pumpkin cannelloni tightly with foil and bake it for 45
minutes.
14. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 603 | Carbohydrates: 100.9g | Fiber:11.1| Protein: 10.1g | Fat:
14.4g | Saturated Fat: 4.8g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 676mg | Potassium:
395mg | Sugar: 12.6g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 57mg | Iron: 8mg

DESSERT

BERRY QUINOA PARFAIT
This rich protein-filled dessert consists of quinoa, oat, milk, fresh berries,
cashew butter, and maple syrup. This berry quinoa parfait is an easy,
delicious dessert that can be made in a few minutes!
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minute| Total Time: 6 minutes|
Servings: 4| Calories: 549 kcal
Ingredients
2 cups cooked quinoa
1 cup vanilla oat milk
1 cup coconut yogurt
1/2 cup strawberries
1/4 cup raspberries
1/4 cup blueberries
4 tablespoon cashew butter
4 tablespoons maple syrup
Instructions
1. Add 1/2 cup of quinoa to 4 Mason jars or dessert glasses.
2. Add 1/4 cup of oat milk to each Mason jar or dessert glass, then add 1/4
cup of yogurt to each jar or glass.
3. Divide the strawberries, raspberries, and blueberries between each jar,
then top each parfait with a tablespoon of cashew butter and 1
tablespoon of maple syrup.
4. Cover the quinoa parfaits and refrigerate them for 8 hours.
5. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 549 | Carbohydrates: 84.8g | Fiber: 7.9g | Protein: 19.1g | Fat:
16.6g | Saturated Fat: 4.7g | Cholesterol: 3mg | Sodium: 53mg | Potassium:
683mg | Sugar: 20.8g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 184mg | Iron: 9mg

INDULGENT DARK CHOCOLATE
TRUFFLES
There's nothing more indulgent than dark chocolate truffles. They are rich
and creamy, and they melt on your tongue. Best of all, these dark chocolate
truffles are easy to make. The hardest part is letting the truffle batter set up in
the fridge for 2-3 hours.
Prep Time: 20 minutes| Cook Time: 2 minutes| Total Time: 22 minutes|
Servings: 16| Calories: 108kcal
Ingredients
9 oz. (1 1/4 cup) vegan dark chocolate (70% cacao or higher), finely
chopped
7 tablespoons full-fat coconut milk
1/2 teaspoon coffee extract
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 tablespoon orange zest
1/4 cup unsweetened cocoa powder
Instructions
1. Place the chopped vegan chocolate into a bowl and set it aside.
2. Place the coconut milk into a small saucepot and set it over medium-low
heat. Gently heat the coconut milk for 1-2 minutes until it is hot but not
boiling.
3. Add the coconut milk to the chocolate and loosely cover it with a clean
kitchen towel.
4. Let the chocolate coconut milk mixture sit for 5 minutes, then remove
the towel and mix it until the chocolate melts.
5. If there are unmelted pieces of chocolate, heat the mixture in the
microwave in 10-second bursts, stirring after each burst, until it is
melted.
6. Add the coffee extract, vanilla extract, and orange zest and stir to
combine.
7. Place the chocolate mixture into the fridge for 2-3 hours until it is almost

solid.
8. Place the cocoa powder into a shallow baking dish.
9. Scoop balls of the chocolate truffle batter onto a parchment-lined baking
sheet using a tablespoon ice cream scoop.
10. Roll one chocolate truffle in your hands to give them a round shape,
dredge it in the cocoa powder, and return it to the parchment-lined
baking sheet. Repeat with the remaining chocolate truffles.
11. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 108 | Carbohydrates: 8.9g | Fiber: 2.3g | Protein: 1.5g | Fat: 7.5g |
Saturated Fat:5g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 2mg | Potassium: 21mg |
Sugar: 4.7g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 15mg | Iron: 1mg

BERRY WALNUT CRISP
Berries and walnuts are the perfect combination. To make the crisp, fresh
berries are tossed with fresh lemon juice, vanilla extract, and arrowroot starch
and topped with a walnut oat topping. It is baked until the fruit is bubbly and
the topping is golden brown.
Prep Time: 5 minutes| Cook Time: 40 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 181kcal
Ingredients
For the walnut topping:
1 cup old-fashioned rolled oats
1/2 cup almond flour
1/3 cup roasted walnuts, roughly chopped
1/4 cup agave nectar
3 tablespoons melted coconut oil
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon salt
For the berry walnut crisp:
1 1/2 cups blueberries
1 1/2 cups raspberries
1 1/2 cup strawberries, chopped
1 1/2 cup blackberries
2 tablespoons arrowroot starch
1 tablespoon freshly-squeezed lemon juice
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Instructions
1. To make the walnut topping, mix the rolled oats, almond flour, walnuts,
agave nectar, coconut oil, ground cinnamon, and salt in a bowl until
combined.
2. Set the oven to 350 °F.

3. Place the blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, blackberries, arrowroot
starch, lemon juice, and vanilla extract into a 9 by 9 baking dish and mix
to combine.
4. Sprinkle the walnut topping over the berries and bake it for 35-40
minutes until the berries are bubbling ad the topping is golden brown.
5. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 181 | Carbohydrates: 25.7g | Fiber: 5.8g | Protein: 3.4g | Fat: 8.1g |
Saturated Fat:1.6g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 108mg | Potassium: 191mg |
Sugar: 14.2g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 55mg | Iron: 1mg

CHOCOLATE COCONUT WALNUT
TART
Chocolate tarts look like a fancy dessert that you'd eat in a 5-star restaurant.
So they must be hard to make, right? Wrong! Chocolate tarts are relatively
easy to make. This chocolate tart features a delicious walnut nut crust and a
creamy, velvety smooth chocolate filling.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 15 minutes| Total Time: 30 minutes|
Servings: 10| Calories: 419kcal
Ingredients
For the nut crust:
1 cup raw walnuts
1 cup almond flour
2 tablespoons agave nectar
3 tablespoons coconut oil, melted
For the chocolate tart:
12 oz. vegan, bittersweet chocolate (70% cacao or higher), roughly
chopped
1 tablespoon agave nectar
1 13.5 oz. can full-fat coconut milk
1/4 cup unsweetened coconut flakes
1/4 cup roasted walnuts
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 300°F, then coat a 9-inch tart pan with non-stick cooking
spray.
2. To make the nut crust, place the walnuts, and almond flour into a food
processor and blend until it is coarsely chopped.
3. Place the agave nectar and coconut oil into the blender and pulse it until
the nut mixture has a crumbly texture.
4. Pour the nut crust into the prepared pan and press it into an even layer.

5. Place the nut crust onto a baking sheet and bake the tart crust bake it for
12-12 minutes.
6. Place the nut crust onto a wire rack and let cool slightly.
7. To make the chocolate tart, place the chopped chocolate and agave
nectar into a bowl and set it aside.
8. Place the coconut milk into a small saucepot and set it over medium-low
heat. Gently heat the coconut milk for 2-3 minutes until it is hot but not
boiling.
9. Add the coconut milk to the chocolate and loosely cover it with a clean
kitchen towel.
10. Let the chocolate coconut milk mixture sit for 5 minutes, then remove
the towel and mix it until the chocolate melts.
11. If there are unmelted pieces of chocolate, heat the mixture in the
microwave in 10-second bursts, stirring after each burst, until it is
melted.
12. Pour the chocolate mixture into the nut crust and add the coconut flakes
and walnuts on top.
13. Cover the chocolate tart loosely with plastic wrap and chill it in the fridge
for 3-4 hours or overnight until the chocolate filling firms up.
14. Cut the chocolate tart into 10 slices.
15. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 419 | Carbohydrates: 26.7g | Fiber: 6.4g | Protein: 8.3g | Fat: 35.5g
| Saturated Fat:18g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 55mg | Potassium: 91mg |
Sugar: 16g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 25mg | Iron: 2mg

LEMON RASPBERRY BARS
Lemon bars are a classic dessert. Add raspberries and this classic dessert has
a modern flare. These raspberry lemon bars are tart yet sweet, so they are the
best of both worlds.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 28 minutes| Total Time: 40 minutes|
Servings: 9| Calories: 437kcal
Ingredients
For the pecan crust:
2 tablespoons ground flaxseeds
2 tablespoon water
1 cup raw unsalted pecans
1 cup old-fashioned rolled oats
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoons agave nectar
For the filling:
1 cup raspberries
1/4 cup water
2 cups cashews, soaked in water for at least 4 hours
Zest of 1 lemon
Juice of 3 lemons
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
7 tablespoons maple syrup
1/8 teaspoon turmeric
2 tablespoons cornstarch
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then 9 by 9 baking pan with parchment paper.
2. To make the pecan nut crust, whisk the ground flaxseed and water
together in a bowl and set it aside for 5 minutes until it thickens up.

3. Place the pecans, oats, and salt in a high-speed blender and blend until it
is a fine powder.
4. Add the agave nectar and the flaxseed mixture to the blender and blend
it until a thick dough forms.
5. Pour the crusts into the prepared pan and press it into an even layer.
6. To make the lemon raspberry filling, add the raspberry and water to a
blender and blend it until it is smooth. Pour the pureed raspberries into
a bowl and set it aside.
7. In a clean blender, add the cashews, lemon zest, lemon juice, vanilla
extract, maple extract, turmeric, cornstarch, and sea salt to a blender and
blend until smooth and combined.
8. Pour 2/3 of the lemon filling mixture on top of the prepared pecan crust
and spread it into an even layer.
9. Add the remaining lemon mixture to the blended raspberries and stir to
combine.
10. Add tablespoonfuls of the raspberry mixture on top of the raspberry
lemon filling, then use a knife or skewer to swirl the raspberry mixture
into the lemon filling.
11. Bake the lemon raspberry bars for 18-20 minutes until the edges of the
bars pull away from the pan.
12. Let the lemon raspberry bars cool completely in the pan, then cut them
into 9 bars.
13. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 437 | Carbohydrates: 26.7g | Fiber: 6.4g | Protein: 8.3g | Fat: 35.5g
| Saturated Fat:18g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 55mg | Potassium: 91mg |
Sugar: 16g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 25mg | Iron: 2mg

PEACH TAHINI CARAMEL CUPS
These peach tahini cups are stunning and extremely delicious. The base is
made from tahini and coconut oil, topped with freshly made date paste which
acts as sweet and salty caramel and topped with peaches and walnuts.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes| Total Time: 10 minutes|
Servings: 9| Calories: 207kcal
Ingredients
1 cup packed, pitted dates
2 1/2 cups hot water
1/3 cup coconut oil, melted
1/2 cup tahini
1 tablespoon agave nectar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
4 peaches, pit removed, quartered
9 roasted walnuts
Instructions
1. Place the dates into a bowl, add the hot water and let them soak for 15
minutes. Drain the dates and set them aside.
2. Whisk the coconut oil, tahini, agave nectar, and vanilla extract in a bowl
until it is smooth.
3. Place 9 silicone baking cups into a muffin pan and divide the tahini
mixture between each cup.
4. Freeze the tahini cups for 10 minutes until they harden completely.
5. Place the softened dates and sea salt into a food processor and blend
until a smooth thick paste.
6. Remove the tahini cups from the freezer.
7. Divide the date paste between each cup, spread it into an even layer, and
freeze it for 20-30 minutes.
8. Arrange 2-3 slices of peaches and 1 walnut on top of each tahini cup.
9. Serve and enjoy!

Nutrition Info
Calories: 207 | Carbohydrates: 14.4g | Fiber: 3g | Protein: 3.3g | Fat: 15.5g |
Saturated Fat:8.1g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 68mg | Potassium: 212mg |
Sugar: 10.4g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 62mg | Iron: 1mg

PISTACHIO ICE CREAM
Healthy pistachio ice cream? Yes, please! This pistachio ice cream is made
with creamy coconut yogurt and avocados, which gives it a creamy texture
and green color. It is sweetened with frozen bananas, and maple syrup then
crushed pistachios are mixed in just before it is served.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 0 minutes| Total Time: 15 minutes|
Servings: 6| Calories: 135kcal
Ingredients
2 medium bananas
1 1/2 cups unsweetened coconut yogurt
1/2 medium avocado
1/4 cup maple syrup
3/4 teaspoon vanilla extract
1/3 cup toasted pistachios, crushed
Instructions
1. Cut the bananas into 1/2-inch chunks, place them into a ziplock bag, and
freeze them for 3 hours.
2. Place the bananas, coconut yogurt, avocado, maple syrup, vanilla extract,
and pistachios into a blender and blend until combined.
3. Next, line a 9 by 9 loaf pan with parchment paper, pour half of the
pistachio ice cream base into the loaf pan, and spread it into an even
layer.
4. Top with half of the pistachios, then add the remaining pistachio ice
cream base and spread it into an even layer.
5. Add the remaining pistachios, cover the ice cream, and freeze it for 3-4
hours until it hardens.
6. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 135| Carbohydrates: 21.7g | Fiber: 3.5g | Protein: 1.4g | Fat: 6g |
Saturated Fat: 1.5g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 44mg | Potassium: 284mg |

Sugar: 13.2g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 67mg | Iron: 0mg

CASHEW BUTTER QUINOA BARK
Who needs plain old chocolate bark when you've got cashew butter quinoa
bark. First, quinoa granola is baked in the oven until it is lightly golden, then
it is allowed to cool down and slathered with melted chocolate. Once the
chocolate sets, all that's left is to break the bark into pieces and eat it.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 30 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 20| Calories: 191kcal
Ingredients
1/2 cup smooth cashew butter
1/2 cup unsweetened oat milk
1/2 cup agave nectar
1 cup quinoa uncooked
1 cup old-fashioned rolled oats
1/4 cup raw unsalted cashews
1/4 cup ground flaxseeds
12 oz. dark chocolate (70% cacao or higher)
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350ºF.
2. Whisk the oat milk, cashew butter, and agave nectar in a bowl and set it
aside.
3. Mix the quinoa, oats, peanuts, and flaxseeds in a large bowl.
4. Add the oat milk cashew butter mixture to the quinoa mixture and stir to
combine.
5. Pour the quinoa oat mixture onto a parchment-lined baking sheet,
spread it out, and press it into an even layer.
6. Bake the quinoa mixture for 20 minutes until slightly golden, then set it
aside.
7. Place 1 1/2 cups of water into a pot and let it come to a boil or medium-
low heat.
8. Add the chocolate to a bowl ad set it over the pot of hot water once it
comes to a simmer.

9. Stir the chocolate until it melts.
10. Pour the melted chocolate over the quinoa oat mixture and spread it
into an even layer.
11. Place the quinoa bark in the freezer for 15 minutes until the chocolate
hardens.
12. Break the quinoa bark into smaller pieces.
13. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 191 | Carbohydrates: 22.1g | Fiber: 6.5g | Protein: 3.4g | Fat: 10.5g
| Saturated Fat: 5.2g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 4mg | Potassium: 89mg |
Sugar: 7.7g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 16mg | Iron: 11mg

RAW BLUEBERRY MANGO TART
Raw tarts are underrated. However, they are very delicious. This blueberry
mango tart is delicious. The crust is made from sweet Medjool dates and
dried blueberries, and the filling is made with blueberries, mangoes, cashews,
and cashew butter. All in all, this raw blueberry mango tart is super delicious
and healthy.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 28 minutes| Total Time: 40 minutes|
Servings: 10| Calories: 426kcal
Ingredients
For the date pie crust:
2 cups pitted Medjool dates
1 cup dried blueberries
1 cup raw unsalted pecans
1/2 cup unsweetened shredded coconut
1/4 cup cacao powder
1/4 cup ground flaxseed meal
1/4-1/3 cup water
For the blueberry mango filling:
2 1/2 cups frozen blueberries
1 cup fresh or frozen mango
1/2 cup raw unsalted cashews
1/4 cup cashew butter
Instructions
1. Place the Medjool dates, dried blueberries, raw pecans, shredded
coconut, cacao powder, flaxseed meal, and water into a food processor.
Blend until combined.
2. Coat a 9-inch tart pan with non-stick cooking spray, then add the date
crust to the pan and press the date crust into the bottom and sides of the
pan.

3. Freeze the date nut crust for 20 minutes.
4. To make the blueberry mango filling, place the blueberries, mango,
cashews, and cashew butter into a blender and blend until smooth.
5. Pour the blueberry mango filling into the date crust, spread it into an
even layer, and freeze it for 2-3 hours ir overnight.
6. Cut the blueberry mango tart into 10 slices.
7. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 426 | Carbohydrates: 55.5g | Fiber: 9.9g | Protein: 7.7g | Fat: 22.5g
| Saturated Fat: 7.8g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 9mg | Potassium: 129mg |
Sugar: 37.5g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 24mg | Iron: 4mg

ZUCCHINI BROWNIES
Zucchini brownies are rich and decadent. These flourless brownies are made
with zucchini, cashew butter, sweet agave nectar, bananas, cocoa powder, a
splash of vanilla, and dark chocolate chips and are baked until they are set,
creating a delicious, sweet, indulgent brownie.
Prep Time: 15 minutes| Cook Time: 28 minutes| Total Time: 40 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 422kcal
Ingredients
4 medium zucchini, grated
1 cup cashew butter
1/3 cup agave nectar
1 medium banana, mashed
1/3 cup unsweetened cocoa powder
1/4 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1/3 cup vegan dark chocolate chips
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350ºF, then line an 8 by 8 baking dish with parchment
paper.
2. Place the shredded zucchini onto a clean kitchen towel and squeeze the
excess moisture out of the zucchini.
3. Place the grated zucchini, cashew butter, agave nectar, banana, cocoa
powder, salt, baking soda, and vanilla extract in a bowl. Mix until
combined.
4. Fold in the dark chocolate chips into the zucchinibrownie batter and
pour the chocolate zucchini brownies into the prepared pan.
5. Bake the zucchini brownie for 40 minutes until it is set. Let the zucchini
brownies cool completely before slicing them.
6. Serve and enjoy!

Nutrition Info
Calories: 289 | Carbohydrates: 32.9g | Fiber: 3.9g | Protein: 7.7g | Fat: 17.2g
| Saturated Fat: 4.7g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 248mg | Potassium:
521mg | Sugar: 13.2g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 21mg | Iron: 9mg

OLIVE OIL ORANGE PISTACHIO CAKE
Olive oil cakes are known for their rich yet light and fluffy texture. However,
this olive oil cake features orange juice and zest adding a sweet yet tangy
citrus flavor to the cake.
Prep Time: 10 minutes| Cook Time: 35 minutes| Total Time: 45 minutes|
Servings: 8| Calories: 289kcal
Ingredients
For the orange cake:
2 tablespoons orange zest
1 cup coconut sugar
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1/4 cup unsweetened applesauce
2/3 cups unsweetened oat milk
2 tablespoons freshly squeezed orange juice
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract
1 3/4 cups all-purpose flour
1 1/2 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
For the orange glaze:
3 tablespoons freshly squeezed orange juice
1 3/4 cups powdered sugar
1 tablespoon orange zest
Instructions
1. Set the oven to 350°F, then coat an 8-inch round pan with non-stick
cooking spray and line it with parchment paper.
2. Add the coconut sugar and orange zest to a bowl and rub them together
to release the oil.
3. Add the extra-virgin olive oil, unsweetened applesauce, oat milk, orange

juice, and pure vanilla extract, and mix until combined.
4. Place the all-purpose flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt into a
fine-mesh sieve and sift the ingredients into the bowl.
5. Next, fold the all-purpose flour mixture into the wet ingredients.
6. Pour the orange cake batter into the prepared pan and bake it for 35
minutes.
7. Let the orange cake cook in the pan for 10 minutes, then remove it from
the pan. Place the olive oil orange cake on a cooling rack to cool
completely.
8. To make the orange glaze, whisk the orange juice and powdered sugar
together until smooth.
9. Pour the glaze over the olive oil orange cake and sprinkle the orange
zest on top.
10. Serve and enjoy!
Nutrition Info
Calories: 422| Carbohydrates: 75.9g | Fiber: 1.9g | Protein: 3.3g | Fat: 13.1g
| Saturated Fat: 1.9g | Cholesterol: 0mg | Sodium: 149mg | Potassium:
155mg | Sugar: 53g | Vitamin D: 0mg | Calcium: 78mg | Iron: 2mg

REFERENCES
Mullins, A. P., & Arjmandi, B. H. (2021). Health Benefits of Plant-Based
Nutrition: Focus on Beans in Cardiometabolic Diseases. Nutrients, 13(2), 519.
MDPI AG. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nu13020519
Tuso, P., Stoll, S. R., & Li, W. W. (2015). A plant-based diet, atherogenesis,
and coronary artery disease prevention. The Permanente journal, 19(1), 62–
67. https://doi.org/10.7812/TPP/14-036

