
The Amazon Way
14 Leadership Principles Behind the World’s 
Most Disruptive Company
John Rossman

Copyright © 2014 by John Rossman
Authored with Ryan Masters
Contributions by Clifford Cancelosi
Contributions by Randy Miller
Edited by Karl Weber
All rights reserved.
ISBN: 1499296770
ISBN 13:  9781499296778
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014905059
LCCN Imprint Name: CreateSpace Independent  
Publishing Platform, North Charleston, S.C.  

Contents
Foreword	
v
Introduction	
1
1. Obsess Over the Customer	
7
2. Take Ownership of Results	
25
3. Invent and Simplify	
32
4. Leaders Are Right—A Lot	
51
5. Hire and Develop the Best	
61
6. Insist on the Highest Standards	
67
7. Think Big	
72
8. Have a Bias for Action	
80
9. Practice Frugality	
85
10. Be Vocally Self-Critical	
90
11. Earn the Trust of Others	
95
12. Dive Deep	
100
13. Have Backbone—Disagree and Commit	
107
14. Deliver Results	
110
Conclusion	
111
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service	
113
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow	
130
Appendix C: The Critical Capabilities of Building and 
Operating a Platform Company	
139
Acknowledgements	
154
Sources 	
157


v
Foreword
by Julie Weed
To hundreds of millions of people around the world, 
Amazon.com is a household name. But few know the inside 
story of how Amazon became the seemingly unstoppable 
powerhouse it is today. What was it like to work there as the 
company blossomed, successfully opening up more than a 
dozen new retail categories and outgrowing its headquarters 
in downtown Seattle? What made it possible for Amazon to 
transition from an online retailer to the inventor of a selling 
platform for all kinds of other companies and products, ex-
ponentially increasing its own reach and becoming the go-to 
store for almost any imaginable consumer product?
John Rossman was there during that critical period, and 
in this book, he’ll tell you how it about the leadership culture 
behind it all.
From the beginning, starting with his 1997 Letter to 
Shareholders, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos has focused on 
the long term, on reinventing the customer experience, and 
on perfecting the technologies that would make it all pos-
sible. Over time, a set of leadership principles emerged and 
were used to make smart strategic decisions and accurate ev-
eryday choices.
These principles aren’t slogans printed on wall posters 
and coffee mugs. They are lived and breathed every day by 
Amazonians from the CEO on down. They are principles 
that other companies, small or large, may just want to adopt.

vi
The Amazon Way
Every department at Amazon, from the mailroom to 
the tech team responsible for the Kindle book delivery sys-
tem, has a year-over-year improvement plan. How will we 
get better? What does the customer want from us? How can 
we use new technology to improve the customer experience? 
Lots of companies aspire to innovate, to create more value 
for customers. At Amazon, making that happen is ingrained 
in the corporate psyche. And this innovation mentality is 
just one of the principles that have enabled the company to 
outgrow its competitors and consistently surprise the best of 
the business world.
Now you can journey back in time to Amazon’s early 
days of crazy growth, continual reinvention, and wild (but 
never thoughtless) experimentation. John Rossman offers 
both an insider’s view of Amazon’s history and an insight-
ful analysis of the leadership principles that have helped Jeff 
Bezos own America’s shopping list.
Just turn the page.
Julie Weed is a freelance writer who covers the world of business 
for The New York Times and other publications. Her national 
best-seller, All I Really Need to Know in Business I Learned 
at Microsoft, has been published in 12 languages.

1
Introduction
I
t is January, 2003. With less than a year under my belt as 
Amazon.com’s director of merchant integration, I am still 
considered the new guy on the block. At the moment, I am 
sitting in a conference room in the company’s Seattle head-
quarters, surrounded by what’s called the S-Team, a group 
that includes Amazon’s 20 most senior executives, and I hap-
pen to be the center of attention. Unfortunately, this is be-
cause the founder and CEO, Jeff Bezos, is frustrated.
“The answer to that question begins with a number!” he 
roars.
All eyes had turned in my direction when Jeff asked me 
a deceptively simple question: “How many merchants have 
launched since the first of the year?”
The question had puzzled me, since at the moment there 
simply aren’t any third-party sellers—“merchants,” in Jeff’s 
parlance—to launch, which was out of my direct control. A bit 
apologetically, I responded, “Well, you see, as of right now—”
Before I could finish, Jeff had erupted. “The answer to 
that question begins with a number!”
Jeff’s reputation for pyrotechnic displays of emotion is al-
ready part of his legend. Jeff Bezos doesn’t worry about your 
feelings; he doesn’t give a damn whether or not you’re having 
a good day. He only cares about results—and they’d better 
be the right results. Everyone who joins Amazon.com un-
derstands this; it’s part of the deal. But this is the first time 
I’ve found myself at the business end of his double-barreled 
fury, and I’m more than a little shell-shocked by the experi-
ence. I hesitate, frantically juggling possible responses in my 

2
The Amazon Way
head. Finally, taking a big gulp, I offer the simple answer he 
is asking for: “Six, but …”
Jeff pounces like a lion tearing into the soft underbelly of 
its kill. “That is the most pathetic answer I have ever heard!”
The ensuing rant is neither a simple exercise in humilia-
tion nor some sort of power play designed to reinforce Jeff’s 
status as the alpha dog of Amazon.com. It’s an educational 
exercise that uses my situation as an opportunity to set an 
example and to transmit a series of cultural, strategic, and 
operational messages to the leaders of the company. The lec-
ture is classic Jeff because, despite its thunderous volume and 
tone, it contains valuable lessons about the principles that 
define Amazon.com. In the next five minutes, Jeff touches 
on a half dozen of these principles as he describes my short-
comings in painful detail. I am chastised for my failure to 
sufficiently obsess over the customer, for not taking complete 
ownership of my project and its outcomes, for not setting 
higher standards for myself and my team, for not thinking 
big enough, for not possessing a bias for action, and for not 
being firmly and vocally self-critical when it was clear my 
performance was lacking. Throughout, I am pinned to my 
chair as if by a hurricane-force gale.
When Jeff’s rant finally ends, he simply leaves the room 
without another word and, just like that, the S-Team meet-
ing has ended. As I allow myself to start breathing again, 
processing what has just happened, I notice that many of the 
other senior leaders are smiling at me—and not unkindly. A 
few make a point of congratulating me as they gather their 
things and file out of the conference room.
“He likes you,” one explains with a pat on the shoulder. 
“He wouldn’t take the time to embarrass you like that if he 
didn’t.”

3
Introduction 
In a fog, I stumble from the conference room, clutching 
my notes and half-wondering how it is that I am still em-
ployed. “How can anyone possibly withstand the white-hot 
crucible of Jeff’s expectations?” I wonder.
The key, of course, is right in front of my nose. In fact, 
it’s publicly available on the Amazon.com site if you know 
where to look.1 And in that 2003 meeting, Jeff was all but 
hitting me over the head with it: The 14 leadership prin-
ciples that drive Amazon, from top to bottom. I’ve ed-
ited a bit of the language of the leadership principles for 
readability.
How has Jeff Bezos built a company, a culture, and a 
legacy that meet his highest standards? Unlike in most or-
ganizations, Amazon’s leadership principles are not simply 
suggested guidelines for new hires or empty verbiage from a 
mission statement buried in the employee manual. They are 
core tenets on which company leaders are rigorously rated 
during their annual performance reviews and self-evalua-
tions. In fact, as a leader or potential leader at Amazon.com, 
you are expected to record concrete examples of how you 
embody the 14 leadership principles and to be prepared to 
cite them upon request.
This book is not a tell-all story of my time at Amazon.
com. The fact is that, after I moved on to my current posi-
tion as a managing director at the consulting firm Alvarez 
& Marsal, I didn’t expect to think much about my years 
at Amazon.com at all. Funny thing, though: as I began to 
tackle the wide range of challenges presented by my clients 
in fields from technology and manufacturing to retail and 
even philanthropy, I found myself frequently referencing 
strategies, management techniques, and approaches I had 
experienced at Amazon.com. At first, I didn’t even notice I 

4
The Amazon Way
was doing it. Then a colleague of mine said, “You know, you 
should really write those down.”
“Write what down?” I asked.
“All those lessons from Amazon. You’re constantly us-
ing them. Might as well capture them all in one place. I bet 
people would find them interesting. I know I would.”
I decided to give it a try. I began roughly outlining the 
concepts, lessons, strategies, and approaches I’d learned, ob-
served, and practiced at Amazon. To my surprise, although 
seven years had passed since I’d left the company, the con-
tent was all right there at the surface, ready to be transcribed 
and organized. Before long, I realized that the lessons had 
grouped themselves into 14 leadership principles.
What makes Amazon’s principles so unforgettable—
even for a company alumnus who’d made no special effort to 
recall them? The answer has a lot to do with why Jeff Bezos 
was so livid at my status report on merchant integration in 
that 2003 S-Team meeting. Amazon’s leaders work hard to 
make their thinking very clear—to be clear not only about 
what they decide, but about precisely why they decide as they 
do. This quest for clarity has created an organization whose 
actions are based on a specific philosophy and a consistent 
set of values and principles. It’s a way to get the details right 
and scale the business successfully—something Amazon.
com has arguably done better than any other company in 
history.
Encouraged by my colleague’s suggestion, I decided to 
turn my notes into a book. I’ve deliberately kept it short and, 
I hope, enjoyable to read. A few years ago, I read with interest 
a story of a 52-year-old Slovenian athlete who decided—who 
knows why?—to swim the length of the Amazon River. He 
survived 3,272 miles of exhaustion, sunburn, delirium, and 

5
Introduction 
piranhas to set a world record for distance swimming. While 
his journey up the Amazon was an amazing feat, I don’t want 
yours to feel like a grueling test of endurance. Although the 
story of Amazon.com is a continent-spanning tale of growth, 
innovation, and steadily-increasing influence, the company’s 
strategies, management techniques, and approaches are both 
simple to understand and difficult to emulate. So I’ve strived 
to present them as clearly and directly as possible. Instead of 
a marathon swim through the muddy currents of business 
think, consider this book a riverboat tour with 14 stops—one 
for each of the leadership principles.
Sit back and relax. I hope you enjoy the ride.


7
1. Obsess Over the 
Customer
Leaders at Amazon start with the customer and work back-
wards, seeking continually to earn and keep the customer’s trust. 
Although leaders pay attention to their competitors, they obsess 
over their customers.
J
eff Bezos’s customer obsession is really something beyond 
a mere obsession—it’s a psychosis that has generated many 
of his most vitriolic tirades or, more often, sarcastic com-
ments at Amazon associates who have fallen short of his own 
standard for customer service. It stems from Jeff’s unique 
ability to put himself in the customer’s position, deduce his 
or her unspoken needs and wants, and then develop a system 
that will meet those needs and wants better than anyone else 
has ever done.
This approach to business is at the core of Jeff’s genius. 
Long before social media revolutionized the retail world 
with its vast, transparent networks linking companies, cus-
tomers, prospects, and detractors; long before companies like 
Zappos.com made customer service the foundation of their 
business model; and even long before Jeff had fully realized 
his own vision for Amazon.com, he had profoundly internal-
ized two truths about customer service:

8
The Amazon Way
 When a company makes a customer unhappy, 
she won’t tell a friend, or two, or three . . . she’ll 
tell many, many more; and
 The best customer service is no customer ser-
vice—because the best experience happens when 
the customer never has to ask for help at all.
Of course, an actual business model that doesn’t require 
any customer service is about as realistic as a perpetual mo-
tion machine. But very early in the Internet revolution, Jeff 
saw that the online retail model raised the bar of what was 
possible. He long recognized that the biggest threat to the 
customer experience was human beings getting involved and 
mucking things up. The logical corollary was that the key to 
creating the most pleasant, frictionless customer experience 
possible was minimizing human involvement through pro-
cess innovation and technology.
(Of course, Amazon still needs human beings. 
Throughout this book, we will discuss the techniques Jeff 
developed to help him hire, evaluate, and retain the very best 
talent in the world. But Amazon’s goal has always been to 
minimize the time and energy its talented people must spend 
on routine service interactions, freeing them to innovate new 
ways to delight the customer.)
Jeff’s insight led to some counterintuitive tactics. Back 
in the late 1990s, Amazon.com made it intentionally dif-
ficult for customers to find the customer service number, 
which momentarily confused some observers who thought 
this reflected an attitude of disdain for customers. But those 
customers quickly realized that Jeff’s engineers had created a 
robust technology that enabled them to deal with their ser-
vices requests almost instantaneously with no human inter-
vention. This wasn’t as difficult as it might sound. After all, 

9
Obsess Over the Customer
98 percent of all customer questions at a retailer like Amazon 
boil down to, “Where is my stuff?” An online tracking tool 
that lets the customer following his shipment from the ware-
house to his front door eliminates the need for a large, costly 
call center and the vast amounts of organizational friction it 
generates.
Jeff believed that people don’t actually like to talk to cus-
tomer service representatives. He was right. All he had to do 
was provide the data, tools and retrain customers to answer 
their own questions. Now customers have come to expect 
and demand effortless self-service customer care technol-
ogy, a concept explained by Bill Price and David Jaffe in 
their 2008 book, The Best Service is No Service: The more 
frictionless the experience, the more loyal the customer and 
the lower the control costs. And this includes marketing and 
advertising costs as well. Price and Jaffe explain, “Amazon 
has enjoyed a 90 percent reduction in its CPO [contacts 
per order], meaning that it could keep customer care costs 
(headcount and associated operational expenses) flat with a 
9x increase in orders (revenues), a major contributor to the 
company’s profitability beginning in 2002.”1
The best customer service just works, without effort—
producing incredible benefits both for customers and for 
the company that serves them. Take, for example, Amazon.
com’s revolutionary Free Shipping program, launched in 
November, 2000. It was originally called the “Free Super 
Saver Shipping Offer” and was good only for orders over 
$100. Instead of paying for advertising, Amazon.com 
pumped its money into free shipping, which resulted in cus-
tomer-driven word of mouth, the world’s most effective (and 
cheapest) form of advertising. This created a virtuous cycle: 
by sacrificing short-term financials for customer benefit, the 

10
The Amazon Way
strategy drove long-term competitive and financial benefit. 
“In the old world, you devoted 30 percent of your time to 
building a great service and 70 percent of your time to shout-
ing about it,” Jeff explained. “In the new world, that inverts.”2
At the time, free shipping seemed like a wildly radical 
and risky strategy. Now customers expect it. In fact, most 
people assume that companies will pay for return shipping 
as well—just one of the ways Amazon has raised the bar on 
customer service for countless businesses.
The Virtuous Cycle Goes Fractal: The Flywheel Effect
Allen Mandelbrot founded the field of fractal mathemat-
ics, which studies (among other phenomena) how patterns 
in nature have a tendency to repeat themselves at different 
scales—for example, the way spiral galaxies resemble whor-
ling sea shells which in turn resemble tiny unfurling fern 
fronds. In a similar fractal fashion, the virtuous cycle is rep-
licated throughout Amazon.com at macro and micro levels. 
It generates a set of self-reinforcing energies that continue to 
flow even when the energy source is discontinuous—much 
like a flywheel, which is the favorite metaphor for this phe-
nomenon at Amazon.com.
Here’s a macro example of how the flywheel effect works 
(see Figure 1.1). Jeff doesn’t focus on margins. He’s more 
focused on free cash flow—that is, the cash that a company 
is able to generate after laying out the money required to 
maintain or expand its asset base. Why? Because he believes 
the Internet’s potential for growth is gargantuan and still 
fundamentally unexploited. To Jeff, the year is 1889 and the 

11
Obsess Over the Customer
Oklahoma Land Rush is on—or, as he likes to put it, it’s still 
Day One of the Internet. So he’s ready to slash prices and 
create programs like free shipping to cultivate customer loy-
alty and drive sales growth toward the unimaginable heights 
he foresees. Then he invests the revenues generated back into 
“the holy trinity”: price, selection, and availability (more on 
this later).
Figure 1.1. The flywheel effect: How an improved customer experience 
and customer growth feed one another in a virtuous cycle.
Sometimes, the lever you need to pull in order to create 
the flywheel effect can be sticky and difficult to budge. The 
effort involved can be costly, even painful. Jeff and the com-
panies’ stockholders had to be willing to sacrifice a lot at the 
very beginning so long as the customer experience was the 

12
The Amazon Way
primary beneficiary. Not every CEO has the stomach this 
requires. But Jeff’s readiness to pay the price has produced 
much of Amazon’s success.
In July, 1999, Jeff decided to move Amazon into the elec-
tronics business. The company was making a lot of money on 
book sales, but he knew that the push into electronics would 
be the first big step into a limitless world of new markets. 
Critics doubted it would work. Many said that customers 
needed to physically see and touch the equipment in a show-
room and learn how to operate it with help from trained 
professionals. These critics—including many at leading 
manufacturers like Sony as well as analysts on Wall Street—
needed to be convinced that Amazon.com was capable of 
selling electronics at a high volume and as an “Everyday 
Low Price” leader. Until they were won over, Amazon’s elec-
tronics business would face tough sledding, including a cost 
structure much too high for the modest sales it would ini-
tially generate.
Many retailers aren’t willing to operate in the red for 
a while. Jeff was. And while it was ugly for a number of 
quarters (seemingly validating the warnings of the doubt-
ers on Wall Street), by providing enough information and 
a frictionless return process, Amazon.com eventually built 
the type of volume that convinced the vendors and big-name 
manufacturers that people would buy complicated technol-
ogy online. Jeff had wagered that his customers were intel-
ligent enough to figure out electronics on their own—and 
he had won.
Once that flywheel was engaged, the energy generated 
was huge. Amazon.com’s success in the electronics market 
kicked off a virtuous cycle of expanding e-commerce mar-
kets that continues to spin to this day.

13
Obsess Over the Customer
The Holy Trinity
Amazon.com’s strategy includes great pricing on virtu-
ally every product it sells. But the strategy is not just about 
price. A wide selection and fast, convenient availability with 
great delivery and service are equally critical elements of 
long-term customer needs. Price, selection, and availability . 
. . these are the three durable and universal customer desires 
that Amazon thinks of as its holy trinity.
Offer everything, get it cheaper, and make it more easily 
available. Fashions, tastes, product types, and form factors 
change, but the holy trinity won’t. That’s why Jeff Bezos em-
braced this strategy from the earliest days of Amazon. Here’s 
an excerpt from his very first letter to Amazon’s shareholders 
in 1997:
From the beginning, our focus has been on of-
fering our customers compelling value. We real-
ized that the Web was, and still is, the World 
Wide Wait. Therefore, we set out to offer cus-
tomers something they simply could not get any 
other way, and began serving them with books. 
We brought them much more selection than was 
possible in a physical store (our store would now 
occupy 6 football fields), and presented it in a use-
ful, easy-to-search, and easy-to-browse format 
in a store open 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. 
We maintained a dogged focus on improving the 
shopping experience, and in 1997 substantially 
enhanced our store. We now offer customers gift 
certificates, 1-Click(SM) shopping, and vastly 
more reviews, content, browsing options, and 

14
The Amazon Way
recommendation features. We dramatically low-
ered prices, further increasing customer value. 
Word of mouth remains the most powerful cus-
tomer acquisition tool we have, and we are grate-
ful for the trust our customers have placed in us. 
Repeat purchases and word of mouth have com-
bined to make Amazon.com the market leader in 
online bookselling.3
Price, selection, and availability—all the elements of 
the holy trinity are there. Incidentally, Jeff has attached this 
original 1997 shareholder letter to the back of every share-
holder letter he has written since. And he repeats the same 
mantra every chance he gets. In 2004, I accompanied Jeff 
when he gave a talk to the leadership team at Target, the 
large retailer. Jeff’s message: He could never imagine a day 
when the customer would want higher prices, less selection, 
or a more complex and difficult transaction process. The 
holy trinity is eternal and must never be forgotten.
Let’s take a closer look at the three elements of the holy 
trinity and consider how Amazon has built its business 
around each one.
Price. Amazon’s low-price strategy is well documented. 
For nearly two decades, Jeff has proven that he is willing 
to make less on an item—or an entire line of products—
in the short term to guarantee the long-term growth of the 
business. Yet Jeff’s obsession with pricing knows no bounds. 
Here’s an example:
During my years at Amazon, everyone understood that 
our goal was to be an Everyday Low Price leader. To do that, 
we had to make sure our prices matched those of our image 
competitors—Walmart, Best Buy, and Target. During one 

15
Obsess Over the Customer
S-Team meeting, someone opined, “If the retailer with the 
lowest price doesn’t have the item in stock, then we shouldn’t 
match price. Why bleed the margin for no reason?”
Jeff immediately objected, pointing out how this might 
backfire. If customers saw that our price was higher, they’d 
grudgingly buy an item unavailable elsewhere—but the 
transaction would leave a bitter taste in their mouth that they 
would associate with Amazon.com. Jeff rejected the idea of 
protecting our profit margin, emphasizing that what really 
mattered was what customers were thinking.
Of course, a low-margin pricing strategy is constantly 
under siege. Most recently, the pressure has been coming 
from some very unlikely competitors—brick and mortar re-
tailers. An analyst for BB&T Capital Markets made waves 
in the media when he reported that the prices charged by 
retailer Bed, Bath & Beyond on a representative “basket” 
of thirty items had fallen from 9 percent higher than those 
charged by Amazon (in early 2012) to 6.5 percent lower than 
Amazon’s (as of August 2013).4 Other traditional retailers, 
such as Best Buy, are offering guarantees to match Amazon’s 
pricing. Thanks to factors such as falling real estate prices, 
the gradual leveling of the sales tax playing field between 
online and offline retailers, and the greater leeway to reduce 
prices among old-school merchants with healthy profit mar-
gins (like those currently enjoyed by Bed, Bath & Beyond), 
Amazon’s once-huge price advantage over brick-and-mortar 
retailers is fading. How Amazon will respond to this inten-
sified competition is one of the big questions for the com-
pany’s future.
Selection. From the beginning, Jeff Bezos’s goal was to 
make Amazon a source for virtually anything a customer 
might want to buy, starting with an unmatched assortment 

16
The Amazon Way
of books and other media products and then expanded to 
include a practically unlimited array of goods.
Of course, trying to become “the everything store” (as 
described in the title of Brad Stone’s excellent 2013 book 
about Amazon’s history) is far from easy. When Jeff couldn’t 
figure out how to organically scale Amazon.com to provide 
the vast assortment of products he envisioned, the idea of the 
third-party marketplace was formed. The world was full of 
people already selling everything under the sun. Jeff hired 
me to figure out a way to cohabitate with them under the 
umbrella of the Amazon.com brand (see Chapter 7, “Think 
Big”). Long story short, we eventually figured out how to 
sell everything without carrying a huge load of inventory or 
the risk that goes with it.
Today, the scale at which Amazon.com operates is nearly 
infinite, providing a richness and variety of customer expe-
rience that would have seemed impossible a few years ago. 
What are you looking for? Uranium? Check. A fresh, whole 
rabbit? Sure. Bacon-shaped Band-Aids? Roger that. If you 
can imagine it, chances are it can be purchased on Amazon.
com. And the more out-of-the-ordinary products custom-
ers discover when they browse Amazon’s site, the more they 
make it their default location for any shopping they want to 
do, making the flywheel spin even faster.
Availability. Any time Amazon takes a customer order, 
it offers a projected arrival time for the package using the 
Amazon-speak term “the Promise.” Why the heavy lan-
guage? Because Jeff knows that in business, there are heavy 
consequences for those who don’t have an item or can’t get 
it to a customer quickly. Woe to those who fail to honor any 
element of the holy trinity—including convenient, timely 
availability.

17
Obsess Over the Customer
One year, we ordered 4,000 pink iPods from Apple for 
Christmas. In mid-November, an Apple rep contacted us to 
say, “Problem—we can’t make Christmas delivery. They’re 
transitioning from a disk drive to a hard drive memory in the 
iPods, and they don’t want to make any more using the old 
technology. Once we get the new ones made, we’ll get you 
your four thousand. But it won’t be in time for the holiday.”
Other retailers would have simply apologized to their cus-
tomers for the failure to deliver a product on time. That wasn’t 
going to fly at Amazon.com. We were not the kind of com-
pany that ruined people’s Christmas because of a lack of avail-
ability—not under any circumstances. So we went out and 
bought 4,000 pink iPods at retail and had them all shipped to 
our Union Street office. Then we hand-sorted them, repacked 
them, and shipped them to the warehouse to be packaged and 
sent to our customers. It killed our margins on those iPods, 
but it enabled us to keep our promise to our customers.
During the next weekly business review, we had to ex-
plain to Jeff what we were doing and why. He just nodded 
approvingly and said, “I hope you’ll get in touch with Apple 
and try to get our money back from the bastards.” Ultimately, 
Apple did grudgingly split the cost difference with us. But 
even if they hadn’t, it still would have been the right thing 
for Amazon to do.
Serving the Customer: The Andon Cord
The Andon Cord is not a unique Amazon concept; 
it is an idea borrowed from Japanese lean manufactur-
ing. My Amazon colleague, Clifford Cancelosi, was in 
the room when the concept was originally adapted for use 

18
The Amazon Way
at Amazon. It’s a lean manufacturing principle most fa-
mously used in car manufacturing. Say you’re working in a 
busy Toyota assembly plant, and you notice that the widget 
you’re installing doesn’t fit or is broken. You immediately 
reach up and pull the Andon Cord, stopping the assembly 
line and forcing an inspection so that the defect can be 
ferreted out quickly. As consultant Todd Wangsgard ex-
plains, “The andon cord is literally a cord that workers can 
pull – a cord they should pull – any time something in the 
manufacturing process goes wrong that would compromise 
the quality of the product or safety of the people. The line 
stops immediately.”5
The Amazon version of the Andon Cord started with a 
conversation about a customer care problem during a week-
ly business review. The issue centered on the way mistakes 
made by one set of employees—those working in the retail 
group—were creating headaches for a different set—those 
in the customer care department. “When the people in the 
retail group don’t provide the right data for the customer or 
enter a product description that’s inaccurate,” the head of 
customer care explained, “the customer is disappointed with 
the purchase. And that means they call customer care, which 
lands us with the hassle of refunding the product.”
We discussed the problem and left the folks in the retail 
group with some action items intended to fix it. But a couple 
of weeks later, customers reported that nothing had gotten 
better.
Frustrated, the customer care group took matters into 
their own hands, creating their own version of the Andon 
Cord. When customers began complaining about a problem 
with a product, customer care simply took that product down 

19
Obsess Over the Customer
from the website and sent a message to the retail group that 
said, in effect, “Fix the defect or you can’t sell this product.” 
Needless to say, in the world of retail, halting the sale of a 
product is a pretty disruptive step—the equivalent of shut-
ting down an automotive assembly line. Yet Jeff was adamant 
in supporting the system. “If you retail guys can’t get it right, 
you deserve to be punished,” he declared.
The story of the Andon Cord underscores yet again the 
obsession with the customer that permeates Amazon. But 
it also illustrates the importance—and the challenge—of 
thinking about internal customers. When I was tasked with 
launching the third-party marketplace, I found it very diffi-
cult to get our internal people to think about the third-party 
sellers with the same amount of passion as shoppers. But for 
my group, these third-party sellers were customers who de-
served to be treated with the same reverence as our website 
shoppers. The Andon Cord is one way to force people to 
pay attention to the needs of their internal or external cus-
tomers—by literally shutting down the business until those 
needs are met.
Amazon literally has jobs titled “Senior Product Manager, 
Andon Cord,” whose role is to build cross organizational 
process and systems that detect and “pull the Andon Cord” 
when defects occur. It’s a form of real-time instrumentation 
to detect errors and force teams to fix them.6
The Voice of the Customer as a Driver of Innovation
In the early days of Amazon, Jeff Bezos would bring an 
empty chair into meetings as a constant reminder to his team 

20
The Amazon Way
that the customer, even though she might not be physically 
present in the room, still needed to be constantly acknowl-
edged and heard. But Amazon also takes unusual steps to 
ensure that the literal voice of the customer is heard through-
out the organization. The goal is to ensure that customer 
feedback is used to identify, examine, and fix root problems 
in Amazon’s operations. Jeff requires all of his managers to 
attend two days of call-center training each year. In fact, if 
you dial into the call center on just the right day, you may 
even get Jeff himself on the line. In theory, the resulting 
sense of understanding and empathy for the customer trick-
les up into the very highest echelons of the organization.
Of course, in the age of blogs, tweets, and Facebook 
posts, a single customer complaint that goes viral can have 
a devastating impact. So Jeff has invested millions to con-
struct systems that monitor the online feedback Amazon.
com receives from its customers. For example, during my 
time heading up the third-party marketplace, we established 
an internal email system that facilitates and monitors con-
versations with customers and retailers, uses metrics to track 
customer complaints about third-party retailers, and imple-
ments a fulfillment capability (Fulfillment by Amazon) 
which lets merchants easily leverage Amazon.com’s distribu-
tion channels.
Jeff’s shareholder letter dated April, 2013, describes an-
other example of how the customer experience drives inno-
vation at Amazon:
We build automated systems that look for occa-
sions when we’ve provided a customer experience 
that isn’t up to our standards, and those systems 

21
Obsess Over the Customer
then proactively refund customers. One industry 
observer recently received an automated email 
from us that said, “We noticed that you expe-
rienced poor video playback while watching the 
following rental on Amazon Video On Demand: 
Casablanca. We’re sorry for the inconvenience 
and have issued you a refund for the following 
amount: $2.99. We hope to see you again soon.” 
Surprised by the proactive refund, he ended up 
writing about the experience: “Amazon ‘noticed 
that I experienced poor video playback…’ And 
they decided to give me a refund because of that? 
Wow…Talk about putting customers first.”7
The history of the company is studded with innova-
tive triumphs driven by customer obsession. Pushing the 
publishing industry to make books available electronically 
provided readers with instant gratification at lower prices. 
Providing unlimited next-day delivery (the Amazon Prime 
loyalty program) for $79 (now $99) a year drove revenue by 
drastically reducing the friction involved in online shopping. 
And Amazon Web Services, the category leader and chief 
innovator in the field of cloud computing, was based on the 
idea of offering business customers the same sophisticated 
online infrastructure technology that Amazon has devel-
oped for itself.
Here is a closer look at some of Amazon’s biggest cus-
tomer-driven innovation hits:
Look Inside The Book.™ In 2001, Amazon.com launched 
this program based on a simple concept—the idea of emulat-
ing the bookstore experience by allowing Amazon.com surf-
ers to look at pages inside the book before buying.

22
The Amazon Way
Of course, this required Amazon.com to house book 
content in online form on their site, which raised some 
questions about whether this would expose book content 
to piracy. Publishers were worried and skeptical. The pro-
gram would also be very costly. Each book would have 
to be scanned digitally and indexed, a huge logistical 
challenge.
Jeff gave the go-ahead for a large-scale launch, recogniz-
ing that this was the only way to see whether it would go 
over with Amazon’s 43 million active customer accounts.8 
The feature debuted with an astonishing 120,000-plus 
books. The database took up 20 terabytes, which was about 
20 times larger than the biggest database that existed any-
where when Amazon.com was founded.
David Risher was Amazon.com’s first vice president of 
product and store development, responsible for growing the 
company’s revenue from $16 million to over $4 billion. He 
described the strategy behind the launch of “Look Inside the 
Book” this way: “If we had tried it in a tentative way on 
a small number of books, say 1,000 or 2,000, it wouldn’t 
have gotten the PR and the customers’ perception. There’s 
an X-factor: What will it look like in scale? It’s a big invest-
ment, and a big opportunity cost. There’s a leap of faith. Jeff 
is willing to take those gambles.”9 Ultimately, the publishers 
embraced the “Look Inside the Book” program as an asset 
to sales.
Amazon Prime. Though many people think of Amazon 
Prime as a shipping program, it’s really a very clever loy-
alty program. When we were coming up with this concept, 
Jeff referenced airline credit cards—how you never feel like 
you’re being rewarded when you’re using one. He wanted to 

23
Obsess Over the Customer
create a loyalty program that provided very tangible benefits. 
With Prime, the customer is very clear on how they’re be-
ing rewarded for shopping with Amazon. The benefits start-
ed with free two-day shipping; now members also receive 
monthly e-book rentals on Kindle devices and can stream 
selected movies and television shows for no extra charge be-
yond Prime membership annual fees.
Since its inception in February 2005, Amazon Prime 
has become an increasingly important part of Amazon.com’s 
broader strategy to retain customers and get them to spend 
more time and money on its services and products. Because 
they pay $79 per year to join, Amazon Prime members use 
the service more frequently. And Amazon Prime continues 
to up customer expectation. Amazon may soon introduce 
free same-day delivery in certain urban areas.
;
In the end, Amazon.com’s strategy for remaining the 
world’s most customer-focused retail company in the years to 
come leans heavily on another leadership principle: a bias for 
action (see Chapter 8). Rarely do you find Jeff Bezos reacting 
to a competitor’s initiative. In his mind, it’s much preferable 
to launch a new innovation based on customer needs and 
experience and force your competitors to react—even if that 
innovation struggles or fails.
“If you’re competitor-focused, you have to wait until 
there is a competitor doing something,” Jeff explains. “Being 
customer-focused allows you to be more pioneering.”10	
Or, as he put it in a 2009 Fast Company interview, “There are 

24
The Amazon Way
two ways to extend a business. Take inventory of what you’re 
good at and extend out from your skills. Or determine what 
your customers need and work backward, even if it requires 
learning new skills.”11

25
2. Take Ownership of 
Results
Leaders at Amazon are owners. They think long term, and they 
don’t sacrifice long-term value for short-term results. They never 
say, “That’s not my job.” They act on behalf of the entire com-
pany, not just their own team.
W
henever I discuss the principle of ownership, I think 
about a famous story in Amazon company lore about a 
Christmas party early in the life of Amazon which was held 
at a rented facility in downtown Seattle. When the employ-
ees responsible for setup realized they didn’t have a stand 
for the Christmas tree, someone decided to nail its trunk 
directly to the wooden floor. “What the hell?” they thought. 
“We’re just renting the place.”
Jeff, always on the lookout for symbolic gestures to drive 
home his principles, pounced on the incident. For years, he 
used this unfortunate solution to highlight the shortcomings 
of the renter’s mentality. “Owners would never nail a tree 
into the floor.”
One of the biggest mistakes you can make as a leader at 
Amazon.com is sacrificing long-term value for short-term 
results. Jeff wants his people to approach every business situ-
ation as an owner, not a renter.

26
The Amazon Way
Of course, Amazon.com enjoys the luxury of a CEO 
who can think about investments with a horizon that spans 
years, even decades. Why? Because he still owns more than 
87 million shares of the company he founded—approxi-
mately 20 percent.1 Most public companies must respond 
to the quarterly demands for steady growth in sales, profits, 
and stock value from the board, the shareholders, and Wall 
Street. Amazon.com is able to place long bets and nurture 
them to maturity without as much focus on short-term re-
sults. When you look at business opportunities through a 
lens that’s in multiple years or longer, suddenly buying The 
Washington Post may not seem like such a crazy idea. And 
from the get-go, Jeff has sold investors on this idea of the 
long-term. That’s partially why Amazon gets very differ-
ent—and much higher—stock valuations than other com-
panies. It’s also why investing in scale is so vital to Amazon.
com.
Amazon isn’t the only company to discover this secret. 
If you’re looking for reliable indicators of enterprise value, 
take a look at the tenure of the leadership team. Successful 
organizations with long-term strategic visions tend to have a 
very low turnover rate at the top. The key, of course, is bal-
ancing a culture of long-term commitments with the need to 
deliver short-term excellence. You want a patient CEO, but 
you don’t want an extremely patient workforce. Maintaining 
an atmosphere of urgency (see Chapter 8, “Bias for Action”) 
is crucial. The best way to achieve that balance is with a 
sense of shared ownership. Amazon.com’s culture rewards 
people who plead passionately for their projects or ideas and 
are empowered to respectfully challenge decisions. In other 
words, people who give a damn about what they’re working 
on—and own results.

27
Take Ownership of Results
How does Jeff build and maintain this sense of owner-
ship among his team members? One way is by hiring the 
right people. The company has built an effective and scalable 
system for recruiting, managing, and developing high-per-
forming talent (see Chapter 5, “Hire and Develop the Best”).
Another way is by instilling a sense of accountability 
throughout every stratum of the organization. As co-owners 
of Amazon.com, every employee must be unflinching in his 
accountability and honesty. The highest level of customer 
service is impossible to achieve without a high degree of ac-
countability and a willingness to be direct, open, and hon-
est—especially when things are not going well.
During my time at Amazon.com, we had a philosophy 
called “the open kimono.” If you weren’t willing to be com-
pletely honest about where you, your project, or your num-
bers stood, then there was simply no chance of attaining your 
goals. You had to open your kimono and willingly expose 
the faults, errors, and limitations of your situation. And as I 
learned in that 2003 S-Team meeting, if you started caveat-
ing or waffling about why you were not hitting objectives, 
Jeff wouldn’t hesitate to tear that kimono off for you. I dis-
tinctly remember him asking one poor soul who’d been ram-
bling and tergiversating in an effort to explain away some 
mistake, “Which do you think you are exhibiting—gross 
stupidity or sheer incompetence?”
When asking for a report on a failed project, all Jeff ever 
wanted to know was the following: “Here’s what didn’t work, 
why it didn’t work, and how we’re going to change.” If a 
project looked as if it might be heading for disaster, all he 
wanted to hear was, “We don’t think it’s going to work, let’s 
try something else.” While an honest mea culpa didn’t guar-
antee that Jeff wouldn’t pounce, at least it allowed you to 

28
The Amazon Way
retain a certain measure of self-respect . . . and your job. This 
balance of driving for success and accountability while real-
izing that some ideas are not going to work lets the organiza-
tion “fail forward.” Sometimes execution is poor, and that is 
a performance issue. Sometimes the idea is just not quite the 
right idea, and so you learn, adjust, and move forward.
In The Everything Store, Brad Stone examines this cul-
ture of unyielding accountability and summarizes how 
Bezos’s incredibly high standards frequently overwhelmed 
his people: “Many just couldn’t take working for Bezos 
any longer. He demanded more than they could possibly 
deliver and was extremely stingy with praise. At the same 
time, many . . . would later marvel at how much they ac-
complished.”2 Accountability is not painless. But it’s the only 
sure path to achievement.
Amazon’s Principles of Ownership
Simply declaring that everyone in the company is an 
owner and that he or she will be held accountable for de-
cisions and actions is not enough, of course. There are a 
number of crucial connecting principles that help transform 
ownership from a vague aspiration into a daily reality.
Yes, It Is Your Job. Amazon.com employees quickly learn 
that the phrase “That’s not my job” is an express ticket to an 
exit interview. Ownership means not only mastering your 
domain, but also being willing to go beyond the boundaries 
of your role whenever it’s needed to improve customer expe-
rience or fix a problem.
Such boundary-less behavior requires an understand-
ing of details and metrics which goes two to three degrees 

29
Take Ownership of Results
deeper than normal. It was not uncommon for senior peo-
ple at Amazon to be able to talk with knowledge and au-
thority about details of a project that was not in their own 
department, let alone under their direction. It also implies 
a readiness to speak up and contribute without having to 
be asked. For example, if you have something valuable to 
offer in regard to a specific program, you don’t wait to be 
invited to the next meeting about that program—you sim-
ply show up.
You Own Your Dependencies. Of course, everyone in busi-
ness depends on others for success. Those around you—col-
leagues, team members, outside suppliers and partners, those 
in other departments that touch your work—contribute es-
sential elements that make you effective. This means that 
when they let you down, they can also cause you to fail, 
sometimes miserably.
At Amazon, one of your primary directives is to iden-
tify and tenaciously manage every potential business-derail-
ing dependency you have. It is not okay to fail because of 
a breakdown of dependencies. That’s a failure of leadership 
and, as you’ve seen, there is not much wiggle room for excus-
es at Amazon. When called to account for a problem caused 
in part or in whole by a dependency breakdown, you must 
be able to say, “I did these things to manage my dependen-
cies. I went above and beyond the reasonable in my efforts 
to manage them.” That means having rock-solid contracts, 
service-level agreements, and penalties in place as well as 
continual, active management of communications. You can 
assume nothing.
In that 2003 S-Team meeting, Jeff broke down the pro-
cess of managing dependencies in three easy steps (while, of 
course, yelling and wildly gesticulating like a madman):

30
The Amazon Way
1.	 Whenever possible, take over the dependencies 
so you don’t have to rely on someone else.
2.	 If that is impossible, negotiate and manage un-
ambiguous and clear commitments from others.
3.	 Create hedges wherever possible. For every de-
pendency, devise a fallback plan—a redundancy 
in a supply chain, for example.
Taking absolute responsibility for every possible depen-
dency under your purview is no small task. This is one reason 
that very few have the rigor, determination, and tenacity to 
make it in a leadership role at Amazon.com. It is a company 
of control freaks run by control freaks and lorded over by 
the king of control freaks. As one ex-engineer famously said, 
Jeff Bezos is such a control freak he “makes ordinary control 
freaks look like stoned hippies.”3
And since your own team is one of the most important 
dependencies under your authority, your ability to mentor 
those around you is a key metric during your annual evalu-
ation. That means your success is intrinsically linked to the 
success your people have acquired over the course of their 
careers at Amazon.com.
Compensation Rewards Long-Term Thinking. Finally, 
Amazon incentivizes ownership by designing compensation 
plans that reward it.
It’s well-known that, compared to many Silicon Valley 
companies that offer lavish salaries and outlandish perks, 
Amazon likes to run lean. The company doesn’t pay for its 
employees’ cell phones, keeps salaries low, and even uses old 
doors as desks. (Frugality, as I will discuss in Chapter 8, 
has long been a forcing function for resourcefulness, self-
sufficiency, and invention at Amazon.com). But that doesn’t 
mean employees aren’t well compensated. Amazon just 

31
Take Ownership of Results
prefers to reward employees with stock options rather than 
salary or cash bonuses.
Jeff explains his logic in the 1997 shareholder letter: “We 
know our success will be largely affected by our ability to 
attract and retain a motivated employee base, each of whom 
must think like, and therefore must actually be, an owner.”4 
Jeff incentivized us by letting us share in the rewards of 
company growth. In so doing, he got us constantly thinking 
about the long term.
The beauty of the ownership principle is that once you’ve 
established it in your organization, it works as a flywheel to 
drive Leadership Principle No. 3: Invent and Simplify.

32
3. Invent and Simplify
Leaders at Amazon expect and require innovation and inven-
tion from their teams and always find ways to simplify the pro-
cesses they touch. They are externally aware, look for new ideas 
from everywhere, and are not limited by “not invented here” 
thinking. And they are willing to innovate fearlessly despite the 
fact that they may be misunderstood for a long time.
A
mazon.com currently sells more goods online than its 
next 12 biggest competitors combined, including Staples 
and Walmart.1 What’s more, Amazon.com’s sales are grow-
ing faster than Internet sales as a whole. When I am asked 
to explain this unprecedented growth, I go immediately 
to one of Jeff Bezos’s key leadership principles: Amazon.
com continues to grow by inventing and simplifying every 
single day.
Jeff understands the same thing that Steve Jobs did: the 
best design is the simplest. Simple is the key to easy, fast, 
intuitive, and low-cost. Simple scales much better than com-
plex, which means that simplicity is intrinsically linked to 
another leadership principle: Think Big (Chapter 7). As a 
leader at Amazon.com, you are not expected to design and 
build a new innovation with ten to 100 people in mind. You 
must design it for millions of customers and tens of thousands 

33
Invent and Simplify
ecosystem partners, such as merchants and developers—
“innovation at scale”—which means truly understanding the 
users and innovating with them in mind.
I recently saw an Amazon press release stating that it had 
8,000 Amazon Web Services (AWS) partners—companies 
that are building solutions and going to market in the cloud 
computing business segment. With that kind of partnership 
base, Amazon.com leaders are driven to focus on innovation 
at scale, achieving repeatable and sustainable organic growth 
through new products, services, and business models that 
build on the core business. It’s a clearly defined, durable, and 
oft-repeated directive that is woven into the organizational 
DNA from the C-suite to the warehouse.
At Amazon, your job description is never limited to sim-
ply running things. No matter what your job, you are expected 
to improve on the processes in ways that ultimately enhance 
the customer experience and/or lower costs. Amazon.com 
engineers, for example, do not consider themselves coders 
but rather problem solvers. This mentality promotes big 
thinking—game-changing solutions and inventions—rather 
than finger-in-the-dike fixes.
Simplification Epitomized: Amazon’s Platform Businesses
In the world of business, the term platform has come to 
refer to a state in which machines interact seamlessly to knit 
together complex processes and tasks performed by various 
parties. Amazon.com is a platform. It could have stopped 
at selling books—the “books platform”—but instead it has 
cascaded its scope of service to all forms of consumer items, 
and even to the enterprise itself.

34
The Amazon Way
My time at Amazon.com made me a big believer in the 
power of process automation to make workflows simpler and 
more productive. When a process is automated, it’s not only 
easier to scale but also simpler to measure; while manual ef-
fort, even when it begins at a seemingly insignificant level, 
can evolve into an expensive, non-scalable, and non-real-time 
capability. That is why automation, algorithms, and tech-
nology architecture are the engines behind game-changing 
platform businesses such as Kindle, Amazon Mechanical 
Turk, Third-Party Sellers, Fulfillment by Amazon, and 
Amazon Web Services.
The second page of Jeff’s 2011 shareholder letter, en-
titled “The Power of Invention,” is a manifesto about the 
undeniable impact of data science and computer science on 
the growth of Amazon’s platform businesses:
Invention comes in many forms and at many 
scales. The most radical and transformative of 
inventions are often those that empower oth-
ers to unleash their creativity—to pursue their 
dreams. That’s a big part of what’s going on with 
Amazon Web Services, Fulfillment by Amazon, 
and Kindle Direct Publishing. With AWS, 
FBA, and KDP, we are creating powerful self-
service platforms that allow thousands of people 
to boldly experiment and accomplish things that 
would otherwise be impossible or impractical. 
These innovative, large-scale platforms are not 
zero-sum—they create win-win situations and 
create significant value for developers, entrepre-
neurs, customers, authors, and readers.

35
Invent and Simplify
Amazon Web Services has grown to have thir-
ty different services and thousands of large and 
small businesses and individual developers as 
customers. One of the first AWS offerings, the 
Simple Storage Service, or S3, now holds over 
900 billion data objects, with more than a bil-
lion new objects being added every day. S3 rou-
tinely handles more than 500,000 transactions 
per second and has peaked at close to a million 
transactions per second. All AWS services are 
pay-as-you-go and radically transform capital ex-
pense into a variable cost. AWS is self-service: 
you don’t need to negotiate a contract or engage 
with a salesperson—you can just read the online 
documentation and get started. AWS services 
are elastic—they easily scale up and easily scale 
down.
In just the last quarter of 2011, Fulfillment by 
Amazon shipped tens of millions of items on 
behalf of sellers. When sellers use FBA, their 
items become eligible for Amazon Prime, for 
Super Saver Shipping, and for Amazon returns 
processing and customer service. FBA is self-
service and comes with an easy-to-use inventory 
management console as part of Amazon Seller 
Central. For the more technically inclined, it also 
comes with a set of APIs [application program-
ming interfaces] so that you can use our global 
fulfillment center network like a giant computer 
peripheral.

36
The Amazon Way
I am emphasizing the self-service nature of these 
platforms because it’s important for a reason I 
think is somewhat non-obvious: even well-mean-
ing gatekeepers slow innovation. When a plat-
form is self-service, even the improbable ideas 
can get tried, because there’s no expert gatekeep-
er ready to say, “that will never work!” And guess 
what—many of those improbable ideas do work, 
and society is the beneficiary of that diversity.2
Amazon.com’s business platforms are enablers. They en-
able writers and booksellers. They enable people who want 
to sell to Amazon.com’s community. They enable businesses 
looking to outsource labor. They enable people and compa-
nies that want to use Amazon’s technology and computing 
capacity. They enable smaller organizations to enhance their 
reputations by piggybacking on that of Amazon.com. By em-
powering entrepreneurs, they enable personal and professional 
growth for thousands of individuals. Amazon.com’s business 
platforms build virtuous cycles that circulate and expand en-
ergy in much the same way as the Amazon flywheel itself.
So if you want to understand how Amazon.com thinks 
about the principle of invent and simplify, you need to un-
derstand the platform opportunity.
As we’ve noted, technology makes the platform possi-
ble. But algorithms, automation, workflow, and technology 
are only part of how Amazon is inventing and simplifying. 
More important is the fact that capabilities are designed from 
the user backwards. When we were building the third-party 
selling business at Amazon.com, creating a great experience 
for the seller was our goal. Building a simple seller registra-
tion process was difficult but essential to achieving that goal, 

37
Invent and Simplify
and my job was to push engineering teams to integrate more 
than 40 different underlying systems to create a seamless and 
simple workflow for that process.
Willingness to rethink policies, rules, and other assump-
tions that are widely accepted in the business world is criti-
cal. So is asking and answering the question, “If I had to 
completely automate the process and eliminate all manual 
steps, how would I design it?” Instead of aiming for a ten-
percent reduction in friction, push a much more radical re-
thinking of assumptions; ask “the five whys” (see Chapter 
12, “Dive Deep”), and have the willingness to challenge the 
status quo. This is where all types of resistance, both active 
and passive, will be experienced, requiring a response from 
strong executive leadership. Some jobs will be changed, oth-
ers will be eliminated. For all these reasons, it takes vision, 
creativity, desire, and courage to carry out the invent-and-
simplify principle.
Process vs. Bureaucracy
Notice that the two halves of the principle—invent and 
simplify—are both equally necessary. Process innovation 
can be enormously powerful, but when it is practiced with-
out an emphasis on simplicity, the result is bureaucracy—the 
multiplication of processes for their own sake.
One of the great observations I heard from Jeff came 
during one of our all-hands meetings, held at a local movie 
theater. Jeff took a question from an employee about avoiding 
bureaucracy while still ensuring that certain rules were put 
in place. Jeff responded with “Good process is absolutely es-
sential. Without defined processes, you can’t scale, you can’t 

38
The Amazon Way
put metrics and instrumentation in place, you can’t manage. 
But avoiding bureaucracy is essential. Bureaucracy is process 
run amok.”
Jeff understood that A-level performers hate bureaucracy 
and will leave organizations where it encroaches upon them. 
By contrast, C- and D-level performers, many of whom 
typically reside in middle management in any given orga-
nization, love bureaucracy because they can hide behind it, 
acting as gatekeepers and frequently creating the kind of 
friction that can bog down an entire company. Strong pro-
cesses with measurable outcomes eliminate bureaucracy and 
expose underperformers.
So how do you recognize bureaucracy and distinguish 
it from well-defined process? When the rules can’t be ex-
plained; when they don’t favor the customer; when you can’t 
get redress from a higher authority; when you can’t get an 
answer to a reasonable question; when there is no service-
level agreement or guaranteed response time built into the 
process; or when the rules simply don’t make sense—when 
any of these circumstances occur, the chances are good that 
bureaucracy is beginning to spread.
I distinctly remember one particular S-Team meeting 
where Jeff looked east, out across Lake Washington to the 
Microsoft campus, and told us, “I don’t want this place to 
become a country club.” He truly feared that, with success 
and growth, Amazon would become complacent and bloated 
like Microsoft; that we would lose our spirit and our desire 
to take risks; that we would cease to insist on the highest 
standards and gradually entangle ourselves in a giant ball of 
red tape. He told us that if we became like Microsoft, we 
would die. What’s worse, he said, it won’t be fun to come to 
work anymore.

39
Invent and Simplify
As you work to invent and perfect processes, always re-
member that simplicity is an essential bulwark against the 
creeping onslaught of bureaucracy.
Other People’s Work and The Mechanical Turk
Even Amazon.com can’t automate everything. One of 
my favorite strategies for dealing with this fact is the mobi-
lizing of Other People’s Work (OPW). In many cases, the 
best way to scale an unavoidable residue of manual labor is to 
enable and motivate other people to do it.
Consider just two of the many tasks that must be done 
when building an e-commerce website with a virtually in-
finite array of products: evaluating the quality of a product 
image and writing clear and accurate product descriptions. 
Neither can be handled effectively by a computer. Instead of 
hiring a vast army of people to perform these small but essen-
tial and practically endless tasks, Amazon.com handed that 
task over to its customers and partners. It created a product 
image management tool that collected customer feedback, 
allowed customers to compare images, and enabled them to 
report offensive or irrelevant content. It worked extremely 
well. Before long, Amazon.com was using OPW to man-
age other processes that couldn’t be automated. Customer 
reviews, which were controversial when Amazon first intro-
duced them, are a great example of OPW—a way of allow-
ing thousands of Amazon customers to handle the task of 
describing, rating, and categorizing products for the benefits 
of millions of other users of the website.
With the right approach, almost every company can 
find opportunities for OPW. Many of my current clients are 

40
The Amazon Way
finding that letting vendors, customers, or business partners 
carry out activities for which they have greater motivation 
and better expertise can be a powerful step toward trans-
forming their businesses while dramatically cutting costs.
Eventually, Amazon’s basic OPW concept was retooled 
into a platform for others to use named Amazon Mechanical 
Turk. It’s an online marketplace that provides businesses ac-
cess to an on-demand, scalable, flexible army of freelancers 
they can hire to tackle small, manual tasks. Countless com-
panies use this platform daily to leverage a worldwide em-
ployment base and, of course, Amazon.com makes money 
every time they do.
Third-Party Sellers: Inventing a Platform and Making It 
Simple
One of the best examples of the principle of invent and 
simplify is the project that brought me to Amazon in the first 
place—the development of the third-party seller program.
In late 2001, I was working at a technology start-up and 
actively looking for the next big thing—both in my own ca-
reer and in the world of business in general. Jason Child, a 
colleague of mine from my Arthur Andersen days (he’s now 
the CFO of Groupon), introduced me to Jason Kilar (who 
later became the founder and CEO of Hulu). They invited 
me to interview at Amazon.com. The successful candidate, I 
was told, would lead a business responsible for designing and 
operating a capability that would allow third parties to sell 
at Amazon.com.
Over the next two months, I had 23 interviews at 
Amazon.com. It was, without a doubt, the most exhaustive, 

41
Invent and Simplify
intense hiring process I have ever experienced. What we 
were really doing in these interviews was refining strategy 
and brainstorming the requirements of a third-party sell-
ing business. A precursor already existed. Unfortunately, 
zShops was largely defined by its horrible customer experi-
ence and shoddy inventory. I remember thinking, “Well, the 
idea is there, but I’m hearing some fairly unbaked plans and 
expectations.”
Eventually, I was hired to lead the launch of the third-
party business as Amazon.com’s first director of Merchant 
Integration. I had direct accountability managing all the 
merchants (a.k.a. sellers) that we were going to bring on 
board for the opening of the apparel category in late 2002, 
including brands like Nordstrom, Gap, Eddie Bauer, and 
Macys. But I was also responsible for making the Amazon.
com third-party seller experience just as enjoyable and fric-
tionless as the customer experience. We realized that, with-
out a seller experience culture, the new business would not 
succeed, and we adopted “seller success” as our mission.
At the time, the dominant third-party selling market-
place was eBay. Their mentality was very laissez-faire; they 
simply connected buyers with sellers, taking little account-
ability for customer experience or trust between merchants 
and shoppers. If you searched for a specific model of camera, 
you might get pages and pages of individual listings that of-
fered no help in understanding how the items or the offers 
to sell compared. (Incidentally, eBay has since significantly 
changed and improved in many of these areas, primarily due 
to the pressure arising from the success of Amazon.com.)
By contrast, we defined three main design principles that 
were important to us in building our third-party market-
place business:

42
The Amazon Way
1.	 Present the customer with a single item accom-
panied by an easy-to-compare list of offers to 
sell that item. We called this design principle 
“item authority.” Create a single definition of 
the item, which would allow multiple sellers, in-
cluding Amazon, to make offers to sell the item. 
We wanted to create a marketplace where sellers 
would be competing for the order in a way that 
worked to the customer’s benefit.
2.	 Make it possible for customers to trust our third-
party sellers as much as they trusted Amazon.
com itself. We operationalized the concept of 
“seller trust” in several ways.
3.	 Provide great seller tools, including multiple sell-
ing methods and rich data to help merchants op-
erate their businesses at Amazon.com. For small 
sellers, simple tools were needed. For more so-
phisticated high-volume sellers, different types of 
integrated capabilities should be provided. Docu-
mentation, operational metrics, testing environ-
ments, and professional service partners should 
be developed to help sellers be successful while 
keeping the Amazon team small.
Obviously this was an ambitious program that required 
a highly complex integration between sellers and Amazon.
com. It was clear to me that Amazon.com simply didn’t have 
the human resources to manually govern a platform like this 
at scale. We had to make the third-party marketplace self-
service. We had to provide a simple-to-use, highly intuitive 
tools for sellers as well as a system that would somehow cull 
sub-par sellers from the marketplace in order to keep cus-
tomer trust high.

43
Invent and Simplify
We quickly realized that the only way to accomplish all 
this was by taking a page from the OPW book. Fortunately, 
Jeff Bezos smiles upon projects designed to scale a business 
on a self-service platform. One of Jeff’s favorite techniques is 
to create a forcing function—a set of guidelines, restrictions, 
or commitments that force a desirable outcome without hav-
ing to manage all the details of making it happen. Forcing 
functions are a powerful technique used at Amazon.com to 
enforce a strategy or change.
One example of a forcing function was the concept of 
direct vs. indirect headcount. Direct headcount for a par-
ticular project would typically include system development 
engineers (SDE’s), technical program managers, and people 
who negotiated contracts, such as vendor managers. In Jeff’s 
mind, these were the essential skills to build a scalable com-
pany. All other headcount—all the people that don’t directly 
create a better customer experience—was considered indi-
rect. The forcing function was that acquiring direct head-
count was relatively easy to get approved. However, indirect 
head count was constrained and had to be justified by dem-
onstrating that it would decrease with scale in the business.
In building the third-party business, my indirect head-
count consisted of the account managers I hired to help as-
sist merchants complete their integration into Amazon.com. 
These account managers initially launched 15 to 20 mer-
chants at a time, but before long they were launching 50 to 
100 merchants. Eventually the number became astronomi-
cal. The forcing function did exactly what it was intended 
to do—it enabled us to build capabilities and processes that 
scaled well and became more efficient over time.
Under Clifford Cancelosi’s direction, our team built 
tools, metrics, dashboards, alarms, and other capabilities to 

44
The Amazon Way
help the sellers meet all of their contractual commitments to 
us and to help them live up to our marketplace’s high stan-
dards and ultimately, the expectations of their customers. 
We also built various technological and operational tools for 
monitoring their performance. For example, we policed the 
price and availability of an item on the seller’s website to 
ensure it was not less expensive or easier to purchase than it 
was at the Amazon.com marketplace, and we flagged sellers 
who made unreasonable commitments or failed to keep their 
promises.
Eventually we built a seller’s trust index based on all the 
touch points between merchant and customer as well as all 
the promises a merchant made. Every seller could track the 
answers to questions like, Is my content good? Am I fulfill-
ing orders on time? Am I managing returns correctly? Is my 
customer feedback good? All of this was then rolled into an 
aggregated index yielding a score for each seller. We used 
many functions and algorithms to reward high-perform-
ing sellers—for example, by having them vault to the top 
of search results. In this way, the third-party marketplace 
evolved into a highly efficient, self-governing meritocracy. If 
a seller’s score was really low, our management team would 
have various discussions with him before eventually remov-
ing him from the platform.
Equally important was Item Authority. Deceptively 
simple at first blush, Item Authority was perhaps the mer-
chant program’s quintessential invent-and-simplify innova-
tion and a major reason for our success. In order to increase 
item selection, availability, and price competition, we signed 
up multiple sellers of the same items. Item Authority rec-
onciled onto one page all of the various content from sell-
ers selling the same item. This forced sellers to compete on 

45
Invent and Simplify
price, selection, and convenience while markedly improving 
the customer experience. Instead of having to look through 
pages and pages for the best deal on a single item—which is 
essentially how eBay worked at the time—customers were 
presented with the most competitive offers all in one place.
Taken together, all these innovations worked remarkably 
well. Today, there are over two million third-party sellers at 
Amazon.com, accounting for 40 percent of all Amazon units 
shipped and sold. Here is how Amazon.com describes the 
mission and critical nature of Item Authority (the language 
comes from a job description):
Item Authority is a mission-critical service at the 
heart of Amazon’s business, and we are looking 
for a passionate, results-oriented, inventive soft-
ware manager to head it up.
When a merchant submits a product for listing 
in Amazon’s catalog, Item Authority searches the 
catalog for matches. It either approves assigning 
that offer to a page, authorizes creation of a new 
page, or rejects the submission with an error. 
And it does this tens of millions of times per day.
This “Matching” technology enables the creation 
of high quality Single Detail Pages (SDP) that 
help Amazon provide a great experience for our 
customers. It relies heavily on search technology 
(using A9), auto-classification, custom rules, and 
machine learning techniques for success. The 
ideal candidate thrives in a fast-paced environ-
ment, understands elements of matching, search, 

46
The Amazon Way
and machine learning, and will help us build fea-
tures that reduce merchant friction and drive rev-
enue for Amazon.3
Described this way, it all sounds rather matter-of-fact, 
even obvious. But now that you know the story behind the 
story, you can see that inventing Item Authority and the 
other elements of Amazon’s third-party seller program, and 
then simplifying them for the benefit of every user of the 
platform, was far from easy.
Fulfillment by Amazon
Many classic cases of invent and simplify at Amazon.com 
are behind-the-scenes processes and capabilities in fulfill-
ment and customer service. One example is Fulfillment by 
Amazon (FBA), an idea driven by the success of the third-
party seller business. Over the first decade of its existence, 
Amazon.com had built a vast system of physical storage 
space, technological systems, and processes that optimized 
item location in correlation with demand. As the third-party 
sellers’ marketplace took off, it became clear that if we could 
allow others to leverage those capabilities, there would be a 
lot of upside for both our new third-party business and for 
Amazon.com as a whole.
The idea germinated when Amazon.com signed part-
nership agreements with Toys “R” Us and Target to run their 
e-commerce infrastructures. When both companies began 
storing their items in the Amazon fulfillment network, it 
became clear that our capabilities offered an opportunity 

47
Invent and Simplify
to create increased economies of scale and utilization for 
Amazon.
The concept was remarkably simple: “You sell it, we ship 
it.” With FBA, you store your products in Amazon.com’s 
fulfillment centers, and Amazon workers pick, pack, ship, 
and provide customer service for these products. Amazon 
had created one of the most advanced fulfillment networks 
in the world, and any business could now benefit from their 
expertise. In a 2013 survey, 73 percent of respondents re-
ported that their unit sales had increased on Amazon.com 
by more than 20 percent since joining FBA.4
In addition, products listed through FBA also became 
eligible for free Super Saver Shipping and Amazon Prime 
shipping discounts, gift wrapping, 24/7 Amazon customer 
service, and up-to-the-minute countdown for one-day ship-
ping. In other words, sellers are able to piggyback on argu-
ably the most powerful retail brand in the world. A great 
new flywheel!
In the 2011 shareholder letter, Jeff writes:
Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA) shipped tens 
of millions of items on behalf of sellers. When 
sellers use FBA, their items become eligible for 
Amazon Prime, for Super Saver Shipping, and 
for Amazon returns processing and customer 
service. FBA is self-service and comes with an 
easy to use inventory management console as part 
of Amazon Seller Central. For the more techni-
cally inclined, it also comes with a set of API’s 
so that you can use our global fulfillment center 
network like a giant computer peripheral.5

48
The Amazon Way
Amazon Web Services
No discussion of Amazon.com’s platform businesses 
would be complete without some analysis of Amazon Web 
Services (AWS). It is a prime example of Jeff’s “invent and 
simplify” principle. AWS offers companies technologies and 
capabilities that provide the ability to grow infrastructure in-
stantaneously and to shrink it back if the need diminishes. 
This elasticity in resource usage gives companies momen-
tum on a vast new scale.
Having built one of the world’s largest infrastructures for 
e-commerce, Amazon.com was not content simply to lever-
age this new technology for its own business. Instead, it also 
became the leader and critical innovator in cloud computing, 
creating a business now estimated at around $3.8 billion in 
revenues (2013) that could be worth $19 billion to $30 bil-
lion if it were a standalone company.6
In his 2011 shareholder letter, Jeff writes:
Amazon Web Services (AWS) has grown to 
have over thirty different services and thousands 
of large and small businesses and individual de-
velopers as customers. One of the first AWS of-
ferings, the Simple Storage Service or S3, now 
holds over 900 billion data objects with over a 
billion being added every day. S3 routinely han-
dles more than 50,000 transactions per second 
and has peaked at close to a million transactions 
per second. All AWS services are pay-as-you-go 
and radically transform capital expense into vari-
able cost. AWS is self-service: you don’t need to 

49
Invent and Simplify
negotiate a contract or engage a salesperson – you 
just read the online documentation and get start-
ed. AWS services are elastic – they easily scale up 
and easily scale down.7
You can see the pattern: the radical transformation of 
an industry aching for a new delivery model, in this case for 
cloud-based technology services; the development of a pro-
cess for driving dramatically lower costs by providing self-
service capabilities; and the drive toward scale as a platform 
business. (See Appendix A, “Future-Ready Self-Service,” for 
a further explanation of why the concept of self-service is 
such a powerful value-creating strategy.)
Imitate the Competition, and Don’t Be Afraid to Fail
In business, innovation is great—but it’s clear that in 
many high-risk fields, mimicry pays off even better. Let the 
other guy originate the idea, invest the capital, discover a 
market, and develop operating processes. Then slide in, steal 
the blueprint, improve upon it, and scale it until the other 
guy has been left in the dust. The copycat often has a dis-
tinct advantage in this competition; the original innovator is 
typically emotionally bound to the original idea and hesitant 
to change it. The mimic has the benefit of an objective per-
spective and a willingness to course correct as needed.
Early on, Amazon.com tried to launch an auction busi-
ness, but it couldn’t out-auction eBay. Learning from our 
failure, we took the eBay concept and recast it with dis-
tinct Amazon.com values and technology, creating our 

50
The Amazon Way
ultra-successful third-party seller program. Jeff likes to say 
“Failure happens.” Stumbles are a part of life, but at Amazon.
com it is imperative that you learn something useful from 
them.
Don’t be afraid to fail; some of the best ideas at Amazon 
have emerged from the ashes of defeat. But if you expect to 
have a long career at Amazon, make sure that failure doesn’t 
happen a lot—regardless of how much you may learn in the 
process.

51
4. Leaders Are 
Right—A Lot
Leaders at Amazon are right—not always, but a lot. They have 
strong business judgment, and they spread that strong judgment 
to others through the utter clarity with which they define their 
goals and the metrics they use to measure success.
M
ake no mistake; there is a high degree of tolerance for 
failure at Amazon.com. A successful culture of inno-
vation cannot exist without it. But what Jeff Bezos cannot 
tolerate is someone making the same mistake over and over 
again, or failing for the wrong reasons.
Therefore, leaders at Amazon are expected to be right 
far more often than they are wrong. And when they are 
wrong—which of course will happen when a company con-
tinually pushes the envelope, as Amazon does—they are ex-
pected to learn from their mistakes, develop specific insights 
into the reasons for those mistakes, and share those insights 
with the rest of the company.
The resulting culture of learning, growth, and account-
ability would be impossible without a high premium on clar-
ity—clarity in the setting of goals, the communication of 
those goals throughout the organization, the establishment 
of metrics, and the use of those metrics in gauging the suc-
cess or failure of any initiative. Practices like “fudging the 

52
The Amazon Way
numbers,” “guesstimating,” “approximating,” and “bending 
the rules,” as well as deadlines that aren’t real deadlines and 
targets that are purely aspirational rather than firm objec-
tives—all of these are anathema at Amazon.com.
As I’ve mentioned, one of the reasons I’m able to write 
out a description of Amazon’s fourteen leadership secrets 
eight years after I left the company is the exceptionally clear 
way we articulated our goals and processes as a team and 
as an organization. Great leaders (like Jeff Bezos) develop 
a strong, clear framework; then they constantly apply that 
framework and articulate it accurately to their team. Get this 
right from the outset and you’ve got an excellent mechanism 
for scaling good decision-making from top to bottom.
Interestingly enough, as leaders at Amazon.com we were 
required to write out our ideas in a long, narrative form, 
which may seem contrary to the value of clarity. After all, 
don’t most business presentations involve a series of bullet-
point PowerPoint slides that are supposed to boil down com-
plex concepts into a handful of brief, vivid phrases?
But at Amazon, PowerPoint slides were not allowed. 
If you needed to explain a new feature or investment to 
the S-Team or Jeff himself, you began by writing a five to 
seven page essay. After you finished that, you reviewed it 
and trimmed it down to maybe two pages of text for the 
executives. I can’t tell you how many of my weekends were 
consumed by this writing and editing process. Then, at the 
beginning of the meeting, you would pass out this narrative 
and sit quietly for ten minutes while everyone read it.
The two-page document was a useful tool for sharing a 
set of ideas with your colleagues. But even more important 
was the process of working on the plan or proposal, describ-
ing it in a narrative so that important nuances, principles, 

53
Leaders Are Right—A Lot
and features were clear is a critical goal. As Dwight D. 
Eisenhower said, “Plans are nothing; planning is every-
thing”. Jeff believes that reliance on PowerPoint presenta-
tions dumbs down the conversation and does not push teams 
to think all the way through their topic. As he explained in a 
2013 Charlie Rose interview, “When you have to write your 
ideas out in complete sentences and complete paragraphs, it 
forces a deeper clarity of thinking.” By contrast, in the typi-
cal PowerPoint show, “You get very little information, you 
get bullet points. This is easy for the presenter, but difficult 
for the audience.”1 Written documents share more informa-
tion without the need of additional explanation. When you 
have to be super specific, it further drives a culture of clarity, 
commitment, and accountability.
Jeff also believes that successful leaders, when presented 
with new evidence and data, are able to adapt their perspec-
tive. Accordingly, he looks for people who are constantly 
revising their understanding and circling back on problems 
they thought they’d already solved. He also looks for lead-
ers who can maintain a remarkably granular understand-
ing of their businesses through metrics, intensity, and great 
program execution. (It’s a principle I will further explore in 
Chapter 12, “Dive Deep.”) He believes that his system of 
corporate communication via written-out narratives will de-
velop ideas much more effectively, deeply, and quickly than 
oversimplified bullet points and pie charts.
The Future Press Release
The style and format of Amazon.com project vision 
statements offers another excellent example of the narrative 

54
The Amazon Way
as a forcing function. Written as a short, simple, clear, 
digestible narrative, the Amazon “future press release” 
creates very little wiggle room and holds the highlighted 
team’s feet to the fire by introducing specific parameters 
and deadlines that are expected to be met. So useful is this 
technique that an Amazon product launch almost always 
begins with what we used to call a future press release—an 
announcement of the product written before its develop-
ment even began, used for internal purposes only. Crafting 
the future press release forced us to articulate for ourselves 
what would be newsworthy about the product at the very 
end of the development process.
This is a great way to define clear and lofty goals, re-
quirements, and objectives, and to build broad understand-
ing from the start of a program or enterprise change. Any 
time your organization is beginning to undertake a criti-
cal enterprise or competitive endeavor—launching a new 
product, undergoing a transformation, or entering a new 
market—writing a future press release is a great technique. 
Follow these rules to make them effective:
 Write the release as if you are writing at some 
future point in time where success has been 
achieved and realized. For example, when look-
ing forward to the introduction of a new product, 
writing a press release as if at the day of product 
launch is good, but even better is a date sometime 
after launch, where true success can be discussed.
 Discuss why the initiative is important to cus-
tomers or other key stakeholders. How did the 
customer experience improve? What benefits 
have customers received? Then discuss other rea-
sons why it was important.

55
Leaders Are Right—A Lot
 Set audacious, clear, and measurable goals, in-
cluding financial results, operating objectives, 
and market share.
 Outline the principles used that led to success. 
This is the trickiest and most important step. 
Describe the hard things accomplished, the im-
portant decisions along the way, and the design 
principles that led to success.
The future press release is a type of forcing function. It 
paints a clear vision to galvanize understanding and com-
mitment. Once it has been reviewed and approved, teams 
have a difficult time backing out of the promises it implies. 
As the project continues, a leader can refer to the press re-
lease and use it to remind and hold teams accountable.
Here is the future press release we might have written in 
2002 when launching the third-party selling business:
Amazon Announces Huge Growth in Third-Party 
Selling, Delighting Customers and Sellers
Seattle, WA: Amazon announced results for 
the third-party selling business today. Using the 
third-party selling platform, Amazon customers 
can now shop across many categories of products 
today including apparel, sporting goods, home 
decor, jewelry and electronics with incredible se-
lection, price and an experience equaling orders 
fulfilled by Amazon.
“The Amazon customer now thinks about 
Amazon for any retail need, thanks to the third 
party selling business. Over 30% of all orders 

56
The Amazon Way
at Amazon are now third party sold and ful-
filled orders, across 10 new and expanded prod-
uct categories,” explained Director of Merchant 
Integration John Rossman. “We tackled several 
difficult hurdles to make this successful, with 
the key being that sellers had a great experience. 
Sellers can now register, list products to sell, take 
orders and fulfill in the middle of the night, with-
out ever having to talk to someone at Amazon.”
If you want to increase your chances of achieving your 
goals when launching any important initiative, make sure 
you define and explain those goals with utter clarity from 
the very beginning. The future press release is a useful tool 
for making that happen.
Clarity and the Culture of Performance
There is no hiding from your failures in a culture that 
holds people accountable for their metrics. As Manfred 
Bluemel, a former senior market researcher at Amazon, once 
said, “If you can stand a barrage of questions, then you have 
picked the right metric. But you had better have your stuff 
together. The best number wins.”2
Bluemel was referring to Amazon.com’s “gladiator cul-
ture.” Because the numbers provide crystal-clear, incontro-
vertible proof of which leaders are right a lot, Amazon.com 
operates to as close to a true meritocracy as possible. I cannot 
overstate how important this is for minimizing bureaucracy in 
the organization. When Jeff purchased The Washington Post 
in 2013, a reporter at the paper interviewed me about this 

57
Leaders Are Right—A Lot
cultural phenomenon at Amazon.com. I explained how key 
judgments were made during my years at the company: “It was 
not the title but rather who’s got the best idea. Who’s bringing 
the solution to the table? That’s what was most important.”3
To be blunt, as an Amazon.com leader, you don’t get the 
chance to make a lot of mistakes. Screw up for long enough, 
or for the wrong reasons, and the island will simply vote you 
off. It is the strongest culture of performance I have ever ex-
perienced, and it is directly tied to metrics and results.
“Did I Have a Good Day Today?” The Engineer’s Answer
At Amazon.com, having a balanced, well-engineered 
scorecard of metrics that is consistently reviewed day over 
day, week over week, provides deep insights into what works 
and what doesn’t. It also places sole responsibility for success 
and failure on you as a leader.
Repeatable, consistent performance reflected in metrics 
is the gold standard for success at Amazon. Without access 
to a consistent set of metrics, an Amazon.com leader would 
be flying blind, and such risky behavior is not acceptable at 
the company. Amazon.com relies on real-time metrics or in-
strumentation more than any other company I have ever been 
involved with. Real data and real insights from the customer 
experience are used continually to answer the question, “Did 
I have a good day today?” If your metrics are in place, they 
are real-time, and your team and processes use them, this 
question yields a simple “yes” or “no” answer.
It takes foresight to do leadership-by-the-numbers cor-
rectly. You must embed real-time metrics from the very start 
of a program, because they are nearly impossible to retrofit. 

58
The Amazon Way
The Amazon experience shows us that the single biggest 
opportunity for companies operating today is to completely 
rethink their concept of metrics. Most companies use what’s 
called batch architecture to record large sets of transactions 
or other quantitative updates and to process them periodi-
cally (daily or weekly is typical). Batch architecture is very 
last century. In this day and age, you need real-time data, 
real-time monitoring, and real-time alarms when trouble 
is brewing—not lag-time metrics that hide the real issues 
for 24 hours or longer. Your business should operate like a 
nuclear reactor. If a problem arises, you need to be aware 
immediately.
This is why the word instrumentation is useful. It gives a 
different feel than metrics or business intelligence. An airplane 
pilot needs accurate real-time data. There can be no latency 
because there is no “down time” in a plane. Introducing the 
concept of instrumentation was a big and important change at 
Amazon.com, closely tied to our commitment to application 
programming interfaces (APIs) and service-oriented archi-
tectures (SOA). Instrumentation as a critical feature provided 
the dashboard to understand performance and issues in a real-
time manner. In pursuit of true instrumentation, Amazon.
com is constantly developing its real-time capabilities. During 
my time at the organization, Amazon.com tracked its perfor-
mance against roughly 500 measurable goals, nearly 80 per-
cent of which had to do with customer objectives.4
As I mentioned in Chapter 3, while I was heading up 
our third-party seller business, we decided we wanted the 
customers to have as much trust in buying from a third party 
as they did in buying from Amazon.com itself. Only because 
we embedded real-time instrumentation from the very outset 
could we ask a third-party seller, “Why aren’t you fulfilling 

59
Leaders Are Right—A Lot
this on time?” or “Why is this item available at your site but 
not through Amazon.com?” The key is that our measure-
ment tools had to be actionable and very current—as close to 
real-time as possible. We started with the concept of “perfect 
orders,” already used in Amazon retail as a way of measur-
ing seller performance. The specific metrics we developed to 
measure seller performance included:
Order defect rate (ODR). This is the percentage of a sell-
er’s orders that have received negative feedback (such as a 
one-star or two-star customer rating), an A-to-Z Guarantee 
claim, or a service credit card chargeback request (when a 
customer disputes a credit card charge with his or her bank). 
ODR allows Amazon.com to measure overall performance 
with a single metric. Obviously, a seller who maintains a 
high percentage of negative feedback is failing to live up to 
Amazon.com’s customer-centric philosophy.5
Pre-fulfillment cancellation rate. This is the percentage of 
orders cancelled by a seller for any reason prior to shipment 
confirmation.
Late shipment rate. This is the percentage of orders with 
a shipment confirmation that is overdue by three or more 
days. Orders that are ship-confirmed late may lead to in-
creased customer contacts and negatively impact customer 
experience.
Refund rate. This is the percentage of orders refunded by 
a seller for any reason.
All sellers should be working toward achieving and 
maintaining a level of customer service that meets the fol-
lowing performance targets:
 Order defect rate: < 1%
 Pre-fulfillment cancel rate: < 2.5%
 Late shipment rate: < 4%

60
The Amazon Way
Failure to meet these targets often results in the removal 
of the individual’s selling privileges. Internally, seller metrics 
become bundled with even more measures of effectiveness 
and quality of seller performance, including customer ratings 
and the number of customer service contacts.6
Systems and software engineers will always be at the 
top of the food chain in a culture of innovation and metrics 
because they create the proprietary algorithms that enable 
leaders to have their fingers on the pulse of their businesses 
every second of the day. Jeff Bezos and Amazon have a deep 
belief that small teams of world-class engineers can out-in-
novate massive bureaucracies. Why? It has a lot to do with 
the instinctive preference for clarity that engineers develop 
through a lifetime of working with numbers and system re-
quirements. Whereas bureaucrats automatically obfuscate, 
engineers automatically clarify. Clarification is the Amazon 
way, and is the basis for the culture of accountability that Jeff 
prides himself on creating.

61
5. Hire and Develop 
the Best
Leaders at Amazon raise the performance bar with every hire 
and promotion. They recognize exceptional talent, and willingly 
move them throughout the organization. Leaders develop lead-
ers and take seriously their role in coaching others.
I
n 2009, Amazon.com acquired ecommerce footwear com-
pany Zappos.com for $807 million in Amazon.com stock, 
plus about $40 million in cash and restricted stock.1 While 
many were shocked by the deal, it made perfect sense to 
me—though not for the reason given in Jeff Bezos’s official 
statement, which read, “Zappos is a customer-focused com-
pany. We see great opportunities to learn from each other 
and create even better experiences for our customers.” While 
that is true, the primary organic connection between the two 
firms lies in their hiring policies.
Zappos CEO Tony Hsieh has become the latest standard 
bearer for a successful CEO-driven company culture. He has 
been quoted as saying that hiring mistakes had cost his orga-
nization $100 million. In response, he implemented a fairly 
radical policy of paying new hires to quit. It’s a strategy that’s 
so counterintuitive yet so transparent in its thinking that I 
was immediately reminded of Jeff Bezos.

62
The Amazon Way
What’s the thinking behind paying employees to quit? 
Pretty simple, really. It’s about testing for commitment. If 
you’re willing to take $2,000 to leave Zappos (which was the 
offer last time I checked), then you obviously haven’t bought 
into what the company is trying to do. I don’t know for sure, 
but I suspect that Hsieh’s gutsy “all-in” requirement from 
his employees was a major driver in Jeff’s decision to buy his 
company.
Jeff didn’t offer me money to leave Amazon at any point 
during my tenure, but (as I’ve mentioned) I did endure 23 in-
terviews over six weeks before being hired in the first place. 
I’ve heard others compare the process to the oral exam that 
a Ph.D. candidate must survive. I don’t have a doctorate, but 
that sounds about right. The scrutiny is very, very intense. 
A typical interview day at Amazon can last nine hours. You 
may find yourself speaking to a group of people who will 
be working for you if you are hired. You may find yourself 
sitting in on a strategic meeting with company brass. You 
may be expected to contribute a solution to a real-time prob-
lem. You may even be shown the door before you ever get 
started. This is a test of commitment that is very comparable 
to Zappos’s $2,000 exit offer and reflects the same belief in 
the crucial importance of hiring and retaining only the right 
people.
From the beginning, Jeff understood how important it 
was to seed Amazon with people who embodied the culture 
he wanted to create—that your people are your company. 
As a result, his standards are shockingly high. As Jeff often 
says, it’s better to let the perfect person go than to hire the 
wrong person and have to deal with the ramifications. Why? 
Because it is a difficult, time-consuming, and expensive pro-
cess to get rid of a bad hire—and in the meantime, they are 

63
Hire and Develop the Best
dragging down those around them by their failure to help 
keep the flywheel of continuous growth and improvement 
humming at full strength.
Raising the Bar on Hiring
In the beginning, Jeff personally okayed every hire. 
After a few years, for obvious reasons, that became impos-
sible to do. So in order to maintain his own high standards 
within the rapidly expanding organization, he created what 
he called the bar raiser.
The bar raiser is an individual appointed to serve as the 
last line of defense to ensure Jeff’s standards of excellence. 
The bar raiser has veto power over any potential hire—re-
gardless of the candidate’s pedigree or his popularity among 
the rest of the hiring group. The bar raiser’s job is to ensure 
that the next hire should increase the company’s collective 
IQ , capacity, and capability—not decrease it. He or she also 
has to gauge how “fungible” the candidate is—that is, how 
capable of expanding into new roles and new areas of the 
business. Jeff famously put the philosophy this way: Five 
years after an employee was hired, he said, that employee 
should think, “I’m glad I got hired when I did, because I 
wouldn’t get hired now.”2
It’s quite an honor to be named a bar raiser. The selec-
tion is based on the success and retention of the hires you’ve 
already made. Yet in having a veto over hiring, the role often 
puts you in direct opposition to the team doing the hiring. 
As an outside voice, your job is be an independent force, free 
from the pressure of work demands that sometimes lead hir-
ing teams to make hasty or short-sighted decisions.

64
The Amazon Way
Even if you are not the bar raiser, your role in the hiring 
process is vital. Jeff would frequently tell us all that a hiring 
decision was probably the most important decision we could 
make as a member of the organization. We all knew that 
every successful candidate’s career was inextricably linked to 
our own. And this was, without a doubt, the most effective 
forcing function for excellence.
Another was our custom recruiting application, which 
forced every interviewer to provide a lengthy, narrative anal-
ysis of the candidate and a yes-or-no recommendation (with 
no “maybe” option available). Your notes were expected to 
be detailed enough to justify your answer; the after-inter-
view questioning could almost be as intense and consuming 
for the interviewer as it had been for the interviewee. The 
data was then immediately processed and applied to the next 
round of interviews. The process was so efficient that the 
next set of interviewers would often adapt their questions to 
push the candidate in directions suggested by answers they 
had provided just an hour or two earlier. As an interviewer, 
I sometimes forgot to listen to the candidate’s answers be-
cause I was so busy directing my line of questioning to suit 
the previous interviewer’s data or scribbling madly to record 
everything said.
After the interviews were completed, the hiring man-
ager and bar raiser would review the notes and the votes of 
every interview. If a debrief was required, it was mandatory 
that everyone attend. And, of course the bar raiser could veto 
the hire without question, no matter how the team or hiring 
manager felt.
It was an absurdly rigorous process, one that would be 
considered wildly excessive at almost any other company. 
But if you really believe that your people are your company, 

65
Hire and Develop the Best
why not invest the time and effort required to identify and 
hire only the very best?
Because standards are so high, hiring can be problem-
atic. What many people don’t realize is that Amazon.com 
almost went out of business in 2000, not long before I ar-
rived. There was not enough revenue and way too much cost. 
The stock price plunged from $100 to $44 to $20 to below 
$5. The company closed down customer service, and massive 
layoffs ensued. Over the next few years, it was tremendously 
difficult to hire the best because we wouldn’t pay them what 
they deserved and the stock options were far from enticing. 
There was a lot of risk and we basically expected people to 
take a pay cut to join us.
Yet the incredible commitment to hiring only the best 
remained unwavering. One colleague of mine wasn’t able to 
find a suitable hire for over two months, so they just axed the 
position and told him that, if he hadn’t been able to make 
the hire, then he obviously didn’t need the person in the first 
place.
Of course, Amazon isn’t above taking advantage of short-
cut methods for identifying great talent. In a 2012 CNN 
Money article, Adam Lashinsky explained how Amazon.
com had gone on a “military hiring spree” because Jeff was 
impressed with veterans’ logistical know-how and bias for 
action.3 In fact, Amazon.com has a dedicated military re-
cruiting website and a highly consistent hiring and retention 
record for ex-military personnel.
This practice of hiring veterans isn’t about expressing 
gratitude for ex-soldiers’ service to our country. Veterans 
fit Jeff’s business model. As a result, Amazon.com has not 
bothered to launch a huge PR campaign about its military 
employment program. Jeff just realized it was good business.

66
The Amazon Way
The Passing Grade Is A
The kiss of death at Amazon.com is being known as a 
“solid guy.” While this might seem like a perfectly accept-
able description at another company, Jeff’s perception was 
different. As far as he was concerned, everyone at Amazon 
is fortunate to be there. People who didn’t excel at their jobs 
were failing to contribute appropriately, in effect free-riding 
on the rest of us. As leaders, we were expected to work with 
laggards like these to improve their performance into the A+ 
category—or else find some way to incent these people to 
leave.
As a result, Amazon.com experienced systematic and 
significant turnover during my years there. Jeff told us to 
focus our positive reinforcement on our A+ people; he was 
comfortable with a high degree of churn below that standard.
This strategy was distinctly underlined by the compen-
sation policy. At Amazon.com, the vast majority of stock op-
tions go to the A+ employees; only the crumbs go to the B 
and C players. And since the salaries were, relatively speak-
ing, quite low (I think the top salary at the time was $155k), 
a vast majority of our compensation came in the form of 
stock. So being “a solid B” meant a significant falloff in 
stock options and promotion opportunities. It was all part of 
Jeff’s way of instilling a sense of ownership in the company: 
our financial fortunes were directly tied to the success of the 
company.
Only seeking out, hiring, and retaining the very best 
people makes it possible to insist upon the highest standards 
of performance in the everyday activities of your company.

67
6. Insist on the 
Highest Standards
Leaders at Amazon set high standards—standards that many 
people consider unreasonably high. Leaders are continually rais-
ing the bar and driving their teams to deliver an ever-increas-
ing level of quality. Leaders also ensure that the few defects that 
elude the quality process do not get sent down the line, and that 
problems are fixed so they stay fixed.
I
n earlier chapters of this book, I outlined numerous ways 
Jeff Bezos and the leadership team at Amazon.com have 
maintained “unreasonably high” standards of quality. The 
question is, how has such a large, complex organization man-
aged to embed these standards into the DNA of the organi-
zation, from entry-level customer service representatives to 
the CEO himself? The answer begins with the seriousness 
and consistency with which the company applies its stated 
values—the Amazon leadership principles. Those principles 
are challenging—even inspiring—but also exacting in their 
demands.
Here’s the most important thing about the principles: 
most of them refer to the expectations that Amazon has 
for leaders. (You’ve probably noticed that I’ve echoed that 
language in this book.) It sends a subtle but powerful mes-
sage that empowers every Amazon.com employee to act and 

68
The Amazon Way
think like a leader. When everyone behaves like a leader, it 
acts as a forcing function for the relentlessly high standards 
that Jeff insists upon.
Jeff believed that his workforce, like his technology, 
should be constantly improving. He believed every new hire 
should improve the talent pool, just as every new techno-
logical process should improve efficiency and eliminate op-
erational friction. And as the organization grew beyond the 
size where Jeff could personally enforce his high standards of 
performance, he developed instrumentation and metrics to 
play that role. One of these standards-enforcing tools is the 
service level agreement.
Service Level Agreements
A service level agreement (SLA) is a kind of contract 
that specifies the precise standards to which a particular ser-
vice will be held. A well-written SLA will define the inputs, 
outputs, and the metrics that will be used to define accept-
able quality and performance. At Amazon.com, SLAs are 
used to define expectations for the services provided to both 
external and internal customers.
Because bad customer experiences are simply not accept-
able at Amazon.com, SLAs are written in such a way that 
the worst experiences are still very, very good compared to 
the rest of the industry. When you settle for the median, 
mediocrity sets in. That’s where many companies get SLAs 
wrong.
Jeff relentlessly conveys to his team that even small ser-
vice failures are far from trivial. For example, one of Amazon.
com’s metrics shows that even a minuscule 0.1-second delay 

69
Insist on the Highest Standards
in a webpage loading can translate into a 1 percent drop in 
customer activity. For that reason, the amazon SLA specifies 
that the worst page load time—experienced by customers no 
more than one tenth of one percent of the time—must be 
three seconds or less. These SLAs are heavily negotiated. 
Part of the weekly metrics review is discussing and under-
standing the root causes of SLA failures and the planned 
fixes. What’s probably most impressive is that everything at 
Amazon.com has an SLA—everything. For instance, the 
time between an image’s upload and the moment it appears 
on the website has an SLA. So does the time it takes to 
change a third party’s inventory from ten to eight. If it can 
be measured, it is—and an exceptionally high standard of 
service is attached to it.
This dedication to real-time metrics and SLAs is one of 
the most unique aspects of Amazon.com. Most organiza-
tions don’t have the ability to collect and manage this much 
near-real-time data. They don’t have the ability to insist on 
SLA instrumentation and agreements or the investment 
mentality to make this happen. Doing so is not cheap—but 
at Amazon.com, instrumentation is a non-negotiable launch 
requirement for any new program.
As a result, Jeff and his leadership team always have a 
very clear picture of the organization’s health. Needless to 
say, if your numbers don’t reflect Jeff’s expectations, you’ll 
hear about it soon enough.
“Cookies or Cookies & Crumpets?”
In 2003, I was helping with the launch of a third-party 
store devoted to gourmet food. Amazon.com uses a hierarchy 

70
The Amazon Way
of “browse nodes” to organize its items for sale. Each node 
represents a category of items for sale rather than the items 
themselves—for example, Harry Potter books rather than an 
individual title from the J.K. Rowling book series. Browse 
node IDs are positive integers that uniquely identify prod-
uct collections, such as Literature & Fiction (17), Medicine 
(13996), Mystery & Thrillers (18), Nonfiction (53), or 
Outdoors & Nature (290060). Amazon.com uses over 
120,000 browse node IDs in the U.S. market alone.
Anyway, Jeff and the small group running the launch 
were having a conversation about the relevant browse nodes 
for the gourmet food store. It was one of those rare times 
when Jeff was in a really good mood. He was enjoying him-
self. Perhaps partly for this reason, we spent literally 20 
minutes deeply discussing whether or not one browse node 
should be “Cookies” or “Cookies & Crumpets.” A crumpet, 
Jeff argued, is actually a thick, flat savory cake, not a cookie, 
and thus deserved to be recognized as such.
The level of detail involved in this discussion bordered 
upon the absurd, but Jeff was entirely engaged and deadly se-
rious about the decision’s importance. To this day, whenever 
I am catch myself thinking that a decision is “not that im-
portant,” I ask myself, “Cookies or Cookies & Crumpets?”
After reading this story you might think, “Jesus, what 
a micromanager! How does anything ever get done?” You’d 
have a point. Many of Jeff’s standards are unreasonably high. 
And as a result, efficiency is occasionally sacrificed. In fact, 
some of the worst leaders I encountered at Amazon.com 
were the ones who hid behind ridiculous standard critiques. 
They became parrots of ideology, instead of being pragmatic 
in its application. Like any good idea or concept, the idea of 
high standards can be carried to a non-productive extreme.

71
Insist on the Highest Standards
Most of these bureaucratic parrots didn’t last long, how-
ever. Because Amazon.com is a culture of metrics and per-
formance, everything eventually comes out in the wash.
More than a few ex-Amazon.com employees have de-
scribed the organization as a large company that functions 
like a start-up—meaning, I believe, that they feel as if they 
were required to do excellent work at a frenetic, breakneck 
pace while still adhering to time-consuming processes like 
the long-form written narrative and other elaborate commu-
nication processes.
This is all true, I suppose. But here’s the thing. If you 
want to work for Jeff, you have to understand that the leader-
ship principles are more than just nebulous guidelines. None 
of the 14 principles mentions the need for a healthy work-life 
balance. That is not an accident. Jeff expects all of his people 
to function as both owners and leaders. He wants you to 
drive the business as if it were your own car, not some week-
end rental.
And the truth is that Jeff’s maniacally high standards 
exist for a reason. There’s a lot at stake when your entire 
storefront is a website. In 2012, the Amazon.com site went 
down for 49 minutes. A small glitch? Maybe. But as a result, 
the company lost sales of nearly $5.7 million.2
One of the original names for Amazon.com was 
Relentless.com.3 Eventually this name was jettisoned be-
cause it had too many negative connotations, but that word 
lives on in Jeff’s insistence on the highest standards. It takes 
a certain kind of personality to succeed in an organization 
like Amazon.com. As an employee, you really do have to 
adopt a long view, just like Jeff’s, and truly believe you are 
part of something very big—something that is changing the 
world.

72
7. Think Big
Thinking small is a self-fulfilling prophecy. Leaders at Amazon 
create and communicate a bold direction that inspires results. 
They think differently and look around corners for big new ways 
to serve customers.
J
eff Bezos is closely associated with an organization called 
The Long Now, which is primarily made up of people 
concerned by society’s ever-shortening attention span. On a 
Bezos-owned West Texas property they are building a clock 
that ticks once a year. The century hand advances once every 
100 years, and the cuckoo will come out once every millen-
nium for the next 10,000 years.1
Jeff is big on symbols. The 10,000-Year Clock is sym-
bolic of his desire to always be thinking big and looking 
long-term—as a company, a culture, and a world. Bezos rec-
ognizes that “a lot of people believe that you should live for 
the now.” He’s not one of them. He recommends that people 
“think about the great expanse of time ahead of you and try 
to make sure that you’re planning for that in a way that’s go-
ing to leave you ultimately satisfied.”2
I’m reminded of this quotation whenever I read about 
Jeff’s quest to salvage one of Apollo 11’s F-1 engines from the 
bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. I’m just extrapolating here, 

73
Think Big
but I imagine he might consider the NASA space program—
once the very definition of thinking big—as having lost its 
drive to really achieve anything as monumental as going to 
the moon. For him, dredging this symbol up from obscurity 
is a great metaphor for a renewed quest for greatness—a call 
to the American people to once again think big.
Or maybe he’s just really into space stuff. I don’t know.
Either way, it’s clear that Jeff’s emphasis of thinking big 
applies most of all to himself. You and I might consider Jeff a 
legend of entrepreneurial achievement and one of the great-
est success stories in modern history. But in his mind, he 
still has a long way to go. He’s openly said that he hasn’t yet 
built “a lasting company” and that “the Internet in general 
and Amazon.com in particular, are still in Day One.” Jeff is 
out to not just sell history books, but to also rewrite them. 
And if you want a seat on his bus, be prepared to “go big or 
go home.”
A colleague told me this story about one S-Team meet-
ing in 2002 when they were discussing the selection of mer-
chandise Amazon would make available to customers. Chief 
information officer and senior vice president Rick Dalzell 
asked Jeff when “enough would be enough.” Jeff responded, 
“When a factory in Paraguay can buy a railroad boxcar full of 
bauxite from a mine in China and transact it over Amazon, 
then we might be done.”
After a moment, Dalzell asked if we would ever sell bull 
semen. Jeff said, “Well, why not? There is lots of margin in 
it.” Then he turned to Jeff Wilke, the senior vice president 
of consumer business and said, “You will need refrigeration.”
This story illustrates that there is probably nothing “too 
big” in the Amazon.com universe and why “think big” gets 
imbedded into everyone’s behavior.

74
The Amazon Way
Leaders create and communicate a bold direction that 
inspires results. As I’ve explained, my challenge was to de-
sign and operate a capability that would allow third parties 
to sell at Amazon—not for 10 or 100 users but for tens of 
thousands. With that kind of scale in mind from day one, 
based on a vision that is massive, you’re willing to invest in 
a way that you wouldn’t with a modest vision of incremen-
tal change. This is one of Amazon’s secret sauces—to think 
about the vast potential of a project from day one and create 
an inspired team that owns that.
Free Cash Flow—The Secret of Thinking Big
In his April, 2013, letter to shareholders, Bezos addressed 
one of the most important factors in Amazon.com’s massive 
success—the willingness to sacrifice this year’s profits to in-
vest in long-term customer loyalty and product opportunities 
that will create bigger profits next year and for years there-
after.3 Writer and former Wall Street analyst Henry Blodget 
responded to Jeff’s letter in an April 14, 2013 Business Insider 
article that contrasted his long view with the myopic focus 
on today’s bottom line that characterizes most companies. 
Blodget observed:
This obsession with short-term profits has helped 
produce the unhealthy and destabilizing situation 
that now afflicts the U.S. economy: The profit 
margins of America’s corporations are now high-
er than they ever have been in history, while the 
employee wages paid by America’s corporations 
are the lowest they have ever been in history. 

75
Think Big
Meanwhile, a smaller percentage of America’s 
adults are working than at any time since the late 
1970s.4
Amazon.com has never put short-term profits ahead of 
long-term investment and value creation—a strategy many 
believe has the potential to boost the entire American econ-
omy. Sometimes overlooked is the fact that maintaining low 
margins—and deliberately eschewing short-term profits—is 
a brilliant strategy in the tumultuous age of the Internet. 
Not only do low prices drive customer loyalty, but they also 
discourage competition. If you want to jump into the fray 
against Amazon.com, you can’t just match them on value—
you have to significantly beat them. But that’s easier said 
than done. Jeff has left very little room to huddle beneath 
Amazon.com’s price umbrella, leaving most competitors out 
in the soaking rain.
“We’ve done price elasticity studies,” Bezos once said. 
“And the answer is always that we should raise prices. We 
don’t do that, because we believe—and we have to take this 
as an article of faith—that by keeping our prices very, very 
low, we earn trust with customers over time, and that actu-
ally does maximize free cash flow over the long term.”5
Free cash flow is the key phrase in that comment. Jeff re-
turned to the subject in a January 3, 2013, Harvard Business 
Review interview: “Percentage margins are not one of the 
things we are seeking to optimize. It’s the absolute dollar 
free cash flow per share that you want to maximize. If you 
can do that by lowering margins, we would do that. Free 
cash flow, that’s something investors can spend.”6
The move towards free cash flow (FCF) as the primary 
financial measure at Amazon.com began in earnest when 

76
The Amazon Way
Warren Jenson became CFO in October, 1999. That’s the 
time when the finance organization began to move away 
from a percentage margin focus to a cash margin focus. Jeff 
loves to give his loud, guffaw laugh and toss out the axiom 
“Percentages don’t pay the light bill—cash does!” He then 
follows up with the question, “Do you want to be a $200 
million company with a 20 percent margin or a $10 billion 
company with a 5 percent margin? I know which one I want 
to be!” Again, the guffaw.
As explained in his 2004 letter to stockholders, Jeff likes 
the FCF model because it gives a more accurate view of ac-
tual cash generated through Amazon.com’s operations (pri-
marily retail sales) that is truly free to use in doing a number 
of things.7 In the model Amazon.com uses, capital expendi-
tures are subtracted from gross cash flow. This means that 
the cash is available to grow the business by adding new cat-
egories, creating new businesses, scaling through technology 
(done often and well at Amazon.com), or paying down debt 
(in 2004, Amazon.com had $4 billion and some FCF was 
used to pare that down). Of course, that extra cash could also 
be given back to stockholders in the form of dividends (never 
really considered) or given back to shareholders via stock re-
purchases (maybe someday—no, not really).
Jeff believed then, as he does now, that without constant 
innovation a company will stagnate. And the primary ingre-
dient for investment in innovation is FCF.
This philosophy and the need to practice it successfully 
drove the creation of other capabilities, such as Amazon’s 
robust, extremely accurate unit economic model. This tool 
allows folks like the merchants, finance analysts, and opti-
mization modelers (known at Amazon.com as quant-heads) 
to understand how different buying decisions, process flows, 

77
Think Big
fulfillment paths, and demand scenarios would affect a 
product’s contribution profit. This, in turn, gives Amazon.
com the ability to understand how changes in these variables 
would impact FCF. Very few retailers have this in-depth fi-
nancial view of their products; thus, they have a difficult job 
making decisions and building processes that optimize the 
economics. Amazon.com uses this knowledge to do things 
like determine the number of warehouses they need and 
where they should be placed, quickly assess and respond to 
vendor offers, accurately measure inventory margin health, 
calculate to the penny the cost of holding a unit of inventory 
over a specified period of time, and much more.
While Amazon.com’s short-term investors may grouse 
that Amazon.com should be “making more money,” Jeff 
continues to build one of the most dominant, enduring, and 
valuable enterprises in the world. Meanwhile, other Internet 
boom companies have bit the dust, mostly because they put 
too much emphasis on short-term profitability and failed to 
invest enough in long-term value creation.
Jeff explains it this way, “Take a long-term view, and the 
interests of customers and shareholders align.”8 That’s the 
philosophy that has made Amazon so successful. Another 
way of saying it: If you’re inefficient and have fat margins, 
you die a Darwinian death.
On the Origin of Species . . . now there’s a business model 
that thinks big.
The Regret Minimization Framework
One of my favorite Jeff concepts is the idea of the re-
gret minimization framework. It was something he referred 

78
The Amazon Way
to every once in a while, especially when we were thinking 
big and preparing to do something that everyone thought 
was crazy . . . launching the third-party seller division, for 
instance.
Apparently, when Jeff decided he was going to quit his 
job and start a company that sold books online, his boss at 
D. E. Shaw advised him to think about it for 48 hours be-
fore making a final decision. So Jeff sat down and tried to 
find the right framework in which to make that kind of big 
decision. In typical Jeff Bezos long-term thinking manner, 
he referenced something he called his regret minimization 
framework. As he explained in a 2001 interview:
I wanted to project myself forward to age 80 and 
say, “Okay, now I’m looking back on my life. I 
want to have minimized the number of regrets 
I have.” I knew that when I was 80 I was not 
going to regret having tried this. I was not go-
ing to regret trying to participate in this thing 
called the Internet that I thought was going 
to be a really big deal. I knew that if I failed I 
wouldn’t regret that, but I knew the one thing 
I might regret is not ever having tried. I knew 
that that would haunt me every day, and so, when 
I thought about it that way it was an incredibly 
easy decision. And, I think that’s very good. If 
you can project yourself out to age 80 and sort of 
think, “What will I think at that time?” It gets 
you away from some of the daily pieces of confu-
sion. You know, I left this Wall Street firm in 
the middle of the year. When you do that, you 
walk away from your annual bonus. That’s the 

79
Think Big
kind of thing that in the short-term can confuse 
you, but if you think about the long-term then 
you can really make good life decisions that you 
won’t regret later.9
This is advice that works well when applied to a personal 
career decision. But it works just as well when making a de-
cision about the future of your business. Which choice will 
look best when you consider it, not six months or one year 
from now, but decades in the future? Chances are that’s the 
right option—the one that holds out the promise of doing 
really big things.

80
8. Have a Bias 
for Action
Leader at Amazon value calculated risk taking. Speed matters 
in business. Many decisions and actions are reversible and do 
not need extensive study. So when you are in doubt, try some-
thing—and take advantage of the opportunities that being the 
first in the field can offer.
T
he physics of inertia show us that a body at rest has a 
tendency to remain at rest. In his book, The Wall Street 
Journal Essential Guide to Management, Alan Murray points 
out that a corollary of that physical principle is this: It’s usu-
ally easier to stop things from happening than it is to make 
them happen.1
At Amazon.com, there is a natural tendency to push 
forward at all times. The right kind of person for Amazon.
com is somebody who is astute and contemplative yet avoids 
paralysis from analysis—the kind of person who is always 
moving forward on things without waiting to be asked to 
do so. This is one of the best aspects of working at Amazon.
com. There is no status quo—just a continual effort to push 
ahead. I read somewhere that Hall of Fame NFL coach Bill 
Parcells posted a sign in his locker room that read “Blame 
Nobody. Expect Nothing. Do Something.” He would make 
an excellent leader at Amazon.com.

81
Have a Bias for Action
Jeff has always reassured his people that they will never 
be punished for erring on the side of action. This has resulted 
in both huge wins (the creation of one-click shopping) and 
colossal failures (the creation of Amazon Auction). There’s 
a common assumption that it’s important to know the ex-
act right action to take before doing anything. That’s not 
how things are viewed at Amazon. As Jeff once said, “If you 
never want to be criticized, for goodness’ sake, don’t do any-
thing new.”2 (Of course, this bias for action and willingness 
to be wrong doesn’t mean you can also be wrong repeatedly. 
Unlike Thomas Edison, leaders at Amazon don’t get 2,000 
tries at developing just the right filament for the light bulb.)
Sometimes the Mere Threat of a Big Idea Is Enough
In a December 1, 2013, television interview with Charlie 
Rose, Jeff sent the media into a tizzy by unveiling his plan to 
eventually use drones to facilitate same-day delivery of pack-
ages. While he admitted that this service was still some way 
off in the future and faced such obstacles as FAA regulations 
and limitations on package size, the drone story was great 
PR copy that was timed perfectly—the day before Cyber 
Monday, when reporters everywhere are focused on the re-
tail industry. And it worked. Sales shot through the roof the 
morning after the interview aired, partly because Jeff’s sly 
smile and the Amazon.com brand seemed to be plastered 
across every news media page and Internet blog.
The primary message I took from the interview was a 
simple one: Jeff’s focus on the long view and on thinking 
big has clearly remained unchanged. If you are not invent-
ing for your customers and improving their experience every 

82
The Amazon Way
day—even in ways that may hurt short-term financial re-
sults—then someone else will.
Even if drones never deliver a single package for Amazon, 
they make a highly effective symbol of Amazon.com’s com-
mitment to continuing to invent and simplify on fulfillment. 
As radical and controversial as drone delivery may seem to-
day, the idea is perfectly in line with this strategy. And quite 
frankly, I wouldn’t be shocked if Jeff finds a way to make 
them work.
Don’t Let Simple Things Be Hard Things
A bias for action does have its down side. Many cur-
rent and ex-employees at Amazon.com—especially in the 
early days—complained to me that they were occasionally 
not given the resources they needed to build things properly. 
There is continuous pressure to get things done as quickly as 
possible, which sometimes leads people to apply Band-Aids 
to problems rather than address the underlying issues. Some 
say Amazon would be better served by slowing down and 
moving at a more deliberate pace.
In response, Jeff would probably say, “If you double the 
number of experiments you do per year, you’re going to dou-
ble your inventiveness.”3 You may or may not agree with this 
philosophy, but it’s hard to argue with it when Jeff propounds 
it—because he’s proven it works.
Nonetheless, it is true that a bias for action tends to 
encourage decision-making that is based on gut instinct. 
There’s a reason why a bias for action is often mentioned as 
a characteristic trait of successful start-ups. The time and 
money budgets of start-up companies simply don’t allow for 

83
Have a Bias for Action
elaborate market analysis. And it’s clear that Jeff has often 
followed his gut instincts over the years. He respects leaders 
who are willing to do the same.
However, this can cause a leader to run head-on into a 
paradox. Amazon.com has what I would call a two-strike 
culture. Leaders are expected to be right—a lot. They are 
encouraged to take risks, but they must be calculated risks. 
And a leader cannot completely blow it very often before be-
ing shown the door.
So how do you successfully balance a bias for action with 
the ability to be right a lot? By developing and monitoring the 
metrics. As Jeff likes to say, “Don’t let simple things be hard 
things.” Innovating products, increasing sales, recruiting 
great talent . . . these are hard things to do. Administrative 
and procedural tasks like collections should be simple. So 
a question like “Are we up to date on collections or not?” 
should be easy to answer. But at many companies, the infor-
mation to answer questions like these is simply not available.
That’s where the metrics come in. Creating an op-
erational environment that automates processes and makes 
them clear and transparent allows you to invest more time 
and energy on the thornier issues that require more work 
and creativity.
So one of the keys to creating and sustaining a success-
ful bias for action is having the right data in front of you at 
the right time. Of course, you have to trust that the data are 
trustworthy and accurate, and that’s why Jeff puts so much 
stock into hiring the world-class engineers.
The seriousness of Jeff’s commitment to the bias for ac-
tion is shown by the thought he has given to rewarding and 
honoring it. For example, Amazon.com’s system of iconogra-
phy rewards and engages employees who develop new skills 

84
The Amazon Way
or attributes. These “merit badges” take the form of highly 
visible icons on their phone tool, the internal phone directory 
on the intranet of Amazon. You’d be surprised how effective 
this is at motivating people to take on new challenges.
Then there’s the Just Do It award, which is presented at 
the quarterly all-hands meeting to employees who exemplify 
the values of a bias for action, ownership, frugality, and self-
starting. The award may just be an old tennis shoe that’s 
been mounted and bronzed, but it’s also a highly coveted, 
very visible icon that winners display proudly in their offices.
Leaders understand that 100 percent certainty about the 
prospects for any new venture is almost never available. No 
matter how much research and analysis you do, the future 
can never be guaranteed. That’s why Amazon rewards lead-
ers who just do it—who respond to uncertainty by taking a 
(smart) risk and learning from the results.

85
9. Practice Frugality
A leader at Amazon tries not to spend money on things that 
don’t matter to customers. Frugality breeds resourcefulness, 
self-sufficiency, and invention. No extra points are awarded for 
headcount or budget size.
A
mazon.com has always been tremendously deliberate 
about keeping a cost- conscious, even cheap culture. Jeff 
firmly believes that frugality drives innovation. It is one of 
his favorite forcing functions. As he puts it, “One of the only 
ways to get out of a tight box is to invent your way out.”1 
Every dollar saved is another opportunity to invest in the 
business. Eliminating cost structure from the business drives 
low prices, which drives the virtuous cycle flywheel.
When I was at Amazon.com, nobody flew first class. 
Everybody stayed in budget hotels. The company didn’t 
pay for anybody’s cell phone bill. Most important, this low-
cost culture was executed consistently from top to bottom. 
Jeff drove the same little Honda for years after he founded 
Amazon.com. Perhaps most extraordinarily, Jeff’s salary is 
$81,840—just $14,000 more than the average Facebook in-
tern makes.2
Just as he did in 1997, Jeff fundamentally believes 
that Amazon is still in day one, and so he runs it with the 

86
The Amazon Way
cost-minded discipline normally applied to a brand new 
start-up. More than anything else, he fears and loathes 
complacency—especially since the company still operates 
on razor-thin profit margins, relying on high and growing 
volume to pay the bills. Keeping costs down is one way of 
fending off complacency. It also discourages employees from 
measuring their importance by the amount of money they 
spend. No extra points are awarded for headcount or budget 
size. Empire-building by managers is virtually impossible, in 
partly because there’s just no money for it.
The Legend of the Door Desk
From the beginning, Jeff was adamant that Amazon was 
not going to create offices with big, elaborate desks. He fig-
ured all anyone needed was a place to work—and that in-
cluded senior leadership as well. Early on in the company’s 
history, someone came up with the idea of hammering legs 
on to doors to create more desks. Eventually, the “door desk” 
became Jeff’s symbol for the low-cost, egalitarian culture he 
was trying to create. In fact, the company still hands out 
the Door Desk Award, a title given to select employees who 
have a “well-built idea” that creates significant savings for 
the company and enables lower prices for customers.
Ironically the door desk, one of Jeff’s supremely effec-
tive symbols for company frugality, later became a symbol 
of mindless bureaucracy that nearly gave him a connip-
tion fit. I found out about it at an all-hands meeting where 
Jeff was ranting about bureaucracy. What had set him off? 
Apparently someone had shipped door desks to our London 
office. “You know you’re becoming a bureaucracy when 

87
Practice Frugality
you decide to spend money to ship [expletive] symbols to 
Europe!” he yelled.
I’m fairly certain someone lost their job over that one.
That hasn’t stopped Jeff from searching for opportuni-
ties to create fresh symbols of frugality. For example, at the 
company’s annual shareholders meeting in 2009, Bezos re-
vealed that all the light bulbs had been taken out of the caf-
eteria vending machines. “Every vending machine has light 
bulbs in it to make the advertisement more attractive,” Jeff 
explained. “So they went around to all of our fulfillment 
centers and took all the light bulbs out.”3 Amazon.com es-
timated that the measure saved tens of thousands a year on 
electricity. Not a huge sum in itself, but the gesture speaks 
volumes about the way this multi-billion-dollar company 
thinks.
No More Free Advil
Like any goal or policy, a good idea can go too far. 
Frugality can have a downside when it sends a message of 
not caring to employees or customers. Just visit Glassdoor.
com, the website dedicated to employee comments about the 
companies they work for, and read about how many Amazon 
ex-employees cite the company’s cheapness as the number 
one reason they jumped ship. Many people have warned that 
Amazon.com’s policy of hiring temporary-contract workers 
could lead to low-quality work and inconsistent productivity, 
and waste resources on extra training.
Amazon.com has also been criticized for outsourcing its 
customer chat support to India. In one particular instance, 
an American customer went so far as to post the transcript 

88
The Amazon Way
of his wildly dysfunctional discussion with an Amazon.com 
chat support representative named “Farah,” a woman who 
clearly had a tenuous relationship with the English lan-
guage.5 While this is hardly an uncommon problem in cus-
tomer service among many U.S. companies, critics pointed 
to the unfortunate interaction as a sign that Amazon.com 
was growing too big to adhere to its stated principles.
To my mind, the fact that this story made the pages of 
Business Insider suggests that Amazon.com is still the gold 
standard when it comes to high customer service standards. 
But it also suggests that Amazon’s quest for cost reduction 
carries with it the risk of compromising those standards—a 
challenge I’m sure Jeff Bezos is focusing on.
In The Everything Store, Brad Stone writes about how 
employees are impacted by the emphasis on frugality:
Parking at the company’s offices in South Lake 
Union costs $220 a month, and Amazon reim-
burses employees—for $180. Conference room 
tables are a collection of blond-wood door desks 
shoved together side by side. The vending ma-
chines take credit cards, and food in the company 
cafeterias is not subsidized. New hires get a back-
pack with a power adapter, a laptop dock, and 
orientation materials. When they resign, they’re 
asked to hand in all that equipment—including 
the backpack.4
Stone goes on to report that, in the late 1990’s, a newly 
installed executive “cut a rare office perk, free Advil, which 
he viewed as an unnecessary expense.” The move set off “a 
near insurrection among employees,” but was upheld.

89
Practice Frugality
All of that said, it’s probably important to note that 
Amazon.com has industry-typical health insurance and 
dental plans, as well as its yearly employee stock grants and 
matching 401k program. The company pays enough to at-
tract quality talent—but not enough to make people fat and 
happy, or to create the country-club atmosphere Jeff is trying 
to avoid. It’s a delicate balance to strike for both customers 
and employees.

90
10. Be Vocally 
Self-Critical
Leaders at Amazon do not consider themselves, or their teams, 
above criticism. They benchmark themselves against the best, and 
they are proactive about revealing problems or mistakes, even 
when doing so is awkward or embarrassing.
P
roblems exist in every business. As every recovering al-
coholic knows, the first step in fixing any problem is ad-
mitting that it exists. While many business teams and their 
leaders fool themselves by denying the existence of prob-
lems for weeks, months, and even years on end, Amazon.
com leaders are expected to be intellectually honest. They 
acknowledge their shortcomings and continually ask, “How 
can we get better?”
Needless to say, the experience can be humiliating. As 
you may have gathered, Jeff Bezos is not always the most 
gentle and understanding of leaders. Knowing that you 
could be facing an experience only slightly less embarrass-
ing than a public pillory, it’s tempting to give the appearance 
that you or your team are progressing more quickly than you 
actually are, especially when reporting directly to Jeff. It’s 
also tempting to remain quiet while others are telling a rosy 
story or making promises that you know are unlikely to be 
fulfilled. But a leader at Amazon.com is expected to speak 

91
Be Vocally Self-Critical
up and make sure the truth is heard. After all, the alterna-
tive—hiding a problem and having it discovered down the 
road—is a terminable offense. Besides, when you tell the 
truth despite the pain it may cause, you encourage others to 
give you honest feedback, thereby preempting the need for 
others to criticize you.
For all these reasons, a leader at Amazon has to be will-
ing to “open his kimono” and take responsibility for his mis-
takes. There simply is no other way.
The Journey and the End Results
In an interview on the Amazon Fulfillment web-
site, Director of Fulfillment Miriam Park is asked which 
Amazon.com leadership principle resonates most with her. 
She answers, “Being vocally self-critical. I am humbled by 
the caliber of talent at Amazon and our willingness as lead-
ers to acknowledge and learn from our mistakes. We value 
both the journey and the end results.”1
Miriam understands Jeff’s ethos precisely. In terms of 
the big picture, he surely cares about the end results—but 
he’s also very much engaged in the journey. The end result 
is all about victory—overcoming competition, attracting and 
delighting millions of customers, enjoying rewards and ac-
claim. But the journey is about the struggle—the hard work, 
experiments, mistakes, reboots, and countless details that 
must be dealt with along the way to victory. Thinking about 
the ultimate victory may feed our egos, but we can’t survive 
the journey without a large dose of authentic humility.
The principle of being vocally self-critical is one of 
the tools Jeff uses to help Amazon combat the danger of 

92
The Amazon Way
arrogance; the virus that has taken down countless hugely 
successful organizations. Jim Collins has done a wonderful 
job of illustrating how organizational decline is largely self-
inflicted, specifically in his book How the Mighty Fall. He 
uses the ancient Greek term “hubris”—the excessive pride 
that destroys a hero—to describe how leaders become ar-
rogant about their success and begin to view it as an entitle-
ment. As a result, they lose sight of what caused their success 
in the first place.2
You may also recall from another classic Jim Collins 
book, Good to Great, that one of the keys to organizational 
greatness is the presence of Level 5 Leaders–leaders who 
blend humility and will. Collins says, “Like inquisitive sci-
entists, the best corporate leaders we’ve researched remain 
students of their work, relentlessly asking questions–why, 
why, why?–and have an incurable compulsion to vacuum the 
brains of people they meet.”3
Amazon.com expects everyone to be a Level 5 leader.
Which Dog Is Not Barking?
A vital corollary of humility and self-criticism is the 
readiness to recognize potential threats wherever they may 
be. No business is so powerful and successful that it can af-
ford to overlook emerging competitors—even those that may 
appear innocuous or beneficent.
In the Sir Arthur Conan Doyle story “Silver Blaze,” the 
legendary detective Sherlock Holmes must solve the mystery 
of a missing racehorse and the apparent midnight murder 
of its trainer. He eventually deduces that the crime was an 
inside job because the dog at the scene of the crime did not 

93
Be Vocally Self-Critical
bark—indicating that the criminal was someone well known 
to the animal. Jeff likes to use this story of “the curious in-
cident of the dog in the night-time” as a departure point for 
a discussion about the urgent need for leaders to critically 
address Amazon’s blind spots as a company.
Clifford Cancelosi told me about how, at a Merchant 
Services leadership offsite meeting, one of Amazon’s senior 
leaders recounted how the S-team had used the dog-not-
barking exercise to recognize that one of the company’s most 
significant long-term threats was none other than Google. 
On the surface, Google didn’t seem like a direct competitor. 
In fact, they seemed like friends and potential allies. But as 
company leaders discussed Google’s capabilities and some of 
the innovative products and services they’d been developing, 
they realized that Google had a growing capacity to migrate 
into Amazon’s space. The exercise of looking for the “un-
barking” dog helped reveal the possibility that a significant 
competitive threat was lurking right under their noses—in-
visible in plain sight.
In response, Amazon reduced its dependency on Google 
by improving its own search capabilities and creating places 
on the Web where customers could get to Amazon directly 
without Google.
The willingness to engage in constant self-examina-
tion—both as individual leaders and as an organization—
is vital to maintaining success. And you can’t conduct such 
self-examination effectively without a large dose of humility, 
and a willingness to look in the mirror and recognize hon-
estly what you see there. In most organizations, the typi-
cal mentality is “I have so many obvious needs and threats, 
I can’t possibly spend time looking for the non-obvious 
threats—much less doing something about them.” Through 

94
The Amazon Way
these types of exercises, teams at Amazon can pick a couple 
of ideas, build programs around them, and make progress. 
These efforts often yield new innovations and other benefits, 
but only because maintaining healthy paranoia and always 
looking for improvement is a priority and a leadership value.

95
11. Earn the Trust 
of Others
Leaders at Amazon are sincerely open-minded, genuinely listen, 
and examine their own strongest convictions with humility. 
Their openness enables them to trust those around them—and to 
earn the trust of others in turn.
I
’ve already talked about how important it is for the customer 
to trust the company. Amazon devotes itself single-mind-
edly to earning the customer’s trust every day. But equally 
important is trust within the business—which means that 
leaders at Amazon must learn both to trust their colleagues 
and to earn their trust through transparency, commitment, 
and mutual respect. For many people, learning to do this 
isn’t easy.
When I first arrived at Amazon.com, I felt exposed and 
vulnerable. I worried that I might be fired at any time be-
cause the standards and the stakes were so high. As a re-
sult, I insisted on personally handling too much of my team’s 
work, feeling too anxious and untrusting to delegate enough 
to my colleagues.
Of course, I quickly learned that overloading myself was 
a recipe for disaster—I simply didn’t have the time, energy, 
or skill to do everything well. I also wasn’t sufficiently de-
veloping my people; I was hurting the organization by not 

96
The Amazon Way
training the leaders of the future, which is a cardinal sin at 
Amazon.com. I simply had to learn to trust.
Flourishing companies are filled with really bright peo-
ple who have the authority to achieve, but also the confi-
dence that, if they fail, someone will be there to pick them 
up off the floor, dust them off, and give them another shot. 
Amazon is such a company. One reason I really enjoyed my 
time there was the ability to work collaboratively without 
worrying about titles, organization charts, and official roles. 
All of those things got ditched at the door so that we could 
devote our energies to attacking problems. This is very dif-
ferent than at most organizations, where teams and individ-
uals waste time playing a game of chicken, pointing fingers 
and trying to seize political advantages from one another.
Six Keys to Earning Trust
True collaboration is only possible in an atmosphere of 
trust. And that atmosphere is always set by a leader who 
has earned his team members’ trust and who trusts them in 
return.
Unfortunately, almost everyone has had a boss at some 
time that simply didn’t deserve to be trusted. He may have 
been gifted with MENSA-level intelligence and the charis-
ma of George Clooney, but you were always waiting for the 
blaming, the backtracking, and the backstabbing to begin.
Jeff understands that a lack of trust perpetuates fear. If 
you fail to earn the trust of your team members, fear eventu-
ally becomes their primary driver. They will fear your opin-
ions. They will fear your decisions and evaluations. They 
will fear failure. They will fear you. Once fear becomes 

97
Earn the Trust of Others
dominant, the organization can barely operate, let alone be 
vocally self-critical.
Fortunately, there are proven ways to earn the trust of 
others. Here are six I have adapted from the blog of inten-
tional leadership guru Michael Hyatt:
 Open your kimono. Learn to take accountability 
and admit faults—not recklessly or in a way that 
lets people exploit you, but rather in a way that 
demonstrates honesty and pursuit of improve-
ment. Be willing to admit your own failures. If 
you put up a wall around yourself, your team will, 
too.
 Take the hit. When bad thing happen, resist the 
temptation to point the finger. As leader of a 
team, you need to accept responsibility for both 
the good and the bad. When your team members 
see that you are willing to take the blame even for 
mistakes that are not directly your fault, they will 
start to let go of fear and begin to trust you.
 Build up your team members. This is the opposite of 
taking the hit. Whenever appropriate, make sure 
you praise your team members in front of their 
peers and superiors. Never try to take sole credit 
for something good that your team did.
 Ditch the leash. Allow your team members free-
dom to explore new ideas and to be creative. If 
people feel that you are micro-managing them, 
they will stop trusting you. Make room for failure 
and, more importantly, the opportunity to learn 
from failure.
 Accept confrontation. Fighting is not good, but 
neither is false agreement. When there is a 

98
The Amazon Way
difference of opinion, promote open discussion. 
Explore solutions with the intent to solve prob-
lems. If disagreement never occurs, it’s a warning 
sign that your team is afraid of telling you the 
truth.
 Find the value in each person. We all have weak-
nesses, but we also have strengths. Everyone 
brings something different to the table. Find 
what is unique in each individual and use that 
unique strength for the good of the team.1
Trust and the Two-Pizza Team
In his 2011 shareholder letter, titled “The Power of 
Invention,” Jeff Bezos wrote, “Invention comes in many 
forms and at many scales. The most radical and transfor-
mative of inventions are often those that empower others to 
unleash their creativity—to pursue their dreams.”2
Jeff was talking specifically about the ability of the plat-
form business as a tool for empowering people, but I think 
the same description applies to trust in the workplace. Trust 
is the platform to truly empower your team.
Much has been written about Amazon.com’s famous 
Two-Pizza Teams—working groups whose size is limited 
to six to ten individuals—the number of people that can be 
fed by an order of two pizzas. However, most people miss 
the point. What truly matters isn’t team size—it’s autonomy 
and accountability. The Two-Pizza Team is about trusting 
a small faction within an organization to operate indepen-
dently and with agility.

99
Earn the Trust of Others
At Amazon, Two-Pizza Teams work like little entrepre-
neurial hot houses. Insulated from the greater organization’s 
bureaucracy, the Two-Pizza Teams encourage ambitious 
young leaders, provide opportunity, and instill a sense of 
ownership.
Should every organization in the world start authoriz-
ing the creation of Two-Pizza Teams to tackle its problems 
and creative challenges? No, because not every organization 
has the underlying culture of trust needed to make autono-
mous teams work effectively. If you work in a company that 
is dominated by fear, start trying to turn that atmosphere 
around. Once trust begins to flourish, creativity and innova-
tion can flourish as well.
Just search the web for “2 pizza team lead” and you will 
find great references and examples of what a two-pizza team 
does.

100
12. Dive Deep
Leaders at Amazon operate at all levels, stay connected to the 
details, and audit them frequently. No task is beneath them, 
because they know that only a deep dive into the nuts and bolts 
of a process can really uncover opportunities and solve problems 
before they become insurmountable.
A
t Amazon.com, ownership means accountability. The 
leader is responsible for the entire lifecycle of a project 
or transaction and for all its possible outcomes. If you are a 
leader, you must be willing to go beyond the parameters of 
your job to improve the customer experience.
The corollary is that leaders understand details and met-
rics two to three degrees deeper than senior executives at 
most companies. They are keenly aware of their dependen-
cies and therefore can discuss the details of any given project 
under their jurisdiction.
One driver of the dive-deep philosophy is the pure, re-
lentless sense of curiosity that Jeff Bezos exemplifies and 
that he encourages among all those who work for him.
It’s been widely reported that Jeff spends time working in 
Amazon.com’s fulfillment centers. This is not just an excel-
lent PR ploy; in fact, Jeff does not generally invite the media 
to join him on these trips. Jeff likes working alongside the 

101
Dive Deep
hourly employees because he’s curious about what they have 
to say and wants to see for himself precisely how efficient the 
process of fulfilling orders is.
Jeff’s relentlessly inquisitive mind is one of his most 
prominent and distinctive features—and he demands the 
same from his people. As a result, experiments are encour-
aged, but the results must be rigorously measured. This 
combination of free thinking and disciplined analysis is very 
productive and makes diving deep a daily reality at Amazon.
The dive-deep philosophy is also driven by Jeff’s aware-
ness that a company is very much like an ecosystem. It is 
complex, constantly evolving, and thrives on diversity. This 
means that numerous possibilities for failure are continually 
emerging.
For this reason, as any major initiative unfolds at Amazon.
com, Jeff stays as close to the project team and its data as he 
can, not only monitoring it but questioning it, poking holes 
in it, and examining every facet down to the smallest detail. 
Every leader in the company is expected to behave the same 
way. Every manager is expected to maintain a strong presence 
throughout a project’s implementation, making continuous 
deep dives into the data, the processes, and the performance 
of every team member. It’s a practice that enables every lead-
er at Amazon.com to overcome traditional organizational 
barriers—another form of bureaucracy busting that crashes 
through the obstacles that might delay or distort progress 
or learning along the new performance dimensions. Leaders 
who are constantly digging deep into a challenge—curious 
leaders—dismantle silos and bureaucracy.
Of course, to dive deep, you need metrics and systems 
designed to collect and analyze them accurately, consistently 
and quickly. Leaders must have a willingness to dive deep, 

102
The Amazon Way
but Amazon.com’s remarkable culture of metrics provides the 
data that rewards the effort. As SVP of Consumer Business 
Jeff Wilkie once said, “Math decisions always trump opin-
ion and judgment. Most corporations make judgment-based 
decisions when data-based could be made.”1
The desire to dive deep is also why (as I discussed in 
chapter 4) Jeff has banned PowerPoint and demands clear 
decision-making narratives. Putting together a slideshow 
makes it all too easy for employees to only skim the sur-
face of their ideas while creating the illusion of an intelligent 
argument. On the other hand, knowing they must publicly 
present an in-depth essay to their peers and their boss forces 
them to dive in a little deeper. It helps creates an atmosphere 
of accountability because it means that you have to know 
your stuff when you present to others.
The Five Whys
Working under deadline pressure, it often feels as if we 
don’t have enough time to dive deep and really understand 
a problem, technology, or situation. There is a balance be-
tween knowledge exploration and exploitation; it takes ex-
perience to learn when it’s necessary to dive deep and when 
it’s better to leave things at an abstract/aggregate level. The 
Five Whys is an iterative question-asking technique we used 
at Amazon.com to explore the cause-and-effect relationships 
underlying a particular problem. It is so called because expe-
rience suggests that five is the number of iterations typically 
required to identify and fix the true root causes of a problem. 
Here’s how it works:

103
Dive Deep
 Write a description of the problem. This helps 
you formalize the problem and helps ensure that 
the entire team understands and is focused on the 
same problem.
 Ask Why the problem happens, and write the 
answer down below the problem description.
 If the answer you just provided doesn’t identify 
the root cause of the problem, ask “why?” again, 
and write that answer down.
 Loop back through the second and third steps 
until the team is in agreement that the problem’s 
root cause has been identified. This may take 
fewer than five Whys or more, depending on the 
complexity of the problem.
Here’s an example of how the Five Whys might work 
in practice. Suppose you have suffered from a technology 
outage. The problem description might read, “Customers 
were unable to access our service for forty-five minutes on 
Saturday evening.” When you ask Why, the first answer 
might be “There was an unprecedented demand from other 
services.”
However, you and your team might agree that this does 
not identify the root cause of the service outage. So you ask 
a second Why, which yields the answer “Our service was 
dependent upon another service that could not handle the 
demand.”
This in turn forces you to ask a third Why, for which the 
answer is “The service we were calling did not meet their 
service SLA.”
Which leads to a fourth Why, whose answer is “The 
other service did not have adequate service capacity to meet 

104
The Amazon Way
their SLA.” But so far, this leads us to just put accountability 
on someone else. What is our accountability?
And this leads to a fifth Why, which elicits the answer 
“Because I have not engineered it to handle these conditions 
and exceptions.”
Ah! And there we have it. Finally, after starting with a 
vague sense of the cause of the problem that basically boils 
down to a finger-pointing “It was their fault,” the real answer 
finally emerges: “I need to engineer my technology service to 
gracefully handle any condition that it might be required to 
address. Now, how do we build that?”
By diving deep into the real conditions and managing 
the dependencies of others, true answers to problems are 
found.
Rolling Up the Details
The Amazon annual planning process starts in August 
and wraps in October. It’s an organization-wide deep dive 
that is designed to create alignment around where resources 
(including people and capital) are going to be allocated in 
the coming year. Teams build six-to-eight-page narratives 
describing their businesses, growth opportunities they envi-
sion, their plans for taking advantage of those opportunities, 
and the resources required.
These narratives work their way up the food chain of 
leadership culminating in two-pagers that are read at the 
S-Team level. At each step of the journey, the narratives are 
examined at strategy meetings, which start with a 15 to 30 
minute period of quiet while everyone reads the plan being 
reviewed. Then discussion begins, which may be far-ranging 

105
Dive Deep
or focused on one or two features or capabilities out of sev-
eral. Armed with the detailed written narrative and all the 
pre-meeting collaboration required to get to this point, the 
discussions, and ultimately the decisions, are much deeper 
and more refined than those that emerge from many corpo-
rate planning processes.
The enterprise bias for avoiding PowerPoint presenta-
tions in favor of written narratives (typically six pages long, 
sometimes as short as two pages) is a great example of a forc-
ing-function to create an organization that dives deep. As 
Bezos noted in a 2012 interview with Charlie Rose, “When 
you have to write your ideas out in complete sentences and 
complete paragraphs, it forces a deeper clarity of thinking.”2 
Narratives force clarity, prioritization, and accountability 
to deliver, and they force your audience to understand at a 
deeper level.
Conversely, the dumbing-down of organizations and 
decision making by overreliance on PowerPoint is well rec-
ognized. A retired marine officer voiced his opinions in an 
essay titled “Dumb-dumb bullets”: “PowerPoint is not a 
neutral tool — it is actively hostile to thoughtful decision-
making. It has fundamentally changed our culture by alter-
ing the expectations of who makes decisions, what decisions 
they make and how they make them.”3
The combination of forcing clarity by using narratives 
and the roll-up process of planning is how Amazon.com 
gathers ideas and inputs from throughout the organization, 
allows innovation to sprout, and brings it all together in or-
der to make the big bets on its future. The moral is clear: at 
Amazon, no big decision is made without first ensuring that 
it is based on a deep dive into the underlying details that will 
determine its success.

106
The Amazon Way
“In God We Trust, All Others Must Bring Data”
This well-known management slogan isn’t an Amazon 
leadership principle, but it could be. The ability to combine 
data, facts, and a customer-centered approach, along with an 
uncanny ability to dive deep into the details—these are the 
fundamental tools of leadership at Amazon.com.

107
13. Have Backbone—
Disagree and Commit
Leaders at Amazon have conviction. They are obligated to 
respectfully challenge decisions when they disagree, even when 
doing so is uncomfortable or exhausting; they do not compromise 
for the sake of social cohesion. But once a decision is made, they 
commit to it wholeheartedly.
J
eff Bezos likes to describe the Amazon.com culture as 
friendly and intense, but adds, “If push comes to shove, 
we’ll settle for intense.”1 If you’re a member of his S-Team, 
he expects you to challenge him. He demands a robust 
conversation.
This is not common in corporate America. In most or-
ganizations, senior executives are too terrified to practice 
dissent in the C-suite. As a consultant, I can’t tell you how 
many CEOs have complained that “no one ever challenges 
me.”
By contrast, Amazon.com is a gladiator culture. No one 
leaves the coliseum unbloodied, but if you fight hard, you 
may obtain glory—and at the worst, live to fight another 
day. But if you refuse to do battle for the emperor altogether, 
you’re guaranteed to be carried out on your shield.
At Amazon.com, I learned that disagreeing with Jeff 
and the other senior executives was not only beneficial to me 

108
The Amazon Way
personally (as an “owner”) but also my obligation to the cus-
tomer, to the shareholder, and company. “If I drive us over a 
cliff,” Jeff would say, “You’re as much at fault as I am.”
During my years at Amazon.com, I probably won or wit-
nessed as many gladiatorial combats won with Jeff as lost. 
More important, my willingness to engage him helped en-
courage others to do the same. People who watched us in-
teract took heart and began to have the same kinds of robust 
conversation with him and with others—cautiously at first, 
more naturally later. That’s how you create a healthy top-to-
bottom culture—by demonstrating the principles, not just 
posting them on a wall.
The Importance of Mental Toughness
The backbone necessary to disagree with some of the 
smartest business minds in the world and commit to your 
own vision requires an immense amount of mental tough-
ness. Psychotherapist Amy Morin compiled a list of traits 
that characterize mentally strong people. When I read it, I 
immediately thought of Amazon.com’s gladiator culture. If 
you want to succeed in Jeff’s relentless and fiercely competi-
tive world, you cannot:
 Feel sorry for yourself
 Give away your power
 Shy away from change
 Waste energy on things you cannot control
 Worry about pleasing others
 Fear taking calculated risks
 Dwell on the past
 Make the same mistakes over and over

109
Have Backbone--Disagree and Commit
 Resent others’ success
 Give up after failure
 Feel the world owes you anything; or
 Expect immediate results2
In a similar vein, psychologist and author Angela 
Duckworth has done some remarkable research on the im-
portance of what she calls “grit.” She argues that success is 
only partially defined by talent—one’s ability to naturally 
play the piano, hit a curve ball or catch a 20-foot wave. The 
real test of someone’s ability to rise to the top rests more in 
perseverance—the tenacity they display when confronted by 
obstacles or conflict.1 While Duckworth’s research focused 
on the success rates of West Point graduates and spelling bee 
contestants, I believe her theories would be proven true at 
Amazon.com as well. The most successful are those who can 
excel in the pressure cooker, week in and week out, shaking 
off the occasional failure and the subsequent tongue-lashing, 
put their heads down, and keep on driving.

110
14. Deliver Results
Leaders at Amazon focus on the key outputs for their business 
and deliver them with the right quality and in a timely fashion. 
Despite setbacks, they rise to the occasion and never settle.
I
’ve told a lot of stories and quoted a lot of Jeff Bezos sayings 
in an effort to explain what drives the man and the compa-
ny he has built. But here, at last, is the true heart of the book.
At the end of the day, it’s all about outcomes at Amazon.
com. If you violate all of the other principles—if you fail to 
obsess over the customer, communicate vaguely, hire second-
rate people, ignore details, and so on—but consistently de-
liver outstanding business results, then all will be forgiven. 
After all, the purpose of all the other principles is simply to 
support and facilitate this final, crucial principle—deliver-
ing results.
So my final advice to you is to forget the first 13 prin-
ciples entirely. “Deliver results” is the only one that really 
matters.
Just kidding.
Sort of.

111
Conclusion
A
s you may have figured out, the leadership principles pre-
sented here are not secrets—they are publicly posted at 
Amazon.com and discussed within the company often. The 
key to these principles lies in the combination of principles 
and the way they are actually used in making everyday de-
cisions at Amazon. Let me repeat that: these principles are 
referred to every day, in real decision-making scenarios, in every 
corner and at every level of Amazon.
Like any effective dogma, the leadership principles 
should be used as a guide, not a blueprint. Even the most 
enlightened doctrines are going to crash and burn when fun-
damentalists get their hands on them. Ultimately, Jeff gets 
this. He probably put it best when said, “If you’re not stub-
born, you’ll give up on experiments too soon. And if you’re 
not flexible, you’ll pound your head against the wall and you 
won’t see a different solution to a problem you’re trying to 
solve.” Jeff understands that striking a common sense bal-
ance is crucial—not trying to follow a set of rules as if they 
constitute a recipe for success.
Lending too much importance to any one of the prin-
ciples can up-end the entire framework and ruin the desired 
effect. For example, if you are too vocally self-critical (prin-
ciple 10), you might endlessly question yourself and sacrifice 
a bias for action (principle 8). Attempt to earn the trust of 
others by accepting every task (principle 11), and your high 
standards could slip (principle 6). You get the picture.
When I was at Amazon in the early to mid-2000s, the 
leadership principles were used and discussed, but there was 

112
The Amazon Way
no training on them and I don’t remember a formal, written 
list being presented. Today, the principles are referenced and 
actively used in orientation, training, performance reviews, 
and so on. A client of mine who ran major technology opera-
tions at another high-tech company did a year-long stint at 
Amazon, and then decided to return to his former employer. 
Reflecting on his lessons learned over a beer, he told me, “At 
my current company, I can’t even tell you what the company 
leadership principles are. They were likely developed by a 
consultant. They certainly aren’t used to actively make deci-
sions. What is so unique about Amazon’s leadership prin-
ciples is that they are tactical in nature—they are used every 
day to make better decisions.”
With that, I leave you with one final Jeff-ism on develop-
ing your own company culture: “Part of company culture is 
path-dependent—it’s the lessons you learn along the way.”1 
These fourteen leadership secrets are some of the lessons 
that Jeff Bezos and Amazon have learned along the way. I 
hope you’ll find them useful as you make your own journey 
through today’s challenging, dynamic, complex, and incred-
ibly promising business world. May you enjoy some measure 
of the success that Amazon.com has experienced—and may 
you have a lot of fun along the way.

113
Appendix A: Future 
Ready Self-Service
A
uthor’s Note: I originally wrote this document as a white 
paper at Alvarez and Marsal. I’ve included it as it is a syn-
thesis of many lessons learned from Amazon. The case exam-
ple illustrates how we needed to “Think Big” when building 
the third-party seller platform. Today over 2 million third-
party sellers use the tools we created, and their sales represent 
over 40% of all the product units shipped by Amazon.com.
;
Look closely at Google’s purchase of Frommer’s and 
Zagat: It is a window into how customer expectations will 
continue to evolve over the next eight years.
How? Daisy-chain Google’s services together, feed them 
decades of additional insights enabled by acquisitions like 
Frommer’s and Zagat, and something exponentially more 
powerful emerges: a completely integrated, “end-to-end-
and-back” experience.
A Snapshot of Future-State Customer Service
Picture this: A traveler arrives in Rome, hungry for an 
authentic Italian meal. A quick search on her smart phone 

114
The Amazon Way
automatically presents restaurant choices in order of their 
distance from her hotel. Restaurant reviews are also dis-
played, with those of a few friends and even a fellow traveler 
she met the day before listed at the top. She taps her choice 
and discovers the film she saw last week was shot nearby. 
She finds the eatery with a map app and scopes out the in-
side and surrounding area using street view. Google Offers 
notifies her that her favorite Italian dish is the daily special. 
After her meal, she pays the check using a banking app and 
is automatically offered the chance to recommend the res-
taurant to others through various social media apps.
True, much of this picture is familiar today. But in this 
scenario, every step to her objective—an authentic and 
memorable experience—is completely contained in the smart 
phone universe.
Moreover, she is empowered to make free and relevant 
choices with ease in a foreign country. And she is completely 
self-sufficient, able to accomplish each of the outcomes most 
important to her in the exact moment and place she values 
them most.
Enabling it all? A self-service architecture that under-
stands and serves her well.
The Service-Agile Organization
Welcome to the future of service, where leading compa-
nies will be differentiated by the level of immediacy, empow-
erment, personalization and customization their self-service 
capabilities offer customers. These “service-agile” companies 
will also:

115
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
 Anticipate and change around customers’ needs 
with unprecedented speed;
 Know which customer interactions are the most 
valuable and which are most expensive;
 Have a structure and culture promoting the re-
duction or elimination of manually intensive pro-
cesses; and
 Provide their customer service agents or custom-
ers with easy access to all the information they 
need to complete a task.
Summary
Here, we explore the impact of self-service on customer 
experience, operational effectiveness, innovation and agility.
We also examine the fundamental principles of archi-
tecting customer-centric services—the scaffolding that im-
pacts customer experience and operational efficiency today, 
and enables the customer intimacy of the future.
An outline of 10 steps essential to making self-service 
ready for the near future of customer service follows, along 
with a brief case study of Amazon.com’s creation of a suc-
cessful self-service architecture for third-party sellers.
Why Self-Service Matters More Than We Thought
Effective self-service does not suffer from a lack of ben-
efits. Lower operating costs alone can be enough to lure any 
company into developing a self-service architecture. And, as 

116
The Amazon Way
capabilities have evolved, self-service has also improved qual-
ity, reduced cycle times and improved customer satisfaction.
Customers Prefer to Serve Themselves
Perhaps most counter-intuitive is the level of customer 
satisfaction self-service has wrought. Instead of deeming un-
attended service cold and impersonal, customers have grown 
accustomed to greater control. In fact, depending on the seg-
ment, it appears they prefer it:
 In a recent consumer survey, 2 out of 3 said they 
prefer self-service over speaking to a person for 
customer service inquiries.1
 60 percent of consumers surveyed by Corporate 
Executive Board choose a company’s Web self-
service as the first method for resolving an is-
sue.2 A similar survey by Forrester returned 72 
percent.3
As increasingly advanced mobile devices find their way 
into more hands around the world, customers will come to 
expect even greater control over their service experience. 
Should one company not meet their expectations, a competi-
tor who will can be found with a tap of the finger.
Self-Service Can Define an Organization’s Capacity for 
Growth
Exposing self-service capabilities also drives consider-
able benefits to the organization as some of these capabilities 
are already required for internal functions and systems. In 

117
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
mandating customers, agents, and vendors to “do for them-
selves,” companies cannot help but:
 Eliminate non-value-added activities;
 Architect for “exposing” capability and integrat-
ing functions and systems automate processes 
“end-to-end;”
 Create companywide awareness that capabilities 
must be turned “inside-out” to serve others;
 Eliminate cycle times, reduce errors and elimi-
nate waste;
 Galvanize innovation in measureable and practi-
cal ways.
“I am emphasizing the self-service nature of these plat-
forms because it is important for a reason I think is some-
what non-obvious,” wrote Jeff Bezos in his 2011 Letter to 
Shareholders. “Even well-meaning gatekeepers slow inno-
vation. When a platform is self-service, even the improb-
able ideas can get tried, because there’s no expert gatekeeper 
ready to say, ‘That will never work!’ Guess what? Many of 
those improbable ideas do work.”4
The “side” benefits companies collect on their self-ser-
vice journey invariably make their organizations more effi-
cient, responsive and innovative in the long run.
Why the Definition of Self-Service Must Change
Customers are not looking for “service.” They simply want 
to get something done or resolve an issue. (Track a package. 
Change a flight. Fix a problem.) And, they increasingly want 
to do so quickly and efficiently online so they do not have to 
make a phone call, send an e-mail or schedule an appointment.

118
The Amazon Way
What Passes for Self-Service
Now, consider a more complex interaction. A customer 
applies for a loan through her bank’s website. Once she sub-
mits her application, it typically lands on a bank employee’s 
desk and proceeds through several reviews, some automated, 
some manual – all taking time and incurring cost. The cus-
tomer must then wait for a call to verify her information and 
evaluate the parameters of the loan. Then, she waits while 
her application is reviewed, followed by signatures faxed back 
and forth…Since the customer was able to begin this process 
online, many companies would define this as “self-service.”
Self-Service Must Flow
But if the loan process above was truly “self-service,” the 
customer would be able to go from the application process to 
receiving the money, at her own pace, without having to talk 
to somebody. It would flow from end-to-end.
Layering a self-service capability over one or two steps, 
without thinking through and integrating the entire process, 
ultimately requires customers to switch to manual interven-
tion. This does not flow, is not self-service and is all too 
common:
 Corporate Executive Board reported 57 percent 
of inbound calls come from customers who first 
attempt to resolve their issue on a company’s 
website.5
 A recent study by The Customer Respect Group 
found online self-service offered by the major-
ity of auto insurance providers—including State 

119
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
Farm, Travelers and Nationwide—to actually be 
unhelpful.6
 Forrester indicates that 49 percent of consumers 
are dissatisfied with help pages and FAQs found 
on company websites.7
What Is Your Self-Service Communicating?
Customers want to accomplish their goals as they de-
fine them and as they see fit. Self-service should enable 
that. When it does not—when the flow is interrupted—the 
company must ask if it is still in touch with their custom-
ers’ objectives. And, typically, the customer objective is most 
vulnerable to compromise in the implementation of self-ser-
vice. Specifically, due to two common failures:
 Lack of change leadership. Despite mounting data 
to the contrary, the concern that self-service will 
reduce the amount of service customers receive 
persists. This alone can create significant road-
blocks. So, too, can concerns over a loss of control 
or the ability to customize. Pushing teams past 
these misconceptions and fears requires real lead-
ership, and too many implementations falter due 
to a lack of it.
 Unwillingness to tackle legacy issues. From a tech-
nical and data standpoint, successfully imple-
menting self-service comes with no lack of chal-
lenges. Chief among them is resolving the legacy 
issues self-service development tends to expose. 
The tough decisions needed to move forward are 
too often unexplored.

120
The Amazon Way
10 Essential Best Practices of Future-Ready Self-Service
Understanding the customer’s objective is vital, and it 
can be more difficult than many companies realize. Yet, by 
comparison, it is far simpler than retaining that objective 
amidst the misconceptions, divergent agendas and difficult 
decisions involved in self-service implementation. This is 
where most companies fail and their customers’ experiences 
suffer. According to a recent study8 by Forrester, that experi-
ence can have a profound impact on performance:
 Organizations with the lowest customer experi-
ence index scores average a negative annual re-
turn of 46 percent, while those at the top aver-
aged an annual return 23 percent higher.
 When firms move from below- to above-average 
scores, they generate incremental revenue based 
on customer loyalty ranging from $31M for re-
tailers to $1.4B for hotels.
The role of self-service—the kind that flows all the way 
to the customer’s objective—in customer experience will only 
continue to grow larger. Enabling “end-to-end” self-service 
is not easy, but your customers will not accept anything less.
After all, if their experience communicates a lack of 
understanding of their goals, is it unreasonable for them to 
wonder if you understand them at all?
Experience creating self-service architecture in multiple 
environments has revealed 10 best practices essential to an 
end result that truly serves customer objectives. Some are 
strategic in nature, while others are more technical and op-
erational. They have been divided accordingly.

121
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
1. Design everything from the customer’s perspective. 
Involve your customers / partners/vendors in the 
design of self-service capabilities. Observe them 
as they try to accomplish activities important to 
them. Understand their requirements, true goals 
and get their ideas on how to improve. Then, de-
sign services and workflows from the customer’s 
perspective regardless of how systems are owned 
internally. Expose them only to what will help 
them reach their objectives (capabilities and 
choices). Remove everything else.
2. Rethink policies and the need for manual interven-
tion. Manage service matters by exception. This 
will allow the vast majority of customers to make 
real-time decisions and complete their objectives 
while you identify the hands-on problems. With 
the right analytics and algorithms, an automated 
system can make the repeatable decisions in tan-
dem with a separate exception process for the mi-
nority that requires intervention and review.
3. Require the entire process to be automated. When 
the entire process—not just the steps—must be 
automated, your thinking about what is truly 
value-added activity will be stretched. Processes 
that end in non-automated corners become evi-
dent and are more easily corrected, resulting in 
significant improvements in cost and speed. It 
will force root-cause error reduction and vastly 

122
The Amazon Way
improve quality. Automating end-to-end is an 
amazing forcing function for innovation.
4. Provide a stateless workflow for real-time cus-
tomer feedback. Design self-service workflows to 
support all registration, provisioning, configu-
ration and de-registering processes from the 
beginning. Then design the underlying services 
supporting the workflows to manage all states. 
Also provide customers complete visibility into 
where they are in the process and how far they 
are from their objective. Allow them to stop at 
any point along the way and restart from their 
last stopping point.
5. Create a balanced set of metrics for the customer 
self-service experience. Create metrics to measure 
the financial, operational, cost and quality facets 
of the customer’s self-service experience. Break 
and cascade metrics into detailed sub-processes 
assigned to specific internal owners. Use routine 
meetings to review the metrics and encourage 
peers to challenge each other to improve perfor-
mance that hurts any phase of the process.
6. Create and support a program to systematically re-
duce contacts. Using methods such as Six Sigma, 
find and resolve problem areas creating the most 
contacts by number and cost. Then, design cus-
tomer interactions so simple, obvious and fool-
proof that no help documentation is required. In 

123
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
other words, make the experience “as simple as 
buying from Amazon.com.” Implement “voice-
of-the-customer” processes to let customers 
give direct feedback. This gives response teams 
empowerment to direct change and prioritiza-
tion efforts across the company. Proper organi-
zational support for this group is critical, since 
they are addressing the verifiable pain endured 
by customers.
7. Unlock data and systems through Service-Oriented 
Architectures (SOA) and Web Services. Externalizing 
processes managed by legacy systems is one of the 
biggest technical challenges in self-service, but it 
can be done. Invest in wrapping legacy systems 
using an SOA approach, so that developers can 
more readily access the underlying data and busi-
ness logic. SOA architecture will also simplify 
the customer experience by abstracting and hid-
ing the underlying complexity.
8. Invest in user interface design to make all inter-
actions outstanding. Insist on user experience ex-
cellence in all interactions, including vendors, 
partners and employees. This increases the num-
ber who use self-service, requiring far less sup-
port from your organization. Requiring this level 
of consistency develops the habits and culture of 
“design excellence.” Steve Jobs demanded the in-
side of the computer be as simple and beautiful 
as the outside. Why? It created a company-wide 

124
The Amazon Way
culture of design excellence and attention to 
detail.
9. Analyze data to create new customer insights. 
Collect as much data about customer self-service 
interaction as possible. Use this data to understand 
how the customer interacts with the system one 
way or another. Use this information to provide 
the feedback to both the customer and internal 
teams. Show the customer this data in a transpar-
ent way, including benchmark information, and 
set a high bar for the performance and reliability 
of the self-service platform. Consistently mea-
sure and review the “to-the-glass” performance 
of your services. Relentlessly focus on raising 
the bar by measuring and reporting against the 
worst, not the best, customer experience.
10. Integrated and agile solution development. Break 
the long cycle, big-bang project waterfall mental-
ity by investing in agile development methods. 
Create integrated project teams between busi-
ness, technology and operations. Make these tru-
ly integrated and break the traditional fences and 
rules of engagement. Challenge the organization 
to deliver significant benefit in no more than 
three-month segments. Engage tough problem 
sets early and seek speed to market. A bias for 
action will allow you to “see around the corner” 
and uncover problems others have not confronted 
yet, which in turn drives innovation.

125
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
CASE STUDY—AMAZON.COM: A PROFILE IN SELF-
SERVICE ARCHITECTURE FOR THIRD-PARTY SELLERS
The Problem
In early 2002, Amazon.com wanted to open its online 
marketplace up to thousands of third-party merchants. The 
new, self-service, “Selling on Amazon” program had to meet 
a rigorous design objective:
A new seller had to be able to register, list and sell prod-
ucts in the middle of the night, with no one at Amazon 
knowing or assisting.
In other words, each step—from start to final sale—had 
to be 100 percent self-service.
This was a huge program impacting vast systems at 
Amazon, including website, item management, payment, 
customer service, fraud and ordering systems. The registra-
tion workflow alone required automation and integration of 
approximately 40 different backend systems. To add to that, 
new Amazon.com sellers possessed various levels of techni-
cal ability.
The Solution
The team decided to build different paths and tools for a 
range of seller types.
This required a complex set of requirements, a deep un-
derstanding of both the customer experience and seller expe-
rience, and a healthy dose of ambition.

126
The Amazon Way
By designing for self-service from the beginning, the 
team created clear and easily understood automations—well 
beyond what an internal-only process would have required. 
Key self-service capabilities built included:
 Registration: A state-full workflow for a seller 
to register and begin listing, selling, and getting 
paid by Amazon.
 Documentation: A robust set of documentation 
and application programming interface (API) 
guides, including reference implementation 
material.
 Test environments and validation: Documented 
test cases, feedback and many test harnesses and 
tools to help sellers practice on the system before 
they started selling to real customers.
 Different integration methods: API driven, file 
upload or “1 x 1 graphical user interface (GUI)” 
tools sellers could either use or automate.
 Feedback and account management: A “Seller 
Central” portal environment in which a seller 
could manage his relationship with Amazon, in-
cluding key settings, reports and notifications.
 Extensive real-time data: Providing orders, cus-
tomer feedback and other operational information 
to help sellers do better and make more money.
The Results
In 18 months, Amazon.com went from not having any 
third-party sellers to having tens of thousands in more than 
12 different categories.

127
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
“This was in 2002, 2003 and 2004, when I had the op-
portunity to play a key role in launching and scaling that side 
of the business,” said John Rossman, Managing Director 
at Alvarez & Marsal and former Director of Merchant 
Integration at Amazon.com. “Today, it accounts for 40 per-
cent of all Amazon.com units sold.” Within five years, that 
share of overall sales is expected to grow to 55 percent.9
Takeaways
Self-service is no longer a “nice-to-have.” Customers not 
only accept self-service, they expect it. As access to more ad-
vanced, web-savvy mobile devices increases, the demand for 
control over the kind of interaction they choose and the time 
it takes to reach their objective will only continue to grow.
Self-service must be “end-to-end.” Yet what too many com-
panies accept as self-service will simply not be sufficient 
to keep pace with the rise and change of their customers’ 
expectations.
Rather than a piecemeal approach layering self-service 
capability over one or two areas of the process, “service-ag-
ile” companies integrate self-service processes from end-to-
end. They will enable their customers to not only begin a 
process, but also reach their ultimate objective without ever 
being required to “talk” to someone.
The 10 essential best practices of future-ready self-service
In our experience of creating self-service architec-
tures in multiple environments, we have identified 10 best 

128
The Amazon Way
practices—strategic and technical—essential to leading a 
service-agile organization:
1.	 Design everything from the customer perspective
2.	 Rethink policies and the need for manual inter-
vention
3.	 Require the entire process to be automated
4.	 Provide a stateless workflow providing real-time 
customer feedback
5.	 Create a balanced set of metrics for the customer 
self-service experience
6.	 Create and support a program to systematically 
reduce contacts
7.	 Unlock data and systems through Service-Ori-
ented Architectures (SOA) and Web Services
8.	 Invest in user interface design to make all inter-
actions outstanding
9.	 Create great usage metrics
10.	Integrated and agile solution development
Conclusion
Enabling the capabilities essential to end-to-end self-
service is not easy. It requires change at a level many compa-
nies have yet to consider.
Meanwhile, companies that have made the change are 
already reaping the benefits of increased revenue, lower 
costs to serve and greater market share. And they have, in 
turn, become more efficient, performance-oriented and 
customer-focused.

129
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
As customer expectations continue to rise, self-service is 
no longer a “nice-to-have.” Rather, end-to-end self-service 
capabilities will only play an increasingly central role in who 
retains more customers, fosters innovation and spurs growth.

130
Appendix B: Free 
Cash Flow
A
uthor’s Note: I wrote this document with my colleagues 
at Alvarez and Marsal, Ryan Scott and Randy Miller. It 
offers a more detailed discussion of free cash flow (FCF) 
including more background and examples, than I had room 
to provide when introducing the topic in chapter 7.
;
Mass retail is a notoriously low margin, efficiency based 
business. Keeping large margins over a long period of time is 
difficult, and likely results in a smaller market share. From 
the beginning, Amazon has set a course and vision to be “the 
biggest store in the world”, starting as a book store and now 
including all categories. Tied to this philosophy is a perspec-
tive about optimizing financial results. Jeff Bezos sums up 
the strategy this way:
“Percentage margins are not one of the things we are 
seeking to optimize. It’s the absolute dollar free cash flow 
per share that you want to maximize. If you can do that by 
lowering margins, we would do that. Free cash flow, that’s 
something investors can spend.”1

131
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow
Free Cash Flow Defined
Free Cash Flow (FCF) can be calculated in a few ways, 
with most calculation methods designed for investors who 
are looking to untangle the accounting tricks used to gener-
ate Financial Statements. For the business manager, we will 
focus on the following definition:
[Note that depreciation is added back in because it is a 
non-cash expenditure. It is for this reason that FCF is not the 
same as other measures commonly used by investors to eval-
uate the health and success of a business such as EBITDA, 
Net Earnings, and Profit Margin Percentage.
Rearranging terms in Eqn. 1, we arrive at a basic defini-
tion of Free Cash Flow:
‘Revenue - Cost’ represents cash generated from opera-
tions, CapEx and ∆NWC is the money spent to keep the 
business running, and the final term in Eqn. 2 is the cash 
contribution that ‘depreciation as a tax shield’ represents.

132
The Amazon Way
A business’s day-to-day operations, such as the sale of 
products and sale of services, are the source of FCF and 
Operating Expenditure is cash spent to run and maintain 
the business on a day-to-day basis. FCF, however, is the re-
maining cash available, and is free to be spent in ways that 
add value for the business. Stated simply, FCF is free to be 
spent in ways that grow real value for shareholders.
In his 2004 Letter to Shareholders, Bezos explains the 
reason for Amazon’s focus on FCF: “Why not focus first 
and foremost, as many do, on earnings, earnings per share or 
earnings growth? The simple answer is that earnings don’t 
directly translate into cash flows, and shares are worth only 
the present value of their future cash flows, not the present 
value of their future earnings.”
“Our ultimate financial measure, and the one we most 
want to drive over the long-term, is free cash flow per share.
Free Cash Flow as Amazon’s Business Engine
Free Cash Flow can be a powerful engine for driving 
shareholder value. At Amazon, it is both the proverbial 
North Star that managers use to guide operations, and the 
fuel that leadership uses to drive business strategy.
The following figure shows how FCF moves from 
Operations to Business Strategy which in turn grows and 
improves Operations.
Operations Generate Free Cash Flow. Now that we’ve es-
tablished that Operations is the source of Free Cash Flow, the 
next step is to set up appropriate measurements and KPIs. A 
few examples from Amazon include contribution profit and 
total sales rather than contribution margin as a percentage.

133
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow
Figure B-1. Free Cash Flow as a Business Engine
This focus on FCF as the primary financial measure at 
Amazon began in earnest when Warren Jenson became CFO 
in October of 1999. As noted above in the Bezos’ quote, it is 
also the time when the Amazon finance organization began 
to move away from a “percentage” margin focus to a “cash” 
margin focus. Bezos loved to toss out the axiom “percentages 
don’t pay the light bill, cash does!” He would then ask “Do 
you want to be a $200 million company with a 20% margin 
or a $10 billion company with a 5% margin? I know which 
one I want to be!”
This new direction of putting FCF at the center of 
Amazon’s strategy, as well as the need to manage it success-
fully, drove the creation of powerful measurement and mod-
eling capabilities. One powerful example of this is the robust 
and extremely accurate ‘unit economic’ model that was de-
veloped. This tool allows merchants, finance analysts, and 
optimization modelers to understand how different buying 

134
The Amazon Way
decisions, process flows, fulfillment paths, and demand sce-
narios will affect a product’s contribution profit. This in turn 
gave Amazon the ability to understand how changes in these 
variables would impact FCF, and has allowed them to react 
accordingly.
Very few retailers have this type of in-depth financial view 
of their products, and thus have a difficult job truly making 
decisions or building processes that optimize the econom-
ics. Amazon uses this knowledge to determine the number 
of warehouses and where they should be placed, to quickly 
assess and respond to vendor offers, to develop a better un-
derstanding of inventory margin health, to know how much 
it will cost them to hold a unit of inventory over a specified 
period of time down to the penny, and so forth and so on.
Free Cash Flow as the Fuel for Business Strategy. Let us 
now assume that Operations are running efficiently and 
FCF is being generated. As a leader, it is your responsibility 
to spend this cash in whatever way creates the most value for 
shareholders. Your options fall into 4 basic categories:
 Investing in growth
 Paying down debt
 Buying back shares
 Paying out dividends
Investing in growth is the most interesting option here, 
and has been the core of Amazon’s business strategy to date. 
Bezos believes that a company will stagnate without con-
stant innovation, and that the primary ingredient for strong 
innovation is free cash flow. Many would argue that spend-
ing FCF on buying back shares or paying out dividends is 
a signal that senior leadership has run out of positive NPV 
projects, and that shareholders are better off finding better 
uses for their money.

135
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow
At Amazon, common areas of investment have included 
adding new categories, new businesses, new infrastructure 
(such as fulfillment centers), and scale through technology. 
New businesses are incubated for a period of time in order to 
prove their viability and optimize operations before FCF is 
invested to scale to a national or global level. Amazon Fresh 
is a perfect example of this, having been run locally in Seattle 
since 2007 before expanding to other cities in 2013.
Free Cash Flow as a Decision Driver
As a business leader, one of your main responsibilities is 
to make sound and reasonable decisions for the management 
of your company. It’s a given that these decisions should be 
based on data, goals, and KPI’s, and competitive insights—
but which ones? Let’s take an in-depth look at how a C-level 
decision can vary with the following two goals:
 Maximize Net Earnings
 Maximize Free Cash Flow
To compare these alternative decision drivers, let us ana-
lyze a hypothetical business scenario from Jeff Bezos’s 2004 
Letter to Amazon Shareholders:
Imagine that an entrepreneur invents a machine 
that can quickly transport people from one loca-
tion to another. The machine is expensive—$160 
million with an annual capacity of 100,000 pas-
senger trips and a four year useful life. Each 
trip sells for $1,000 and requires $450 in cost of 
goods for energy and materials and $50 in labor 
and other costs.

136
The Amazon Way
Continue to imagine that business is booming, 
with 100,000 trips in Year 1, completely and per-
fectly utilizing the capacity of one machine. This 
leads to earnings of $10 million after deducting 
operating expenses including depreciation—a 
10% net margin.
Although overly simplified, this business scenario allows 
us to take a closer look at the decision process.
Maximize Net Earnings. It is now the end of Year 1 and 
the entrepreneur must make a decision. If the company’s pri-
mary goal is to maximize earnings, then the best course of 
action is to invest more capital to add additional machines, 
fuel sales, and grow earnings. Let us assume that the en-
trepreneur decides to grow the business by 100% each year, 
purchasing an additional machine in Year 2, two more in 
Year 3, and four more in Year 4.
Here is the income statement for the first four years of 
business when earnings growth is the company goal:
Table B-1. 2004 Letter to Shareholders

137
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow
If this transport machine is truly revolutionary, it is rea-
sonable to assume that demand can keep up with capacity. In 
the first 4 years of operation, the company sees 100% com-
pound earnings growth and $150 million of cumulative earn-
ings! It appears that the sky is the limit for this company. Let’s 
see what things look like when maximizing FCF is the goal.
Maximizing Free Cash Flow. To analyze this business 
through the Free Cash Flow lens, let’s take a look at the 
Cash Flow statement for Years 1 through 4 with the addi-
tional machine purchases included:
Table B-2. 2004 Letter to Shareholders
Free Cash Flow tells a very different story from the one 
told by Earnings. FCF is negative in Year 1 because of the 
massive capital expenditure in the transport machine. The 
machine is already being run at full capacity, and only has 
an operating life of 4 years so even with 0% growth, the net 
present value of cash flows (assuming 12% cost of capital) is 
still negative.
To improve FCF, we can focus on improving Cash 
from Operations, or on reducing Operating Expenditures. 
Probing in these two areas leads to questions such as:
T bl B 2 2004 L
Sh
h ld

138
The Amazon Way
 How much would the production cost of the 
transportation machine need to be reduced by for 
this to be a positive FCF business?
 How much should the price of a ticket be raised 
to for this to be a positive FCF business? What is 
the price elasticity of near instant transportation?
 Would the transportation machine last longer if 
it wasn’t run at full capacity? What if it turned 
out that running at 80% capacity doubled the 
operating life of the machine? How would this 
effect FCF?
With maximizing FCF as the goal, our manager would 
have made very different investment decisions then when 
maximizing Earnings was the goal. Without other options 
or modifications to this business model, we see that, in this 
scenario, committing capital to growth is a poor choice. 
Rather than investing in growth, the best course is to invest 
in improving and optimizing the business model to see if 
this business model can become FCF positive.

139
Appendix C. The 
Critical Capabilities of 
Building and Operating 
a Platform Company
T
he development of the “capabilities-as-a-business” mar-
ket is rapidly accelerating the rate of innovation in busi-
ness. Whether it is “cloud computing” as a service, or more 
process-oriented capabilities such as “delivery as a service” 
or “content management as a service,” leaders are driving 
change and competing faster, cheaper, and with lower risk 
by utilizing “platforms.”
As I detailed in multiple chapters of the book, Amazon.
com and Jeff Bezos have famously catalyzed strategy and 
execution of a “platform.” Additionally, we developed these 
platform strategies and capabilities during my tenure run-
ning the third-party selling business and then the enterprise 
services business—where we managed other large retailers’ 
ecommerce infrastructures (Target.com, Toys R Us.com, 
Marks & Spencer).
However, Amazon.com is actually several different plat-
forms. There is the “retail platform business” which allows the 
roughly 2 million third-party sellers to leverage the customer 
base and infrastructure of Amazon.com to sell products, plus 

140
The Amazon Way
Amazon the retailer to sell and deliver. There is also the 
“merchant services” platform which brings both holistic and 
component capabilities to ecommerce capabilities that cli-
ents use to build and run their ecommerce business. Example 
capabilities include “checkout by Amazon,” “fulfillment by 
Amazon,” and “payments by Amazon.” There is the cloud 
computing infrastructure business at Amazon known as 
AWS (Amazon Web Services), a computing and technology 
infrastructure that is the market leader in cloud capabilities. 
Example AWS capabilities include “compute,” “storage,” and 
sophisticated managed services such as the “big data infra-
structure” known as Elastic Map Reduce and Redshift, that 
allow a company to rapidly provision infrastructure that is 
well beyond the engineering capability of most companies to 
bring together.
Yet creating a platform is a far more comprehensive 
change than simply adding a technology or altering opera-
tions. It transforms your sales model and the channels you 
utilize; it alters your project management and changes the 
very nature of your relationships and revenue. It also requires 
patience and a long-term strategy. It changes everything.
To fully understand the catalyzing force of the platform, it 
is important to define its key differences and critical capabil-
ities. In today’s world of hype-driven, buzzword marketing, 
it seems as if everyone is calling their business a “platform.” 
Yet what are the critical differences between a platform company 
and a normal technology and data services company?
The framework and outline below seek to answer this 
question. However, I doubt that any company embodies 100 
percent of these factors. In fact, it may not be beneficial to 
embody all of these factors. Moreover, “being a platform” 
may not be the right strategy for your company at all. That 

141
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
said, this framework will help you evaluate if and how to 
either transition to being a platform company, or work with 
a platform company.
The segmentation of these capabilities fall into the 
groups shown in Figure C-1:
Business Model
Attributes of the business model 
that differentiate a pltform 
business.
Operational
Attributes of “operating the 
company” that differentiate a 
platform business.
Ecosystem
Attributes of the ecosystem highly 
impacted or differentiates platform 
business.
Critical Capabilities
Capabilities or features important 
to end customers or ecosystem 
partners.
Figure C-1. Platform capabilities segmentation.
Changes to the Business Model
A wide variety of businesses are looking for ways to re-
invent using a platform model. While launching a platform 
business requires new cost structures and revenue models, it 
also requires patience and a fresh perspective. The follow-
ing attributes differentiate a platform business from a more 
traditional technology business model.

142
The Amazon Way
Fixed Cost. A platform business is characterized by hav-
ing a largely fixed cost business, with little or no marginal 
costs for each additional user of the platform. While there 
is significant capital and R&D in building the platform, 
the business then operates on the “network effect.” A plat-
form’s popularity and effectiveness increases exponentially 
in relation to the number of tenants it supports. Consider 
Facebook. The more users, the better the experience, the 
larger the network grows—it’s more or less a self-perpetuat-
ing system. Once the platform is established, costs are mar-
ginal. In other words, much of your investment is up front.
Depending upon the business, these initial fixed costs 
may be in manufacturing infrastructure (TSMC, Samsung, 
Intel), distribution network and fleet assets (i.e. FedEx, 
UPS), telecommunications (ATT, Verizon, Cox), content 
(i.e. NetFlix, Hulu), and certainly technology infrastructures 
(Amazon, Amazon Web Services). Out of this list, only 
Amazon has organized itself as a platform company.
Marginal Costs. While marginal costs for each customer 
do exist, these per customer marginal costs decrease over time 
as the scale of adoption and scale of the platform increases. 
This is often accomplished by simple, leveraged purchasing 
and vendor management, but can also occur by incorporat-
ing increasing commodity elements into the infrastructure 
and building the IP in the proprietary platform management 
layers. Continuously reducing the IP of third-party compo-
nents, and building these capabilities into your platform ca-
pability, is a classic move of driving toward commoditization 
and reducing dependencies on other partners.
For example, Amazon Web Services decreases marginal 
costs of additional technology infrastructure by continuing 
to use highly scalable commoditized infrastructure and by 

143
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
building the proprietary cloud fabric managing the infra-
structure. In the case of Microsoft, marginal costs include 
the development of new software or even producing the jew-
el cases to package their disks.
Hidden Platform. The end customer is often unaware 
of the underlying platform being used. An indicator of a 
platform business is that end customers and clients are (or 
can be) significantly ignorant of the underlying platform 
provider. This creates a marketing challenge perhaps best 
exemplified by the “Intel Inside” campaign or the fact that 
Netflix uses Amazon Web Services as a platform—a fact 
that few if any customers realize. Direct marketing, tradi-
tional sales may not be as necessary as traditional market-
ing and sales channels. Building the interactions with the 
platform as “self-service” as possible, helps enable flexibil-
ity and scaling.
Revenue Model. For a platform business, revenue is col-
lected in a more continuous stream with smaller amounts, 
rather than the lumpy quarterly collections from new sales 
that often make up 90 percent of revenue. Revenue tends 
to be more recurring revenue and subscription based than 
a ‘one-time’ license or service revenue found in traditional 
software or services companies. Because of the network ef-
fect mentioned above, “customer satisfaction” is perhaps 
more important than in traditional non-platform businesses.
Platform businesses must also adjust to the transient na-
ture of customers. Simplicity of provisioning to the platform 
services lowers barriers to access and use and result in casual 
or seasonal usage. A successful platform business will see a 
significant percentage of revenue fluctuate as these casual 
users migrate and must shift marketing and operating focus 
to support this new class of customers.

144
The Amazon Way
Lastly, platform companies may need to adjust to a lower 
margin and higher volume mix of business as well as look at 
capital investments return over a longer horizon than may 
have been typical.
Long-Term Strategy. Platform businesses often need to 
take a longer term, phased view regarding capital investment 
and product development. Delivering scalable and reliable 
services over time requires careful upfront planning and de-
sign with phased long-term execution. The platform must 
be able to be run economically at both small and large scale.
It also requires significant investment to build a compel-
ling platform. Once you have achieved this, you must allow 
time for the flywheel to engage. A platform business is not 
the fast way to revenue. It requires a long-term strategy.
Operational Changes
Establishing a platform business requires different op-
erational attributes or core processes than a traditional busi-
ness model. When offering a platform service, it is vital to 
be far more wired to customer and internal metrics while 
ensuring seamless continuity, high performance and a high 
degree of availability.
Service Level Agreements (SLAs). Well-defined and gran-
ular operational service levels, security and privacy controls, 
along with key real-time operating data availability is critical 
to allow others to trust and operate on a platform. If third 
parties cannot manage and have the operational controls 
of the environment, the ability to “bet the business” is sig-
nificantly compromised. Best-in-class platforms offer ser-
vice levels and operational control exceeding what a typical 

145
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
company can practically build and deliver for itself. This is a 
key value proposition for using the platform.
Business Continuity. Platform businesses must target 100 
percent service availability. This means planning for service 
failures while being able to seamlessly shift customers to 
alternative services. Ideally, the customer should not know 
which services are being used or where they are located. 
Business continuity becomes about overall service network 
redundancy and durability. The importance of this aspect of 
a platform cannot be overstated. Consider the outcry when 
Facebook is down or the revenue lost if the Amazon.com site 
crashes for even a few hours.
High Performance and Availability. Platforms offer avail-
ability and performance attributes that non-platforms can-
not offer (at comparable costs). However, to compete with 
the latter, successful platforms must work well and always 
work. New features and system maintenance should be ac-
commodated without adverse impact to customers to main-
tain business continuity. Exemplary performance is key to 
the retention of tenants, which tend to be more transient—
especially if a competitive platform exists. It is also at the 
core of any platform’s value proposition and constitutes a 
great deal of its competitive advantage. The gold standard 
of web service platforms, for example, is Amazon’s AWS, 
which offers a degree of performance and availability that 
typical companies cannot begin to match.
Instrumentation as a Core Competency. As a core com-
petency, the platform and organization builds and runs the 
business with world-class monitoring, metrics, analytics and 
self-monitoring capabilities. These capabilities and data are 
appropriately exposed to partners and clients. In short, you 
must measure and monitor everything in order to assess and 

146
The Amazon Way
improve performance. Without proper instrumentation, your 
platform is “flying blind.”
Service Analytics. Transparency is key. Platform cus-
tomers must have the same level of visibility into platform 
performance, exception management, and end customer be-
haviors as the service providers themselves. Some aspects of 
the service should be a “black box,” but platform customers 
need to be able to implement efficient feedback loops and be 
able to analyze their interface with the platform to facilitate 
continuous improvement. Fortunately, the very nature of a 
platform business allows for comprehensive monitoring—if 
the instrumentation is in place.
Multi-tenant. Capabilities of a multi-tenant platform 
include the ability to add a substantial amount of clients, 
brands, or “eco-system partners” without modification, sep-
arate infrastructure or new “instances.” A platform facilitates 
multiple tenants with custom configuration, business rules 
and functionality—without changing the underlying plat-
form. This often requires the ability to “co-mingle” clients 
while providing the required “separation” of critical data 
or proprietary capability. Consequently, this shared infra-
structure requires the proper placement of governance, data 
management or public policies to minimize conflict and dis-
ruption on the common infrastructure.
Global Platform. An indicator of a platform business is 
that a common execution and code base is used, resulting 
in an entirely consistent interface. This results in a “one in-
stance” model versus multiple deployed instances running 
parallel to another. This massively scalable technology of-
fering is easy to operate, upgrade and deploy; as important, 
it requires only “one bug, one fix” solutions. The result is a 
well-oiled machine that provides seamless interface and user 

147
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
experience—key aspects to business continuity. AWS, for 
example, could lose a complete data center and the customer 
would never know it. In fact, Amazon.com occasionally tests 
that theory by purposely shutting off data centers.
Zero Provisioned. Adding a partner or client has zero pro-
visioning costs for the platform company due to the self-service 
attribute. In other words, an external entity that wants to use 
your capabilities should be able to sign up and use them without 
your assistance (see Appendix A, “Future Ready Self-Service”).
“Eat Your Own Dog Food.” Be your own customer. 
Internally, all developers must use APIs to access services 
and capabilities just as an external developer would. This 
inherently makes the capabilities better. Using your own 
platform provides detailed internal feedback and drives ever 
more robust capabilities. Amazon.com’s move into the Web 
services business (offering storage, payment and bandwidth 
infrastructure to other companies in what has come to be 
known as cloud computing), was initially a response to the 
company’s own technology needs.
Core Capabilities as Services. Platform businesses need 
to approach product management in a different way than 
traditional product companies. Companies need to define 
the core, value-adding capabilities that they currently have 
or could develop, and determine how to expose capabilities 
as comprehensive and complete services. Thinking broadly 
about potential services is important.
The Attributes of a Platform Ecosystem
A platform company not only enables, but also facili-
tates other businesses’ use of their platform. Ideally, a strong 

148
The Amazon Way
platform attracts deeply invested third parties that innovate 
and construct new capabilities on top of it. For example, 
Amazon Web Services, Fulfillment by Amazon, and Kindle 
Direct Publishing create powerful self-service platforms that 
allow large numbers of users to experiment and accomplish 
things that would otherwise be impossible or impractical. In 
his 2011 Shareholder Letter, Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos ex-
plained how “innovative, large-scale platforms are not zero-
sum—they create win-win situations and create significant 
value for developers, entrepreneurs, customers, authors, and 
readers.” Consequently, one of the keys is to actively identify 
the types of partners who can build on your platform—those 
opportunities become your channel expertise.
External Innovation. Not only do other enterprises pro-
vide a new channel or “sell” the platform (as in the cases of 
traditional VAR or channel partners), but actually innovate 
on the platform as well—without anyone in the platform or-
ganization needing to know about it. In other words, there 
are no gatekeepers. Bezos has consistently emphasized the 
self-service nature of platforms because “even well-meaning 
gatekeepers slow innovation.” In his 2011 Shareholder Letter, 
he goes on to explain, “When a platform is self-service, even 
the improbable ideas can get tried, because there’s no expert 
gatekeeper ready to say, “That will never work!” And guess 
what—many of those improbable ideas do work, and society 
is the beneficiary of that diversity.”
Natural Synergies. A platform business creates both in-
tentional and unintentional synergies—a virtuous cycle or 
flywheel. These synergies increase the value and traction of 
the platform with each additional partner. For example, us-
ing “Fulfillment by Amazon” allows a seller’s items to be 
“Prime” eligible at Amazon. Being Prime eligible increases 

149
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
the sale of the item at Amazon.com. Increasing the sales is 
good for both the seller and for Amazon.com (and the end 
customer). Again, the more a platform is used, the more its 
fixed costs are covered, and the more efficiently the flywheel 
turns. Increased use increases use.
An Open and Level Playing Field. The rules, potential 
conflicts and competition between the platform, policies, and 
ecosystem partners should be fair, well governed and slow 
moving. Ecosystem partners must be able to bet on the plat-
form with low risk of being cannibalized. If you want other 
companies betting their futures on you, you have to be trans-
parent and fair. As a prime example of getting this wrong, 
many experts point to Mark Zuckerberg’s 2007 launch of 
Facebook Platform. While the initial idea was promising—
effectively allowing any developer to build full applications 
on top of the social graph, inside the Facebook framework—
the execution was undermined within 18 months when the 
company abandoned the idea of a level playing field and 
added new features that restricted the capabilities of devel-
opers who were building similar products. Today, Facebook 
Platform is considered a missed opportunity representing 
tens of billions of dollars of lost revenue.
Unplanned Customers and Innovation. Peter Drucker 
wrote that the unexpected was the richest source of oppor-
tunity for successful innovation. Prepare for customers and 
innovation you haven’t even dreamed of or have yet to ex-
ist. Successful platforms should expect to be “surprised” by 
new and different types of innovation and capabilities. This 
requires the business to be effective in identifying new cus-
tomer segments and nimble in responding to new demand 
channels. Creating both the environment and tools (such 
as API’s) which make it easy for customers and partners to 

150
The Amazon Way
use and innovate without your direct involvement is the new 
paradigm for management.
Critical Capabilities
There are several important facets that a successful plat-
form is required to offer. These product capabilities promote 
innovation, growth, data measurement, adoption rates, com-
pliance and security. Without them, any platform will strug-
gle to effectively engage its flywheel.
APIs and Bulk Operations. The clearly defined “sockets” 
or interfaces through which others interact with the platform 
are often hardened APIs. APIs are the essential enabler of 
exposing capability in a useable manner to allow others to 
leverage it. APIs can expose data, logic, processes and other 
types of either high-level or low-level capabilities. While 
having APIs is critical, the right APIs coupled with other 
key strategic and tactical capabilities are needed to develop a 
platform business model.
However, APIs are not the only interfaces. Portals, 
documentation, SLAs, and real-time operational data are 
all examples of additional aspects of hardened interfaces. 
“Hardened” means that the interface is durable and evolves 
over time, but possesses a well-established roadmap and 
change control. These capabilities are typically backwards 
compatible, and should always be “obvious” to the user.
Analytics. Platforms need to empower customers and 
their ecosystem by providing robust and deep analytics—far 
deeper and real-time than providers are engineered to typi-
cally deliver.

151
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
Self-Service. A platform business creates scale and oper-
ating efficiencies by being “self-service” for partners, clients 
and users of the platform. Clientele should be able to gradu-
ate from “discovery to operating” without ever talking to 
someone at the platform business. Often, communities are 
formed to help provide collaboration, but these communities 
are often independent of the platform company and build 
excitement and awareness (see Appendix A, “Future Ready 
Self-Service”).
By-The-Sip Pricing. Part of the value proposition of a 
platform business is that the service transforms what are tra-
ditionally fixed capital and operating costs to flexible and 
variable expensed costs. The ability to quickly scale, both up 
AND down, is a key aspect of the model. The scaling should 
be able to happen with a much shorter lead time than is tra-
ditionally needed for the capability. This provides greater 
flexibility to the client by switching traditional fixed “capi-
tal” costs to more elastic, “by-the-sip” operating expenses. 
For example, if a “fulfillment center” capability is the ser-
vice, a company would traditionally need to build and capi-
talize distribution centers and equipment, with a typical year 
to multi-year lead time. “Fulfillment-As-A-Service” allows 
a client to vary fulfillment capability, dial-up and dial-down 
fulfillment capacity, and do so with a very short lead time 
(one month to one day). In addition, platforms do not require 
clients to sign a huge contract, which promotes use.
Compliance Capability “As a Service.” In the heightened le-
gal, global and compliance atmosphere in which we operate, 
platform businesses provide clients with an unusually high 
control and assurance for meeting and supporting compli-
ance, as well as audit and tax management. Both governance 

152
The Amazon Way
and compliance are facilitated by the platform’s inherent 
metrics and instrumentation. Similarly, a platform must be 
able to demonstrate a high degree of data security.
Data and content stewardship. Attracting tenants to a 
platform requires a high degree of trust in your service offer-
ing. It is vital that a platform provides clearly expressed and 
easily managed policies and assurances on data protection, 
reconciliation, and delete rights.
Change Enabler. Be a door, not a wall. Whether via acqui-
sition/divestiture or structural change, the platform should 
be an enabler and not a constraint to structural realignment 
of the user organization. Data models, configuration, ar-
chiving, and key capabilities are designed to accommodate 
and manage change.
Summary
Becoming a platform company is not just a major change, 
it changes everything! Sales, marketing, product manage-
ment, operations, roles, responsibilities, measures—all are 
impacted by shifting one’s strategy to being a platform com-
pany. Creating capabilities that others leverage “as a service” 
creates tremendous opportunity in innovation, truly chang-
ing the way work gets done.
What are the opportunities in your industry? By looking 
at the value chain of an industry and seeing where the inef-
ficiencies, brokers and “gatekeepers” are trapping customers, 
we can develop strategies to continuously innovate with a 
platform. Take, for example, Amazon apparel. We start-
ed the business as just another third-party seller platform. 
Then Amazon started selling inventory they sourced. Now, 

153
Appendix C. The Critical Capabilities
they are designing their own proprietary product and build-
ing apparel-specific process capabilities such as Amazon 
Photo Studios that others can easily leverage as a service. It 
is very difficult to get building platforms right. Companies 
that might be assumed at being good at this have largely 
missed. Steve Yegge, a senior Google engineer and former 
Amazon engineer, articulated how “That one last thing that 
Google doesn’t do well is Platforms. We don’t understand 
platforms. We don’t “get” platforms.”1 Facebook pronounced 
in 2007 that they were going to be an open platform. How 
many companies are making their business on the Facebook 
platform?2
Make no mistake. We are “Day One” in building and 
using platform capabilities to fundamentally reinvent how 
work gets done. What is your strategy?

154
Acknowledgements
I
’m an industrial engineer by education and a consultant by 
profession. I create too many PowerPoint decks for a living, 
which means that writing in bullet points comes far more 
naturally to me than writing a book.
This project really started when Clifford Cancelosi, my 
great friend, a colleague at Amazon and then at Alvarez and 
Marsal, sat with me in my home office one rainy Seattle day 
to brainstorm the principles that became the article “Future-
Ready Self-Service” (Appendix A in this book). Writing that 
piece helped me realize how much I’d learned at Amazon, 
and that I had a story to tell. Clifford contributed many sto-
ries and helped me clarify many of the concepts that appear 
in these pages. Without his ideas and suggestions, the con-
tents of this book would be far less rich and interesting.
Greg Shaw at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and 
now at Microsoft was one of the first to encourage me to 
write the book. He saw the leadership principles as the cen-
tral theme to build around, and he was critical in helping me 
pull together the team.
Tom Elsenbrook, who runs the business consulting busi-
ness at Alvarez and Marsal, recognized the potential of the 
project and helped me navigate making this happen.
Randy Miller, another ex-Amazon colleague and Alvarez 
and Marsal colleague, was an early finance and category 
leader at Amazon and has been very generous in sharing his 
time and experiences.
The talented writer Ryan Masters played the critical role 
in transforming my raw content and stories into a coherent 

155
Acknowledgements
and interesting book. He understood the messages I was 
trying to convey, the needs of the audience I was trying to 
reach, and the kinds of anecdotes and examples that would 
help bring the key themes vividly to life. Thanks for your 
essential help, Ryan!
My editor Karl Weber polished the prose and provided 
fantastic feedback to improve the story.
John Rossman 
March, 2014

156
About the Author
J
ohn Rossman works with companies to develop and im-
plement innovative business models, technology strategies, 
and operations improvement for Fortune 500 companies in 
industry sectors ranging from high tech, to philanthropy to 
retail. He currently works as a managing director for Alvarez 
& Marsal, a global, professional services firm that deliv-
ers performance improvement, turnaround management, 
and business advisory services to organizations seeking to 
transform operations, catapult growth, and accelerate results 
through decisive action.
Prior to A&M, John served as director of enterprise ser-
vices at Amazon.com, where he developed the Merchants @ 
program, a B2B network that enables millions of sellers to 
offer products through Amazon, which now is over 40 per-
cent of all orders. He also ran the relationships with enter-
prise clients like Target.com, Toys “R” Us, Sears.ca, Marks 
and Spencer, and the NBA.
John lives in Seattle, Washington with his wife and two 
boys. He holds a BS in industrial engineering from Oregon 
State University.

157
Sources
Introduction
1 “Amazon Leadership Principles,” at http://www.
amazon.jobs/principles.
Chapter 1
1 Bill Price and David Jaffe, The Best Service is No Service: 
How to Liberate Your Customers from Customer Service, Keep 
Them Happy, and Control Costs, Jossey-Bass, March 21, 2008.
2 “Inside Amazon’s Idea Machine,” Forbes, April 23, 
2012.
3 1997 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
March 30, 1998.
4 “Amazon Losing Its Price Edge,” The Wall Street 
Journal, August 20, 2013.
5 http://franklincovey.com/blog/consultants/toddwangsgard/
2010/02/12/pulling-andon-cord-lessons-timeout/
6 http://www.amazon.com/gp/jobs/228529?ie=UTF8&
category=Customer%20Service&jobSearchKeywords=&loc
ation=US&page=1
7 2012 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 12, 2012.
8 “Inside the Mind of Jeff Bezos,” Fast Company, August 
1, 2004.

158
The Amazon Way
9 Ibid.
10 David LaGesse, “America’s Best Leaders: Jeff Bezos, 
Amazon.com CEO,” U.S. News, November 19, 2008.
11 Chuck Salter, “Most Innovative Companies 2009: 
Amazon #9,” Fast Company, February 10, 2009.
Chapter 2
1 Nicholas Carlson, “Jeff Bezos’s Salary Is Only $14,000 
More Than The Average Facebook Intern’s,” Business Insider, 
April 15, 2013
2 Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age 
of Amazon, Little, Brown and Company, October 15, 2013.
3 “Jeff Bezos ‘Makes Ordinary Control Freaks Look Like 
Stoned Hippies,’ Says Former Engineer,” Business Insider, 
October 12, 2011
4 1997 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
March 30, 1998.
Chapter 3
1 “Fascinating Number: Amazon Is Larger Than 
The Next Dozen Internet Retailers Combined,” Forbes, 
September 1, 2013.
2 2011 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 13, 2012.
3 “Senior Software Development Manager, Item Authority,” 
http://www.amazon.com/gp/jobs/221091, Amazon.com website
4 “What is Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA)?” YouTube, July 
17, 2013, (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAi4fPb_kp4).

159
Sources
5 2011 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 13, 2012.
6 “Private Cloud Matures, Hybrid Cloud is Next,” 
Gartner, Inc., September 6, 2013.
7 “Analyst: Amazon’s Cloud Is Really A $19 Billion 
Business ... And Growing,” Business Insider, January 7, 2013.
Chapter 4
1 Charlie Rose, “Amazon’s Jeff Bezos Looks to the 
Future,” 60 Minutes, December 1, 2013.
2 “Inside Amazon’s Idea Machine,” Forbes, April 23, 
2012.
3 “Jeff Bezos, The Post’s incoming owner, known for a 
demanding management style at Amazon,” The Washington 
Post, August 7, 2013.
4 George Anders, “Inside Amazon’s Idea Machine,” 
Forbes, April 23, 2012.
5 http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?
modeId=12880481.
6 “Seller Performance Management,” http://www.amazon.
com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=12880481, 
Amazon.com website
Chapter 5
1 “Amazon.com Acquires Shoe E-tailer Zappos,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, July 22, 2009.
2 Richard L. Brandt, One Click: Jeff Bezos and the Rise 
of Amazon.com, Portfolio Trade, December 31, 2012.

160
The Amazon Way
Chapter 6
1 George Anders, “Inside Amazon’s Idea Machine,” 
Forbes, April 23, 2012.
2 Marcus Wohlsen, “Amazon Outage Could Cost a Lot 
More Than 400,000 Pairs of Unsold Underwear,” Wired.
com, February 1, 2013.
3 Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age 
of Amazon, Little, Brown and Company, October 15, 2013.
Chapter 7
1 “The Truth About Jeff Bezos’ Amazing 10,000-Year 
Clock,” Business Insider, August 12, 2013.
2 “Jeff Bezos Interview,” Academy of Achievement, May 
4, 2001.
3 2012 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 12, 2012.
4 Henry Blodget, “Amazon’s Letter To Shareholders 
Should Inspire Every Company In America,” Business Insider, 
April 14, 2013.
5 Morgan Housel, “The 20 Smartest Things Jeff Bezos 
Has Ever Said,” The Motley Fool, September 9, 2013.
6 HBR IdeaCast, “Jeff Bezos on Leading for the Long-
Term at Amazon,” HBR Blog Network, January 3, 2013.
7 2004 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 13, 2004.
8 2012 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 12, 2012.
9 “Jeff Bezos Interview,” Academy of Achievement, May 
4, 2001.

161
Sources
Chapter 8
1 Alan Murray, The Wall Street Journal Essential Guide to 
Management, HarperBusiness, August 10, 2010.
2 Morgan Housel, “The 20 Smartest Things Jeff Bezos 
Has Ever Said,” The Motley Fool, September 9, 2013.
3 Ibid.
Chapter 9
1 “Bezos on Innovation,” BloombergBusinessweek, April 
18, 2008.
2 “Jeff Bezos’s Salary Is Only $14,000 More Than The 
Average Facebook Intern’s,” Business Insider, April 15, 
2013.
3 Brad Stone, The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age 
of Amazon, Little, Brown and Company, October 15, 2013.
4 Ibid.
5 Jim Edwards, “This Man Had Such A Bad Experience 
With Amazon Customer Support He Posted The Entire 
Conversation Online,” Business Insider, December 3, 
2013.
Chapter 10
1 http://fulfillment.amazon.rtio.nl/amazon-fulfillment/
leaders-of-fulfillment/miriam-park/
2 Jim Collins, How The Mighty Fall, HarperBusiness, 
May 19, 2009.

162
The Amazon Way
3 Jim Collins, Good to Great, HarperBusiness, October 
16, 2001.
Chapter 11
1 “How to Build (or Rebuild) Trust,” www.michaelhyatt.
com, April 16, 2012.
2 2011 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 13, 2012.
Chapter 12
1 Fred Vogelstein, “Mighty Amazon,” Fortune, May 26, 
2003.
2 http://www.charlierose.com/view/interview/12656.
3 http://www.armedforcesjournal.com/essay-dumb-dumb-
bullets/.
Chapter 13
1 George Anders, “Bezos As a Media Tycoon: This is 
His Undeniable Agenda,” Forbes, August 5, 2013.
2 Amy Morin, “13 Things Mentally Strong People Don’t 
Do,” Lifehack.org, November 13, 2013.
3 AL Duckworth, C Peterson, MD Matthews, DR 
Kelly, “Grit: Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term 
Goals,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92 (6), 
1087.

163
Sources
Conclusion
1 “America’s Best Leaders: Jeff Bezos, Amazom.com 
CEO,” by David LaGesse, US News & World Report, 
November 19, 2008, http://www.usnews.com/news/best-leaders/ 
articles/2008/11/19/americas-best-leaders-jeff-bezos-
amazoncom-ceo.
Appendix A: Future Ready Self-Service
1 “The Tide Has Turned: Nuance Research Finds Most 
Consumers Would Rather Self-Serve Over Speaking With a 
Live Agent,” May 10, 2012, Nuance Communications, Inc.
2 “3 Reasons to Show Your Support Page a Little Love,” 
cccbuzz.exbdblogs.com, March 13, 2012.
3 “Selecting Online Customer Service Channels To 
Satisfy Customers And Reduce Costs,” Forrester Research 
Inc., June 25, 2010.
4 2011 Letter to Shareholders, Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com, 
April 13, 2012.
5 “Stop Trying to Delight Your Customers,” Matthew 
Dixon, Karen Freeman and Nicholas Toman, Harvard 
Business Review, July 2010.
6 “Auto-Insurers Online Self-Service Report 2012: 
Leaders and Laggards,” The Customer Respect Group, June 
11, 2012.
7 “Web Sites That Don’t Support Customers Waste 
Millions,” Forrester Research Inc., February 17, 2010.
8 “The Business Impact of Customer Experience,” 
Forrester Research, Inc., March 26, 2012.

164
The Amazon Way
9 “An Unlikely Banker Emerges: Amazon,” The Wall 
Street Journal, October 4, 2012.
Appendix B: Free Cash Flow
1 http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2013/10/
31/what-jeff-bezos-gets-that-amazons-critics-dont/ 
3324845/.
Appendix C: The Critical Capabilities of Building and 
Operating a Platform Company
1 https://plus.google.com/+RipRowan/posts/eVeouesvaVX.
2 http://pando.com/2013/07/23/move-fast-break-things-
the-sad-story-of-platform-facebooks-gigantic-missed-
opportunity/.

