Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
the
digital
handshake
seven proven strategies
to grow your business
using social media
PAUL CHANEY
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

the
digital
handshake


Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
the
digital
handshake
seven proven strategies
to grow your business
using social media
PAUL CHANEY
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
www.Ebook777.com

Copyright # 2009 by Paul Chaney. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness
for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for
any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical
support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-
4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information
about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Chaney, Paul, 1955–
The digital handshake : seven proven strategies to grow your business using
social media / by Paul Chaney.
p.
cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-49927-6 (cloth)
1. Internet marketing.
2. Online social networks–Economic aspects.
3. Internet advertising.
I. Title.
HF5415.1265.C48 2009
658.8
0
72–dc22
2009015532
Printed in the United States of America
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

To all my friends in social media.
You are the inspiration for this book and
to you it is dedicated.


CONTENTS
Foreword
Ann Handley, Chief Content Ofﬁcer,
MarketingProfs
xi
Preface
The Insurgent Consumer
xiii
Acknowledgments
xv
About the Author
xvii
Introduction
A New Communications Paradigm
xix
PART I
Five Consumer Trends Turning the
World Upside Down
1
Chapter One
Consumer Skepticism Is at an All-Time High
3
Chapter Two
The Media Is Fragmented and So Is the Audience
9
Chapter Three
Who Is In Control of the Marketing Message?
(Guess What. It’s Not You!)
15
Chapter Four
Businesses, Improve Your Aim
21
vii

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter Five
Customers Are Mad as Hell, and They’re
Not Going to Take It Anymore
27
Chapter Six
What’s a Marketer to Do? (Start a Conversation)
37
PART II
Seven Proven Strategies to Grow Your Business
53
Chapter Seven
Business Blogging: Your Social Media Marketing
Headquarters
55
Chapter Eight
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
77
Chapter Nine
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
Your Business
97
Chapter Ten
Microblogging: Social Media Marketing in
140 Characters or Less
115
Chapter Eleven
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
to Market Your Business
137
Chapter Twelve
Podcasting (Overlooked, Underutilized
Marketing Tool)
149
Chapter Thirteen
PR 2.0 (Introducing the Social Media News Release)
163
Chapter Fourteen
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
173
PART III
Putting the Tools to Good Use
(A Social Media Marketing Plan of Action)
185
viii
CONTENTS
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter Fifteen
A Brief Word About Web Sites, E-mail
Marketing, and Search Engines
187
Chapter Sixteen
Listening Is the New Marketing
197
Chapter Seventeen
Now That You’ve Listened, It’s Time to Engage
205
Chapter Eighteen
Measuring the Effectiveness of Your
Social Media Marketing Plan
211
Conclusion
221
Notes
225
Index
233
Contents
ix


FOREWORD
Ann Handley, Chief Content Ofﬁcer,
MarketingProfs
I’m imagining that you have just picked this book off of the
shelf in the bookstore, you noticed it in the library, or you are
ﬂipping through it on Amazon.com, and that, however you
are accessing it, you are wondering, ‘‘Do I really need to read
this book?’’
Look, you’re busy. You have a business to run, payroll to
make, decisions to weigh, widgets to create, things to man-
age and prioritize and direct . . . and a million other de-
mands on your time: Can you really afford to read this book?
But here’s the reality in which you are doing business
today: You are operating in a very different market these
days. In other words, things have changed.
The notion of marketing your products or your services to
your customers by interrupting them repeatedly through
advertising isn’t enough anymore—not in the current busi-
ness climate. Creating awareness about your company or
your brand through mass media like newspaper advertising,
magazine callouts, or any sort of broadcasting medium
doesn’t go far enough. The same holds true for PR campaigns
that beg reporters to pay attention to your products or to tell
your company’s story. In the end, those strategies sell your
brand short.
xi

The advent of the Internet and, more speciﬁcally, the
rise of Web-based tools and technologies, have given your
customers a new voice. Suddenly—thanks to blogs, Face-
book, Twitter, and other social and online networking tech-
nologies—your customers are empowered to demand more
of the companies they do business with. They are using their
newfound voices to talk to you as well as to converse with
each other. They will howl when you screw up, they will
praise you when you do well, and they will create their own
version of the story of your business and what it sells.
That sounds a little scary, doesn’t it?Orat leastdaunting?
And maybe it is. The customers are in control, and your
customers can make a difference in ways that are un-
precedented.
But the shift we are talking about also creates enormous
opportunity for businesses. Rather than being afraid of the
newly empowered consumer, or blocking your ears to their
voices, consider the ways your business can harness this
change.
How might you think of leveraging the newfound voice of
the consumer to tap into new insights about your company
or its market? How might you use blogs to foster new
relationships with your customers? How might you draw
on social networks to develop relationships with new pros-
pects? How might you deepen your relationships with exist-
ing customers?
More questions: How might you rely on these tools and
tactics to help you market more effectively, brand your
products and services, develop products that really reso-
nate, and enhance your PR strategies? All of that is, of
course, the real opportunity that Paul Chaney talks about
here. As Paul’s editor at MarketingProfs, which provides
strategic and tactical marketing know-how for 320,000
marketing and business member-professionals through a
full range of online media, I assure you . . . Paul knows his
stuff.
Which brings me back to my original question: Can you
really afford to read this book?
My response to you is this: ‘‘Can you really afford not to?’’
xii
FOREWORD

PREFACE
THE INSURGENT CONSUMER
The consumer today is in open rebellion.
He doesn’t pay attention to advertising anymore. He no
longer trusts corporate spokespeople or their messages. In
fact, according to the 9th Annual Edelman Trust Barometer1
people now say their most credible source of information
about a company and its products is ‘‘a person like me’’—a
trust level in peers that, in the United States, has skyrock-
eted from only 22 percent a few years ago to 60 percent
today.
This lack of trust has major bottom-line consequences.
More than 80 percent of people surveyed say they would
refuse to buy goods or services from a company they do not
trust. And new research also shows that negative consumer
comments on blogs have a direct impact on corporate
brands, earnings, and share prices.
The fact is that consumers are no longer willing to
put up with shoddy products, indifferent service, and
lack of accountability and transparency. What’s more,
they are demanding a decision-making voice in shaping
the products, services, and media they consume. TiVo is
one example of this new take-charge attitude on the part
of consumers. Another is the fact that, according to a Pew
Internet & American Life Project survey,2 half of all teens
in this country—and 57 percent of those who use the
xiii

Internet—have created a blog or Web page, posted original
artwork, photography, stories or videos online, or re-mixed
content into their own creations.
Indeed, the consumer now demands more of business—
and thanks to blogs and other new consumer-empowering
technology and media—he can now get it. Companies that
meet these new expectations are rewarded. Those that don’t
see their businesses punished as never before.
How should business leaders respond to this new insur-
gent marketplace? How can they use blogs, social networks,
and other new ‘‘voice of the customer’’ media to develop a
new and more democratic relationship with customers—one
that leverages customer insight and initiative to create more
effective marketing, branding, product development, and
public relations strategies that materially enhance ﬁrm suc-
cess? Those are questions this book hopes to examine and
answer.
xiv
PREFACE

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost I want to thank several colleagues in
social media who have been both an inspiration and an
inﬂuence for a number of years: Toby Bloomberg, Wayne
Hurlbert, Yvonne DiVita, Denise Wakeman, Tris Hussey,
Jane Genova, Anita Campbell, Zane Safrit, John Jantsch,
Lee Odden, Des Walsh, Jim Turner, Kevin O’Keefe, Debbie
Weil, Andy Wibbels, Steve Rubel, and BL Ochman. We started
blogging about the business of blogging back at a time when
most people didn’t know what a blog was. Thank you for the
opportunity to be a member of your tribe. You’ve taught me
so much.
Another group I must thank are those who opened doors
of opportunity for me along the way. Susannah Gardner
gave me my ﬁrst taste of writing. Richard Nacht not only
gave me a job working in his business blogging startup,
Blogging Systems, but partnered with me in co-authoring
my ﬁrst book, Realty Blogging. Other ‘‘door openers’’ include
Steve Broback, Jason Calacanis, Peter Levinson, Ann
Handley, Rick Calvert, Terri Murphy, and Kerry Murdock.
Thank you all for the opportunities you afforded.
A huge number of people in the real estate industry
embraced me after Realty Blogging was written and con-
tinue to count me as a member of their tribe to this day. I
would like to thank Matt Heaton, Jonathan Washburn, Brad
Andersohn, Rich Jacobson, and all the folks at Active Rain,
where I was warmly received, ﬁrst as ‘‘The Blog Coach,’’ and
xv

now as the ‘‘Social Media Handyman’’; Jeff Turner, Benn
and Lani Rosales, Andy Kaufman, Todd Carpenter, Mariana
Wagner, Mike Price, Morgan Brown, Derek Overbey, Stepha-
nie Edwards-Musa, Dustin Luther, and, most especially,
Ines Hegedus-Garcia round out the short list. More recent
additions include Bill Lublin and Ginger Wilcox. There are
many, many more who should be named. The manner in
which I have been received almost makes me want to get my
real estate license . . . almost!
John Munsell, CEO of Bizzuka, took a chance in letting
me use the company as a laboratory to experiment with
social media marketing. Much of what you will read in this
book has come out of my experience there. John and all the
staff at Bizzuka deserve my utmost respect and apprecia-
tion, and they have it.
I want to thank my publisher, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
for taking a chance on me as well. I could detail the course
of events that led them to welcome me as a member of their
family of authors. I am deeply appreciative of the opportu-
nity to work with them, and especially with my editor Shan-
non Vargo and editorial assistant Beth Zipko. To say they
have been patient, nurturing, and very supportive during
the entire process would be an understatement.
Lastly, let me thank my wife, Amie. Her understanding,
encouragement, and patience truly made the difference in
this book being written. She spent many a night sitting
alone while I was sequestered away in our home ofﬁce
laboring over the manuscript. It’s not the ﬁrst time, either,
and probably won’t be the last. She is an amazing woman,
and I am blessed to have her as my partner in this journey
through life.
xvi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Paul Chaney is internet marketing director for Bizzuka, a
Web content management software company based in
Lafayette, Louisiana. He also serves as President of the
International Blogging and New Media Association (IBNMA),
a non-proﬁt trade association dedicated to advancing blog-
ging, podcasting, and social media as an industry. In addi-
tion, he sits on advisory boards for the Social Media
Marketing Institute, Womens Wisdom Network, and Smart-
Brief on Social Media.
Paul was cofounder of Blogging Systems, a blog software
company that signiﬁcantly impacted the real estate industry
by encouraging realtors to adopt blogging as a marketing
strategy. In 2006, along with Blogging Systems CEO Richard
Nacht, he co-authored Realty Blogging: Build your Brand
and Outsmart Your Competition, which similarly impacted
the industry and was the ﬁrst blogging book to target a
speciﬁc industry vertical.
He has been a feature writer for Practical Ecommerce
magazine on the use of blogs and social media for marketing
purposes. He has led numerous workshops and seminars on
the topics of business blogging and social media, including
the ﬁrst seminar on business blogging ever to be held in Asia,
in September 2005.
xvii

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Paul has blogged professionally with Weblogs, Inc., as
well as Allbusiness.com and currently blogs at marketing
resource supersite MarketingProfs for their Daily Fix blog.
He has served as technical editor on a number of the
‘‘For Dummies’’ series books related to blogs and Internet
marketing, and was contributing writer on Buzz Marketing
with Blogs for Dummies, published in 2005 by John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
xviii
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
www.Ebook777.com

INTRODUCTION
A NEW COMMUNICATIONS
PARADIGM
Businesses large and small are being confronted with a new
communications paradigm known most familiarly as Web
2.0. Individuals were once primarily consumers of informa-
tion, but with the advent of new forms of media such as
blogs, social networks, and Internet video, that is no longer
the case.
A sea change has taken place, and now anyone with
access to a computer or mobile device and the Internet can
become a publisher, not just a consumer, of information.
Everyone, both amateur and professional alike, has the
ability to produce content and share information, opinion,
and editorial commentary and make it available to the entire
world with the click of a mouse. What used to be known as
the information superhighway has become an intercon-
nected maze of conversation, a global symphony of voices
speaking at once. This has vast implications for business.
New terminology has even evolved to describe this phenom-
enon—the ‘‘participatory Web,’’ ‘‘social media,’’ and, as pre-
viously mentioned, ‘‘Web 2.0.’’
No longer can companies turn a deaf ear to the conver-
sation that is taking place through these manifold channels.
Businesses must develop engagement strategies to:
xix

 Counter negative perceptions about their brands, peo-
ple, products, and services
 Reward those who speak well of them
 Use the same media as consumers to generate brand
awareness, create positive brand impressions, and
incite customer evangelism and word of mouth.
Further, the way businesses market themselves has
changed. No longer do companies merely target audiences
and broadcast messages through unidirectional mass media.
In this new paradigm, ‘‘markets are conversations’’ and ‘‘par-
ticipation is marketing.’’ As such, businesses must learn how
to operate through these new channels to engage their cus-
tomers and prospects and penetrate newly developed niche
markets. The tools of social media are the means by which
this is done.
Not only that, but businesses are seeing less return on
investment (ROI) from their advertising and marketing dol-
lars. Marketing professionals and small businesspeople
alike need to know why that is the case and what they
can do to counter its effect. The Digital Handshake provides
that information in a clearly laid-out, easy-to-understand,
practical manner. It is replete with real-world examples of
how companies as large as Dell and as small as a four person
sign-making shop in Lincoln, New Hampshire are using the
tools of social media to effectively address these changes.
PURPOSE OF THE DIGITAL HANDSHAKE
Where other books in this space are written from a largely
strategic, conceptual standpoint, this one approaches the
subject in a more tactical, hands-on, instructional manner.
It is a complete handbook on social media marketing that
ﬁlls the gap between a For Dummies style approach and
books such as Groundswell or Marketing to the Social Web. It
is written with the nontechnical person in mind and walks
them through leveraging the tools of social media to posi-
tively affect their bottom line.
This book explains in great detail the intricacies of this
new paradigm, demonstrates in a practical manner how
xx
INTRODUCTION

these tools are being used successfully, and explains how
you can use them as well. It provides numerous case studies
to support the proposition, and lays out a simple strategy for
social media engagement.
The Digital Handshake contains:
 Strategic thinking from someone with an extensive
background and years of experience dealing with
this topic in day-to-day, real-world environments—
someone who has learned by doing and knows what
works and what doesn’t.
 Practical, detailed, ‘‘how-to’’ application of the tools
under consideration. Awareness about the use of so-
cial media for marketing is growing exponentially
within the business community. Many are making
attempts to use these tools, but more often than not
their efforts meet with failure because they lack under-
standing of how to do so. Not only that, because the
number and breadth of technology tools grows every
day, new practitioners often do not even know where to
begin. This book provides a clear path to understand-
ing, accompanied by ample statistical and anecdotal
evidence, illustrations, and case studies.
 Both a strategic andtactical focus. It serves the needs of
those looking for a high-level (though non-academic)
treatise on the subject, as well as those needing a
practical ‘‘in the trenches’’ manual on how these tools
can be applied.
 Provides answers to questions people are actually
asking. Every day I ﬁeld questions about how to put
these tools to use, including everything from how to
use blogs for lead generation to whether a microblog-
ging tool like Twitter is worth the investment of time.
This book provides precise and conclusive answers to
these and other such questions.
Because the use of social media as a marketing
approach is still very much in its nascent stage, the
need for down-to-earth, understandable explanations ac-
companied by practicable examples and illustrations is
Introduction
xxi

obvious. That is the unique value proposition this book
provides.
Based on my research of the current state of the market,
my thorough understanding of how the Internet has evolved
as a marketing channel, and the current rate of adoption of
social media tools and tactics, I believe we are at a tipping
point.
WHAT IS A ‘‘DIGITAL HANDSHAKE?’’
In computer language, ‘‘digital handshake’’ is the term used
to describe the connection between two modems. I’m talking
about something similar, yet quite different.
Gary Hirshberg, CEO of Stonyﬁeld Farms, one of the ﬁrst
companies to hire a corporate blogger, is quoted in a May
2005 Wall Street Journal article as follows: ‘‘The blogs give us
what we call a handshake with consumers, a bond of loyalty
and mutual trust that’s different than the typical selling
relationship, where it’s all about price.’’1
The book builds on the idea that relationships tend to
start with a handshake and grow from there. In the virtual
world, social media is a way of extending a digital hand-
shake. There are certain unwritten, yet accepted rules of
engagement. Don’t push, but pull instead. Use the power of
attraction. Take a Dale Carnegie ‘‘win friends and inﬂuence
people’’ approach by expressing interest in others ﬁrst.
‘‘Seek ﬁrst to understand, then be understood,’’ as St.
Francis of Assisi said.
Author and futurist John Naisbitt, in his 1982 best-
selling classic Megatrends, referred to a time when comput-
ers would facilitate human interaction. High tech meets high
touch, he called it.
I believe Naisbitt’s vision of the future is now being
realized. Social computing has given us the ability to create
digital relationships. While I am not suggesting that face-to-
face interaction is no longer needed (as most certainly it is),
social media has added a very human, relational dimension
to our use of computing technology.
Rather than merely seeing a balance between the elec-
tronic and face-to-face interaction, as Naisbitt suggested,
we are seeing a melding of the two. Often, what begins as
xxii
INTRODUCTION

online interactions lead to in-person meetings. Allow me to
cite four such examples.
Toby Bloomberg
Early in my business blogging days, one of the bloggers I
came into connection with was Toby Bloomberg, a marketing
consultant based in Atlanta. (I was living in Mississippi at
the time.) After a few months of interaction online we decided
it was time to meet face to face. Toby invited me to attend a
monthly meeting of the AiMA (Atlanta Interactive Marketing
Association), and I took her up on the offer. Toby and I have
been fast friends ever since.
Zane Safrit
Zane Safrit is a small business consultant and former CEO.
As was the case with Toby, Zane and I met via the blogo-
sphere. (He is an avid, proliﬁc blogger.) Not long after, we met
in-person at a blogging conference and experienced real
camaraderie. So close was this relationship that Zane trav-
eled all the way from Iowa to attend my wedding! (Keep in
mind, we had only met in-person once previously.)
In fact, he showed up in jeans, running shoes and a plaid
shirt! (Turns out, even though Zane arrived at the airport, his
luggage didn’t.) Personally, he could have shown up in his
bathrobe. His willingness to travel all that way never ceases
to warm my heart.
Richard Nacht
This list would not be complete without including one of the
best friends I have on this earth, my former business partner
and co-author of my ﬁrst book, Realty Blogging, Richard
Nacht. As with Toby and Zane, our relationship began online
and evolved into a business relationship, the start-up of a
new company, and a book! Oh, and Richard came to my
wedding as well. Fortunately, his luggage did arrive.
My wife, Amie
The best example of the ‘‘high tech, high touch’’ phenomena
is being lived daily by my wife, Amie, and I. You see, we met
Introduction
xxiii

online via eHarmony. (God bless Dr. Neil Clark Warren!) In
fact, one out of every eight couples married today met online.
While I don’t pretend to be a social anthropologist or
understand societal trends in the way that Naisbitt does, my
own experience has proved that his prediction has value, if
not exactly in the same way as he intended.
Through the use of social media tools like LinkedIn and
Facebook and microblogging tools like Twitter, the gap be-
tween the digital world and the real one is being bridged.
Certainly, this has beneﬁt for personal relationships. This
book will prove it has value in building business relation-
ships as well.
WHAT’S IN THE DIGITAL HANDSHAKE?
Part One begins by outlining ﬁve consumer trends turning
the business world upside down:
 Consumer skepticism and resistance to advertising
 Current state of media fragmentation
 Growing trend toward consumers being in control of
marketing/advertising messages
 Pressure businesses face to improve targeting of their
marketing and advertising to increase relevance and
minimize waste
 Companies being held to a higher level of accountabil-
ity than ever before
Once these trends are identiﬁed and explained, the focus
turns toward the philosophy behind the use of social media
and proposes it as the antidote to these marketing maladies.
Part Two explains in chapter-by-chapter detail how to make
use of seven proven strategic tools of social media:
 Business blogs
 Social networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn
 Online communities
 Microblogs like Twitter
 Online video
xxiv
INTRODUCTION

 Podcasts
 Social media press releases
There is also a chapter on other ways to use social media
for marketing: Social bookmarking, customer ratings and
reviews, RSS, and more.
Part Three outlines a simple social media marketing plan
of action, which can be summarized in three words: Listen,
Engage and Measure.
Here I show you how to put the tools outlined in the
previous section to good use and help you create a compre-
hensive yet cohesive marketing strategy uniquely tailored to
your situation.The most important topics being covered in
the book are:
 Five consumer trends. I illustrate these trends using a
number of case studies from corporations as large as
Dell and Intel and many small businesses as well. In
fact, my emphasis on small business use of social
media is one of the things that sets this book apart
from the ﬁeld.
 The fact that ‘‘markets are conversations’’ and ‘‘par-
ticipation is marketing.’’ This is an explanation of the
philosophy behind the use of social media as a market-
ing strategy. It is accompanied by quotes and case
studies from leaders in the ﬁeld.
 Practical explanations of how to use the tools of social
media and the associative beneﬁts that can be
gleaned. Again, these are accompanied by real-world
examples from both corporate and small business
communities.
 Social media marketing strategy. You will take away
from the book a cohesive, integrated strategy for social
media marketing engagement.
WHO THIS BOOK WAS WRITTEN FOR
While anyone is welcome to read this book, it was written
with two primary audiences in mind: Professional practi-
tioners in the ﬁelds of marketing and public relations
Introduction
xxv

and small business owners. However, if you fall into one
of the following categories, rest assured, this book is for
you:
 Chief marketing ofﬁcers
 Marketing directors
 C-level executives
 Public relations professionals
 Advertising agency executives
 Small business owners
 Company/corporate bloggers
 Social media strategists
 Social media managers
 Online community managers
 Solo entrepreneurs
 Consultants
 Investors and venture capitalists
The ideal reader is a:
 Marketing executive or small business owner who
understands that his or her marketing and advertising
efforts are not as effective as they used to be, but who
lacks understanding of why that is the case.
 The reader who is gaining awareness of the impact
the Internet, especially Web 2.0, is having on market-
ing, and who needs direction in planning future
campaigns.
 Those who have a need or would like to learn how to
use the tools of this new marketing paradigm to grow
their business.
The book assumes that you have at least a basic under-
standing of marketing principles and tactics. What is not
needed is an understanding of technology or of social media
tools like blogs and wikis, as it is the task of this book to
provide such knowledge.
xxvi
INTRODUCTION

Social media is more than a toolset; it is a mindset as
well. Before we get into a discussion of how to use the tools
of social media, we much ﬁrst lay the groundwork for
understanding why they need to be used. Chapter 1 intro-
duces us to the ﬁrst of ﬁve consumer trends that have
immediate bearing on how marketing should be done in
the Web 2.0 era.
Introduction
xxvii


PART I
FIVE CONSUMER
TRENDS TURNING
THE WORLD
UPSIDE DOWN


CHAPTER ONE
Consumer Skepticism
Is at an All-Time High
Trust is a commodity in short supply nowadays. We con-
sumers are increasingly skeptical of advertising messages
that promise to make our lives easier, our bodies healthier,
or our wallets fatter. Ours is a cynical age tainted by war,
economic downturn, political unrest, and an uncertain fu-
ture. We are suspicious of hype, and we favor that which is
real, even if it lacks the shiny exterior and pomp commonly
associated with advertising.
This chapter seeks to lend insight into the reasons for
this increasing skepticism and shed light on who consumers
are turning to for advice on goods, products, and services.
THE INSURGENT CONSUMER AND THE INFLUENCE
OF WORD OF MOUTH
In a February 2006 article from Advertising Age,1 Editor
Jonah Bloom stated, ‘‘While too many advertisers are still
focused on the business of shouting one message over and
over, today the most important communication is not the
marketing monologue, but the dialogue that takes place
among customers.’’
3

Consumers are becoming insurgent, rising in revolt
against slick, overly produced ads in favor of recommen-
dations by fellow consumers and user-generated content
such as that found in YouTube videos or customer rat-
ings and reviews such as those at Amazon, Judy’s Book,
or Yelp.
For example, never do I go to the movie theater and spend
$35 for tickets, soft drink and popcorn without ﬁrst checking
movie reviews on sites such as Yahoo! Movies or Rotten
Tomatoes. I’m not interested in reading what the profes-
sional critics have to say but glean, instead, the opinions of
average Joes who spent their hard-earned cash.
Of course, nothing trumps the inﬂuence of recommen-
dations from trusted family members and friends. In their
social media manifesto ‘‘Trust Economies,’’2 authors Chris
Brogan and Julien Smith assert, ‘‘We are suspicious of
marketing. We don’t trust strangers as willingly. Buzz is
suspect. It can be bought. Instead, consumers and business
people alike are looking towards trust. We want our friends
to tell us it’s good. We want someone we know to say we
should look into it.’’
‘‘We may be seeing the golden age of word-of-mouth and
social media in its use,’’ said small business marketing
consultant Zane Safrit. ‘‘A perfect storm of early adopters,
obvious metrics for its use, the over-saturation by adver-
tising that leads to the demise of its dynamics could com-
bine to create some sweeping changes for business and its
methods.’’3
Public relations ﬁrm Edelman in 2006 completed a sur-
vey4, which concluded:
 By a 3-to-1 margin people are far more likely to trust
‘‘average people like me.’’
 67 percent of consumer goods sold are as a result of
word of mouth.
 Consumers trust word-of-mouth recommendations
far more than traditional marketing or advertising.
 People would rather hear about real experiences and
perspectives than ‘‘marketing speak.’’
4
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
‘‘We have reached an important juncture, where the lack
of trust in established institutions and ﬁgures of authority
has motivated people to trust their peers as the best sources
of information about a company,’’ said Richard Edelman,
president and CEO. ‘‘Companies need to move away from
sole reliance on top-down messages delivered to elites
toward fostering peer-to-peer dialogue among consumers
and employees, activating a company’s most credible
advocates.’’
BOURNE, NOT BOND: CONSUMERS WANT REAL
EXPERIENCES AND PERSPECTIVES,
NOT MARKETING SPEAK
You recall the days of classic Agent 007 James Bond (Sean
Connery was my favorite, by the way). He was suave, debo-
nair, and hardly ever got a scratch. Bond drove expensive
cars, wore fabulous clothes, ate at the ﬁnest restaurants,
and always, always got the girl.
There was a time when advertising was the same. Slick
marketing messages conceived in Madison Avenue high-
rises delivered mass-marketing style via broadcast and print
were consumed and believed by the buying public, no ques-
tions asked. If manicurist Madge said a certain brand of
dishwashing liquid softens hands while using it, who were
we to disagree? Not so any longer. We now live in the age of
Jason Bourne, not James Bond.
Unlike his counterpart, Bourne gets beaten up, shot at,
and otherwise knocked around with great regularity. Rarely
does he walk away from a ﬁght unscathed. Neither does he
get the girl. In fact, his girlfriend was killed. Bourne’s is a
world of gritty, cold reality.
That’s the world advertisers ﬁnd themselves in as well.
Consumers have little trust in marketing messages, and,
therefore, advertisers have to work much harder for their
attention and, more importantly, their trust.
Another example of this real experience versus marketing-
speak mentality can be seen in what arguably has become in
recent years the most popular genre of television entertain-
ment: Reality TV. Programs run the gamut from the sublime
Consumer Skepticism Is at an All-Time High
5
www.Ebook777.com

to the ridiculous and cover every topic imaginable, from drug
and alcohol interventions, to bounty hunting to modeling, to
cooking, real estate sales, and home decorating contests.
Oh, yes, let us not forget musical entertainment a la Ameri-
can Idol.
What is the reason for such popularity? Within all of it
there is an underlying theme, that what I’m watching has
some degree of realism. I can identify with the participants,
imagining myself in their place as their peer. These ‘‘ordi-
nary’’ people, whether placed in similarly ordinary or exotic
circumstances, carry with them a level of authenticity.
I believe this phenomena is a sign of our times that carries
over into advertising. Advertisers and marketing professio-
nals who understand this will do well in making the changes
necessary to re-establish trust with the consumer.
To their credit, some are doing their best to bring some
level of ‘‘reality’’ to the 30-second spot. It is becoming much
more commonplace, for example, to see the CEO of a Fortune
1000 speaking on behalf of the company. Every once in a
while they even apologize for wrongdoings, as was the case
with JetBlue CEO David Neeleman.
In a now-famous YouTube video, Neeleman addressed
operational problems faced by his airline in 2007.5 You
recall the incident on February 14, 2007, where thousands
of JetBlue’s customers were left stranded for hours in air-
ports and on planes.
His apology was one of the ﬁrst times that the CEO of a
major company used social media in crisis management.
The video has received more than 350,000 views. Most
YouTube users who commented on the video expressed
support for Neeleman, praising him for placing the apology
on the site.
A little bit of honesty accompanied by a healthy dose of
humility goes a long way toward restoring a company’s repu-
tation among consumers, and Neeleman’s attempt was met
with word-of-mouth enthusiasm.
WHY THE SKEPTICISM?
There are a number of reasons consumers are skeptical of
advertising. First, advertising is interruptive. I don’t know
6
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

anyone who welcomes a series of 30-second spots during a
favoriteTV show.This is one reasonforthe growing popularity
of devices such as TiVo. No one picks up a magazine for the
sole purpose of scanning the ads.
Seth Godin, in his 1999 book Permission Marketing,6
says, ‘‘For ninety years, marketers have relied on one form
of advertising almost exclusively. I call it Interruption Mar-
keting. Interruption, because the key to each and every ad is
to interrupt what the viewers are doing in order to get them
to think about something else.’’ Advertising is not why we
watch television, listen to the radio or browse a Web page.
Interruption gives way to aggravation, followed by a search
for the remote.
A second reason for rising skepticism is deceptive ad-
vertising with its misleading claims, bait-and-switch tech-
niques, false comparisons that suggest one brand is better
than the others without stating that outright—we’ve all been
there.
Often, it’s not that the advertiser intended to deceive us,
but simply that the ads over promised while the product or
service under-delivered. Once we have been fooled by claims
that turn out to be exaggerated or even false, we tend to shy
away the next time around.
Of course, part of this could be the consumer’s own fault.
‘‘The anticipation of a thing is always greater than the
realization of it,’’ someone said when describing how our
assumptions regarding a product’s performance can set up
both it and us for failure.
Yet a third reason for this growing distrust is a com-
pany’s inability to connect with customers at a human level.
Of all the reasons, that may be the most damning. The great
promise offered by social media is that real, genuine, honest,
human connections can be made between the company and
consumer that will engender trust and build a foundation for
long-term relationships.
CONCLUSION
In the end, it is not so much a matter of knowing why con-
sumers are skeptical but simply accepting that they are. The
antidote is not more mass-market messaging but radical
Consumer Skepticism Is at an All-Time High
7

transparency and a willingness to admit mistakes, much in
the same way JetBlue’s Neeleman did. By re-instituting the
conversation, social media can help companies reconnect
with consumers, rebuild the bridge of trust, renew customer
loyalty, re-energize brand evangelism, and re-humanize the
company.
8
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

CHAPTER TWO
The Media Is
Fragmented and So Is
the Audience
MEDIA IN THE SIXTIES: WHEN I WAS MY
FATHER’S REMOTE CONTROL
I recall it like it was yesterday. As a child I would sit on the
ﬂoor of our family room in close proximity to the television,
not because I had difﬁculty seeing the screen, but because,
invariably, my father would want the channel changed and
guess who would be the one to do it. This was in the 1960s
mind you, long before the invention of the remote control. I
guess you could say I was the remote.
My job was relatively easy as there weren’t many chan-
nels. Normally, depending on the weather, we averaged three
and sometimes four—two stations in a nearby town and two
a bit farther away. That was television in the sixties. Most of
it was black and white, as was life back then.
What about radio? FM had not yet taken over. That left a
few local AM stations that played mostly country music or a
9

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
combination of formats: country in the mornings, rock and
roll in the afternoons, and gospel on Sundays. They went off
the air at dusk to make room for the 100,000-watt clear-
channel stations broadcasting out of Nashville, Little Rock,
and even Chicago.
As for print, there was a daily newspaper published in a
nearby town and our local hometown weekly. My parents
subscribed to Life, Time, and Readers Digest. Oh, and Pro-
gressive Farmer, too. (I guess you can tell I grew up in a rural
community.)
Advertising in this ‘‘Mad Men’’ era was, by comparison,
much simpler than it is today. It was much easier to reach a
mass audience, and companies like Procter & Gamble,
Coca-Cola, and General Motors had mastered the art.
In the 1960s, for example, a single ad aired simulta-
neously on the big three networks (CBS, NBC, and ABC)
could reach 80 percent of U.S. women. Today, that same ad
would have to be run on one hundred channels multiple
times to have any hope of duplicating that feat. Then, the
emphasis was on reach and frequency, metrics that have
less importance now.
In 1960, an advertiser could spend $5 million a year
and reach 160 million television viewers. With the right
message, sustained over a period of years, 85-percent
message penetration into the audience was achievable.
Mass media reached a mass audience. That was then;
this is now.
MEDIA FRAGMENTATION AND
THE ATTENTION ECONOMY
Today, media is fragmented in a thousand different ways.
Take television, for example. There is still terrestrial tele-
vision received via antennas (so long as you have the digital
converter box), but there are satellite television and cable
as well. The average viewer has access to over eighty
channels, and children no longer have to play the role of
channel changers! In addition, thanks to sites like Hulu
and Netﬂix, more viewers are consuming full-length tele-
vision shows and movies via their computers and even
mobile devices.
10
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

Radio has followed the exact same course in that there
are terrestrial, satellite, and Internet versions. With fewer
and fewer people reading the daily newspaper (a trend that
has continued unabated for the past twenty years), it would
appear print media is going the way of the albatross. Several
major dailies ceased publication in 2009. Even the local
weekly in the town where I grew up closed after being in
business for over one hundred years!
The number of daily advertising messages we encounter
has skyrocketed into the thousands, and some experts be-
lieve it to be as high as 3,000. Although that number may
be exaggerated, the truth is we are constantly bombarded
with ads.
Think about it. In the Mad Men days, there were fewer
commercials, which reached more people with undivided
attention. Today, more ads reach fewer people paying less
attention.
In 1965, the number of people who could recall an ad
from a television program they just watched was 35 percent.
Today, that number is less than 10 percent.
In 1960, there were:
 4,400 radio stations—today, there are nearly 14,000;
 8,500 magazine titles—today, the number is more
than 17,000;
 5.7television channels—today, there are 82.4on average.
And I’ve not even mentioned the Internet with its millions
of Web sites and billions of pages, the hundreds of social
networks and online communities, e-mail inboxes overﬂow-
ing with messages, and the scores of RSS feeds to which we
subscribe.
To complicate matters, people are consuming content in
an asynchronous, on-demand fashion. More people are
using TiVo and DVRs to control what they watch and
when. Automobiles, the favorite spot for radio listening,
are now equipped with inputs for MP3 players, bypassing
the need to listen to the radio at all. On the Internet, people
suffer from banner blindness and pay little attention to
display ads.
The Media Is Fragmented and So Is the Audience
11

AN AGE OF INFORMATION OVERLOAD
With consumers ﬁrmly in control, this spells gloom and
doom for advertisers. Media buying, given the current land-
scape, has to be a nightmare. With people fast-forwarding
through commercials or skipping them altogether, adver-
tisers are scurrying around to ﬁnd new ways to gain con-
sumers’ attention. And precious little of that commodity
exists. We are in an age of information overload!
Research ﬁrm Basex called information overload the
‘‘Problem of the Year’’ in 2008.1 We have more things to
attract our attention, but no more time to pay attention.
(Unless things have changed, there are still only 24 hours in
a day.) The result is that we pay less attention. Advertising
slips through the cracks.
Wikipedia suggests a number of possible causes2:
 A rapidly increasing rate of new information being
produced
 The ease of duplication and transmission of data
across the Internet
 An increase in the available channels of incoming
information (e.g., telephone, e-mail, instant messag-
ing, RSS)
 Large amounts of historical information to dig through
 Contradictions and inaccuracies in available information
 A low signal-to-noise ratio
 A lack of a method for comparing and processing
different kinds of information
It is estimated that scientiﬁc information doubles every
ﬁve years. Seventy percent of all information in our global
society has been created since the start of the Internet, and
the amount of information is currently doubling every three
years. This means we will have sixteen times more informa-
tion by 2015 than we had in 2003. Looking back over our
shoulders, the past seems like a walk in the park compared
to the seemingly insurmountable mountain of knowledge
and information that lies ahead.
12
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

American psychologist Herbert Simon put it this way3:
‘‘ . . . in an information-rich world, the wealth of infor-
mation means a dearth of something else: a scarcity of
whatever it is that information consumes. What informa-
tion consumes is rather obvious: it consumes the attention
of its recipients. Hence a wealth of information creates a
poverty of attention and a need to allocate that attention
efﬁciently among the overabundance of information sour-
ces that might consume it.’’
Some would suggest that the problem is not information
overload at all, but faulty ﬁltering. On the contrary, I think
we instinctively ﬁlter based on need. Most of us have so
much going on in real time that we pay little if any attention
to that which does not pass through the ﬁlter.
CONCLUSION
Whether the problem is information overload or an inability
to adequately ﬁlter the information we encounter daily, the
result is bad for interruptive advertising. There has to be
a better way, and indeed there is, as we will see later in
this book.
Social media offers marketers the ability to move beyond
the attention economy to the participatory economy, one
where companies and consumers sit down across the table
from one another and engage in meaningful dialogue about
their brands, products, and services.
Social media promises to spell the end of advertising as
we know it and bring us to an age where the content that’s
being created (otherwise known as ‘‘information’’) is the new
advertising.
The Media Is Fragmented and So Is the Audience
13


Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CHAPTER THREE
Who Is In Control of the
Marketing Message?
(Guess What. It’s Not You!)
There was a time when advertisers and marketers were the
center of the marketing universe. Messages were broadcast
in one-way fashion to largely passive consumers. Today,
thanks to the tools of social media people are talking to
each other about our companies, products, services, indus-
tries, and competitors whether we are present or not. What’s
worse, we may not even be aware that a conversation is
taking place! That head in the sand mentality may work for
the ostrich, but not for business. Who is in control of the
marketing message? One thing is certain, it isn’t us.
FROM COMMAND-AND-CONTROL TO OUT
OF CONTROL TO COMMUNITY CONTROL
Classic command-and-control marketing and advertising in-
volved creating a message and distributing it through every
available channel. You’ve seen this methodology employed
hundreds of times in ads like Ford’s ‘‘Drive One,’’ or Nike’s
‘‘Just Do It’’ campaigns.
15
www.Ebook777.com

If it feels a bit militaristic, that’s because command-
and-control has its roots in the military. The General
barks orders to the Colonel who hands them down to the
Major who passes them along to the Captain, then to the
Lieutenant and so on down to the lowly Private.
Not unlike that, marketing executives, working in tandem
with ad agencies, carefully craft messages that get syndicated
through multiple channels until they reach the consumer,
who is supposed to be inspired to do just what the ads direct.
Simple,really.Ifonecampaigndoesn’tpanout,anothercomes
along behind it that may. If that one fails, then a new agency
is hired to replace the one that faltered, or maybe the CMO
herself is the one to get the ax.
New media has disrupted that structure and put the
message in the hands of the consumer who remixes it to
suit his liking. The brand’s message becomes whatever the
community dictates, not the brand. In fact, it is no longer the
sole property of the brand.
You would think that companies would respond favor-
ably and create ways to incorporate the consumer in spread-
ing the message. In fact, some are, and we will take a look
at a few examples later in this chapter. However, many
are still motivated by fear of losing control, negative feed-
back, legal repercussions and just plain fear of change itself.
The classic ‘‘we’ve never done it that way before’’ mentality
governs a lot of business owners’ and executives’ thinking.
That may be one reason why only 15 percent of Fortune 500
companies use blogs in any meaningful way.
A 2007 McKinsey survey1 of nearly 3,000 C-level exec-
utives revealed that:
 Just 37 percent of executives were using or planned to
use social networking,
 Only 35 percent planned to use RSS, the technology
used to syndicate content across the Web
 Just 32 percent of executives reported sinking dollars
into blogs
A more recent survey by the CMO Council of 400 market-
ing executives2 found that 56 percent said their companies
16
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

have no programs to track or propagate positive word-of-
mouth and that only 16 percent of respondents said their
companies have any routine system in place for monitoring
what people are saying about them or their brands online.
Again, the ostrich mentality comes to mind.
THE EMPOWERED CONSUMER
Consumers aren’t just insurgent, they are also empowered.
Social media has granted them the authority to speak up,
and their voices are being heard loud and clear. While
companies may want them to ‘‘pay,’’ as in buy their prod-
ucts, these empowered consumers want those same compa-
nies to pay attention and give them a seat at the table. They
no longer want to be merely passive consumers of products
and services, but active participants helping to co-create
them.
If the old command-and-control structure no longer
works, what might serve as a suitable alternative? Fard
Johnmar, founder of healthcare marketing communications
ﬁrm Envision Solutions, suggests ‘‘Engage and Encourage’’
as the way to go.3 ‘‘In a world where social media is very
inﬂuential, complete message control will be impossible,’’
says Johnmar. Instead, he recommends reaching out to
inﬂuencers in social media to solicit their help in spread-
ing the word, then producing social media content that will
help enrich and expand the dialogue. He sees it as a collab-
orative effort between company and consumer.
Call it a truce, healthy compromise, collaboration, or
partnership, the best thing companies can do in light of
this paradigm shift is to share ownership of the message.
Brands assume the responsibility to create a strong mes-
sage but ﬁnd ways to engage the consumer and encourage
its viral spread.
Social media consultant Mack Collier offers this advice:
This isn’t a war with the consumer over who has control
of the marketing message. Neither party has total control.
Marketers have control over the marketing message that
they send to their communities, and the communities
have control over how they relate that message to others.
Who Is In Control of the Marketing Message?
17

Communities need marketers just as much as marketers
need communities. The role of marketers isn’t to cede
control to our communities and get out of their way, our
job is to JOIN our community, and clear a path for them
to help them reach their destination as quickly and
efﬁciently as possible.
A few companies are tackling this new communications
paradigm head-on.
Proctor & Gamble
America’s largest advertiser, Proctor & Gamble, has made a
number of valiant attempts at engaging consumers via social
media. Admittedly, they have had their ups and downs.
For example, the company set up a Facebook Page4 for its
laundry detergent ‘‘2X Ultra Tide.’’ Visitors were asked to
contribute photos of their, and I quote, ‘‘favorite places to
enjoy stain-making moments.’’ After eleven months, a total
of 18 photos had been submitted, including two by the
company itself. Apparently, consumers weren’t interested
in ‘‘airing their dirty laundry’’ (sorry, I couldn’t resist) in front
of everyone on Facebook!
Not every attempt by P&G has resulted in failure. Quite
a number of postings, such as their Tide ‘‘Loads of Hope’’
campaign, as well as their niche online communities Home
Made Simple, Health Expressions and The Salon, have met
with great success. Certainly, P&G is to be commended for
trying to embrace social media as a marketing vessel.
Dustin Meyer Photography
Not only are large corporations beginning to get social media,
small businesses are as well. As a case in point, Austin,
Texas, wedding and portrait photographer Dustin Meyer
uses Facebook to effectively market his business.5
For his wedding photography services, Meyer targets
brides in the 22- to 35-year age group and their moth-
ers who have a middle- to upper-income range and a
wedding budget of $25K to $50K. For senior portraits, he
targets students whose parents have an annual income of
$200Kþ.
18
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

Meyer uses Facebook to market both services, as the
social network is an ideal match for his demographic and it
provides him an opportunity to market directly to students
and young adults.
‘‘I use the birthday feature to e-mail gift cards for por-
traits,’’ says Meyer. ‘‘Once a student has their portrait done, I
use Facebook to display their images as a portfolio.’’ He also
posts wedding and engagement photos in the form of video
montages on his business page, along with personal com-
ments about each couple and their wedding.
‘‘The results have been nothing less than remarkable,’’
says Meyer. ‘‘I would say that 75 percent of our students are
introduced to us via Facebook, which in turn allows them to
refer other students to us once they’ve done their portraits.’’
Meyer uses no direct mail or search advertising to mar-
ket his business. ‘‘I would say that the majority of our sales
are brought about by our exposure on Facebook,’’ he says.
‘‘It allows people to instantaneously promote my business to
everyone they know with barely any effort.’’
CONCLUSION
It takes a great deal of courage for companies to turn loose
their marketing message and share ownership of the brand
with consumers. Though some are entering those shark-
infested waters, most have yet to dip their toe in them.
In sizing up the current state of affairs, I think small
business marketing expert and pundit Wayne Hurlbert said
it best:
The Madison Avenue mindset will always retreat to their
default tried and true techniques of marketing. They
will continue to believe that what worked in the past
will work today and tomorrow, just it did in the hey-
day of ads and branding. They will be disruptive with
print, radio and TV advertisements as they attempt to
‘‘control’’ the message. The problem for them is there is
no control of the message anymore. We are in an age of
conversation and of grassroots bottom up marketing.
The old top-down methods are already doomed, but
their practitioners just haven’t noticed it yet.
Who Is In Control of the Marketing Message?
19

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

CHAPTER FOUR
Businesses,
Improve Your Aim
In chapter two we established that the day of mass-media
marketing is over, so can we hammer the last nail in the
cofﬁn now and be done with it?
Don’t get me wrong; I know that companies with huge
advertising budgets like GEICO, Proctor & Gamble and Nike,
will always be able to cover broadcast, print, and digital
media to their heart’s content. But let’s set them aside for a
moment and concentrate on the rest of us.
Who has the budget to create pervasive, long-term cam-
paigns across multiple channels, at least in a way that is
sustainable? Even on a local level it’s expensive. And why
should we when the return on investment (ROI) on so much
of our media spending is incalculable anyway? These days, if
it can’t be measured it likely won’t stand.
Not everyone, especially those in the media, will agree,
but that’s okay. Like you, I live in the world of constrained
marketing budgets. Every small business does, so it be-
hooves us to spend money where we can (a) track the ROI
and (b) see a reasonable return on our investment. More and
more, that means moving the money once reserved for the
Yellow Pages, TV, radio, or print to the Web.
21

Before we go on, let me clarify two things: First, I am
not out to vilify traditional forms of marketing and adver-
tising. For some industries, Yellow Page advertising
works very well. Neither am I out to suggest that social
media is a panacea destined to replace other channels. If
anything, we are seeing a trend toward social media
marketing becoming part of a larger, integrated market-
ing strategy.
Second, when I refer to ROI, I don’t just mean dollar
revenue. There are a number of indirect metrics that have
signiﬁcant bearing. For example, the number of times a
video is downloaded or the number of comments left in
response to a blog post are measurable, though you may
not be able to tie them directly to conversions. We call these
engagement metrics and discuss those in the last section
of the book.
It is difﬁcult to know how many people saw a given
television commercial, heard a radio spot, or read a display
ad in the newspaper. We can only guesstimate those num-
bers. Conversely, we can know how many visitors came to
the Web site or viewed an online video. The more measurable
the media, the better.
Not only that, but the more ‘‘spreadable’’ the media, the
better as well. That’s another reason the Internet trumps
other forms of media. Web content is much more easily
shared thanks to applications like social bookmarking and
RSS syndication. (If those terms mean nothing to you, I
explain them in detail in chapter 14.)
BUSINESSES ARE BEING FORCED
TO IMPROVE TARGETING, INCREASE
RELEVANCE, AND MINIMIZE
WASTE
Not unlike the need to calculate ROI, in times when market-
ing budgets are tight, ﬁnding ways to (1) improve the target-
ing of your message so that it reaches only the audience
you want to reach, (2) increase the relevance of that message
so that it resonates with that audience, and (3) trim the fat
on wasteful spending is of utter importance.
22
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

Target Your Audience
One amazing characteristic the Internet offers is the ability
to thinly slice targeted audience segments. Data that reveal
who is most likely to do business with us can be collected in
a number of ways—from cookies dropped on a Web site
visitor’s hard drive to information collected via a survey or
registration form, to behavioral targeting based on your
activity on the Web to analytics using software such as
Google Analytics or SiteCatalyst. In fact, it can get a bit
creepy just thinking about how much marketers may
know about you and your buying habits.
Please understand, it is not the aim of this book to teach
you how to target your audience, not in the traditionally
accepted ways at least. What I am going to suggest both now
and later is that we no longer just target audiences, we
participate in communities where our prospective custom-
ers already gather, or create such communities ourselves
(or both).
Of course, targeting an audience requires that you know
where they spend their time online. It’s becoming common-
place to ﬁnd them on social networking sites like Facebook
and on microblogging sites like Twitter. We will go into great
detail in the last section of this book on just how to do that.
Increase Relevance
Once you know where online your audience resides, you will
need to fashion messages that have the greatest chance of
resonating with them and scratching where they itch. The
best way to understand the market is to do something
marketers aren’t accustomed to, and that’s listen. In chapter
16, I assert that ‘‘listening is the new marketing,’’ for it is the
pathway to understanding the needs, wants, and interests of
the market.
Minimize Waste
One you know where your audience lives online and what
makes them tick, you will be better equipped to choose
delivery mechanisms that are the most cost-effective. That
is where the tools of social media can become your ally as
Businesses, Improve Your Aim
23

many of them require little or no investment of capital (time,
perhaps, but not capital).
THE FUTURE OF MARKETING IS IN THE NICHES
Given that the Internet can help you more precisely target
and impact a deﬁned market segment, let me go one step
further and say I believe the future of marketing is in the
niches. There is no reason a marketer or small business
owner should take a blanket, shotgun approach and waste
valuable marketing dollars when a riﬂe approach works
much better. There was once a time when the number of
eyeballs who saw your message was the metric of greatest
importance. Now, it’s about ﬁnding the right eyeballs, those
most likely to do business with you. That’s where niche
marketing comes into play.
Wikipedia says, ‘‘Niche market ventures may become
proﬁtable even though they are by nature small in compari-
son to the mainstream marketplace, due to the beneﬁts of
specialization and focus on small identiﬁable market seg-
ments; even without the beneﬁt of economy of scale.’’1
It’s a matter of going deep, not wide, and the Internet is
the perfect vehicle to help you achieve that goal. In the next
section of the book you will see how blogs, social networks,
online communities, Internet video, and other forms of con-
tent will help you do just that, and inexpensively to boot.
Penetrate Unﬁlled or Partially Filled Niches:
The Wailing Wall Story
The real key to success is in ﬁnding unﬁlled or partially
ﬁlled niches. Friend and Internet marketing mentor Dr.
Ralph Wilson, a man I refer to as the ‘‘godfather of Internet
marketing,’’ likens niche marketing to the Wailing Wall in
Jerusalem.2
Standing at the base of the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem
and looking up, the immense stone blocks laid one upon
another seem to reach to sky. . . . But when you look
more closely at the Wall, you see the crevices between
the massive blocks.
24
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

In the ﬁrst two tiers of stone these crevices are ﬁlled
with papers inscribed with the prayers of the faithful.
Above them the crevices are alive: Plants, rooted deeply
in the cracks between the stones, abound far above the
heads of the worshipers and add character and life to
the Wall.
‘‘The Wall has a lesson for us,’’ says Dr. Wilson. ‘‘If your
company doesn’t have the mammoth clout of a Fortune 500
corporation, then you must ﬁnd a niche between the im-
mense players and adapt yourself to thrive there.’’
Marketing on the Internet is not a matter of scaling
the entire wall, but ﬁnding and penetrating a marketable
niche—ﬁlling that yet to be ﬁlled crack, crevice, nook, or
cranny.
Social Media Marketing Can Help You Penetrate
Marketable Niches
Stephanie Edwards-Musa is a real estate agent in Houston,
Texas. According to the Houston Association of Realtors13
there are 21,000 realtors in Houston and the surrounding
areas. So, how does Stephanie go about setting herself apart
from the stiff competition? By ﬁnding and marketing to a
particular niche, the ‘‘green’’ market. In fact, Stephanie has
branded herself as Houston’s green Realtor.
‘‘My niche is that of energy efﬁcient, healthier and eco-
friendly properties,’’ says Edwards-Musa. ‘‘These may have
renewable energy such as solar or rainwater capture, or just
healthier and energy efﬁcient in general.’’
‘‘Green’’ means something different to everyone, Edwards-
Musa states. ‘‘My clients value the fact that I understand what
they are looking for during the home buying process.’’
Rather than use traditional real estate marketing tech-
niques such as direct mail, which would not be in keeping
with how Edwards-Musa is trying to position herself in the
marketplace, she is using digital media, speciﬁcally social
media.
‘‘I market mostly through blogging and social network-
ing. Social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter just
pull it all together allowing me to connect with everyone
Businesses, Improve Your Aim
25

more often,’’ says Edwards-Musa. ‘‘My blog, which focuses
on sharing thoughts regarding green in the real estate in-
dustry, has been instrumental in creating my brand, and a
majority of the leads I receive come through it.’’
CONCLUSION
My favorite example to illustrate just how deﬁnable a niche
can be is a blog published by Jay Brewer that deals with
one topic, single serve coffee makers (www.singleservecoffee
.com). Brewer (which is not a bad name to have if you’re
talking about coffee makers) started the blog in 2004 and
actively maintains it to this day. That’s ﬁve years’ worth of
blogging about nothing but single serve coffee makers and
the accompanying coffee culture.
He makes money by advertising, you guessed it, single
serve coffee makers and similar products. Not only that, he
took what was a hobby and turned it into a business by
ﬁnding other penetrable niches and exploiting them with
blogs, then monetizing that content with advertising. Now,
if a guy can make a living talking about single serve coffee
makers, surely there is a niche out there for you!
The main lesson here is that none of us has money to
waste. The Internet and social media in particular can help
you ﬁnd and exploit a marketable niche cost-effectively. Go
for the niches!
26
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

CHAPTER FIVE
Customers Are Mad
as Hell, and They’re
Not Going to Take
It Anymore
I don’t know when it started—maybe following the Enron or
WorldCom scandals—but at some point consumers decided
they were no longer going to put up with corporate lies,
shoddy products, inept customer service, or overblown ad-
vertising, and they began to ﬁght back using the Internet as
their weapon of choice. Many a company has felt their wrath.
This chapter details case studies of three such compa-
nies. Two of these studies, the ones dealing with Kryptonite
and Dell, reach back a few years into the Internet archives.
The other, Motrin, serves as a more recent example. I chose
these not based on recency but for the lessons that can be
learned.
Each has a distinct reason for being shared. The Kryp-
tonite example shows us how long-standing negative brand
reputation can be, even when a company takes steps to
change its image. The Motrin story shows us how quickly
the groundswell can spread and illustrates the difference in
27

social media tools used today as opposed to those used in the
Kryptonite and Dell examples. Lastly, the Dell study illus-
trates how a company can successfully change its reputa-
tion and evidences some of the steps taken to do so.
KRYPTONITE: YOU CAN TUG ON SUPERMAN’S CAPE
The story of bicycle lock manufacturer Kryptonite is proba-
bly the most classic example of how consumer-generated
media can damage a brand.
In late 2004, an online video began to circulate show-
ing how a Kryptonite lock could be compromised using an
inexpensive Bic ballpoint pen. A brand new Kryptonite Evo-
lution 2000 lock was opened in a matter of seconds using
the barrel of the pen, inserting it into the lock and giving a
single twist.
The story spread quickly, starting in bike enthusiast
forums and then moving through the blogosphere on sites
like Gizmodo and Engadget until it reached the mainstream
press, being covered in such mainstays as the New York
Times. The now defunct Business 2.0 magazine even labeled
the company the ‘‘Grand Prize Winner, Dumbest Moment of
2004’’ because of the incident.
The end result was that Kryptonite was forced to replace
all the locks in question at an estimated cost of $10 million.
Considering the company’s annual revenue for that year
was $25 million, to say it took quite a hit would be an
understatement!
Whether justiﬁed or not, the company was roundly criti-
cized for its apparent laxity in responding to the swiftly
growing groundswell. Keep in mind that this was 2004,
long before online reputation management software had
been created. Monitoring effects of the growing sensation
over the story as it was breaking in the blogosphere was
not something public relations personnel were used to do-
ing back then either. Not only that, there had not been
many prior incidents that would have served as precedent
for how to respond. In many respects, these were untested
waters.
Since that time, Kryptonite has taken signiﬁcant steps
to improve the quality and security of their locks. The
28
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

particular type of lock that started the incident has not been
made in several years, and their locks continue to get high
marks among cycling enthusiasts.
Why talk about an incident that happened in 2004?
For two reasons. First, like an elephant, the Internet never
forgets. For example, if you Googled the keyword phrase
‘‘Kryptonite lock,’’ at the time of this writing seven of the top
ten returns referenced the incident. A search for the same
term on the social bookmarking site Delicious results in
140 returns, many of which had to do with incident, includ-
ing all the top results.
Second, ﬁve years after the fact, the story continues to
circulate. Burn After Reading, a movie by the famed Coen
brothers released in September 2008, included this line
from Chad, the character played by Brad Pitt: ‘‘That’s just
a Kryptonite lock. You can open those fers with a Bic
pen.’’
A check of the search term ‘‘Kryptonite lock’’ on the most
real-time of all social networks, Twitter, came back with
these results:

I need to buy a bike lock; did the Kryptonite locks
ever recover from that whole ‘‘pick ‘em with a Bic pen’’
problem? Other recommendations?

iBood is offering a Kryptonite bike lock at half price
today. Not sure if it comes with or without the ballpoint
pen?

An oldie but goodie is the Kryptonite bike lock ﬁasco.
On a more positive note, there were comments like these
as well:

Did the bike get stolen?! sad! get a Kryptonite lock!

Got snapped key out of bike lock, was friends and of
really poor quality - keys made of cheese. Nothing beats
my Kryptonite New York

Just got a Kryptonite NY Fahgettaboudit U-Lock. Can’t
put a price on peace of mind.
Again, my point is not to make an example of this
company, but to say that even when steps are taken to
Customers Are Mad as Hell
29

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
rectify the problem as Kryptonite did, the residual negative
effect can be long-lasting.
To imagine the type of fallout that could have occurred
had the incident happened today, this next study is a case in
point.
BABYWEARING MOMS GIVE MOTRIN A HEADACHE
On Saturday, November 15, 2008, makers of the pain re-
liever Motrin rolled out a video on the company’s Web site
targeting ‘‘baby wearing’’ moms (mothers who carry their
babies in a sling worn around the torso). The ad was de-
signed to speak to the pain such moms experience on their
neck and back from carrying their child in such a manner
and included the following statements: ‘‘Do moms that wear
their babies cry more than those who don’t? I sure do! These
things put a ton of strain on your back, your neck, your
shoulders. Did I mention your back? I mean, I’ll put up with
the pain because it’s a good kind of pain; it’s for my kid.’’
I suppose the makers of the video thought it would reso-
nate with moms and that they would ﬂock to stores with
babies in arms (or slings) to purchase Motrin. Nothing could
have been further from the truth. In fact, a severe backlash
occurred almost as quickly as the video went live. ‘‘They were
offended by the suggestion that they carry their babies to be
‘fashionable.’ They were outraged at the idea that they look
‘crazy.’ They vehemently disagreed with the phrasing that ‘in
theory’ carrying your baby around is a good idea,’’ stated a
blog post on The New York Times Web site.1
By Saturday evening, what came to be known as ‘‘Motrin
moms’’ was the most talked about issue on Twitter. The next
day, Sunday, a nine-minute video showing a number of the
Twitter posts along with photos of moms wearing their
babies was posted on YouTube, accompanied by the tune
‘‘Danny Boy.’’ (By Tuesday the 18th, someone had created a
parody of the ad and posted it to YouTube as well.)
Sunday evening, Amy Gates, one of the instigators of
the backlash, received the following e-mail from Kathy
Widmer, Vice President of Marketing for McNeil Consumer
Healthcare:
30
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

Dear Amy—
I am the Vice President of Marketing for McNeil Con-
sumer Healthcare. I have responsibility for the Motrin
Brand, and am responding to concerns about recent
advertising on our Web site. I am, myself, a mom of
3 daughters.
We certainly did not mean to offend moms through our
advertising. Instead, we had intended to demonstrate
genuine sympathy and appreciation for all that parents
do for their babies. We believe deeply that moms know
best and we sincerely apologize for disappointing you.
Please know that we take your feedback seriously and
will take swift action with regard to this ad. We are in
process of removing it from our Web site. It will take
longer, unfortunately, for it to be removed from maga-
zine print as it is currently on newsstands and in
distribution.
—Kathy
Not only that, the company quickly replaced the video
with an apology on the Web site which ran for several days.
Figure 5.1
Motrin Apology
Customers Are Mad as Hell
31

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
In looking back on the incident, babywearing mom Gates
had this to say:
When I ﬁrst viewed the Motrin ad and put that ﬁrst Tweet on
Twitter asking if others had seen it as well, I fully expected to get
a reaction but ﬁgured it would be from just a handful of baby-
wearing moms. What I did not expect was for moms (and
others) to become as outraged as they were and for it to spread
like wildﬁre. It seemed that many shared my feelings that the
ad not only insulted and mocked moms (the very group they
were trying to appeal to), it also spread misinformation about
babywearing.
I also did not expect Motrin to pull the ad as quickly as they
did and was surprised to receive an apology from them (McNeil
Consumer Healthcare) in my inbox. I think they responded
swiftly and professionally. I think the biggest lesson to be
learned from the Motrin debacle is to know your audience.2
Truly, the groundswell was enormous. But the question
is, did any of this have to happen? Many alleged the company
should have done its due diligence in better understanding
the market before posting what some considered a patron-
izing, somewhat snarky ad.
The incident illustrates the incredible velocity with which
a message can spread. ‘‘In this case, the platform of choice for
the ‘Power Moms’ is Twitter, and this puts the controversy on
hyper-drive,’’ said social media strategist Pete Blackshaw.
‘‘Like it or not, Twitter has dramatically accelerated the deliv-
ery time of ‘feedback moments.’ ’’3
David Alston, CMO of Radian6, a social media monitoring
service, said in a blog post on the topic, ‘‘The real silver lining
in the Motrin cloud comes from the opportunity now for the
Motrin brand to join the conversation, starting with listening.
There are other successful turnarounds that exist out there
for them to follow.’’4 But will they? At the time of this writing,
Motrin had not established a footprint on Twitter, which
would seem to have been a natural recourse.
DELL HELL: FROM FIRESTORM TO IDEASTORM
Media blogger Jeff Jarvis set off a ﬁrestorm in June 2005
with this short, opinionated rant on his Buzzmachine blog5:
32
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

Dell lies. Dell sucks.
I just got a new Dell laptop and paid a fortune for the
four-year, in-home service.
The machine is a lemon and the service is a lie.
I’m having all kinds of trouble with the hardware: over-
heats, network doesn’t work, maxes out on CPU usage.
It’s a lemon.
But what really irks me is that they say if they sent
someone to my home—which I paid for—he wouldn’t
have the parts, so I might as well just send the machine
in and lose it for 7-10 days—plus the time going through
this crap. So I have this new machine and paid for them
to F FIX IT IN MY HOUSE and they don’t and I lose
it for two weeks.
DELL SUCKS. DELL LIES. Put that in your Google and
smoke it, Dell.
Hundreds, if not thousands, of other bloggers piled on to
voice their concerns over the quality of Dell’s products and
service. It was as if Jarvis had uncorked a bottle of overly
fermented wine just waiting to spew out, and spew it did!
The problem was further exacerbated in 2006 when a
Dell laptop caught ﬁre during a conference in Japan due to a
faulty battery, resulting in over four million of the batteries
being recalled.
Needless to say, neither of these instances helped Dell’s
reputation. Because both stories have been widely covered
in digital and print media, I won’t go into further detail
about the problems themselves. Instead, I want to focus on
what the computer manufacturer has done to turn its
brand image around and go from a ﬁrestorm (literally) to
an ‘‘ideastorm.’’
Realizing they had a huge problem on their hands, Dell
founder and CEO Michael Dell charged the company with
a directive, that they proactively ﬁnd dissatisﬁed customers
in the blogosphere and connect them with someone at Dell
who could help.
Soon after, in 2006, Dell launched their ﬁrst foray
into the blogosphere, the Direct2Dell blog, led by Dell’s
Blogger-in-Chief Lionel Menchaca. But the company did
Customers Are Mad as Hell
33

not stop there. In February 2007, they started Dell Idea-
Storm, a site devoted to gathering consumer opinion on ways
the company can improve its products and services.
As if that wasn’t enough, in 2008, Dell established a
strong presence on Twitter using a team of digital commu-
nications specialists to listen to, respond to, and join in on
the conversation going on about the company. Further-
more, they employed the use of social media monitoring
software to listen to the blog and social mediasphere.
To Dell’s credit, using the tools of social media, the com-
pany has largely turned what was a PR nightmare into some-
thing a lot more dreamlike. For example, in 2006 at least
50 percent of the online conversation about Dell was nega-
tive, according to Dell communications strategist Richard
Binhammer.6 Today, the company calculates negative online
conversation to be at about 25 percent. Much of that change
is credited to their social media engagement practices.
They have certainly created a model for other compa-
nies to follow. In a panel presentation in 2007 Menchaca
outlined Dell’s attitude on engaging consumers via social
media7:
 Customers are in control. Work with them and learn
from them.
 Real conversations are two-way.
 Think before you talk—but always be yourself.
 Address any form of dissatisfaction head on.
 Be aware that any conversation can become global at
any time.
 Size doesn’t matter—relevance does. Just as one jour-
nalist can trigger a news cycle, one blogger can do the
same.
 Don’t be afraid to apologize.
 Develop direct links to customer community (Idea-
Storm for Dell), listen for how we can improve.
 One customer is part of many communities.
 Teamwork, transparency, and frequent, consistent
communication are key in this new world.
34
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

 No shortcuts are possible. Implementing business
change requires much effort across departments.
CONCLUSION
Though I have covered only three companies, a Google
search of nearly any major brand will return negative senti-
ment mixed in with positive. For example, at the time of this
writing, a search for the brand ‘‘Motrin’’ shows at least four
negative mentions on the front page just below the link to the
Motrin Web site. Similarly, a search for the brand name
‘‘Iams,’’ the pet food company, returns results to sites that
talk about Iams’ ‘‘cruelty,’’ and references the use of cats and
dogs in experiments. It is as if one part of the returns are
saying ‘‘buy this product,’’ while another is saying ‘‘don’t
buy!’’ The harsh truth is that people are speaking out using
the tools of social media. You don’t have to be large brand
like Dell or Motrin for them to talk about you, either. Small
companies can fall prey just as easily, just on a smaller
scale. One check of ratings and review sites like Yahoo!
Local, MerchantCircle, Yelp, or Angie’s List may be telling
and well worth the time investment.
How does a company combat negative attention and
reward positive mentions? What is the antidote to this mar-
keting malady? That’s the topic under consideration in the
next chapter. The good news is, the same tools used by
consumers can be used by you.
Customers Are Mad as Hell
35


CHAPTER SIX
What’s a Marketer
to Do?
Start a Conversation
Considering
the
impact
the
aforementioned
consumer
trends are having on the marketplace, to suggest a solution
as elementary as starting a conversation seems quite an
oversimpliﬁcation and underestimation of the severity of the
problem. Certainly, something more advanced and strategic
is required. (‘‘Can we get someone with an MBA in here!?!’’)
While I understand your concern, allow me to remind
you of an old adage that says, ‘‘If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em.’’
Two can play at this game, and, in fact, businesses better be
on the same playing ﬁeld as their customers and prospects
in using the tools of social media if they hope to thrive given
the present landscape.
Part Three of this book outlines a three-step plan for
social media marketing engagement, which should scratch
the itch of those needing something fully developed. For now,
let’s answer the question of why conversational (i.e., social
media) marketing can serve as the antidote.
37

WHY SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING IS AN
ANTIDOTE TO THIS MARKETING MALADY
Before attempting an explanation, we need to ﬁrst deﬁne
what is meant by the term ‘‘social media,’’ both what it is and
what it isn’t, and explore its application where marketing is
concerned.
A good way to begin is by deconstructing the term,
starting with the word ‘‘media.’’ These are the tools—blogs,
social networks, wikis, online communities, microblogs,
video sharing sites—any medium through which a message
can be conveyed. ‘‘Social’’ is anything that has to do with
relationships, connections, or interactions. Put the two to-
gether and what you are talking about are tools that enable
people to relate to one another in a social way.
Wikipedia deﬁnes social media as ‘‘Internet- and mobile-
based tools for sharing and discussing information among
human beings.’’1 It is that last part I want to camp on for just
a moment.
Social Media Is Both a Toolset and a Mindset
Social media is not just about technology. In fact, the barrier
to entry into the use of this technology has been set so low
that anyone who can use Microsoft Word or send an e-mail
can take advantage of almost every one of the applications
available today, and there are a great many, as the graph on
the next page reveals.
Social media is less about the tools and more about what
people can and are doing with them. ‘‘First, it’s an under-
standing that social media is about sociology and less about
technology,’’ said PR blogger Brian Solis. The tools simply
serve to facilitate social, human interaction and do so at a
scale heretofore thought impossible. Really, social media is
about people.
To put it more academically, ‘‘Social media is the democ-
ratization of information transforming people from content
readers into content publishers,’’ says Wikipedia.2 ‘‘It is
a shift from a one-way broadcast mechanism to a many-
to-many model, rooted in conversations between authors,
people, and peers.’’
38
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

Social media is a mindset, a milieu, an environment that,
for people who choose to live in it, can lead to the develop-
ment of lasting friendships, networks of professional col-
leagues and opportunities for business development.
Social Media Is a New Way to Think about Marketing
Does social media ﬁt neatly into old marketing paradigms,
or is it something new altogether? Perhaps, rather, the
use of social media requires a new skill set, that of a
conversationalist.
John Jantsch, author of Duct Tape Marketing, said com-
panies should consider hiring a ‘‘Chief Conversation Ofﬁ-
cer.’’ I think John is onto something. Perhaps the way to
Figure 6.1
Brian Solis Conversation Prism Graph
What’s a Marketer to Do?
39

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
think of social media as it relates to business is not as
marketing (or PR for that matter) but simply as conversa-
tions that lead to conversions.
To borrow a passage from the Bible, you ‘‘can’t put new
wine in old wineskins,’’ and the Web 2.0 certainly qualiﬁes as
‘‘new wine.’’ But we seem hell-bent on making it sync with
old forms, and it’s not doing so well.
For example, conversion rates on advertising in social
networksareabysmal at best.Cost perthousand impressions
(CPM) rates are dropping like rocks, and it should not be a
mystery as to why. No one participates in conversations at
Facebook,Twitter,oranyotherformofsocialmediatoclickon
ads. In fact, they don’t view social media as a marketing
channel at all, but as a way to connect with each other.
The old saying, ‘‘I know what I like,’’ would be more truth-
fully restated, ‘‘I like what I know.’’ We’re uncomfortable with
those things with which we have no familiarity and, thus,
attempt to ﬁt them into our current frame of reference or
dismiss them altogether.
An example of this comes from a survey released earlier
this year by Marketing Executives Networking Group of the
top marketing trends of 2009.3 The survey indicates that
‘‘twice as many marketers are ‘sick’ of hearing about Web 2.0
and related buzzwords such as ‘blogs’ and ‘social network-
ing’ compared to last year’s survey.’’
The reason may be that, according to the report, ‘‘marketers
still admit they don’t know enough about it’’ and that ‘‘67 per-
cent of executive marketers consider themselves beginners
when it comes to using social media for marketing purposes.’’
(The primary reason for writing this book was to make
this stuff more palatable and put it in layman’s terms.)
Social Media Is Not Just a Marketing Channel
When it comes to social media marketing, we are apt to think
of it as merely another channel through which to broadcast
our marketing message. While, yes, social media is a chan-
nel marketers can use, it is so much more.
To illustrate the difference between social media and
other forms of marketing, let me draw a comparison from
the world of healthcare nonproﬁt fundraising.
40
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

Years ago I served as a regional manager for the Ameri-
can Cancer Society. One of my chief duties was fundraising,
and the primary venue through which that was done was an
event called ‘‘Relay For Life.’’ If you’ve never participated in
Relay, you may consider it to be simply another ‘‘walkathon.’’
Far from it.
Relay is about a community forming over a 24-hour
period to raise funds to ﬁght cancer. Certainly, walking is
involved, but that becomes almost tangential. Where the real
action happens is inside the walking track.
Participating teams set up campsites, choose a theme,
and go all-out to decorate their site. Often, teams will be seen
in costumes that support their chosen theme, or they don T-
shirts that do so at least. I have seen teams dressed up as
characters from the Wizard of Oz, characters from the movie
Grease, as punk rockers, and as superheroes!
Over a 24-hour span of time, these disparate groups re-
presenting businesses, organizations, clubs, and churches
from across the community meld together to become what
author Seth Godin would refer to as a ‘‘tribe.’’ They laugh
together, cry together, share meaningful moments that leave
them both tired and exhilarated at the same time—and they
are ready to come back and do it all over again the next year! I
have never seen anything like it. You have to experience the
phenomenon to fully appreciate it and to understand the
impact a Relay can have on a community.
In my view, that’s something very similar to the beneﬁts
that participation in social media provide. People gather in
virtual communities and forge relationships, both personal
and professional, built on afﬁnity and trust. From a market-
ing standpoint, social media is a way to turn strangers into
friends, friends into customers, and customers into evan-
gelists. Not unlike Relay For Life, you have to experience it to
truly understand.
Social Media Is Not an Advertising Campaign
‘‘Forrester Research believes today’s ad agencies are not
well-structured to take on tomorrow’s marketing challenges,
needing to move from making messages to establishing
community connections,’’ states an article in Adweek.4
What’s a Marketer to Do?
41

Advertising agencies tend to look at everything as a cam-
paign, and social media is not a campaign. To deﬁne it thus
is to do a disservice.
‘‘Once you start thinking about using social tools as
campaign support, you’re thinking in terms of one-night
stands with your customers, not building long-term rela-
tionships,’’ said Peter Kim, entrepreneur and former For-
rester analyst. Marketing in this era is no longer so much
about crafting messages directed at targeted audiences but
about participating in relevant communities. Building rela-
tionships takes time, and you have to be in it for the long
haul.
So, that’s it. Social media is not a channel, a campaign,
or a one-night stand. It is about building relationships,
participating in conversations, and being part of a tribe. It
is an understanding that authenticity and transparency are
its cornerstones. It’s recognizing that the customer has a
face and a name and should be treated as a partner in co-
creation. It’s business gone personal. Companies that get
that will wonder how they ever got along without it.
THE CONNECTED CONSUMER
Consumers are using the Internet for just about everything
these days. Consider these statistics:
 73 percent of adults in the United States are online.
 87 percent of those age 12–17 years are online.
 22 percent of the world’s population is online.
 Over 200 million people use Facebook.
 MySpacereceives125millionuniquevisitorspermonth.
 More than 133 million blogs exist.
 There are over 195 million cell phone users in the
United States.
 People love video—13 billion online video streams by
over 100 million U.S. Internet users in December
2008.
 They connect with each other online—61.4 percent
have visited a social networking Web site.
42
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 35 percent of Internet users in the United States aged
18 years or over now use an online social network.
It stands to reason that we need to be where our custom-
ers and prospects are. Today, that means having a substan-
tial presence on the Internet. If those numbers aren’t enough
to convince you, consider the following.
Google Is the New Yellow Pages
I cannot recall the last time I actually picked up a copy of the
Yellow Pages. In fact, I don’t even know where our copy is. I
think I may have thrown it away. That’s because, like every-
one else, I use Google to ﬁnd information, and that includes
local information. Whether it’s to ﬁnd a good Italian restau-
rant, get directions, ﬁnd which theater where a particular
movie is playing, or recommendations for a plumber, most
often Google is the ﬁrst place I look. And I am not alone.
Consumers are increasingly turning to the Internet to
ﬁnd local businesses where they can buy products or ser-
vices, according to a survey conducted by WebVisible and
Nielsen Online.5
The survey, which included almost 4,000 U.S. Internet
users, reported that about half of the respondents said that
search engines were the ﬁrst place they looked when they
needed to ﬁnd a local business. Just 24 percent went to the
Yellow Pages, and only 10 percent looked to the Internet
Yellow Pages as a ﬁrst reference. That’s because Google is
the new Yellow Pages.
Generation C
They have been called by many names: Generation Y,
Millennials, Echo Boomers, and the iGeneration. No matter
what the term, they are the offspring of Baby Boomers, born
between 1982 and 1995, and they are beginning to heavily
impact the marketplace.
They don’t read the newspaper, don’t buy CDs, and don’t
listen to the radio or watch television nearly as much as
their forebears. In fact, their ﬁrst ‘‘screen’’ is not the TV at all,
but rather the computer, cell phone, MP3 player, or mobile
device.
What’s a Marketer to Do?
43
www.Ebook777.com

They are digital natives who are always on. I call them
‘‘Generation C’’ because they are connected, creative, un-
derstand the value of community, are co-creators of con-
tent, and have cash to spend. They are the new ‘‘Consumer
2.0,’’ and if your business or organization hopes to attract
them you had better be where they are. That means hav-
ing a presence on social media sites like Facebook and
MySpace.
Younger adults ﬂock to social network sites in droves;
85 percent of adults age 18–34 years use them. Case in
point, I recently had the opportunity to speak to a commu-
nications class at a local university on the topic of social
media. When I asked how many had Facebook proﬁles, every
hand in the room went up.
The Internet Is Not Just for the Young
While at its core, use of online social networks is still a
phenomenon of the young, it’s not just for the young but
for the ‘‘young at heart’’ as well. (Heck, even my 77-year-old
mother has an e-mail address!)
A growing share of adult Internet users who have a
proﬁle on an online social network site has more than
quadrupled in the past four years, from 8 percent in 2005
to over 35 percent now, according to one report.6 Over 40
percent of MySpace users are between the ages of 35 and 54,
according to comScore,7 and now that it is open to everyone,
Facebook, once the sole domain of college students, is skew-
ing older as well.
Even older technologies, such as e-mail and instant
messaging, are still replacing analog communications:
 22 percent of all American adults say they rely on
instant messaging, up from 9 percent in 2007.
 21 percent of adults age 18–34 rely on instant messag-
ing, up from 14 percent in 2007.
Mobile media continues to become a dominant force:
 Only 41 percent of U.S. adults say they’ve never sent a
text message, down 8 percent from a year ago.
44
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

 Among 18- to 34-year-olds, the proportion of those
who have never sent a text message has fallen to 22
percent, a decline of 16 percent from last year.
When you consider that over 13 million iPhones were
sold in 2008 alone, it’s no wonder there is a mad rush to
capitalize on this fast-growing market.
Self-publishing online and reading blog content also are
growing:
 10 percent of U.S. adults now publish blogs. That
number was only 5 percent last year.
 Younger Americans publish blogs at twice that rate:
Some 20 percent of U.S. adults age 18–34 publish a
blog, up from 10 percent last year.
 50 percent of U.S. Internet users read blogs.
What we are seeing here is a seismic shift in the way
people lives their lives. More and more, they are living them
online and businesses better learn how to reach them there.
ADVERTISING IN THE ERA OF THE WEB 2.0
We are seeing a shift in the way marketing dollars are being
allocated as well. Newspaper revenue has dropped by as
much as 18 percent, especially now that its cash cow, classi-
ﬁed ads, have gone online at sites like Craigslist. Television
and radio revenue has decreased as well, though less sizably.
The real winner in all of this is online marketing, espe-
cially where social media is concerned. Even though a viable
advertising model for social media has yet to be found,
‘‘Spending on social media and conversational marketing
will outpace that of traditional marketing spent by 2012,’’ a
study conducted by TWI Surveys, Inc. reported.8
Think about that. If this survey is correct, in a mere three
years social media will garner more advertising dollars than
print, radio, and television combined! Talk about a seismic
shift.
Part of the reason is that ad targeting and segmentation
will continue to improve. ‘‘Advertising will get more and
What’s a Marketer to Do?
45

more targeted until it disappears, because perfectly targeted
advertising is just information,’’ said Internet pioneer Dave
Winer.
Giventhisinformation,whythenaremostadvertisersand
marketers today still using 1960s ‘‘Mad Men’’ style, mass
media approaches to reach media-fragmented, attention-
deﬁcited, hyperconnected, twenty-ﬁrst–century consumers?
Beats me. I believe, to coin a phrase from Cool Hand Luke,
‘‘What we have here is a failure to communicate.’’
Broadcast media and traditional advertising was a
twentieth-century diversion from more historic means of
selling. Social media marketing is a return to the corner
market or street bazaar. More to the point, it is a return to
being human. Somehow we left that at the door of our ofﬁce
or cubicle when we put on the marketers hat. We forgot that
the audiences we target are made up of people.
SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: MAKING
A CASE FOR SMALL BUSINESS
The Internet is like a massive network of ‘‘small towns’’ (i.e.,
niches). I hold we can lend credibility to that notion, and,
thus, marketing need not be a scaling of some great mono-
lithic wall as described in an earlier chapter but a penetra-
tion of unﬁlled or partially ﬁlled niches that make it up.
Will It Play in Peoria?
While I applaud what giant companies like Dell, Procter &
Gamble, Ford, and Comcast are doing with their use of social
media, my question is, can small businesses put these same
tools to work? Based on my experience, I’d say the answer is
a resolute ‘‘yes!’’
From Bricks to Clicks
Many small businesses are brick and mortar, and I see the
Internet as a digital extension of the service they’re already
providing in person. For that reason, using tools like blogs,
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn makes perfect sense. It’s a
way to strengthen the connections they already have with
their customers and community in the ‘‘analog’’ world. In
46
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

addition, it’s a cost-effective channel through which they can
market themselves and their services/products as well.
Ines Hegedus-Garcia is a real estate agent in Miami,
Florida, who uses a number of social media tools to market
her business. ‘‘I use a variety of applications to reach differ-
ent groups of people,’’ says Garcia.9 ‘‘Some inhabit one social
network such as Facebook, for example, while others are
active at Twitter. I get results in different ways from all of
them.’’
‘‘At ﬁrst, Facebook was a way to reconnect with old
friends and high school classmates,’’ says Garcia, who,
over time, recognized its potential advantage as a business
development tool. ‘‘I ﬁnd just having an active presence there
is enough,’’ she adds. While she uses some ‘‘soft sell’’ mar-
keting techniques such as uploading photos of property
listings, never is there a pitch to make a purchase.
Garcia’s Web site (http://www.Miamism.com) incorpo-
rates both a blog and a photoblog. Though most of her posts
are real estate related, she has created a series called
‘‘Miamism Fridays’’ that features posts that promote and
showcase the area from a local point of view.
She has also set up a Miamism group on the photo
sharing site Flickr, where she invites others to join, using
the incentive that she may feature their photos on one of her
Miamism Fridays posts. ‘‘When I do, I let them know and
they share the link with friends and family,’’ states Garcia.
‘‘It is a way to drive trafﬁc to my site and build exposure
among people who may not otherwise have ever heard of me.
It is working beautifully. I am seeing leads and referrals
coming as a result.’’
Garcia actively uses the microblogging site Twitter as
well. ‘‘When I started, it was just a place to have fun and to
connect with colleagues in the real estate industry. Then, I
began to connect with people locally and realized that Miami
has a strong social network community built around Twit-
ter,’’ says Garcia.
Garcia has not limited her interactions to the online
world solely. In fact, she ﬁnds that what starts out as online
connections leads to real world ones. ‘‘I’ve been able to turn
virtual connections into real ones via local ‘tweetups’ (in-
person gatherings of Twitter users in a given locale). These
What’s a Marketer to Do?
47

tweetups take on the character of a business networking
group such as BNI,’’ she adds. ‘‘In one such group comprised
of mostly professional people, I am the only realtor.’’
USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO INFLUENCE
THE MARKETPLACE
In 2006, well-known Web usability expert Jakob Nielsen
developed the Community Participation Pyramid,10 other-
wise known as the 90–9–1 Principle, which states the
following:
 90 percent of users are lurkers (i.e., read or observe,
but don’t contribute).
 9 percent of users contribute from time to time, but
other priorities dominate their time.
 1 percent of users participate a lot and account for
most contributions. It can seem as if they don’t have
lives because they often post just minutes after what-
ever event they’re commenting on occurs.
I fall into that one percent bracket and tend to think
everyone else either does (or should) as well. They don’t and,
according to Nielsen, they won’t.
Rather than be dismayed at the lack of participation,
perhaps those of us who are assiduous creators of content
should view this as a blessing in disguise, in that it gives us
the opportunity to become all the more inﬂuential.
Personally, I did not get into blogging and social media
just to have a bully pulpit. While I enjoy sharing my points of
view, my chief goal has always been to start conversations.
I’ve long held the view espoused by Internet pioneer
Dave Winer, who once said, in regard to blogs, that com-
ments left by readers are often more insightful than the
post itself. True conversational marketing ‘‘nirvana’’ is
achieved when conversations within the comment thread
take on a life of their own. The original post becomes noth-
ing more than tinder to start a ﬁre. Still, in spite of the
promise social media holds for allowing everyone to be
proactive contributors, the fact is, most won’t.
48
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN

What are the implications of this trend as it pertains to
content creators? We have the opportunity to become cen-
ters of inﬂuence. Being a member of the ‘‘one-percenter’’ club
means there are 99 percent that we have the ability to
inﬂuence.
Being a center of inﬂuence is easier now than ever.
Perhaps the real promise of social media is not that everyone
participates equally, but that those who choose to take up
the mantle of ‘‘one percentership’’ have the opportunity to do
so with fewer obstacles. We can become tribal leaders. Think
of the ways that could beneﬁt your business.
‘‘There’s an explosion of new tools available to help lead
the tribes we’re forming,’’ said Seth Godin in his book
Tribes.11 ‘‘ There are literally thousands of ways to coordinate
and connect groups of people that just didn’t exist a genera-
tion ago. All of it is worthless if you don’t decide to lead.’’
With inﬂuence comes responsibility. We cannot take this
issue of leadership lightly. We have a responsibility to use our
inﬂuence not for selﬁsh motives but to beneﬁt the community
as a whole, and those who take this responsibility seriously
will be rewarded by those very same communities.
Here are some ways you can use social media to exert
inﬂuence:
Express servant leadership. Lead by example and have
a ‘‘do unto others’’ attitude. That’s the mindset I believe an
inﬂuencer needs to have. In other words, be a mentor and a
‘‘mensch.’’
Provide valuable content. Value is subjective of course.
One person’s trash is another one’s treasure. Nonetheless, I
think there are some commonsense principles that can be
applied to content creation.
Think in terms of what will beneﬁt the community.
Face it, most people don’t really care what you or I have to
say unless it beneﬁts them in some way. You have to win the
right to be heard. Think of the example of Jesus feeding the
5,000. Only when he had met his followers ‘‘felt’’ needs could
he go on to meet their real ones (think Maslow’s Hierarchy of
Needs).
I don’t mean to imply that people are selﬁsh by nature,
but one thing is for sure, we are strapped for time. We only
have time to consume the information that will provide the
What’s a Marketer to Do?
49

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
most beneﬁt. If your aim is to become an inﬂuencer, be the
person who serves that function.
Don’t take it personally. While social media is a per-
sonal medium, people will tend to value your content before
they value you. For example, if I’m in the market to purchase
a home, I’m probably going to search for properties before I
search for a realtor.
One of the people who best exempliﬁes the highest and
best of this leadership ethic is new media marketing consul-
tant Chris Brogan. Even he said via a Twitter message that
sometimes he feels ‘‘more like a service than a human.’’ It
goes with the territory and is one of the hazards of the job.
Research, research, research. There was a time when
creating content for the Web was much easier than it is now.
For example, on average a given blog post may take as much
as two hours to write. (Two hours! And some take much
longer than that, believe it or not.) That may be in part
because I’m getting older and not as fast on my feet as I
once was, but I think largely it’s due to the fact I try to
substantiate my commentary with appropriate documenta-
tion and cite a number of other resources. It’s a far cry from
the pithy, anecdotal rants and raves of days gone by.
There is more I couldsay, butyou get the point. If Nielsen’s
numbers are valid, and experience tells me they are, a great
opportunity lays at your feet—to become an inﬂuencer, the
leader of a tribe.
NEW TOOLS REQUIRE NEW RULES
As with any tool, those associated with social media must
be used in accordance with their design. You don’t use a
hammer to screw in a bolt, and you don’t use a saw to drive a
nail. (Lacking the proper tool at the time, I actually tried that
once and can attest to the fact it does not work well at all!)
Similarly, there are certain ‘‘rules’’ that govern social media
engagement.
Author John Jantsch hits the nail on the head (pardon
the pun) with his own new rules, new tools declaration: Don’t
be rude. Don’t be boring. Give to get.12
There is a fallacy and even subtle danger in suggesting,
especially to those either uninitiated or newly initiated, that
50
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

social media is just a toolset. As I suggested earlier in the
chapter, it is also a mindset. I have to go back to the much
heralded, though less read, ‘‘bible’’ of social media, The
Cluetrain Manifesto, and reference the very ﬁrst of its 95
Theses, which is, ‘‘Markets are conversations.’’13
What I’m seeing, especially with tools like Twitter, are
some disturbing trends:
 Automation—This includes the use of auto-replies
and scheduled posts
 Old-school, direct marketing-oriented ‘‘pitching’’
The worse-case scenario is when those two trends com-
bine to create the perfect storm. The auto-response subverts
the need for real human interaction and the upfront pitch
any need to build real, human relationships (to the degree
that is possible in Twitter).
Both ﬂy in the face of what social media is all about, and
I’m grieved that the most conversational and human of all
social media tools, Twitter, is being turned into nothing more
than a marketing machine.
‘‘There will always be some who will ﬂock to a new social
media site in order to game it for cash,’’ said blogger David
Risley.14 ‘‘ They see it as a huge pool of eyeballs that need to
be driven to their website. And, of course, Twitter is a good
medium for that. But, it has to be used properly and with
social tact. You need to be a good community member ﬁrst,
and marketer second.’’
I don’t mean to be unreasonable or overreactive. It’s
just that bad things happen to good technology when un-
scrupulous, irresponsible marketers get involved. Look at
the evolution of blogs over the years. What was once referred
to as the ‘‘last form of honest advertising’’ is now, according
to market research ﬁrm Forrester, an ‘‘untrusted medium.’’
A medium built on the stalwarts of ‘‘authenticity’’ and
‘‘transparency’’ has de-evolved to something that is, at
times, even farcical. Call me a purist if you wish; the fact
is old school marketing doesn’t work in social media. Dare I
say it again: ‘‘Markets are conversations,’’ and ‘‘participation
is marketing.’’ If you’re unwilling to adopt that mindset, you
have no business trying to ply your wares using these tools.
What’s a Marketer to Do?
51

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Social media is a toolset, but it’s also a mindset. If you’re
going to use the tools, do so in the way they were designed
and intended.
In Part Two, we get into the heart of this book and take an
in-depth look at seven of the most popular strategic tools in
the social media tool chest: blogs, social networks, online
communities, microblogs, Internet video, podcasts, and so-
cial media news releases. We include a chapter on several
other forms of social media marketing as well.
52
FIVE TRENDS TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN
www.Ebook777.com

PART II
SEVEN PROVEN
STRATEGIES TO
GROW YOUR
BUSINESS


CHAPTER SEVEN
Business Blogging:
Your Social Media
Marketing Headquarters
Blogs are probably the most well-worn tool in the social
media marketer’s tool chest. They have been around longer
than almost all other social media applications. Blogs read-
ily facilitate the inclusion of many other forms of social
media, such as videos, podcasts, and social bookmarking.
Although no single tool will fulﬁll every marketing need,
blogs are well suited to serve as a headquarters and the
base of operations for forays into other forms of social media.
Before we go any further, we should deﬁne what a blog is.
Technically speaking, a blog is an easy-to-use, Web-based
content management system that allows people with little or
no technical background to publish, maintain, and update
content.
Wikipedia deﬁnes a blog as ‘‘a website, usually main-
tained by an individual with regular entries of commentary,
descriptions of events, or other material such as graphics
or video. Entries are commonly displayed in reverse-
chronological order.’’1
55

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
In my opinion, the Wikipedia deﬁnition leaves much to be
desired. Deﬁning a blog from merely a technological stand-
point, without addressing the human element, tells only half
the story. What makes a blog so unique compared to a typical
Web site, message board, or e-mail application is the blog’s
balanced combination of technology and personality.
Blogs beg to be written in an informal, punchy, and
authentic tone of voice, something Internet pioneer Doc
Searls called an ‘‘e-mail to everyone.’’2 A well-written blog
reﬂects the passions, insights, thoughts, and judgments
of the writer. It has heart as well as substance. It conveys
emotion, and not merely information.
Blogs also provide the ability to do something better than
all other content management media: stimulate conversa-
tion. Blog readers can interact with the blogger via the
comment function, expressing their opinions and asking
questions. In addition, a conversation among the blog com-
menters themselves is not unusual.
Most of the popular blogging platforms will e-mail reader
comments to the blogger, so conversations are carried to
another level: that of personal, private communications
between the two parties. This process is another way in
which blogs facilitate conversation.
My favorite deﬁnition for blogs is that given by Ohio
Realtor David Crockett (no, he does not wear a coonskin
cap!)3:
Blogs are simply living and breathing Internet sites, upscale
chatrooms, constantly growing newsletters. They invite inter-
action and get people involved. They create energy and synergy.
They live and breathe and grow and take on a life of their own.
Rebecca Blood, an early blogging adopter and author of
The Weblog Handbook, characterized blogs as native to the
Web.4
‘‘Everything about them—their format, their reliance on
links, their immediacy, their connections to each other—is
derived from the medium in which they were born. They are
of the Web itself.’’
Although blogging has changed dramatically since the
early days, Blood’s statement still rings true: blogs have
56
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

a uniqueness that almost deﬁes explanation. Blogs are a
unique and effective form of Internet communication, not
only because of the technology used to create them but
because of the personality used in writing them. Blogs are
truly an amalgam of technology and personality, and most
often they are best understood when they are experienced.
BLOGS ARE PART OF OUR DAILY LIVES
Each year, Technorati publishes its State of the Blogosphere
report. The 2008 version of the report began by stating the
impact of blogging as follows: ‘‘[B]logs are a global phenom-
enon that has hit the mainstream.’’5
A March 2008 report from Universal McCann supports
that conjecture.6 According to the report, 184 million people
worldwide started blogs, and 357 million people read them,
which is 77 percent of active Internet users. I’d have to say
Technorati is correct: blogs have hit the mainstream!
TEN THINGS TO CONSIDER BEFORE YOU BLOG
The worst thing you could do is read what I just said, get
excited about the possibilities a blog has to offer, go to one of
the many platforms available, and launch a blog without
giving real forethought as to why you should (or should not,
as the case may be).
I have seen this happen many times. Blogs lay dormant
after only a few weeks or months and never reach their
full potential. Even worse, the writers tell their business
colleagues that they tried blogging but that blogging didn’t
work.
This section outlines ten things marketers should con-
sider before they enter the blogosphere.
1. Determine Why You Want to Use a Blog
You should have a speciﬁc purpose in mind before you start
a blog. Will the blog be used as a marketing channel, to share
company news and updates and express thought leadership
and industry analysis, or will the blog be used more as a
public relations tool? There are many reasons to use a blog,
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
57

but before you start one, you should determine those that
are most applicable to you.
2. Consider Your Blog’s Core Message and Tone
You should ask yourself some questions regarding the blog’s
content. What are you going to write about? What topics will
you cover? What ‘‘tone’’ will your blog have? Should the blog
be warm and humorous, or straightforward and informa-
tional? The audience you are attempting to reach will largely
determine the approach you take.
Your primary consideration must be your readers. Social
media marketing consultant Mack Collier advises that com-
panies not make their blogs self-promotional; rather, the
blogs should provide content that has value to readers.
‘‘Don’t view your blog as a direct sales channel, or your
content will reﬂect that mindset,’’ says Collier. ‘‘Instead,
rather think in terms of the blog being a value-add.’’7
3. Identify Who Will Write the Blog
In its nascent period, blogging was extemporaneous, off the
cuff, often pithy, and anecdotal. I called blogging a ‘‘shoot
from the hip, speak from the heart’’ style of communicating.
Today, blogging has less of that free style. In order to provide
real business and marketing value, a blog requires research,
time, and forethought.
Brian Clark, entrepreneur and author of the Copyblog-
ger blog, says that, thanks to the advent of other forms of
social media, ‘‘much of the migration of pure social chatter
off of blogs and onto social networking applications is a good
thing for the rest of us who are looking to build businesses
powered in whole or in part by blogs.’’8
Even so, a blog requires a writer who understands ‘‘blog
style,’’ and a marketer is not always the most qualiﬁed.
Because the responsibility for blogging is often given to
the marketing or PR department, it is incumbent upon the
marketing or PR person to ﬁnd a writer who understands
what makes the company tick and who can accurately reﬂect
the company’s persona. Invariably, the blogger will inject
her own style and personality, and that’s a good thing. The
58
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

blogger needs to speak with a ‘‘human’’ voice, and not in
marketing language.
4. Determine Whether Your Company Is Prepared to Engage
in the Conversation without Attempting to Control
the Communication
Historically, the blogosphere has been a no-holds-barred,
free-for-all means of communication. It is a two-way street in
that readers can respond to what you have written via their
comments. Their responses may not always be kind. Not all
organizations are prepared to have raw, unedited content
show up on their public Web sites (blogs).
Several options are available. For example, you can leave
the comments feature turned off. In my view, this is the least
favorable course of action. Blogs were built with interaction
in mind. They are about engendering conversations between
blogger and reader. To turn off comments is to say to readers,
‘‘We don’t value your input.’’
A second option is to prevent negative comments from
being shown. This, too, is not a favorable course of action
because it attempts to control communication, purging the
blog of what might prove to be valuable commentary. Read-
ers will view the move as disingenuous, and most likely they
won’t be back.
The best and most authentic way to approach this issue
is to take each comment at face value. If the criticism is
unwarranted, then by all means don’t let it live on the site. If,
however, the comment is a serious attempt to address an
issue of real concern, then it would reﬂect well on your
company if you allowed criticism to appear and then
responded accordingly with a comment of your own. Doing
so will open a channel for dialogue that may turn a critic into
a friend.
5. Establish a Company Blogging Policy
with Posting Guidelines
Many sample company blogging policies are available on the
Web, ranging from Microsoft’s simple ‘‘Be Smart’’ directive
to elaborate documents conceived by legal departments.
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
59

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Susannah Gardner’s 2005 book, Buzz Marketing with
Blogs for Dummies,9 contains an entire section on this sub-
ject, and I recommend her book to you. (Disclaimer: I served
as technical editor and contributing writer of the book.)
The acronym CYRWP (cover your rear with paper) cer-
tainly applies in this area. It is in your company’s best
interests to have in place a legally binding document that
protects the integrity of your company and armors it against
liability.
6. Monitor What Is Being Said About Your Company
and Your Industry
Later in the book I dedicate an entire chapter to online
reputation monitoring. There are many reasons to do so,
but the most obvious is to ﬁnd out what people are saying
about your company and how they view it.
You may ﬁnd that no one is talking about you. In that
case, a blog can help kick-start the conversation. If you are
being talked about but in a less than congratulatory man-
ner, a blog can state the facts correctly or, should the need
arise, apologize for mistakes made.
The
Web
content
management
software
company
Bizzuka experienced just such a situation. A blogger mis-
represented the company’s products and posted his opinion
for all the world to see. A Google search of ‘‘Bizzuka’’ returned
that blogger’s post on the front page. Fortunately, Bizzuka
CEO John Munsell was monitoring what was being said
online about the company. He saw the post and responded
by leaving a comment with the correct information that
helped balance the conversation.
Since that time, the company has started its own blog.
That, along with other social media marketing initiatives
have driven the original post off the search’s front page. In
fact, you have to scroll through several pages before you ﬁnd
the original blog post.
Monitoring your industry lets you see what is being said
about you and your competitors. Observing industry trends
may help you to ﬁnd a marketable niche overlooked by the
competition. Many online tools can assist with this process,
and we will cover some of them in Chapter 16 on listening.
60
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

7. Decide on a Blog Platform
Many excellent blog platforms are available, including Word-
Press, Movable Type, and Compendium Blogware. Each has
advantages and disadvantages.
The main consideration is whether the blog will live on
your existing company Web site or apart from it. In trying to
make a determination, consider point number 1 in the list:
your purpose. A good litmus test is whether the blog will be
representative of the company itself or of an individual
member of the company.
If the blog will be used to post news updates, then it
should reside on your Web site as part of a social media
newsroom (see Chapter 13). However, if the blog will be a
thought-leadership platform used by your CEO, consider
following the example set by Michael Hyatt, president and
CEO of Thomas Nelson Publishing. Hyatt maintains a blog
called ‘‘From Where I Sit.’’ The blog reﬂects his personal and
professional views on the publishing industry, leadership,
and life. Although the blog is linked from the Thomas Nelson
Web site, it resides on its own site.
Another consideration is whether the blog will be hosted
on your server or on a service like TypePad or Compendium
Blogware.
8. Identify Ways to Market Your Blog
Although a blog can be your social media marketing head-
quarters, it is not an island unto itself. The good news is that
you can use other forms of social media to market your blog.
If your blog is suitably equipped, it will have its own built-
in viral marketing engine, with features such as RSS feeds,
social bookmarking, forward to a friend, e-mail subscrip-
tion, and other sharing options. In addition, you should be
able to submit your blog to various search engines and blog
directories.
Perhaps the best way to market your blog is by following
the ‘‘markets are conversations’’ mantra of The Cluetrain
Manifesto and joining the conversation taking place about
you, your company, and your industry.10 Find other blog-
gers who write on the same or similar topics, and comment
on their blogs. Engage others via Twitter, Facebook, and
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
61

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
other social networks. Occasionally, share a link to one of
your posts via these networks. Don’t overdo it though, lest
you be considered too self-promotional.
The process takes time. But if you write extraordinary
content with a view toward providing value to your readers, if
you are not afraid to occasionally express a strong opinion,
and if you participate in the greater conversation about your
topic or industry, you should ﬁnd a willing and growing
audience.
9. Develop a Plan to Track Statistics
Measuring the return on investment (ROI) of social media is
a topic on the minds of nearly all business leaders and
marketers. In this day and age, if social media doesn’t
provide measurable results and doesn’t show a positive
ROI, then no matter how cool or trendy its technology or
how many books like this one espouse its use, social media
will not be taken seriously.
The good news is that, just as with Web sites, activity on
blogs (which, if I have not yet mentioned, are Web sites) can
be measured. Many blog platforms come with their own
internal metrics, but I advise using Google Analytics, Site
Meter, or StatCounter to supplement the internal data. Each
of these analyzers is free at the base level and provides high-
quality data.
Which metrics should be measured? Traditional metrics
are the number of unique visitors, number of page views,
amount of referral trafﬁc, time spent on the site, and per-
centage of trafﬁc from search engines. The number of com-
ments received, the number of subscriptions to your RSS
feed, and the number of e-mail subscriptions are valid
measurements. If you will be using the blog as a source to
generate leads, consider measuring the conversion rates
as well.
10. Be Sure to Know Your Keywords
Without a doubt, blogs are search engine magnets! Blogs
offer Google and other search engines everything they are
looking for in Web sites. As a result, blogs usually rank high
in search engine returns.
62
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

It is vitally important that you know which keywords
your customers are using that ultimately lead them to your
blog as well as which words on your competitors’ or your
industry blogs are giving them a high ranking.
BLOGGING IS ALIVE AND WELL, IN SPITE
OF PREDICTIONS TO THE CONTRARY
Critics may tell you that, with the advent of more conversa-
tional forms of social media, blogs are in a state of demise.
Some even predict that blogging is dead or dying.
A survey conducted by Burson-Marsteller in May 2009
concluded that only 15 percent of Fortune 500 corporations
use blogs in a meaningful way.11 The survey found that only
seventy-four companies, many of them technology-related
corporations, actively maintain blogs.
If you also consider the results of a Forrester survey on
corporate blogging, you might begin to believe the rhetoric.
The Forrester survey concluded that ‘‘[n]ot only do blogs
rank below newspapers and portals, they rank below wikis,
direct mail, company e-mail, and message board posts,’’ and
‘‘only 16 percent of online consumers who read corporate
blogs say they trust them.’’12
To counter that survey, a report from eMarketer stated
that ‘‘blogs have more impact on purchasing decisions than
social networks. One-quarter of readers said they trust ads
on a blog, as opposed to 19 percent who trust ads on social
networks.’’13 Who should we believe?
I have heard that ‘‘blogging is dead’’ many times over the
years, and I’m sick of it. Blogging is no more dead than is
e-mail, which has also had its share of doomsayers. In fact,
e-mail is still the number one Internet activity. Marketers are
spending more on e-mail marketing than on any other form,
and the expenditures continue to rise. No, blogging is not
dead. It has merely found its place in the grand scheme of all
things related to marketing and social media.
I started blogging in 2003, and at that time blogging was
the only arena that spoke of social media, at least in terms of
business. It wasn’t until 2005 when Business Week did a
cover story on blogging that the business world took note.
Up to that point, blogging was a curiosity that only early
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
63

adopters made use of. You have only to read the books on
blogging published around that time to see what I mean.
(Note: Until 2005, no books dealt strictly with business
applications.)
So,tellmehow,onlyfouryearslater,doesanyonehavethe
temerity to say that the future of blogging is dismal, and that
rather than start a blog you should invest your time on Face-
book, Twitter, and other social applications? Balderdash!
Blogs may be old (relatively speaking), but they are new
again. Blogs have morphed into lightweight content man-
agement systems. They serve as vehicles for content market-
ing, they are great niche market penetration tools, and they
are magnets for search engines. Let’s take a closer look at
some of these features.
Lightweight Content Management Systems
Look at what’s happening with what is arguably the most
popular blogging platform: WordPress. The latest WordPress
themes extend the reach of the platform well beyond what we
typically thinkof as a blog andinto more of what we’d consider
a traditional Web site. Unless you are really a student of the
WordPress environment, you’d be hard-pressed to identify
some of the new sites as belonging to the platform.
Bill Austin, a member of the LinkedIn Bloggers group,
said, ‘‘If I use a free, easy to conﬁgure, open source content
management system for developing client Web sites with
integrated blogs, I can turn the entire site over to them
and they can write, copy, paste, publish, edit, delete, and
otherwise manage their content to their heart’s content.’’14
For many small businesses, blogs make excellent Web
sites, and they obviate the need for more complicated and
more expensive content management systems.
Social Media Headquarters
With applications such as Facebook Connect, Google Friend
Connect, and many other socially oriented widgets and plug-
ins, blogs are beginning to function more like online com-
munities. At the beginning of this chapter, I made the point
that blogs cut across the social media landscape better than
any other single tool.
64
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Content Marketing
Though perhaps now framed within the context of commu-
nity, content is still king. Brian Clark, in his polemic on
the so-called death of blogging, says, ‘‘In truth, the real
opportunities for building authority and buzz through
social media have only just begun. You simply have to
look and see where things are going instead of where
they’ve been. . . . Value will always be key.’’15
Author David Meerman Scott said that companies
should consider hiring people with the skills of a journalist
to churn out content, which comes in many forms: videos,
photos, podcasts, blog posts, articles, press releases, etc.
Your blog can serve as a repository or portal to aggregate,
curate, and archive all that data.
That’s not to say that all content has to live on a blog.
Content on third-party sites will be given value through link
love and Google juice. Now that all major search engines use
blended or ‘‘universal’’ searches in their algorithms, use of
third-party tools can gain your company a much stronger
presence. Search queries now commonly gather returns
from Flickr, LinkedIn, Facebook, PRWeb, Twitter, podcast
aggregation sites, and blogs.
Niche Market Penetration
Blogs are great for penetrating partially ﬁlled or unﬁlled
niches. You can discuss a topic over and over again on
your blog until you become the de facto authority on the
subject. I know because I’ve seen it happen and have expe-
rienced it myself.
The more tightly deﬁned the niche, the better. In Chap-
ter 4, I mentioned Jay Brewer, who blogs about single-serve
coffee makers. His topic is about as tight a niche as a person
can have.
Search Engine Magnets
I believe blogs are their own form of search engine optimiza-
tion. Someone once remarked that the word ‘‘blog’’ stands for
‘‘Better Listings On Google.’’ I believe that!
Chris Baggott, cofounder and CEO of Compendium
Blogware, a state-of-the-art business blogging platform,
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
65
www.Ebook777.com

stated that as much as 80 percent of all web-related activi-
ties begins with a search.16
Search engine optimization is one area where blogs can
really make their mark. Blogs provide everything search
engines look for to give the blogs a high ranking: text, lean
code, post titles as title tags, and permalinks. Add a blog-
ger who understands the need to write frequently updated,
keyword-optimized, thematically relevant posts, and the blog
is a force to be reckoned with.
Google does not know a blog when it sees one. However,
blogs contain all the elements that make a search engine
such as Google salivate, including:
 Titles
 Keywords
 Recent content
 Lots of content
 Links
 Relevance
Titles
Somethingmagicalhappenswhenabloggercompletestheblog
post title ﬁeld. Most blog platformsturn it into a title tagunique
to the post. That’s pure gold as far as Google is concerned.
Keywords
Bloggers who understand the power of the medium enrich
their posts with niche-speciﬁc keywords, which help Google
better comprehend the topic being discussed.
Getting your blog to rank highly for a general term like
‘‘real estate’’ will be extremely difﬁcult. Remember what I said
about deﬁning a niche and ﬁlling it. Try the more speciﬁc term
‘‘real estate, Tucker, GA,’’ and your blog will much more likely
land on front-page SERPs (search engine results pages).
Recent Content
Search engines love sites that are routinely updated and will
return repeatedly to index those sites. Blogs are particularly
suited to frequent updates due to their ease of use.
66
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Lots of Content
Google doesn’t understand Flash animation or graphics, at
least not yet. However, Google does see and understand
words, and blogs contain lots of them.
Links
Links serve two purposes in search engine optimization.
First, the Google algorithm understands the purpose of a
Web site by looking at both inbound and outbound links.
Therefore, links to topically relevant sites provide immense
search engine optimization value. Second, Google sees every
person’s link to a Web site as a ‘‘vote’’ for that site. Bloggers
are rabid linkers, and the practice of linking is at the very
heart of the medium. Therefore, links serve to popularize
Web sites.
Relevance
Have you ever heard the term ‘‘latent semantic indexing’’
(LSI)? Google is now using it. LSI is more than indexing
keywords; it takes a more holistic approach. According to
SeoBook.com17:
Latent semantic indexing adds an important step to the
document indexing process. In addition to recording which
keywords a document contains, the method examines the
document collection as a whole, to see which other documents
contain some of those same words. LSI considers documents
that have many words in common to be semantically close, and
ones with few words in common to be semantically distant.
It’s like the ‘‘forest for the trees’’ analogy. Indexing
keywords to determine relevance looks at individual trees,
whereas LSI looks at the whole of the situation: the forest.
I have often said that a frequently updated, keyword-
optimized, thematically relevant blog will rank well in search
engines. I’ve seen it happen again and again.
While attracting lots of trafﬁc to your blog is well and
good, something more needs to happen in order for your blog
to achieve ultimate effectiveness. Trafﬁc to the blog needs
to be converted into trafﬁc to the Web site and more. For
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
67

example, Baggott’s platform (Compendium Blogware) is de-
signed with conversion in mind, including an opt-in e-mail
newsletter sign-up form among other options.
Many More Reasons
Blogs are relevant for many reasons. Your blog is the one
place where you can truly set yourself apart from the com-
petition and establish yourself as a thought-leader, knowl-
edgeable expert, inﬂuencer, or pundit. Through your blog
you can establish a beachhead and gain ground that you
probably never could have otherwise, at least not as easily.
A blog can:
 Help you reach new audiences and build a loyal Web
following
 Give your company its own unique voice on the Web
 Provide a place to collect and share ideas
 Engage your customer in conversation
 Provide customer feedback
 Enable a dialogue between you and your customer
‘‘It’s become an expectation that if you have a business,
you have a blog. Consumers are looking to ﬁnd a community
around your service,’’ said author John Jantsch.18 ‘‘They’re
looking to have conversation with you about the products
they’re using.’’
Even if none of the above reasons existed, blogs still serve
a good and useful purpose. Blogs used to be the entire
medium, but now they are part of a much richer environ-
ment called the social Web. Either way, blogs are useful.
THE MODEL SMALL-BUSINESS BLOGGER: J.D. ILES
AND SIGNS NEVER SLEEP
J.D. Iles is the owner of a four-person custom sign shop in
Lincoln, New Hampshire, and is a small-business owner
whom I consider a model for others.
Iles started his blog, Signs Never Sleep (http://www
.signsneversleep.com), in 2004 because he needed an
68
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

easy way to update his otherwise static Web site, and a blog
ﬁt the bill.
In the beginning, Iles confessed he didn’t know what he
was doing. He posted about his work, but he mixed in posts
about both his family and the local area. (Not a bad idea, in
my opinion.)
One strategy that he began to use and that proved to be
highly effective was showing photos of signs in the process of
being made. Not only did the photos demonstrate his arti-
sanship, but they served as good PR for his clients as well.
When you saw photos of his signs being made, you had no
question that Iles completely understood his craft.
He later experimented with the use of video, but quickly
returned to a combination of photos and text. ‘‘While I could
shoot the video in a few minutes, editing proved to be a time-
consuming process. I determined it wasn’t the best possible
use of my time,’’ said Iles. ‘‘I backed away from video pretty
quickly.’’
Iles has some advice for anyone considering the use of
video on a blog. He suggests that the video be short, shot in
one scene, and uncut. He also says the only video sharing
site you should consider using is YouTube, because it is the
number one such site on the Internet and is the second
largest search engine. He advises that using any other
platform is ‘‘a waste of time.’’
When asked what role his blog played in his overall
marketing plan, his response was straightforward and con-
cise: ‘‘The blog has been my only form of marketing. I even
pulled my Yellow Page ads!’’
Based on his extensive experience, Iles sees a number of
beneﬁts to using a blog, and search engine optimization is
chief among them. He has found the medium as a way to
generate leads and close sales. ‘‘People will call me who have
seen the blog and say ‘You’re doing our sign, no questions
asked,’ ’’ says Iles.
When asked what advice he would give to small-business
owners considering the use of a blog, Iles says it’s certainly
worth a try. ‘‘Many industries are not using blogs at all and
being in a ﬁrst mover position will give you great advantage.
Not only that, many of those who are using them aren’t doing
so effectively,’’ states Iles. One caution he does give is to
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
69

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
be patient and understand that the process will take time,
but that blogging will pay off. ‘‘If you blog for a year, no one
will be able to catch up with you on Google.’’
Iles has become a mentor to others in his industry and
has turned his blog into an online community for custom
sign-making. ‘‘It is another step in my blogging evolution,’’
he says. Iles’s inﬂuence now extends far beyond his indus-
try. I’ll close this case study as I opened it. Because of his
experience and success using blogs, Iles serves as a model
for any small business, and I highly recommend him to you.
INTEL’S INSIDE SCOOP: HOW LARGE
CORPORATIONS ARE USING BLOGS
I admit I have a propensity for small businesses, but they
certainly are not the only companies using blogs. Corporate
America is as well (at least 15 percent of large businesses,
anyway). One such company is Intel, with its blog Inside
Scoop (http://scoop.intel.com).
‘‘Inside Scoop is a consumer-facing, multi-author blog,
the goal of which is to authentically promote Intel’s prod-
ucts, services and brands,’’ says Intel social media strategist
Michael Brito, who oversees the blog.19 ‘‘The challenge,
however, is to make sure the blog is not overtly promotional,’’
says Brito. One way he ensures that is by ﬁnding bloggers
(all Intel employees from across a number of different busi-
ness units) who are passionate both about the company and
about talking to consumers.
The blog deals with a variety of topics, including wireless
and mobile technology and gadgets, consumer electronics,
gaming, and general computing. At ﬁrst glance, you might
likenthe blog tothepopular technology blog Engadget.‘‘While
Engadget focuses on the technology itself, Inside Scoop talks
more about what consumers can do with it,’’ states Brito in
explaining the difference between the two blogs.
Integration with Facebook, YouTube, and Flickr makes
Inside Scoop operate more like a social network hub than
merely a blog. ‘‘It creates a reciprocal relationship. The blog
feeds content out to these other channels which, in turn,
feeds trafﬁc back to the blog,’’ says Brito. ‘‘We want to
increase community on other sites and social networks.
70
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

The blog is the hub of that activity.’’ In keeping with its focus
on community, Intel has built social networking features
such as shared user proﬁles into the blog, which uses the
Movable Type platform. ‘‘This serves to turn our readers into
members. Readers create their own proﬁles so that they can
connect with each other,’’ says Brito.
If anything, these two examples provide ample evidence
that blogs can be used in similar fashion regardless of
company size.
HOW TO CREATE A SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS BLOG
Most of what I share about how to blog I’ve learned by
doing, usually by trial and error. The same can be said of
how I increased trafﬁc to my blogs over the years. Here are
seven of those lessons to help you create a successful
business blog.
1. Know Your Audience, and Write with Them in Mind
Deﬁne your community. Determining the audience you’re
attempting to reach is Marketing 101. In social media terms,
the word ‘‘community’’ is a better representation because
we no longer ‘‘target audiences,’’ but we ‘‘participate in
communities.’’
Deﬁning the community you want to reach has bearing
on everything you do, and the same is true for blogging. I
believe it’s helpful to create a persona, someone who is a
representative of the community in question. For me, that
persona is a real person, Ines Hegedus-Garcia, the Miami
Realtor I spoke about in chapter 6.
About a year ago, I had the privilege of tutoring Ines in
a contest called Project Blogger, which was sponsored by the
real estate social network ActiveRain. I had the opportunity
to share everything I’d learned to that point, and Ines would
tell you that she beneﬁted from the interaction.
Write with that community in mind. When I blog, I try
keep Ines and people like her in mind. I work under the
assumption that if the content is beneﬁcial to her, it will be
beneﬁcial to others as well. As you participate in the com-
munity, you’ll learn what their needs are and how you can
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
71

address them. If you satisfy their needs, you will surely get
their attention.
Someone who keeps this principle at the forefront is
Chris Brogan. Everything he writes is for the beneﬁt of his
readers, and the community has rewarded him with a huge
following and credited him with a high degree of inﬂuence.
I can tell you this: if Chris links to you via his blog or
Twitter, a wealth of trafﬁc and Twitter posts will follow. I’ve
been the grateful recipient of his kindness in this manner a
number of times.
2. Write with Google (and Other Search Engines) in Mind
Let’s face it. Humans make up only one of the communities
reading your blog. Another community is made up of ma-
chines. We call them ‘‘spiders’’: little creatures that index the
content on your site with a view toward understanding your
site’s purpose and ranking your blog accordingly on their
respective search engines.
Make sure your posts are keyword optimized, frequently
updated, and thematically relevant. Include keywords once
in the post title and two or three times in the body content. If
possible, front-load the keywords in the title, that is, put
your keywords at the beginning of the post title.
With regard to frequency, you should post three to ﬁve
times per week at a minimum, at least until you gain a
greater degree of authority with Google.
With regard to topical or thematic relevance, if you’re
writing a blog about cats, then don’t write about dogs,
hamsters, giraffes, kangaroos, and koala bears too. Make
the blog about cats, cats, and more cats! Chris Brogan says
to keep at least a 10:1 ratio of on-topic to off-topic posts.
That’s sound advice.
3. Find, Follow, and Communicate with Inﬂuential Bloggers
in Your Niche
Finding, following, and communicating with inﬂuential
bloggers in your niche will garner a number of beneﬁts. If
you subscribe to their feeds, read and comment on their
posts, write your own comments in response, and use track-
backs when possible, those bloggers will take notice and
72
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

may return the favor. As a result, you’re likely to become the
beneﬁciary of some of their readership and trafﬁc.
I made this technique a common practice early on in my
business blogging career, and it paid off. Although the play-
ing ﬁeld is much more crowded now, the practice is still a
good one.
4. One Word About Inﬂuencers
By ‘‘inﬂuential’’ people I don’t just mean those, like Chris
Brogan, who have multiple thousands of readers and follow-
ers. In social media, it’s not just the number of people who
read your blog that counts, but who those people are. Don’t
become trapped into believing that you must have rock-star
status in order to be inﬂuential. It is absolutely not the case.
In fact, some of the people most inﬂuential with regard to
your company are your customers or clients. They are the
people who most likely will spread your message among
their peers.
5. Write ‘‘Top Ten’’ Posts on Occasion
Rick Bruner, founder of the Business Blog Consulting blog
(http://www.businessblogconsulting.com), is a man I credit
as being one of the pioneers of business blogging. Years ago,
he made a suggestion that I have remembered to this day:
occasionally write ‘‘top ten’’ posts. People like lists. Terms
like ‘‘top ten,’’ ‘‘seven secrets,’’ and ‘‘ﬁve principles’’ suggest
the information contained within the post will be of a practi-
cal nature (or, in David Letterman’s case, of entertainment
value).
Did you note that this chapter is composed of a series of
lists, including the ten things to consider before you blog?
(See, I told you Rick’s advice stuck with me!)
6. Write Link-Bait Posts
Link-baiting means creating content that generates back-
links. Search engine optimization expert Brian Bille gives
this deﬁnition20:
Link-bait is a piece of content (blog post, site content or
an application) created intentionally or unintentionally
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
73

to obtain incoming links. Some link-bait is purposely
created to stir up controversy or mentions high proﬁle
individuals in hopes to recognize the content with a link
from a quality site. Other link-bait is simply well-written,
informative content that does the same.
It is the latter part of the deﬁnition to which I refer.
Personally, I never write posts strictly for the purpose of
link-baiting. I do write posts that, based on past experience, I
assume will become link-bait. With that intention in mind,
let me rephrase the point and put it this way: write high-
quality, informative editorial content.
7. Establish a Presence in the Social Mediasphere
There was a time when blogs were pretty much the core of
social media. Everything hinged around them. In the old
days, options were more limited than they are today. You
could link to other bloggers via a blog roll in hopes they
would respond in kind, reference other blogs in your posts,
leave comments and trackbacks, claim your blog at Tech-
norati, and list your blog on the few blog directories that were
available. And, yes, there was Google.
Okay, so the list of old tactics isn’t quite as limited as I
remember. However, today social media has thrown wide
open the doors to blog trafﬁc growth.
Now, we have sites like LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook
and niche online communities; an entire universe of social
networking sites and applications where you need to have a
presence if you’re serious about using social media to com-
municate your message. (I will be talking about these topics
in the next two chapters.)
It is vitally important that you carry the conversation
contained on your blog to these other realms. As I stated at
the beginning of this chapter, your blog can serve as a social
media headquarters, but you should get off the base once in
a while.
Reciprocity extends to other blogs as well. Writing salient
comments on other blog posts is a good way to gain attention
from other bloggers and readers. Conversely, when someone
leaves a comment on your blog, follow up quickly with a
74
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

comment of your own, or e-mail the person if it seems
appropriate to do so.
If nothing else, at least do these two things:
 Write exceptional content that’s of interest to your
readers. Do it every day, and keep the post keyword
Here are some other ways to extend your blogging
presence.
MYBLOGLOG (HTTP://WWW.MYBLOGLOG.COM)
In addition to letting you see who’s reading your blog,
MyBlogLog lets you connect with and grow your commu-
nity. I’m amazed at the number of people who ﬁnd my blog
speciﬁcally because I have a proﬁle there.
SOCIAL BOOKMARKING
Social bookmarks are sites like Digg, Delicious, Stumble-
Upon, Reddit, and others that allow for bookmarking and
social sharing of your posts. Blogs normally contain links
to these sites in the post footer.
One of my favorite applications that facilitates shar-
ing to many social bookmarking sites with the click of a
button is ShareThis, a plug-in created by Alex King.
Originally, it was created as a plug-in for WordPress,
but it has been redeveloped for use by virtually any
blog platform (or Web site).
BLOG DIRECTORIES
The number of blog directories has grown exponentially
in the past few years. The Robin Good Top 55 list (http://
www.masternewmedia.org/rss/top55/)
includes
well
over 200 different directories where you can list your
blog. Some directories, such as Blog Catalog, are social
in nature. Don’t overlook this site because it can provide
you with much needed Google juice.
Your Social Media Marketing Headquarters
75

optimized and topically relevant. Google will abso-
lutely love you for it, and so will your human audience.
 Actively participate in topically relevant communities
and blogs.
WHAT DOES THE FUTURE HOLD?
I will admit that, for a time, blogging seems to have become old
hat, and everyone’s gaze was ﬁxed on MySpace, Facebook,
and other forms of social media. It now appears that blogging
has received enough mainstream acceptance that organiza-
tions that had been waiting to see what would happen with
blogging may ﬁnally decide to embrace it.
Blogging is still a young medium, yet it has reached a
level of maturity in a comparatively short period of time.
As far as I can see, blogging has a bright future, though a
changing one. For many marketers, blogs will continue to
serve as a social media base of operations for a long time to
come.
76
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER EIGHT
Social Networks
Strengthen Your
Social Graph
Social networks have existed as long as humans have
inhabited the planet. However, the Internet has made the
practice of creating connections and building relationships
much more virulent. It is mind-boggling how large social
networks can grow. For example, I’m directly connected
to only a few hundred people via LinkedIn, but my network
is a gateway to literally millions of others (8.5 million,
according to LinkedIn).
People have become more accustomed to participating
with each other online. The collaboration between CNN and
the social network Facebook during President Obama’s
inauguration is a example of this shift. Not only did CNN
live-stream the event over the Internet, but CNN accom-
panied the coverage with interaction from Facebook. Nearly
19 million people watched the inauguration via the online
channel, while hundreds of thousands of Facebook users
posted status updates on the sidebar. At the height of the
event, 8,500 updates were being posted every minute.
77

The aim of this chapter is not to chronicle the history of
social networking but to discuss practical, actionable ways
businesspeople can use social networks to promote their
companies, brands, and products.
A few months ago, the software company for which I
serve as the marketing director was contacted by an adver-
tising agency in a distant part of the country. The ad agency
was interested in becoming a reseller of our products. When
the agency was asked how they found us, I assumed they
would say they came across us via search. I was hoping so,
because we had spent quite a bit of time and effort trying to
generate favorable search returns. However, their reply
came as an unexpected surprise: they found us via a social
network site where I had created a proﬁle.
I can’t recall what prompted me to set up a proﬁle on that
particular site. Still, the 10 or 15 minutes spent doing so
proﬁle led to a business partnership that has resulted in
thousands of dollars of income for our company! What
lessons can we learn from this?
You Never Know Where Leads Might Come From
I maintain proﬁles on several marketing-related social net-
works and online communities. Because you never know
where leads might come from, having a presence on as many
social network sites as possible makes sense.
Proﬁles Lend a Sense of Ubiquity
Regarding my presence in social media, a friend recently said,
‘‘You’re everywhere!’’ And perhaps being everywhere implies
credibility. Social network proﬁles give you the ability to be
everywhere at once.
Search Engines Include Proﬁles in Blended
Search Returns
The best reason for using proﬁles is that search engines
include social network proﬁles on search engine results
pages (SERPs). A search of the term ‘‘Bizzuka,’’ my com-
pany’s name, includes results from the social networks
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter, as well as from business
78
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

directories on sites like BusinessWeek, Practical Ecom-
merce, and AboutUs.
Proﬁles Are the Starting Point on Social Networks
Your personal or business proﬁle is the basis of any inter-
action on social networks. It is the ‘‘node’’ or point of con-
nection through which others will build relationships with
you, and you with them. Therefore, you should create a
personal proﬁle on social networks where you are likely to
ﬁnd your target audience. Again, you never know where
business may come from.
You should create a business proﬁle on other social
networks, directories, and wikis, including Business.com,
AboutUs.org, Best of the Web, Wikipedia (good luck), and
Google Knol (Google’s version of Wikipedia). Find vertically
related networks and directories and create proﬁles there as
well. The absolute best case scenario is creating a proﬁle on
sites where you can be an active participant. At the least, you
will have a presence via your proﬁle. Showing up is half the
battle, after all.
Warning: many people make the mistake of joining a
social network and then sending messages to fellow mem-
bers without ﬁrst completing their proﬁle. This is a crucial
social media faux pas, and one guaranteed to ruin your
credibility. Creating a proﬁle takes only a few minutes,
but, as in my case, it can provide ample returns. In social
media, people would rather do business with other people
than with ‘‘brands’’; they especially want to deal with people
they know and trust. Your user proﬁle is the ﬁrst step toward
building that bridge.
SOCIAL NETWORKING BEST PRACTICES
Networking via social media is really no different than any
other type of business networking. The same principles
apply.
Come Dressed for the Occasion
In most cases, you would not attend a real-world networking
event dressed in a T-shirt and shorts; rather, you would wear
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
79

a business suit or business casual. The same is true for
online social networking. In this case, your proﬁle and photo
(also known as an ‘‘avatar’’) are your presentation.
Work the Room
An effective networker in face-to-face events learns to work
the room: shaking hands, introducing herself, listening
and participating in conversations, and handing out busi-
ness cards. You know the drill. You’ve done it a hundred
times.
Things are not so different in the online world. Participa-
tionisthepriceofentryandisexpected.Rememberthemantra
of The Cluetrain Manifesto: ‘‘markets are conversations,’’ and
‘‘participation is marketing.’’ You should leave comments on
blog or forum posts, and write a few posts yourself. Share
videos and photos, where allowed. In other words, make
yourself a visible and vital member of the community.
The one thing you don’t want to do is ‘‘pitch,’’ at least not
until people have gotten to know you. Hype and social media
don’t work well together. In fact, pitching may be un-
necessary. Just your presence may be enough. Your proﬁle
serves as your pitch and as your business card, and if people
are interested in learning more about you and what you do,
they will look at your proﬁle.
Ask for a Business Card
Speaking of business cards, just as conventional wisdom
dictates the exchange of business cards at traditional net-
working events, the act of friending someone (asking some-
one to become part of your friend network) in the online
world serves the same purpose as business cards. Normally,
the other person will return the courtesy, and the ‘‘court-
ship’’ can begin.
Use Social Networks to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People
Dale Carnegie’s timeless classic, How to Win Friends and
Inﬂuence People, is a book about building winning relation-
ships, both business and personal.1 Carnegie’s advice about
how to make people like you is as follows:
80
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

 Be genuinely interested in other people.
 Smile (i.e., have a sense of humor)
 Remember that a person’s name is to that person the
sweetest and most important sound in any language.
 Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about
themselves.
 Talk in terms of the other person’s interests.
 Make the other person feel important, and do it
sincerely.
This attitude of beneﬁcence truly puts the ‘‘social’’ in
social media and should be the standard to which we adhere.
The trouble is that many of us (me included) tend to focus
largely on ourselves and our own interests than on others
and their interests. That focus on ourselves is a strategy for
social media failure, if ever there was one.
Amber Naslund, Director of Community Management for
the social media monitoring company Radian6, under-
stands and employs this ‘‘how to win friends’’ ethos. ‘‘I
wish I could tell more people to be real, and quit trying to
be everything to everyone,’’ says Naslund.2 ‘‘There will al-
ways be critics, detractors, and folks you don’t click with.
But you’ll reap far more rewards by investing your time and
energy in those that you DO connect with and ﬁguring out
how you can be helpful to them. Give ﬁrst, and often. Getting
happens naturally.’’
Although he does not state it explicitly, Naslund pays
homage to Carnegie’s philosophy. ‘‘The funny thing to me is
that these social media tenets aren’t new. They’re basic,
common sense fundamentals of communication and cus-
tomer service,’’ shares Naslund. ‘‘I think we’re remembering
them more than we’re inventing them. It can be as simple as
treating others the way you’d want to be treated yourself.’’
Marketing consultant Beth Harte, community manager
for MarketingProfs, is another person who exempliﬁes prop-
er social media etiquette. In keeping with the theme of focus-
ing on others, Beth shares these ten guidelines:
1. Be real, honest, authentic, transparent (it’s what
customers/prospects/the community wants).
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
81

2. Provide valuable content, conversation, help, and
information, and your community will raise you up.
3. Be accessible. Members of your community (cus-
tomers, prospects) want to know that they can
have a conversation with you and that you will
talk back and answer questions.
4. Generate conversations that others can join, and
invite others to participate.
5. Listen to other people and their opinions (you just
might learn something).
6. Ask questions. Usually you are asking what others
have been thinking.
7. Help other people, including your competition (per-
ceived or not), and have conversations with them.
Most customer problems/challenges are industry
problems/challenges.
8. Put other people ﬁrst.
9. Listen to your community and learn.
10. Surround yourself with people who are smarter than
you.
The ‘‘do unto others,’’ ‘‘give and it shall be given’’ ethic of
reciprocity may sound trite or cliche, but it is universal. The
tenets of every religion from Buddhism to Zoroastrianism
contain some version of that ethic, and Carnegie certainly
understood its implications for business.
THE THREE MOST POPULAR SOCIAL NETWORKS FOR
BUSINESS, AND WHY YOU SHOULD USE THEM (A CORD
OF THREE STRANDS IS NOT EASILY BROKEN)
According to the Bible, a cord of three strands is not easily
broken. By analogy, I hypothesize that the more individual
connections to a particular person you have, the stronger
your overall relationship with him or her will be.
In constructing my social graph (my network of connec-
tions), I tend to build relationships at three sites: LinkedIn,
Facebook, and Twitter. In some cases, I have connections
with individuals on all three networks. The connectivity
82
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

usually begins on one or the other network and gradually
extends to two or three networks and sometimes more as we
get to know each other. It seems logical and natural to
continue the cycle of relationship, building to sites where
we both have a presence.
Keep in mind that my focus here is on creating threefold
connections to individuals. It’s not enough that you have a
presence on each of these sites, but that you leverage your
presence to connect with others who also have a presence on
these sites. Social media is about being ‘‘social.’’ Each plat-
form offers distinct advantages, but you need all three to
build the strongest connection.
If the ‘‘cord of three strands’’ philosophy is true, what are
the three top social networks for business? Based on my
experience, I recommend the following:
 LinkedIn. This is your business suit. LinkedIn is not
very conversational in its orientation, but people
expect you to have a proﬁle there. The network lends
a degree of professional credibility. This site requires
the least amount of upkeep.
 Facebook. This is your business casual look. Face-
book allows more of a 360-degree view of you by
combining both your professional and your personal
sides. Facebook is a more conversational platform
than LinkedIn.
 Twitter. This is your cocktail hour. Think of after-
hours social networking events, and you’ve got Twit-
ter. It’s the most informal of the three networks, and
allows for the greatest degree of conversation.
Let’s look at each of these networks in greater detail to
see what advantages and beneﬁts they have to offer.
LINKEDIN IS YOUR BUSINESS SUIT
According to the LinkedIn Web site, LinkedIn is an inter-
connected network of more than 35 million business pro-
fessionals
from
around
the
world,
representing
170
industries and 200 countries. It is designed to be a place
where you can ﬁnd, be introduced to, and collaborate with
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
83

qualiﬁed professionals with whom you need to work in order
to accomplish your goals.
When you join LinkedIn, the ﬁrst thing you should do is
create a detailed proﬁle that summarizes your professional
expertise and accomplishments. From there, you can con-
nect with others and begin the process of building relation-
ships. LinkedIn views your network as an ever-expanding
universe, starting with your ﬁrst-tier connections, then the
people they know, and so on. As mentioned at the outset of
this chapter, I have comparatively few direct connections,
but in LinkedIn’s eyes I’m ultimately connected to millions.
For the longest time, I thought of LinkedIn as nothing
more than a place to ﬁnd jobs or employees. My proﬁle there
was complete and detailed, but it was nothing more than an
online resume. I kept it updated, thinking that one day a
prospective employer might come along and offer me that
‘‘dream job.’’
However, I have come to realize that LinkedIn is much
more than just a place to hunt for a job. It’s a social network
that offers you the opportunity to connect with others in your
ﬁeld, ﬁnd vendors and consultants, develop your business,
and generate leads.
Charles Lauller’s LinkedIn Strategy
Charles Lauller is a sales executive and avid LinkedIn mem-
ber who proactively uses the network to connect with others
on a daily basis. His ﬁrst attempts proved fruitless, however,
because, according to Charles, he focused on ‘‘pimping [my
company] and its products.’’3 He quickly learned that no one
was interested, and he changed his tactic to one that was a
much more comfortable ﬁt given his generous nature, that of
expressing sincere interest in learning about others and
offering his help.
That altruism turned things around for Charles. ‘‘Even-
tually they run out of things to say about themselves, and
start asking me about my business,’’ he says. As a result,
he gets between two and ﬁve warm leads per week, which
he says is about the equivalent beneﬁt of making 200
cold calls. ‘‘And no one slams the phone in your ear either,’’
he quips.
84
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

I asked Charles to outline his approach to building
business on LinkedIn, and he said the following:
 Drop the bogus ‘‘I’m pimping me and my company’’
tactic.
 Be yourself. Be honest, sincere, and authentic (as-
suming that’s you). But remember: whoever you are,
you likely will attract to your network individuals who
are similar to you.
 It’s a cliche, but ‘‘seek ﬁrst to understand, then be
understood.’’ When seeking to expand my network
and connect with people, I always learn about them
from their proﬁle, and I ask how I can help them. I’ve
found that when I continually ask others how I can
help with recommendations, referrals, and/or intro-
ductions, they usually want to reciprocate.
There are many smart ways to use LinkedIn for network-
ing. Linked Intelligence,a blogdedicated toLinkedIn,contains
an exhaustive list, including entries on business development
and sales, career management and personal branding, job
search and employment, and growing your personal network
of trusted colleagues and friends. If your goal is to become a
LinkedIn maven, this list is a good place to start (http://www
.linkedintelligence.com/smart-ways-to-use-linkedin/).
FACEBOOK IS BUSINESS CASUAL
A little over four years ago, I was visiting my son who, at the
time, was a junior in college. He wanted to show me some
photos he had taken and posted online to a site called Face-
book. I had heard of the site, but I really had no conception of
what it was other than a social network for college students.
(Back then, you couldn’t get in unless you had a .edu e-mail
address.)
I remember querying him about the site. I was interested
in its unique features, such as the now infamous ‘‘Wall,’’
photo galleries, and status messages. I thought to myself:
how nice would it be if Facebook could be made available
to users other than the college crowd? Lo and behold, not
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
85

long after, in the fall of 2006, Facebook’s young CEO, Mark
Zuckerburg, did precisely that, opening the platform to
anyone over the age of 13 years.
Since that time, the age of Facebook users has become
progressively older. In February 2009, statistics revealed
that one of the fastest growing demographic segments in
the network was females, 55 years of age and older.4 How-
ever, the number of Facebook users in all age/gender demo-
graphic groups is growing, with use among women growing
faster than among men in nearly all age groups. The fastest
growing age group by total users is 26 to 34 years, with
45 percent of Facebook’s U.S. audience now 26 years of
age or older.
With more than 200 million users worldwide at the time
of this writing and over ﬁve million new users joining every
week (yes, you read that correctly, ﬁve million per week!),
Facebook is the largest social network on the planet. These
numbers are strong evidence that social media is in the
mainstream, and businesses need to pay attention and
consider establishing a presence there.
Facebook Is a Social Utility
Much the same way a power company connects homes and
businesses with electricity, Facebook is a ‘‘social utility’’
designed to facilitate connections between people. Facebook
wants to be a virtual mirror of the real-world social graph
and prefers that relationships online be extensions of those
you have in real life. (Though that’s what Facebook prefers,
that’s not what is happening.)
Not only that, but Facebook wants to become the oper-
ating system of the social Web and serve as the central
source from which all of your social interactions occur. In
a moment, we will discuss Facebook Connect, which is one
facet through which the company is realizing that dream.
Why ‘‘Business Casual?’’
If LinkedIn is your business suit, then Facebook is business
casual because it allows more of a 360-degree view of you,
combining both your professional and your personal sides.
It is a platform that presents both parts of your life as a more
86
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

uniﬁed whole, which is why I refer to it as ‘‘business casual.’’
Facebook offers a deeper, potentially richer level of engage-
ment that enables us to build stronger bridges of trust with
others.
Businesses can use Facebook for marketing in numer-
ous ways.
Facebook Public Proﬁle
A Facebook Public Proﬁle (also known and most commonly
referred to as Facebook Page) is an ideal place for businesses
to establish a beachhead within the social network. It also is
one of the most overlooked places. I’ve noticed that many
companies use other parts of the platform (Groups and
personal proﬁles, in particular) to set up a presence, but
they never bother to create a Public Proﬁle. One possible
reason for this oversight is that Facebook lists Public Proﬁles
under the advertising category, which may lead people to
believe it is a premium feature. It’s not. Businesses can set
up a Public Proﬁle at no cost.
Facebook Public Proﬁles, which mimic user proﬁles in
terms of design and function, allow users to express their
support of your business by adding themselves as fans. They
can write on your Wall, upload photos and videos, and join
other fans in expressing opinions on topics introduced in
discussion groups. You can send regular updates to fans,
and, unlike personal proﬁles, which are limited to no more
than 5,000 members, you are not limited as to the number of
fans you can have. In addition, you can set up a business
page without having to provide a personal proﬁle.
One of the best reasons to use this feature is that Face-
book Public Proﬁle is one part of the Facebook platform that
can be indexed by search engines. This is no small consid-
eration, given that Facebook is one of the most highly traf-
ﬁcked sites on the Internet. If getting noticed on Google and
other engines is an important part of your online marketing
strategy, then using Facebook Public Proﬁle makes perfect
sense. For all these reasons, I highly recommend that you set
up a Facebook Public Proﬁle for your business, then make it
your base of operations from which all other forays into the
network extend.
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
87

Facebook Events
Another useful feature and one that can be launched directly
from your Facebook Public Proﬁle is Facebook Events. Using
this feature, you can let fans and others know about upcom-
ing events and activities your business will be hosting. A
restaurant can use Facebook Events to promote appearan-
ces by musical acts. A B2B company can promote upcoming
Webinars or workshops. Nonproﬁt and civic groups can
enlist support for fundraising activities. Keep in mind that
activities engaged in by Facebook members are reported in
the newsfeed, so word about the events can spread quickly
and virally.
Facebook Groups
Facebook Groups allow you to create or participate in as
many as 200 afﬁnity or geographically based groups. They
can serve as an extremely viral channel through which to
extend your presence within Facebook, and they can be used
as ‘‘ﬁshing pools’’ to help you ﬁnd prospects and build
relationships. Before you set up your own group, I recom-
mend that you participate in two or three groups to get a feel
for how they operate. As with Facebook Events, I recommend
that you use Facebook Groups to supplement your business
page, not act as a substitute for it.
Facebook Ads
Facebook Ads are another way to market your business
within the community. They resemble Google AdSense ads
in that they are primarily text based, but they do allow
inclusion of a small graphic. You can opt to include Social
Actions, which are stories about a user’s friends that are
related to and displayed alongside your advertisement. In
other words, whenever a user takes an action associated
with the ad, his or her avatar and screen name will appear
along with the ad on the friend’s proﬁle pages. This result
implies endorsement, so I suggest you use the component
wisely.
The problem with using ads on Facebook Ads or other
social networks is that members rarely click on the ads. The
88
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

average click-through rate for Facebook Ads is estimated to
be an abysmal 0.008 percent. That means for every 10,000
times a particular ad appears, it is clicked on only 80 times.
People don’t visit social network sites to view advertising;
they visit to be social. Still, Facebook Ads provide another
way to extend your presence on the site, so they may be
worth considering.
Facebook Apps
One of the ﬁrst things you’ll notice when you begin partici-
pating in Facebook is the bevy of widgets (what Facebook
refers to as ‘‘applications,’’ or ‘‘apps’’ for short). These apps,
created by third-party developers, number into the scores of
thousands and cover every conceivable category from games
to music to travel to just plain fun (and many that are just
plain stupid).
It’s easy to get caught up in the hype, but sooner or later
‘‘app fatigue’’ sets in. My son, the veteran Facebooker, told
me to forget all those extras and concentrate on the basics:
the Wall, photo galleries, and status updates. Good advice, if
you ask me.
Some applications can be used to promote your busi-
ness inside Facebook. One way to promote your business
is by developing branded applications, or ‘‘appvertise-
ments,’’ that connect your company and the people you
wish to reach in a more useful, meaningful way. For exam-
ple, Buddy Media, a company that develops branded appli-
cations, has launched dozens of campaigns for leading
brands. Their data show measurable success in engaging
users. ‘‘In particular, users spent an average of 2 minutes
and 35 seconds engaged with our branded applications per
visit, or 75 times greater than the time consumers spend
interacting with traditional banner ads and ﬁve times
greater than the time spent watching a typical TV commer-
cial,’’ said Buddy Media CEO, Mike Lazerow.5
You are not limited to building applications in order
to use them. You can incorporate many of the business-
oriented applications already available in the directory to
help promote your business, such as business cards, net-
worked blogs, and testimonials. It’s worth looking through
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
89

the business category to see which applications might be
useful for your business.
Facebook Lexicon
Lexicon is Facebook’s answer to Google’s Zeitgeist. It is a tool
you can use to spot and compare trends inside the network.
In Lexicon, you input single words or two-word combina-
tions and compare as many as ﬁve strings per query to mine
and analyze millions of Facebook Wall posts. The results are
returned as a variety of graphs and charts. For marketing
professionals, the results gleaned can provide valuable
insight into what’s on the minds of Facebookers on a daily
basis. Lexicon pulls only aggregate information, and the
privacy of its members is never violated.
Facebook Share
Facebook Share is a small button or hyperlink you can add
to your Web site that lets visitors share the site with their
friends on Facebook. Essentially, it’s a way to drive trafﬁc.
Facebook Share is easy to install, but it does require a
minimal knowledge of HTML.
Facebook Connect
Facebook Connect is the next evolution of the Facebook
platform. It provides a way for members to log in to other
Web sites using their Facebook account and ‘‘connect’’ their
Facebook identity, friends, and privacy settings to those
sites. For sites that use it, Facebook Connect means never
having to create another online proﬁle. (Can I get an
‘‘amen?’’) You take your online identity with you wherever
you go. By the time this book is published, hundreds if not
thousands of sites will have incorporated the feature.
To better explain how Facebook Connect works, let me
cite as an example Kudzu.com, a Web site that aggregates
user reviews and ratings on local businesses. You can log in
to Kudzu using your Facebook account, and from there you
can interact with all of your Facebook friends. When you
write a review for a restaurant, for example, you’ll have the
option to publish that story back to Facebook, where your
friends can see it, too.
90
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

For business owners and marketing professionals, two
aspects of Facebook Connect are important. First, Facebook,
once a walled garden, is now opening itself to the entire
Web via third-party sites. And when we’re talking about
third-party sites, we could be talking about the one(s) you
own, too. Second (and this could be the most important factor
for you), Facebook Connect is not just a registration system,
but a marketing channel that comes complete with a built-in
audience of multiplied millions, some of whom may ﬁnd
their way to your door.
Facebook Connect does require a slightly more extensive
knowledge of HTML and programming, but implementing
Connect should not be difﬁcult with the assistance of the
many Facebook application developers available.
Personal Proﬁle
Though your company can create a Facebook Public Proﬁle
or ad without creating a personal proﬁle, let me make my
best pitch for having one. In social media, people relate
better to other people than to brands. Face(book) it: we
like to do business with people we know and trust.
An ideal scenario is to have a brand or company pres-
ence via the means outlined above, but to supplement and
extend that business presence with a personal one. There
are many good reasons to have a personal presence: to
network with colleagues and peers, to ﬁnd business con-
tacts, to build business relationships, to grow your personal
brand, to target your niche audience, to increase trafﬁc to
your Web site, to enhance your Google rankings, and so
much more! It’s a way to extend that digital handshake and
get to know people in a more casual, nurturing environment
where you can make friends. By all means, once you’ve set
up your Facebook business page, set up a personal proﬁle
as well.
TWITTER IS THE SOCIAL NETWORKING
COCKTAIL PARTY
I have devoted an entire chapter to Twitter, so I’ll spare the
details here. Let me simply say: if LinkedIn is your business
suit and Facebook is business casual, then Twitter is your
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
91

business social networking cocktail hour, the place where
you go to casually and informally interact with potentially
thousands of others. Whereas LinkedIn tends to be a more
latent form of engagement, Twitter is (or can be) very much in
real time. Much more on that in chapter 10.
OTHER BUSINESS-ORIENTED SOCIAL NETWORKS
Plaxo
Plaxo started out as a tool to enable people to automatically
update their address books, but it has morphed into a social
network that’s a cross between LinkedIn and Facebook. Like
LinkedIn, Plaxo maintains a more strictly business focus.
Like Facebook, Plaxo has a newsfeed that enables users to
add information about what they are doing on other social
networks, including Twitter, Flickr, Facebook, MySpace,
Digg, and YouTube.
Even with groups, a job board, and photo galleries, Plaxo
is a streamlined version of the other two networks and is
devoid of the clutter that tends to build up, especially as it
does on Facebook. I like it for that reason alone.
The problem with Plaxo is that it lacks the same following
as the other two networks, so it seems to be less of a factor.
I’m not suggesting you shouldn’t create a proﬁle there (I have
one), but I believe Plaxo is a second-tier network. If you have
limited time to invest in online social networking, Plaxo may
not be worthwhile for you. Also, Plaxo had a reputation for
being a spammer (a reputation they have worked hard to
change), so many people avoid the service for that reason.
Still, with a user base numbering in the tens of millions, the
worth of the Plaxo site should not be underestimated.
Ecademy
Founded in 1998, Ecademy is one of the oldest business
social networks. Some people say it is better than LinkedIn.
Ecademy includes features similar to those offered by Linked-
In, but Ecademy goes a step further by incorporating a
face-to-face networking element. Ecademy is most popular
in Europe. It has failed to establish itself in the United
States.
92
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Biznik
Biznik calls itself ‘‘business networking that doesn’t suck.’’
Where Ecademy includes a face-to-face element, Biznik puts
local, real-world networking at its center. The online com-
ponent is designed to serve as a supplement. Biznik does not
see itself as a LinkedIn clone, but, in its own words, as a
‘‘community for real people who are building real busi-
nesses, not a place for job seekers.’’
MySpace
You might have wondered why I’ve said nothing about what
is the second largest of all social networks: MySpace. I do not
mean to diminish its importance, but I think MySpace has
more limited applicability as a business social network as
compared to Facebook or LinkedIn. MySpace tends to have
an entertainment orientation and shows a strong preference
for music and movies. If your company targets audiences
with this orientation, then MySpace might be a good place to
establish a presence.
TEN COMMANDMENTS FOR EFFECTIVE
ONLINE SOCIAL NETWORKING
I want to close the chapter by sharing a ten-step game plan
for social network involvement that I think will work for you.
You don’t have to think of these steps as commandments.
Rather, they are practical guidelines that will make you a
better member of the social networking communities in
which you participate.
1. Pull, Don’t Push
One of the ﬁrst lessons you will learn very quickly when
engaging in social media is that old-school marketing tactics
don’t work. Don’t come out of the gate pushing your prod-
ucts or services. New tools require new rules.
For example, don’t respond to new Twitter followers with
a ‘‘Thanks for following. Visit my Web site for a free . . .
[insert whatever promotional message you’ve seen.].’’ This
response is a dead giveaway that you are new to social media
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
93

and that you do not yet understand that it’s a ‘‘pull’’ medium,
not a ‘‘push’’ medium. If I want to review your credentials, I’ll
read your bio. (You did complete your bio, right?)
2. Win the Right to Be Heard
Social media engagement is a conversation, and participation
in the community is required. In fact, you might say that
participation is the ﬁfth P of marketing. (The other four Ps are
product, price, place, and promotion.) Your value as a partic-
ipant is judged by the value you provide to the community as a
whole. Be a ‘‘glory hog,’’ and you’ll garner little attention.
Share freely, and you will become a respected member.
3. Content Is STILL King, but Conversation Is Queen
(and Conversion Is the Prince)
Nothing beats well-written, informative, entertaining con-
tent in all its forms: blog posts, tweets, videos, podcasts,
images, webinars, or white papers. Place yourself in a posi-
tion of being a knowledgeable expert (assuming you are, of
course). Community is the context.
In addition, keep content and commerce separate. Never
the twain shall meet is a good rule of thumb. Editorial and
advertorial content should be distant kin, if related at all.
4. Authenticity and Transparency Are Social
Networking Cornerstones
Those words may seem trite, but I believe they remain the
cornerstones of this new media marketing paradigm. Be
real. Be open. Be honest. Admit mistakes when you make
them.
5. You Don’t Have to Be on Every Social Network
It’s impossible to maintain an active presence on every social
network, and you don’t have to. You do have to be where your
customers are, however. They expect you to be there.
6. Give, and You Shall Receive
I referred to this concept earlier when I talked about the Dale
Carnegie philosophy, but it’s worth reiterating. Having an
94
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

attitude of helpfulness goes a long way toward establishing a
credible name for yourself in social media circles. ‘‘Seek ﬁrst
to understand, then to be understood,’’ according to St.
Francis of Assisi ‘‘People don’t care that you know until
they know that you care’’ is how I put it.
‘‘Lose control of your marketing,’’ is how author David
Meerman Scott puts it.6 Give ideas and information away
freely, with no strings attached. Be willing to give up control
of the marketing message (as if you could hold it close to the
vest in the ﬁrst place, given the current Web 2.0 landscape).
7. Don’t Throw the Marketing Baby Out with
the Bath Water
The rules of marketing still apply to social media; well, most
of the rules anyway. Social media is another channel to build
your brand and market your message. It’s not a panacea,
and it’s not a replacement for other forms of advertising and
marketing.
I have learned that marketing has room for integration.
E-mail and search still are the areas where most marketers
spend their top dollars, and for good reason, they both
perform very well. All forms of marketing are interrelated,
and social media is ﬁnding its place in the spectrum.
8. Social Media Is a Mindset, Not Just a Toolset
You have to incorporate the essence of social media into your
thinking. Don’t just change your toolset (tactics); change
your mindset (strategy).
9. Be Yourself, Whomever That May Be
A good friend of mine, Aileen Bennett, has a mantra that she
follows in every respect: ‘‘Be yourself.’’ (It’s even her person-
alized license plate.) No better advice can be given, whether
or not you engage in social media. One thing is certainly true:
you can’t be who you are not (see Step 4).
I recommend that you use your photo as your avatar and
your name as your handle. That’s not to say you shouldn’t
have an identity tied to your brand. It’s just that in social
media, people would rather relate to and build trust with
other people than with brands. It’s a trust economy, after all.
Social Networks Strengthen Your Social Graph
95

10. Social Media Is Not a Religion
Although it does comes with a set of largely unwritten rules
(sorry, I don’t know of any stone tablets having been brought
down from Mt. Sinai), social media is not a religion, no
matter how hard guys like me try to make it one. There is
room for experimentation. In fact, experimentation is the
only way the medium will grow.
CONCLUSION
The more I think about it, the more I am convinced that
participation in the big three social networks—LinkedIn,
Facebook and Twitter—is an absolute must for just about
every business. I would encourage you, if you’ve not already
done so, to establish a presence in each. It was the aim
of this chapter to equip you with enough information to
get started on your journey into social networking super-
stardom. The rest is up to you.
In the next chapter, we will explore the differences be-
tween large, aggregate social networks such as Facebook
and niche online communities such as Ning. We will discuss
how the two can work in concert, and what actions you need
to take to build a strong community around your brand,
product, or service.
96
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER NINE
Niche Online
Communities Can
Beneﬁt Your Business
At ﬁrst blush, you may wonder why I differentiate between
social networks and online communities. After all, they seem
to be the same, and in many respects they are. However,
when I refer to social networks I’m talking about the large
aggregated communities like those mentioned in the previ-
ous chapter. Online communities, on the other hand, are
more niche-speciﬁc. You might think of the difference as
similar to that between a large city and a small town, or
even a private reserve. One focuses on breadth, the other
on depth.
One primary difference between social networks and
online communities has to do with the way the proﬁles
are rendered. Veteran business blogger Lee LeFever explains
it this way:
In most traditional online communities, members have
proﬁles that may display a picture, location, recent posts
and membership tenure. These proﬁles can provide val-
uable context to the community, but they are often
97

peripheral to the discussions and remain somewhat
hidden.
In contrast, social networking communities have ele-
vated the user proﬁle to become more like a user home-
page that displays a very rich and contextual set of
information. The member home pages are not peripheral
to the discussions or a subset of the community; they
are at the very core of the system.
Sufﬁceit tosay thatsocialnetworksconnect people across
many niches; online communities focus primarily on one.
Social networks are more about who you are, while online
communities are more about the value you provide. (LeFever
outlines a number of differences in his blog post, Comparing
social networks to online communities, http://www.common
craft.com/archives/000834.html. I recommend reading his
observations if further explanation is needed.)
In this chapter we talk about different types of online
communities, take a look at several speciﬁc ones, discuss
what is required to keep a community vibrant and growing,
and examine a few of the various platforms used to build
communities.
THREE TYPES OF ONLINE COMMUNITIES: WHICH
ONE IS RIGHT FOR YOU?
There are any number of reasons why a company should
consider creating a niche online community:
 It’s a way to strengthen the relationship with your
customer.
 It’s searchable by Google and other engines.
 It’s a useful feedback mechanism.
 It’s a tool customer evangelists can use to spread
positive word of mouth.
 It’s a way to give customers and employees a sense of
ownership of your company, products, and services.
Similarly, there are any number of different types of
communities. Let me outline three:
98
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Customer Communities
Customer-facing communities can take two forms: support
and engagement.
Customer Support: VerticalResponse Marketing Lounge
Direct marketing company VerticalResponse (www.vertical
response.com) created the VR Lounge as a ‘‘resource for small
business owners and marketing professionals to share expe-
riences, ask questions and assist one another in marketing
their businesses.’’ The primary reasons for its existence are
to provide training and support for its customers and to serve
as a platform to enable them to help one another.
VR Lounge is built on the Ning platform (discussed later
in the chapter), which provides members with the opportu-
nity to create forum posts, upload video, join groups or add
articles. VR supplements this activity with content of their
own in the form of articles and business tools.
Another company that invests heavily in online commu-
nities for customer support is Sage, makers of business
management software for small- to medium-sized compa-
nies. It runs more than a dozen product-related communi-
ties designed to enable members to interact with their peers,
discover new ways of doing business, and learn ways to use
the software more efﬁciently and effectively.
The community designed to support its ACT! CRM soft-
ware product saw over 8.9 million page views and 266,000
searches in the ﬁrst year following its launch, far surpassing
the company’s expectations.
Customer Engagement: Abbot Laboratories’ Diabetes Control
for Life and Strong Moms Communities
Healthcare and pharmaceuticals company Abbot Laborato-
ries has created two very similar, branded niche communi-
ties to address the needs of two very different customer
groups: diabetics and pregnant or nursing mothers.
DiabetesControlfor Life(www.diabetescontrolforlife.com)
is a Web site designed to help diabetics control their blood
sugar levels and manage their weight, while Strong Moms
(www.strongmoms.com) provides educational resources for
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
99

new mothers. Both sites function similarly in that they pro-
vide a mix of educational content, articles from experts, and
discussion forums to allow for member interaction. A subtle
emphasis is placed on products made by Abbot targeted to
each community, but that never gets in the way of the main
goals of the site—education, information, and community.
‘‘An effective messaging campaign will make its way into
the lives of their customers through engaging experiences,
conversation and referrals. The Web 2.0 environment has
provided a powerful platform not just for consumers to take
control, but for brands to be relevant and accessible,’’ said
Ana Dan, Director of Marketing Systems and Services for
Abbot Nutrition, explaining the reasons for creating such
branded communities.1 ‘‘In most surveys and studies, con-
sumers who engaged in online forums and tools speciﬁc to a
lifestyle or health category are much more likely to consume
products in the related category,’’ Dan added.
Dan lists several key factors to consider when creating
branded customer engagement communities:
 Research and understand your target segments’ inter-
est in other noncompeting categories and products.
 Form a coalition with related but non-competing
products.
 Create non-branded, dynamic content and tools to
drive consumer engagement and returning customers
to your site.
 Use experts to lend your site credibility.
 Use social engagement tools to foster sharing and
conversation with consumers on your site.
 Infuse the site with the coalition products in passive
ways and more assertively through banners.
 Market to those consumers who come to your site and
to those that don’t by syndicating out content to other
relevant destinations.
Employee Communities
Another reason for creating online communities has nothing
whatsoever to do with customers (at least not directly) but
100
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

everything to do with employees, as a way to give them a
voice and an ownership stake in the company.
Best Buy’s Blue Shirt Nation (www.blueshirtnation
.com), a reference to the employee uniforms, is probably
the premiere example of such a community. It was started as
a way for employees to stay connected with one another
using SMS, chat, e-mail and the Web. Members can set up
personal proﬁles and interact via topical forums.
Best Buy’s goal in creating the site was to tap into
employee insights as a way to improve customer service
and marketing within the stores. The results speak for them-
selves. Over 20,000 employees signed up in the ﬁrst year.
Sixty-ﬁve percent of members are active on the site, and Blue
Shirt Nation experiences a very low turnover rate (8.5 per-
cent) in comparison to the high turnover rate of employees
within the company itself, estimated at 60 percent.
Vendor/Partner Communities
Online communities are not limited to customer or employee
engagement. For many companies, especially those with a
large number of vendor partners, this format can facilitate
communications between the business and its partners,
provide for the sharing of best practices, strengthen partner
relationships, and provide a channel for customer service
and support.
Vendor/partner communities are also being leveraged at
the industry level. For example, Fohboh (www.fohboh.com),
an industry acronym which stands for Front of the House
and Back of the House, is a large professional community
serving the restaurant industry. With more than 10,000
members, it offers a way for those in the food and beverage
industry to connect, collaborate, and communicate with
colleagues and service providers.
COMMON COMMUNITY-CREATION MISTAKES
In 2008, Deloitte completed a research project called the
Tribalization of Business Study2 with over 100 businesses
that had developed online communities. Many of these sites
failed to achieve the goals the companies had set for them.
In fact, more than a few were virtual ghost towns.
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
101

Ed Moran, a Deloitte consultant who participated in the
study, told the Wall Street Journal3 that 35 percent of the
communities had fewer than 100 members and less than
25 percent had more than 1,000. That included companies
that had spent more than a million dollars building their
communities, too!
From this and other research done on the topic I’ve
determined that there are ﬁve primary reasons online com-
munities fail.
Mistake #1: Lack of Adequate Planning and Research
With the many easy-to-use technology platforms, starting a
community is easy. One company even promotes the fact
that you can do so in as little as ﬁve minutes using their
platform.
Online communities may be easy to start, but they are
difﬁcult to maintain and require sufﬁcient research and
planning. As with the Ten Things to Consider Before You
Blog list I outlined in chapter 7, the same degree of consid-
eration needs to be given to community creation. In fact, I
encourage you to take that list and apply it to this setting.
Decisions need to be made about:
 Why the group should be started
 Who will constitute its membership
 The purpose it will serve
 The platform upon which it will be built
 The resources required, both personnel and monetary
 The ethical standards for group behavior
 What the group will be called
As you can see, while it may only take ﬁve minutes in
some cases to set up a group, hours of planning need to go
into its creation beforehand.
Mistake #2: Putting an Undue Focus on Technology
One of the biggest mistakes made by these companies
was a propensity to focus on technology rather than the
102
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

community itself. Community strategist Connie Bensen
says putting such an undue emphasis on technology is a
misplaced priority. ‘‘More important than the technology is
the people factor,’’ says Bensen. ‘‘While it’s true technology
platforms are getting richer in terms of features, even some-
thing as simple as forums can be used effectively. The issue
is not the technology, but the people who make up the
community.’’ Earlier in this book I said social media is
less about technology and more about the people using it,
a statement that is particularly true in this respect.
Mistake #3: Not Putting Resources Where They Are
Best Utilized
Ed Moran told the Wall Street Journal that companies should
spend resources identifying and reaching out to potential
community members instead of investing heavily in soft-
ware. ‘‘Put someone who has experience running an online
community in charge of the project,’’ he said. Many of the
companies included in the study had only a part-time staff
member running the community.
Bensen says the role of community manager is an espe-
cially crucial one. ‘‘Community management is a broad,
overarching, cross-functional position that involves not
only managing the community itself, but serving as a re-
presentative for it in other places such as Facebook and
Twitter,’’ she states. ‘‘Not only that, but the person may be
responsible for training internal staff and serving as a ‘trafﬁc
cop’ ﬁltering and routing information and ideas gathered
from the community to other departments in the company
such as public relations, marketing, product development,
quality assurance and customer service. It is a big job and
not one to be taken lightly.’’4
Mistake #4: Making the Community Fit the Company,
Not the Other Way Around
Trying to make the community align with its own business
goals and processes is another mistake companies often
make. If I’ve learned anything about social media it’s that,
once other people are involved, priorities change. Bensen
says the problem is that companies ‘‘try and make the
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
103

community what it wants, not what the members themselves
want. It’s like putting a square peg into a round hole and
expecting it to ﬁt.5
Despite the best efforts of companies to conform com-
munities to their molds, ultimately conformity has to give
way to the wisdom of crowds. Gary Koelling, one of the
founders of Best Buy’s Blue Shirt Nation, said that in an
online community, everyone shares equal status: ‘‘When the
user tells me, ‘This is how I want to use it,’ I have to do
whatever I can to accommodate that.’’6
Mistake #5: Measuring the Wrong Things
Moran said some of the companies they studied set up
communities to generate word of mouth and increase cus-
tomer loyalty, but focused their ROI on more traditional
metrics such as number of visits and pageviews.
KEYS TO SUCCESSFUL COMMUNITY CREATION AND
MANAGEMENT—ONLINE COMMUNITIES NEED A
PERSONAL (EVEN ‘‘PASTORAL’’) TOUCH
Earlier in my career, I was an ordained minister and served
a number of churches in a pastoral role. A great deal of my
time was spent trying to develop a sense of community
among the members. In building online communities, I
have found that many of the principles used in a church
setting apply.
First, there has to be some unifying factor, some ‘‘glue’’
that holds the members together. Let’s even call it a vision.
My favorite deﬁnition of community is ‘‘Come Into Unity.’’ If
you aim to build a vibrant, growing online community, it’s
imperative that you have a clearly stated goal that members
can identify with and rally around, and of which they can
take some degree of ownership.
Second, you have to keep recasting the vision. I ﬁnd it
useful to remind members as often as once a month of the
reason for the group. The old adage, ‘‘Tell them what you’re
going to tell them, tell them, tell them again, then tell them
what you told them’’ really does have merit. A monthly e-mail
newsletter is a great communication device for this purpose.
104
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

It’s easy for people to get distracted and lose sight of why they
joined the community in the ﬁrst place. That’s why regular
communication is important: to keep the community and its
vision top of mind with members.
Third, every group needs a ‘‘shepherd’’ to help guide the
community. Rather than spending all your resources on the
technology platform, dedicate a portion to hiring someone to
oversee and provide leadership to the community. The com-
monly accepted title for this role is ‘‘community manager.’’ I
have to confess that it is not one I favor because I think the
role extends far beyond mere management. It really is, in a
manner of speaking, a pastoral role. Call this person a
‘‘host,’’ ‘‘sherpa,’’ or ‘‘swami’’ if you want to, but ﬁnd someone
who can commit time, attention, and ‘‘TLC’’ to building the
community. I’m not talking about a dictatorial leader either,
but rather an equipper, exhorter, encourager, and ardent
evangelist. To stretch my analogy even further, this person
needs to be a ‘‘true believer’’ in your company and its prod-
ucts, services, and mission.
Fourth, you need to have plenty of content for group
members to consume. In my role as pastor, two times each
week I was expected to have a sermon prepared. And while
the sermon was not the reason most people attended, if I had
failed in that duty the likelihood of them returning would be
nil. It’s a given that most people who join online communities
are lurkers who don’t contribute content or even comment
on what is contributed by others. They are, in the truest
sense of the word, consumers. In the church world we called
them ‘‘pew sitters.’’ As such, it is imperative that they have
something to consume, or else you’re unlikely to see them
again.
Fifth, it’s important that you encourage active engage-
ment by members. If you will provide the initial leadership,
you should expect a core group to form who will take a more
active role. In my church, for example, we had small group
leaders, Bible study teachers, youth leaders, music teams,
nursery workers, and so forth. Online communities are no
different. Some members will be more oriented toward con-
tent creation in the form of blog or forum posts, video, and
podcasts. Others will form groups, and still others will
contribute via comments.
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
105

That’s why it’s important to use a technology platform
that can facilitate as many forms of communication and
interaction as possible. Later in the chapter I will discuss a
few I recommend.
It is this core group that will provide a majority of the
community-generated content, at least at ﬁrst, and their
involvement will pay great dividends going forward. It’s in
your best interest to ‘‘pay’’ them with time, attention and
other nonmonetary rewards. Even something as simple as a
sincere, heartfelt ‘‘thank you’’ will go a long way toward
securing their ongoing, active involvement.
THE SOCIETY OF WORD OF MOUTH
One community that exempliﬁes these practices very well
is The SWOM, which stands for The Society of Word of
Mouth (www.theswom.com). Members are called ‘‘swomies,’’
a catchy moniker that serves not only to reinforce the pur-
pose of the group, as a gathering place to share insight,
expertise and experience about word of mouth marketing,
but also as a social object to help in the spread of the group’s
message.
The SWOM co-founders, Jackie Huba and Ben McCon-
nell, communicate with the community on a regular basis
via e-mail newsletters and blog posts, keeping members
updated on group activities, new content, and topics of
interest. They encourage active participation among mem-
bers and have even brought on a community manager to
help in the day-to-day operations. Not only that, they held
their ﬁrst face-to-face meeting in Austin, Texas, in 2008,
called SWOMFest. The one-day event brought together
nearly 200 SWOM community members from all across
the country.
As a result of these efforts, the group has grown to more
than 2,000 members, a number of sub-groups have been
formed, and content continues to be created regularly, mak-
ing it very likely that The SWOM will be a valuable resource
for marketing professionals and small businesspeople for a
long time to come.
McConnell suggests the following guidelines for anyone
interested in establishing a niche community:
106
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

 Ensure there’s already a community that’s under-
served and itching to meet. There were a number of
online communities that supported small and me-
dium businesses, but most of them covered a broad
range of topics, from accounting to marketing to HR.
Our purpose with SWOM is to stake out a niche.
 Have an annual meeting. This is true of any vibrant
community, whether it’s the two major political par-
ties, eBay power sellers, Maker’s Mark Ambassadors,
or resellers of Sage software. People love to meet their
online peers in person.
 Keeping the online community juices ﬂowing re-
quires a tremendous amount of content. Have a
solid, ready source of content if members don’t pro-
vide it themselves. And remember the 1 percent Rule:
You’re lucky if more than 1 percent of the members
create content for everyone else.
 Think education. Some of the best momentum we’ve
had is from offering how-to Webinars. Word of them
spreads
quickly,
helping
improve
membership
growth.
 Kick out the polluters quickly. Easy-to-join online
communities are vulnerable to the broken windows
theory, which states that criminals tend to gather in
neglected areas of cities. If your community is beset by
spam or nasty, mean people, boot it and them quickly.
Nothing connotes irrelevance like seeing scads of
spammish posts or videos, and trolls do more damage
than they’re worth.7
TWITTERMOMS: KITCHEN EXPERIMENT TURNED
FULL-TIME BUSINESS
Twittermoms (www.twittermoms.com) is a site for Internet-
savvy (or at least Twitter-savvy) younger women that
started out as a ‘‘kitchen experiment,’’ according to its
founder Megan Calhoun, but has quickly become a full-
time business.
The site launched in September of 2008, and within six
months it had grown to over 12,000 members, all without
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
107

a dime being spent on marketing or PR. ‘‘I was a stay-at-
home mom and wanted to connect with other moms online,’’
says Calhoun. ‘‘I Joined Twitter to do so, but found it hard
just to connect with moms, so I started this community. The
site literally exploded within the ﬁrst couple of weeks of it
going live.’’8
The community is comprised of very smart, highly-
networked moms actively involved in social media, Calhoun
said. A poll of the community revealed that 80 percent of
the members had blogs and over 90 percent were involved
in other social networks.
Based on the rapid growth and desirable demographic, it
wasn’t long until Calhoun began getting calls from PR ﬁrms
and advertising agencies who wanted to tap into the com-
munity. ‘‘It was then I knew I had a business,’’ Calhoun
exclaimed. The site has even received coverage in main-
stream publications like Redbook.
Calhoun suggests the following guidelines when consid-
ering creating an online community:
 When starting a social network, you set the tone.
Make it a warm, welcoming place. Welcome every
member who joins and encourage others to do the
same. (Calhoun even formed a ‘‘welcome wagon’’ group
just for that purpose.) ‘‘You will not have control of
the group once it begins to grow. So, it’s important
to set the proper tone and then let go,’’ Calhoun
recommends.
 Take time to ﬁnd those who have common interests
and connect with them.
 Have
guidelines
in
place
to
deal
with
the
spammers—and you will have spammers.
 Make sure you offer members high-quality content.
Calhoun recruited 15 featured contributors—experts
in their respective ﬁelds—to provide professionally
written content. ‘‘You want people to return and hav-
ing good content is primary,’’ says Calhoun. ‘‘When
starting a network, bring in experts to be featured
contributors who can provide it.’’
108
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

INEXPENSIVE TOOLS TO USE IN CREATING
YOUR OWN COMMUNITY
Ning: The Most Popular Hosted Community Platform
The technology used to host The SWOM and Twittermoms
is a platform called Ning (which means ‘‘peace’’ in Chinese).
Founded by Marc Andreessen (who also created Netscape)
and Gina Bianchini in October, 2004, Ning was developed
to give people freedom to create communities for anything
they choose, and believe you me, you can ﬁnd a Ning
community for just about every topic known to man!
(By the way, Ning refers to these as ‘‘social networks.’’)
The last time I checked, there were well in excess of
300,000 Ning communities and the number was growing,
making it the largest such community-creation platform
on the planet.
According to Ning CEO Bianchini, Ning offers a proven
feature set including shared user proﬁles, blogs, forums,
photo gallery, support for video and podcasts, a Facebook-
like activity stream (newsfeed), event calendar and groups,
to name just a few of the fourteen that are available. If you’re
savvy with programming, you can use Ning’s APIs to create
your own applications. However, it is not a ‘‘one-size-ﬁts-all’’
system. You can choose to use as many of these features or
as few as you want, a la carte as it were. From a design
perspective, Bianchini says the idea is to give you full control
over the look and feel.
The best part about Ning is that, if you don’t mind Google
Adsense ads running on your site, it’s free to use. Actually, it
is a ‘‘freemium’’ model in that you can upgrade to premium
features that enable you to customize the look and branding,
even to the point of matching your existing Web site. (Oh,
and you can remove those ads and replace them with your
own if you want to.)
Though a number of larger companies are using Ning, I
believe that its low-cost and ease-of-use make it best suited
to the needs of small business, especially those that are B2C.
(I’ll talk about another platform I recommend for B2B use
in just a moment.)
Other Ning sites that I’d recommend visiting are:
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
109

 Women’s Wisdom Network (www.womenswisdom
network.com), a site targeting older professional busi-
nesswomen that combines professionally written con-
tent along with that generated by the community.
(Note: I serve on WWN’s advisory board.)
 Sta.rtup.biz (http://sta.rtup.biz/), a site for entre-
preneurs and small business owners.
Each of these use varying degrees of customization of the
platform, with Sta.rtup.biz being the most customized, and I
list them speciﬁcally for that reason. I’ve already mentioned
Vertical Response, The Swom, Twittermoms, and Fohboh, all
of which are Ning communities. You can visit the Ning blog
(http://blog.ning.com) to see many of the newer sites as well.
KickApps: Put the Community on Your Web Site
KickApps is another popular community-creation platform
for small business. Like Ning, KickApps is also a hosted
solution with one difference: You can embed its widgets and
applications directly into your own Web site, effectively turn-
ing it an online community. KickApps brands itself as a
white-label solution and offers as many as 13 different
such applications, including blogs, message boards, video,
photo galleries, and user proﬁles.
The best example of this is The Workbench, which is part
of the Duct Tape Marketing Web site (www.ducttapemarket
ing.com), run by well-known small business coach John
Jantsch. When asked why he chose KickApps, he said that
it was the platform that provided the greatest ability to retain
his branding, keeping it front-and-center. Regarding his
decision, Jantsch says KickApps ‘‘really shines when it comes
to media, butit is notas intuitive on member connecting,’’ and
‘‘could use more community building tools.’’9
Jantsch does suggest that online communities are not
for the faint of heart. He says you have to have the passion for
it and be someone who can nurture it every day until you
have an audience large enough to build momentum.
KickApps is free to use as the base level, but offers
premium features. Unlike Ning, which has a ﬁxed pricing
structure, KickApps works on a cost per thousand (CPM)
110
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

basis. In other words, the more you use it the more it costs.
But it remains very affordable for small business, which is
why I include it on this list.
CollectiveX Groupsites
One other low-cost solution worth mentioning is CollectiveX
Groupsites. This, too, is a hosted solution, and one that uses
the freemium model and has many of the same features as
the other two. The platform lends itself especially well to use
by associations and professional networking groups.
Open Source Options
I would be remiss if I didn’t mention that there are a number
of open-source community-building platforms on the mar-
ket, including Drupal and Joomla. However, unless you are
a devleoper or can afford to hire one, these take quite a bit of
time and effort to create. I’m not disparaging them in any
way, but merely suggesting that they are not for everyone.
However, if you are willing to commit the resources, they can
be the most customizable.
WHITE-LABEL COMMUNITY PLATFORMS
If you are the CMO or marketing executive for a large com-
pany, platforms like Ning, KickApps, or CollectiveX probably
aren’t for you. As mentioned, they are ideally suited for small
business. If that’s your situation, let me recommend a num-
ber of white-label solutions designed for use by enterprises.
WordFrame
WordFrame is a combination content management system/
social network that I consider best suited to the B2B space. It
is also a software-as-a-service (SaaS) solution, though an
enterprise versionisavailablefor deployment onyourservers.
The platform is very blog-centric, which gives it less of a
community feel. Member proﬁles are less obvious and it could
use more community-building functions in my opinion. Still,
for a company that seeks to promote its thought-leaders or
knowledge experts, WordFrame is an excellent choice.
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
111

One of the more prominent users of WordFrame is Social
Media Today LLC, founded by Jerry Bowles and Robin
Carey. The duo has used the platform to create a number
of highly successful niche B2B sites, including Social Media
Today, MyVenturePad, and The Customer Collective. The
company monetizes these sites via sponsorships from com-
panies like SAP and Oracle.
I believe WordFrame is an underappreciated platform
that deserves attention for those targeting B2B.
Mzinga
Mzinga, which means ‘‘beehive’’ in Swahili, brings white-
label social networks to consumer research. Their focus is on
the creation of communities for learning, marketing, and
customer support. It offers a menu of social modules that
companies can add to their sites, including blogs, wikis,
surveys, polls, calendars, forums, individual proﬁle pages,
groups, and tools for idea management.
Awareness Networks
Awareness, formerly known as iUpload, helps companies
build branded online communities for both internal and
external use. Some of the companies that use or have used
the platform include McDonald’s, Kodak, the New York Times
Company, Northwestern Mutual, and Procter & Gamble.
Jive
Jive Software makes web collaboration software products for
businesses and enterprises. Their products include Clear-
space, their ﬂagship team collaboration software; Openﬁre,
an open-source server; and Jive Forums, their premium
forum software with clients like EA, ESPN, and Nike.
Lithium
Lithium Technologies is an online customer-support and
brand-loyalty company based in Emeryville, California.
Some of the company’s services include forums, live chat,
instant messaging, and a wide range of online customer-
interaction tools. Lithium’s products are delivered on a
112
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

hosted basis rather than as traditional packaged software.
Sage, the software company mentioned earlier in the chap-
ter, uses Lithium to power its communities.
ONLINE COMMUNITIES FOR LEAD GENERATION
I may be playing with a lit stick of dynamite here, but I think
online communities can be used as vehicles for lead genera-
tion. Having come from the ‘‘purist’’ days of business blog-
ging, I really don’t want to use online communities for such
‘‘prurient’’ motives as driving marketing and sales agendas.
Yet I can’t help but believe there can be a healthy balance
between community and commerce, especially when it’s
possible the reason the community exists is for the sake
of commerce.
Jerry Bowles, who runs a number of business-oriented
communities, including MyVenturePad and The Customer
Collective (mentioned earlier), navigates these rocky shoals
quite well. He suggests maintaining a focus on creating
quality content and building relations with members as
the way to grow the community. Site sponsors (SAP, Busi-
nessweek, Oracle) get the beneﬁt of the good will and trafﬁc
engendered by the members.
Bowles has his ﬁnger on the pulse of B2B communities.
They do not exist for ‘‘branding or reputation, but to sell the
sponsor’s product,’’ he says. ‘‘It may be conversational mar-
keting, but it’s still marketing, just a nicer and more effective
way of doing it.’’10
CONCLUSION
Let me conclude this chapter by sharing a quote from For-
rester analyst Jeremiah Owyang, who summed up the
advantages to using online communities in his 2009 report,
Online Community Best Practices11:
An online community is an interactive group of people
joined together by a common interest. It’s also one of
the most powerful tools a marketer can deploy for cus-
tomer retention, word of mouth, and customer insight.
To host a successful community, think of it as you would
Niche Online Communities Can Beneﬁt
113

product development: Start by focusing on objectives,
chart a road map, assemble the right team, and plan to
be ﬂexible. Then build your success by launching the
community with the backing of your most enthusiastic
customers and staying engaged as the community
grows. Above all, remember that control is in the hands
of the members, so put their needs ﬁrst, build trust, and
become an active part of the community.
114
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER TEN
Microblogging: Social
Media Marketing in 140
Characters or Less
According to Wikipedia1, microblogging is a form of multi-
media blogging that allows users to send brief text updates,
usually in 140 characters or less. These messages can be
submitted by a variety of means, including text messaging,
instant messaging, e-mail, MP3, or the web. Of all the appli-
cations in this genre, the most popular by far is Twitter. In
fact, though I use the term ‘‘microblogging’’ in the title of the
chapter, my intent is to focus mainly on Twitter, as it is the
ﬁrst of the genre and the service used by the greatest number
of participants.
TWITTER: A LITTLE BIRD THAT
STARTED A REVOLUTION
A question I am often asked is, ‘‘What is Twitter?’’ Often this
is followed by, ‘‘How do I use Twitter for business?’’ I plan
to answer both questions in this chapter.
Let me say at the outset that Twitter is an amazing
application with manifold uses. Companies as large as
115

Dell and Zappos have created business models around it.
(We will talk about their success later in the chapter when we
get to case studies.) Small business owners and solo entre-
preneurs are also proving its value as a channel for business
development.
In fact, a recent survey said that most users (89 percent)
of Twitter agree that companies should engage their custom-
ers there. Over 80 percent indicated they also have a better
impression of companies that use Twitter for customer ser-
vice (81 percent).2
Businesses are using Twitter to:
 Network with others in their industry or community
 Stay connected to customers and prospects
 Monitor what is being said about their company,
products, services, industry, and competition
 Gather valuable feedback about products or services
 Raise awareness about the company, product, or
service
 Find answers and get advice
 Offer proactive customer service
 Promote events, products, and services
 Drive trafﬁc to the company Web site or blog
 Incite word of mouth among customers and others
 Share helpful content such as articles or blog posts
 Generate leads
As you can see, the list is extensive and limited only by
your imagination. In fact, due to its amazing simplicity,
Twitter can be used in just about any manner you see ﬁt.
It is malleable. You don’t have to adapt yourself to Twitter’s
use. Instead, it adapts to you.
WHAT IS TWITTER AND HOW DOES IT WORK?
Wikipedia deﬁnes Twitter this way:
Twitter is a free social networking and microblogging
service that allows its users to send and read other users’
116
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

updates (otherwise known as tweets), which are text-
based posts of up to 140 characters in length.
While I don’t know who cooked up the term microblog-
ging, it’s a suggestion that Twitter is a blogging tool, one
limited to 140 characters. Hence, ‘‘micro’’ blogging.
Why 140 characters? Because the guys who dreamed
up Twitter—Biz Stone and Evan Williams, the same guys
who created Blogger, one of the ﬁrst blogging platforms—
envisioned it as an SMS (text messaging) tool. In other
words, it was ﬁrst conceived as an application for mobile
devices, but one with a Web-based interface.
Even though it started that way, Twitter’s user base
largely ignored the SMS side of things in favor of the Web-
based version. At one point, due to bandwidth and through-
put demands on Twitter’s servers, SMS capabilities were
actually shut off. Essentially, Twitter started out as one thing
and became something else. (More on that in a moment.)
High Latency Instant Messenger
A better explanation was one given to me by a gentleman
(whose name I don’t recall) whom I met at a social media
conference some time back. He referred to Twitter as a ‘‘high
latency instant messaging application.’’ Huh?
Twitter works like other instant messaging applications,
Yahoo! Messenger or AIM for example, only, unlike those,
you aren’t compelled to respond immediately, if at all; hence
the term, ‘‘high latency.’’
Presence Application
Twitter has also been deﬁned as a ‘‘presence application.’’
In instant messaging parlance ‘‘presence’’ is deﬁned as
knowing when someone on the user’s buddy list is online.
Usually, a little icon pops up to indicate their status.
Twitter does not notify you when someone you are
‘‘following’’ in your Twitterstream is online. Presence, as it
applies to Twitter, simply answers the question: ‘‘What are
you doing?’’ (As in, what are you doing right now at this
very moment? ) In fact, once you establish a Twitter account,
you will see that very question above the text entry ﬁeld!
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 117

Trouble is, only Twitter neophytes pay attention to that
question. It’s not that others don’t care what you are doing at
a given moment; it’s just that Twitter’s usefulness extends
much beyond that information.
Best Deﬁnition (my opinion)
So far, we’ve said that Twitter is a ‘‘microblogging, high
latency instant messaging presence application.’’ (Glad we
got that straight.)
While Twitter is all of those things, in my opinion Twitter
is best deﬁned as an open social instant messaging applica-
tion. ‘‘Social’’ in the sense that Twitter is a social network
where you friend others who then see your posts and follow
them, and ‘‘instant messaging’’ in the sense that it has that
feel to it. (The term Twitter uses for friending someone is
‘‘follow.’’)
What Twitter really is is a conversation stream that you
jump into at any given moment. Tony Hsieh, CEO of Zappos,
says one good way to think of Twitter is as a ‘‘CB radio, but
for text messaging.’’3 Yet another way to think of Twitter is
as a 24/7/365 ongoing cocktail party where the conversa-
tion never stops.
More from Wikipedia
‘‘Updates are displayed on the user’s proﬁle page and deliv-
ered to other users who have signed up to receive them,’’ says
Wikipedia. ‘‘The sender can restrict delivery to those in his or
her circle of friends (delivery to everyone being the default).
Users can receive updates via the Twitter Web site, SMS,
RSS, e-mail or through an application such as Twitterriﬁc or
Facebook.’’
Twitter’s Evolution
As mentioned above, Twitter started out as a mobile appli-
cation but morphed to something that was largely Web-
based, thanks to its users. Let’s face it: If you’re following
a few hundred people, do you really want to get text mes-
sages from every one of them? You can pick and choose who
to receive such messages from, of course, but even when
118
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

limited to a handful, if they’re avid Twitter users, your phone
will still be dinging all the time. In my view, it’s overkill. If
you like the SMS component, that’s ﬁne, but I’d limit it to a
select few.
Back to the evolution . . .
Speaking of the user-base, Twitter’s founders have been
fairly receptive to the way Twits (one term for Twitter users)
are using the application. For example, at some point people
started using the ‘‘@’’ symbol to address a single individual
via their Twitter handle (e.g., @pchaney). It was a way to
indicate that the message wasn’t for everyone, but for that
speciﬁc person, even though the message appeared in the
public timeline.
It wasn’t long until Twitter incorporated the activity as
part of its functionality. Not only that, they added a direct
messaging capability enabling users to send private mes-
sages to individual users. Additionally, thanks to Twitter’s
API (Application Programming Interface), many other sites
have developed and incorporated some element of Twit-
ter’s functionality. In fact, the API may be the reason
Twitter has gained such popularity.
TWITTER RULES OF THE ROAD
Twitter is part of the larger spectrum of applications referred
to as ‘‘social media.’’ Think of it like biological classiﬁcation
with social media being the ‘‘kingdom’’ and Twitter the
‘‘genus.’’ (Or would Twitter be better classiﬁed as ‘‘phylum?’’
Science was not my strong suit! Anyway, you get the picture.)
However, social media is not merely a set of ‘‘tools’’ to be
used any old way we see ﬁt. It is also a mindset—a culture—
and, as such, certain rules apply. Unfortunately, most of
these rules are unwritten and many an unwary traveler to
the social media sphere has run afoul of them.
In an effort to keep you on the right side of the law, here
are some that apply not only to Twitter, but universally:
Rule #1: You Must Earn the Right to Be Heard
As mentioned previously, originally Twitter was viewed as
a ‘‘presence’’ application where you simply answered the
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 119

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
question, ‘‘What are you doing?’’ In addition, many consid-
ered it a ‘‘broadcast application,’’ simply a place to make
announcements, share information and links, and so on.
While there is nothing wrong with using Twitter in either
of those respects, it really is the 24/7/365 ongoing cocktail
party—and who goes to a cocktail party, stands up on a table
and starts shouting broadcast-style announcements to
everyone? No one; you go to interact, converse, and network.
That, to me, is the primary role Twitter serves. And to
gain any traction whatsoever you have to ‘‘win the right to be
heard.’’ How do you go about doing that?
Follow others. Don’t do it indiscriminately. Find people
that it makes sense for you to follow. Others in your indus-
try, people in your local community, those who ﬁt your
demographic proﬁle, and so on. Think about who should
qualify to make the grade, and follow them.
That is not to suggest you refuse to follow those who ﬁrst
follow you, but that you be intentional in connecting to people
where it makes the most sense from a business perspective.
Perhaps you’re connected to others via LinkedIn, Facebook,
Plaxo, or Active Rain. Strengthen your social graph by con-
necting via Twitter as well.
Should you thank others for following you?
Thanking someone is a matter of common courtesy and
an evidence of respect. Emily Post would like it, but is it
really a necessary practice for Twitter users? In a perfect
world, perhaps. In this one, following someone is thanks
enough.
That’s not to suggest you shouldn’t thank those who
make a more meaningful impression. For the main, recipro-
cating with a follow will sufﬁce.
Don’t use automated functions. This is a pet-peeve of
mine. Many Twitterers use auto-reply and auto-follow func-
tions. Remember what I said: Social media is a mindset, not
merely a set of tools to be used indiscriminately.
It is my studied opinion that the use of auto-response
devices ﬂy in the face of what this medium is all about:
human beings relating to one another humanly. Robots and
auto-responders have no place here.
Interact. Converse. Those who just broadcast an-
nouncements will never garner the same degree of respect
120
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

or depth of relationships as someone who takes time to
interact with others. Participation is the true price of admis-
sion into the Twitterverse.
Rule #2: Don’t Follow if Only to Pitch
I’m seeing a very distasteful trend developing among newer
Twitter users. People are following me, and if I respond in
kind, their ﬁrst tweet is to thank me for following (which I do
encourage), then immediately pitch a Web site they want me
to visit or explain how they can provide a service.
This is the typical modus operandi of the auto-response/
auto-follow crowd. One bad deed leads to another. Sorry,
folks, that is not how it’s done in Twitterville!
Like I said, the rules of social media engagement may be
unwritten, but they are real nonetheless. Don’t follow or
friend someone if all you want to do is pitch your Web
site, product or service to them. Don’t! Get to know the
person ﬁrst and let them get to know you.
If you want a formula for how this should work, it’s this:
Stranger >
> Connect >
> Converse >
> Friend >
> Client/
Customer
Connect with those you don’t know (strangers) and get
to know them. Then and only then is it permissible to make
a pitch. It is a matter of building trust. In fact, you may
ﬁnd that no pitching is needed whatsoever. They may seek
you out.
Bottom Line: Don’t pitch me if you don’t know me. Am I
stating this clearly enough?
Rule #3: Provide Value to the Community
Give people a reason to follow you by becoming a valuable
member of the community. One way to do this is by
providing good information in the form of links, quotes,
advice, and answers to questions. People will see you as a
resource, thought-leader and knowledgeable expert. They
will come to appreciate your generosity of spirit. Just make
sure that not every link you send them is to your own site,
of course.
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 121

Rule #4: Mix Business with Pleasure
It’s okay to share both from your business side and your
personal side. In fact, it’s preferable. That’s the best way for
others to get to know you.
YOUR TWITTER BIO AND AVATAR
Two items of extreme importance are your Twitter bio and
avatar (photo).
Talk about brevity—Twitter stays true to form and only
allows 160 characters worth of information. ‘‘Pithy’’ is the
order of the day, but ‘‘cutesy’’ is not. Get across the essen-
tials of who you are and what you do. Be sure and include a
link to your Web site, blog, or LinkedIn proﬁle too. One
person I know even created a biography site and links to it.
One thing you don’t want to do is protect your updates,
an option in the account information section. In my opinion,
taking such action goes against the very reason for partici-
pating in Twitter in the ﬁrst place. I’m sure those who choose
this option are well intended, but I don’t see the rationale
where business use is concerned.
TIPS ON USING TWITTER
Here are some tips for sending messages to others:
Reply. When you want to communicate with an individ-
ual, use this: @username (whatever their username is).
Twitter will hyperlink the username and, if the user has
@reply notiﬁcations turned on, he or she will more than
likely see it. @reply messages appear in the public
timeline.
D username. When you want to send a message to an
individual privately (what’s known as a direct message),
use this: d username. (And remember to include a space
after the ‘‘d.’’) Twitter will know to hide it from public
view.
RT. Sometimes a tweet is too juicy, informative, or enter-
taining to keep to one’s self. In those cases, you can
‘‘retweet’’ it by copying the message into the ﬁeld, placing
122
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

RT before it. Another practice becoming more popular is
one that stems from blogging. Rather than use RT, you
say (via @username) instead.
#. You know this as the symbol for pound. Twitter
knows it as something called a hashtag. If you hang
around very long, you’ll begin to see Twitterers using
this symbol, placing it in front of a keyword or acronym.
The purpose of this activity is to make it easy for others
to follow a conversation thread, something done by
using Twitter search. By placing the hashtag in the
search ﬁeld you can view the entirety of a given
conversation.
HOW TO GET STARTED USING TWITTER
FOR BUSINESS
I’m going to begin by outlining a simple, workable marketing
strategy that applies to any form of social media engage-
ment, including Twitter. It’s so simple, in fact, that it con-
sists of only three words: Listen, Follow, and Engage.
Listen
My mother always told me, ‘‘Paul, God gave you two ears and
one mouth. He did that for a reason. Listen twice as much as
you speak.’’ (Bet your mom told you the same thing, right?)
You cannot become an effective social media marketer if
you don’t ﬁrst listen to what’s being said about you, your
company, brand, service, industry, and competition, a prac-
tice known as online reputation monitoring (ORM). Listening
is the new marketing, but it’s not something we’re prone to
do. Still, that’s where it begins.
Monitoring your online reputation is one of the most
signiﬁcant ways Twitter can be used for marketing pur-
poses, and one way to do it is to search Twitter. In fact,
there are at least three applications you can use. (There are
others, but these should sufﬁce.)
 Twitter’s own search engine (http://search.twitter.com)
 Tweetscan (http://www.tweetscan.com)
 Twemes (http://www.twemes.com)
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 123

Keywords are another way to use Twitter search. You can
input your most desirable keywords, then create an RSS feed
to stay updated when the words are used. (There are also a
couple of nifty applications that will send you daily updates
on these terms via e-mail.)
You can listen by just keeping your ear to the ongoing
stream of conversation of course, but the use of search tools
like the ones just mentioned will help you cut through the
clutter.
One more word about listening . . .
I think it’s a good thing, before you ever start conversing,
to spend a few days just reading what others are saying. It’s a
way to give yourself a better understanding of Twitter folk-
ways and mores, ﬁgure out some of the nomenclature, and
understand how best to interact. But once you’ve spent a few
days, dive in! The water’s ﬁne.
Follow
The way you build your network in Twitter is by following
others, then engaging them in conversation. But, whom
should you follow? Keeping in mind that Twitter is another
marketing channel, go back to the basics and ask yourself
the same questions you’d ask when considering any other
form of marketing: ‘‘Who is my market?’’ ‘‘Whom am I at-
tempting to reach?’’ ‘‘What niche am I seeking to penetrate?’’
Think in terms of demographics and geography. Isita
certain demographic? The average Twitter user is 35 and
older, is likely male (60 percent of users are) who has between
100–500 followers. Is it a certain geographic area? Find those
people and start following them. Many will return the favor.
Follow those you already know. One group it makes
sense to follow are those you already know, some of whom
might already be using Twitter. If you use a Web-based mail
program such as Gmail, the platform will search your list of
contacts to ﬁnd them. You can also send invitations to those
in your database not currently using Twitter. In addition, if
you’re connected to colleagues and prospects via Facebook
or LinkedIn, connecting on Twitter will only serve to
strengthen and personalize your relationships even more.
Follow inﬂuentials. A great strategy for building a net-
work is to ﬁnd the most inﬂuential people on Twitter in your
124
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

industry and start following them. A second step is to see
who they follow and follow those people as well. By ‘‘inﬂuen-
tial’’ I am not necessarily talking about those people with
thousands of followers, but rather those who have the
respect of the community and add value to the relationships
being built via Twitter. (Of course, if they happen to have
thousands of followers, that’s not a bad thing either.)
Follow keyword users. Do you remember all that key-
word research you did at the outset? It makes good sense to
follow those who use your keywords.
Follow hashtag users. Hashtags are a way that Twitter
users keep track of a given topic of conversation. They start
with the ‘‘#’’ sign followed by an acronym or keyword. They
can then go to Twitter search, input the particular hashtag
and see every bit of conversation about the topic from any-
one who used the hashtag in their tweet.
For example, while writing this book I asked those who
contributed ideas via Twitter to add the hashtag ‘‘#twitter-
book.’’ I went to Twitter search and saw each person’s entry.
The key here is that if you’re using a certain hashtag to
follow a conversation thread, anyone else who is doing so
might be a good candidate for you to follow. Make sense? If
not, don’t worry. It will.
Follow those who follow you. Finally, don’t forget to
follow those who follow you ﬁrst. While you don’t necessarily
have to do that in every case, it’s a common courtesy.
(Sometimes those who follow you are spammers—yes, Twit-
ter has its share of them too—and you want to avoid them
like the plague.)
For a more extensive list of tips on whom to follow, see my
blog post, Fifteen Twitter Follow Dos and Don’ts (http://
tinyurl.com/ﬁfteenfollowtips).
Twellow: Twitter App Made For Business
Of the many Twitter applications that crowd the land-
scape, one has particular usefulness for business, Twel-
low (http://www.twellow.com). It is a topical directory of
practically everyone who uses Twitter. Think of it as the
(continued )
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 125

(continued )
Yellow Pages of Twitter users. (Why do you think they
called it Twellow?)
Twellow can be used in at least two key ways:

You can search the directory by category or geo-
graphic region to ﬁnd others to follow.

You can claim your proﬁle so others can ﬁnd you.
(Twellow automatically adds Twitter users to its
database, but you have to verify your listing in
order to edit your proﬁle.)
Figure 10.1
Twellow Screenshot
126
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Engage
Once you (1) see what people are saying relative to the
keyword searches, (2) give yourself some time to gain per-
spective by reading other’s Tweets, and (3) have started
following a few folks, the next step is to jump into the
Twitterstream and engage them in conversation. But how
do you go about doing so?
Years ago, my father took a rather direct approach at
teaching me to swim. One summer’s day we boarded our
small boat and paddled out to the middle of the pond on our
property. Dad grabbed me, threw me in the water and stated
matter-of-factly, ‘‘swim or drown.’’
Looking back, I’m sure he would not have allowed the
latter. At the time, however, I determined the best course of
action was to make for the shore, which I did with all haste.
And, guess what? In the process I learned to swim.
I’m a bit like dad when it comes to Twitter in that I think
the best approach to joining or starting conversations is
‘‘swim or drown.’’ Just jump in and start conversing.
OK, for the faint of heart, here are some ‘‘rules of
engagement’’:
 Respond to what others are saying by adding your
two cents. Remember to use the ‘‘@’’ symbol when
addressing an individual. This is an especially useful
FINDING OTHERS TO FOLLOW
Twellow has over forty categories and scores of subcate-
gories from which to choose, ranging from aerospace to
Web development. When categories or subcategories are
clicked on, a list of Twits contained in them appears and
can be sorted by number of followers, latest activity, or
Twitter veriﬁcation ranking. Using a new feature called
Twellowhood users can drill down to speciﬁc geographic
locations.
Twellow bills itself as a way to ‘‘cut through the
clutter’’ and ﬁnd ‘‘real people who really matter.’’ I have
to concur that it’s potentially a highly useful tool which
will only get more so over time.
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 127

approach to those you’ve followed based on keyword
searches.
 Provide information that those in your target market
would consider valuable. It could be links to other
sites, answers to questions, advice, or opinion. Posi-
tion yourself as a trusted resource. You’re already
doing that on your Web site and/or blog. Do it via
Twitter as well.
 Engage in casual conversation with your followers.
There are some who would suggest that for business
purposes you shouldn’t share the minutiae of your
daily life or engage in casual conversation. To that I
say, ‘‘Phooey.’’ Social media marketing is as much
about getting to know someone on a personal as
well as a professional level. Not only that, how are
you going to get to know others if you don’t converse
with them? The mix of personal and business content
is a matter of balance.
 One thing you don’t want to do is solicit business or
‘‘pitch’’ to people. You know the type: ‘‘Thanks for the
follow. Check out my blog at _________.’’ It’s okay to let
people know what you do, but Twitter is a medium for
conversation, not solicitation. Include a link to your
Web site in your Twitter bio. Those who have an
interest will check you out.
TWITTER CASE STUDIES
How Dell Uses Twitter
Dell started using Twitter to promote items for sale via its
Dell Outlet store. Ricardo Guerrero, Global Project Manager
for Dell, began experimenting with the application as a
means to connect to customers looking for deals on Dell’s
refurbished equipment. The result has been nothing less
than phenomenal. Over two million dollars worth of prod-
ucts have been sold with no marketing costs incurred.
To deepen the company’s involvement, several members
of Dell’s digital communications team set up accounts using
their ﬁrst name with ‘‘atdell’’ as their Twitter handles. Chief
blogger Lionel Menchaca (@lionelatdell) was the ﬁrst, using
128
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

it as a way to encourage interaction with the Direct2Dell
blog.
Another
Dell
staff
member,
Richard
Binhammer
(@richardatdell), began testing it as a way to help manage
Dell’s corporate reputation. ‘‘I started by watching what
people were saying about things that were happening on
the Web,’’ said Binhammer. ‘‘I then took a more active role
participating in those conversations. I did not use Twitter as
a way to shill Dell, but participated in communities of
interest.’’
That early involvement morphed into a full-blown mar-
keting and corporate communications strategy that has
become a hallmark of the company. ‘‘Twitter has become
an outworking of Dell’s business model, direct. It’s a way for
us to connect directly with consumers to answer questions,
address concerns and interact with those who mention Dell
in their tweets. This, along with other avenues for social
media outreach, has helped stem the tide on negative senti-
ment which, at one time, was as high as 49 percent,’’ he
stated.
Binhammer outlines a number of reasons companies
should use Twitter as a way to:
1. Gather sentiment and information about your com-
pany
2. Begin a dialogue with customers
3. Address concerns and solve problems
4. Share
information
about
the
company
and
its
products
Binhammer urges businesses to refrain from practicing
reason 4 early on, but establish yourself as an active com-
munity participant by ﬁrst engaging in the other behaviors.4
Zappos CEO, Tony Hsieh (@zappos)
One of the ﬁrst and perhaps most notable CEOs using
Twitter is Tony Hsieh (pronounced shay), CEO of online
shoe retailer Zappos. Hsieh took time to answer some ques-
tions I posed and his responses have been included in
interview form, with his permission.5
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 129

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
What prompted you to start using Twitter? How long
have you been doing so? Were there other CEOs using
it at that time?
I ﬁrst started using Twitter in March 2007 at the SXSW
Interactive Conference. While at the conference, I found
it was a great way to ﬁnd out what was going on during
the day at the conference as well as ﬁguring out what
parties to go to at night. I wasn’t aware of any other CEOs
using it at the time.
After the conference, I introduced it to my friends in
Vegas (where I live now) as well as my friends in San
Francisco (where I used to live). I found it was a great way
to ﬁnd out what was going on and for meeting up with
friends in Vegas. I also found that it was a great way to
keep in touch and feel connected to my friends in San
Francisco.
After using it with just my close friends for about a year, I
realized how much Twitter had allowed me to form more
personal connections with everyone, so we decided to
introduce it to Zappos as a way of growing our company
culture. We’ve found that it’s been great for building
more personal connections with both employees and
customers.
New employees are introduced to Twitter during orien-
tation, and we also offer Twitter classes to all employees.
Employees aren’t forced to use it, but when there are so
many Zappos employees using it, many employees just
gravitate naturally to it.
We have several hundred employees on Twitter. You can
ﬁnd a list of them here: http://twitter.zappos.com/
employees. And we’ve aggregated all their tweets here:
http://twitter.zappos.com/employee_tweets.
What beneﬁts have you accrued personally and
professionally as a result?
At Zappos, our goal is to build the brand to be about the
very best customer service and the very best customer
experience. However, our #1 priority is actually not
customer service. Our #1 priority is company culture.
130
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

Our belief is that if you get the culture right, then most of
the other stuff, like great customer service and building a
great brand, will happen naturally on its own.
Twitter allows us to build and expose our company
culture both internally to employees as well as to cus-
tomers. Part of the Zappos brand is about forming per-
sonal connections, and for us that happens through the
telephone as well as through Twitter.
As for myself, I’ve been able to form personal connections
with many of our employees and customers through
Twitter, and it helps everyone feel like they are dealing
with real people, not a faceless corporation or CEO.
Also, I wrote this blog post titled ‘‘How Twitter Can Make
You A Better (and Happier) Person’’: http://blogs.zap
pos.com/blogs/ceo-and-coo-blog/2009/01/25/how-
twitter-can-make-you-a-better-and-happier-person
In what ways are you using the app? (By ‘‘you,’’ I
mean both you personally and the company.)
As I mentioned, part of the Zappos brand is about forming
personal connections and Twitter is just another means
like, say, the telephone. I believe everyone at Zappos,
including myself, is doing just that . . . creating more
personal relationships with everyone, one tweet at a time.
Along with you, many Zappos employees tweet.
You’ve even incorporated a tweet stream into your
Web site. What’s been the driving force behind such
integration? What beneﬁts are you seeing?
Culture is our #1 priority and I think it’s helped our
culture by giving employees more of an opportunity to
learn about each other personally, as well as by giving
outsiders a glimpse into our culture.
Are you using Twitter in similar fashion to Dell, both
as a listening post and customer service tool?
We like to interact with twitterers on a personal level
while being as transparent as we can. If someone asks
a customer service question on Twitter, the @zappos_
service twitter account usually responds.
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 131

What advice would you give to other CEOs who may
be considering using Twitter? Any cautions?
I would say ﬁrst start using it with a group of around 10
friends who will all commit to doing it as well, and you’ll
learn naturally over time how to tweet. I would also
experiment with following different people to ﬁnd out
what type of twittering you enjoy and what annoys you.
You can ﬁnd a list of the top 100 twitterers (in terms of
number of followers) at: http://www.twitterholic.com
What other thoughts would you like to share?
Just a fun story I like to tell. An employee twittered out
that she could really use a cheeseburger because she
was hungry. She wasn’t actually expecting a cheese-
burger to magically show up, but it just so happened
that another employee was on her way to work, so she
decided to stop by McDonald’s, and within 10 minutes
the ﬁrst employee had a cheeseburger on her desk. She
was wowed by that experience. Since our #1 priority is
company culture, moments like this just help build our
company culture even more.
Amy Wood, Television News Anchor (@tvamy)
Amy Wood (@tvamy), news anchor with WSPA-TV, in Spar-
tanburg, South Carolina, is using Twitter as a way to con-
nect with viewers by including interactive segments into
evening news shows, not unlike we have become accus-
tomed to seeing on cable news channels such as CNN.
However, Wood is quick to point out that she started using
Twitter a full six months before Rick Sanchez or other CNN
anchors adopted the practice. In fact, where the use of
Twitter and other forms of social media at the local level is
concerned, Wood is most deﬁnitely a pioneer. ‘‘In this mar-
ket, I’m the only one using it,’’ she says.
Wood has a very clear rationale for using Twitter. ‘‘In the
good old days of television news, viewers were very loyal.
Anchors were seen as celebrities. Now, everything is so
cluttered, viewers hardly know who you are. Social media
is a way to break through the clutter,’’ Wood states.
132
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Using social media offers a number of other beneﬁts,
Wood asserts. ‘‘For the longest time, we had trouble reaching
younger viewers,’’ she says. ‘‘Social media has helped us
resolve that.’’
Regarding her approach to using Twitter, Wood says,
‘‘I’m very transparent. I want to help people understand how
TV works. Social media is a place where my personality can
shine through and I can be very ‘human.’’’
In addition to using Twitter, Wood has set up a Facebook
page for the station and maintains her own blog, The Ribbit
(www.theribbit.com). Her success with the medium has even
inﬂuenced other stations in the broadcast company’s group
to adopt the approach.
‘‘The handwriting is on the wall. No longer can television
stations see themselves as a one-way broadcast medium. In
particular, news anchors have to be accessible again. Social
media is a way to achieve that goal,’’ states Wood. ‘‘It may not
be mainstream yet, but it’s coming and fast.’’6
OTHER MICROBLOGGING PLATFORMS
While Twitter is the ‘‘king of the hill’’ where microblogging
tools are concerned, I would be remiss in my duties if I didn’t
at least mention some of the others.
Jaiku
Jaiku is a forerunner to Twitter, serving much the same
purpose, and is owned by Google. It bills itself as an ‘‘activity
stream and presence sharing service that works from the
Web and mobile phones.’’ Jaiku (the name is a takeoff on the
Japanese term ‘‘haiku’’) is more of a lifestreaming applica-
tion in that you can incorporate feeds from other apps.
Followers can comment on posts, so it has a bit more of a
conversational feel. Like Twitter, Jaiku has mobile phone
capabilities as well.
Plurk
A couple of things differentiate Plurk from its counterpart
Twitter: the user interface and the forums-like feel to the
conversations. The best way to describe the interface is to
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 133

imagine boats ﬂoating down a stream, in that it shows
updates in horizontal form via a scrollable timeline.
Each of the ‘‘boats’’ contains a short (up to 140-character)
message from either the user or one of his or her friends.
Users interact by clicking on the message, thereby opening
a window showing responses from the user’s friends along
with a form ﬁeld to input your own response. This allows the
application to be very conversational, but it can be unwieldy
if several people join the conversation, or if there is a bevy
of interaction.
When Plurk was ﬁrst introduced, the novelty resulted in
great
user-adoption,
even
spawning
something
called
‘‘Plurkshops,’’ topically-centric interactive workshops using
Plurk as the conduit for discussion. However, once the
novelty wore off, most users went back to Twitter.
Yammer
Think of Yammer as Twitter, but focused strictly on business
use. An enterprise version of Twitter, if you will. Only indi-
viduals with the same corporate address can join a given
network. Yammer is free to use, but companies can claim
their networks to get administrative rights and features on
a cost-per-user basis. Yammer also offers mobile applica-
tions for iPhone and BlackBerry. I have found Yammer to
be extremely useful for companies that have employees
in disparate locations as a way for them to immediately
interact.
WHEN DOES THE ‘‘MAGIC’’ HAPPEN?
I was afraid you were going to ask that. You see, by partici-
pating in the conversation, the magic is happening—but you
have to give it a chance.
Social media marketing does not lend itself well to
formulas. ‘‘Markets are conversations’’ and ‘‘participation
is marketing’’ are the only ones I know that work. Remember
rule #1: You have to win the right to be heard. By partici-
pating in the ongoing conversation, you turn strangers into
friends and friends into customers. But, there is no ‘‘X times
Y divided by Z’’ equals a lead or conversion.
134
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

That’s true with a lot of advertising, is it not? Can you
easily factor the ROI of a billboard, newspaper ad, or TV
commercial? One thing is for sure: Conversing on Twitter is a
lot less expensive than a television commercial!
If you have been selective and purposeful in choosing
those you follow and have concentrated your efforts on
providing value to your growing network, you will become
a resource others trust. And the longer you do so, the more
trust you’ll earn. So, go ahead, jump in the Twitterstream
and see where it takes you!
Social Media Marketing in 140 Characters or Less 135


CHAPTER ELEVEN
Lights! Camera! Action!
Use Online Video to
Market Your Business
Let me state loudly, clearly, and for the record that online
video and indeed online television is the technology to watch
(no pun intended) in the coming years. Thanks largely to
the expansion of broadband, there is a seismic shift toward
digital distribution of video content, including HD-quality
video. We are also experiencing a small-camera revolution,
which includes webcams and portends a continued rise in
consumer-generated content.
YouTube was just the beginning. Now it’s accompanied
by sites like ooVoo, seesmic, Revver, Viddler, Kyte, Vimeo,
and Fliqz, and the list just keeps growing. People are ﬂocking
to their computers to watch television programs on demand
on sites like Hulu, Miro, and Joost. There is a constant
stream of live video on Ustream, Stickam, and Justin.tv.
And let me not forget video delivered via iTunes on portable
devices like iPods and iPhones.
Video is everywhere we want it to be and available on
demand when we choose to consume it. All of this points to
the fact that, more than any other technology, including
137

social networks, online video is the next killer app of the
Web. The future of the Internet is video.
THE SMALL-CAMERA REVOLUTION
In the past, if you wanted to make a video for your business,
you had to hire a production company or ad agency (who, in
turn, hired the production company), spend tens of thou-
sands of dollars, and, as often as not, end up with a product
much different than you expected. Edits and retakes were
costly, so you often had to settle for less than what you had
hoped for.
This is no longer the case. Now, with a small, inexpensive
camcorder and low-cost (or even free) video-editing software,
you can create your own videos at a fraction of the cost. In
fact, you can purchase easy-to-use, hand-held, HD-quality
camcorders for under $200!
Bizzuka’s Recession Marketing Story
The costly scenario just described was played out to the
letter at the company where I serve as marketing director,
Bizzuka. We spent somewhere in the neighborhood of
$20,000 to have a video professionally created to show-
case our company’s content management system software
products. While the end result was very satisfactory, it took
months
to
complete
the
project,
which
signiﬁcantly
exceeded our budget in the process.
When the recession hit in the fall of 2008, we decided to
create what we referred to as a ‘‘video whitepaper’’ and talk
about ways small businesses could save money in market-
ing and advertising. Needless to say, this time we didn’t
hire a professional videographer. Instead, we bought a
$600 HD camcorder, a $100 wireless microphone, and a
$50 tripod and set out to make our own videos. We inter-
viewed thought-leaders in the web development, marketing,
public relations, and social media industries. We quickly
edited the series using iMovie software that came loaded
on our CEO’s MacBook, and within a few weeks released a
nine-part series titled Nine Ways to Maximize Your Marketing
Dollars During the Recession.
138
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

We created a microsite to house the videos and uploaded
the series to YouTube and our company public proﬁle on
Facebook. Then we used free social media channels like
Facebook and Twitter to create buzz about the series and
propagate word of mouth. The only money we spent on mar-
keting was $200 for a press release syndicated via PR Web.
We experienced more trafﬁc to our Web site in two weeks
than we would normally have seen in two months. The videos
were viewed hundreds of times, creating exposure for the
company that we never would have been able to afford using
advertising. Dell even picked up the series for use on their
small business blog, opening the company up to the exact
audience we wanted to reach: small business owners. For
less than $1,000, we were able to generate more news and
interest in our company than the $20,000 professionally
created video ever did.
I’m not suggesting that professional videos are no longer
needed; just that there are less expensive ways to go about it,
which, given the bent toward realism that pervades the
social Web, are perfectly acceptable.
Mojitos as a Social Object
YoumayrecallthatItalkedaboutMiamiRealtorInesHegedus-
Garcia in chapter 6. One of the most interesting outcomes of
Hegedus-Garcia’s involvement with social
media involves,
oddly enough, mojitos!1 ‘‘In December of 2007, I was playing
with SEO keywords related to my business, real estate in
Miami, when I happened to notice that, at the time, ‘mojitos’
was the #1 keyword searched for in Google. Given that mojitos
are a Cuban drink and that I am of Cuban descent living in
Miami, the mention really struck a chord,’’ stated Hegedus-
Garcia. ‘‘I grabbed my video camera and my husband Rick
and, together, we produced a video on how to make a mojito,
which I posted to my blog. Since that time, the video has been
seen 33,000 times!’’
Hegedus-Garcia says that while the idea has nothing to
do with real estate proper, it is something fun that helps
keep her top-of-mind with friends and associates—so much
so that it has become a ‘‘social object’’ associated with her
brand. ‘‘I regularly post mojito recipes, reviews, photos, and
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
139

videos on my blog and have even gone so far as to set up a
mojitos group on Facebook,’’ she says. ‘‘The lesson I’ve
learned is that everyone has the opportunity to ﬁnd their
social object. Keep an eye open for what works for you. Just
don’t make it mojitos. That’s mine!’’
Blendtec’s ‘‘Will It Blend’’ Success Story
One of the best and most prominent examples to support
this approach is the ‘‘Will It Blend’’ series of videos created by
Blendtec, a little-known company that makes very high-
quality commercial-grade blenders. I say ‘‘little-known’’ be-
cause, prior to the series, they were. That all changed,
however, when George Wright became marketing director.
Soon after starting work with the company, Wright was
on the factory ﬂoor and came across Blendtec CEO Tom
Dickson testing a blender by blending a 2  4 piece of lumber
(No, that is not a misprint. He was actually grinding up a
2  4!). Of course, this caught Wright’s attention, though he
later found out that such extreme blending was a routine
way of quality testing.
Wright was smart enough to take advantage of a good
marketing idea when he saw one and went out and bought a
few items—a rake, a bag of marbles, a six pack of Coke, a
rotisserie chicken, and a lab coat—spending a total of about
$50. He dressed Dickson up in the lab coat to make him look
like an engineer, grabbed a camcorder, and made the ﬁrst
video, grinding the bag of marbles into powder. He released
the video on YouTube, and the rest is history.
Since that time, Wright and Dickson have recorded doz-
ens of videos, grinding up everything from a rake to an
iPhone3G. This low-cost, do-it-yourself approach to video-
making has paid off in spades for Blendtec. Here are the facts:
 65 million views on YouTube
 120 million views on WillItBlend.com
 200,000+ subscribers
 Total blender sales up 700 percent
 Pull-through impact in commercial products—B2B
and B2C
140
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

 People now know who they are—brand awareness—
retail and commercial
 34th most subscribed channel of all time on YouTube
The company experienced the kind of media coverage
that would make a Fortune 500 CMO jealous:
 National coverage, including The Today Show, iVillage
Live, the History Channel, the Discovery Channel, The
Big Idea, the Food Network, and the Tonight Show
 Print magazine coverage in publications such as Inter-
net Retailer Magazine and Wired
 Blogs: Engadget, Forbes, AdAge, NYTimes, WSJ,
BusinessWeek
It is even reported that Blendtec was mentioned in the
halls of Congress when a congressmen talked about taking a
bill and putting it in a Blendtec blender. (I can think of
several bills Congress has passed that would have been
better served by grinding them into powder.)
Gary Vaynerchuk, Wine Library TV (www.winelibrary.tv)
If the preceding examples are not enough to sway you toward
using video, let me cite yet one more that will most certainly
inspire you to do so. It’s the story of Gary Vaynerchuk and
his company, the Wine Library.
An immigrant from Belarus, Vaynerchuk has expanded
a small wine business from $2 million in annual revenue to
over $50 million, and he did so in just a few short years.
How? By creating an Internet television show called Wine
Library TV (also known as The Thunder Show) that has
vaulted him to celebrity status. Vaynerchuk has appeared
on nearly every major talk show in the country, including
The Today Show, the CBS Early Show, the Ellen Degeneres
Show, and even Mad Money with Jim Kramer.
A big part of Vaynerchuk’s rise to fame can be attributed
to his engaging, hyperkinetic personality, coupled with his
expertise in wines. He is certainly one of a kind, and it only
takes one viewing of his show to understand that. When
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
141

asked why he chose Internet video as his medium, his
answer was concise, ‘‘I have a charismatic personality and
don’t know how to write!’’2
Vaynerchuk is adamant about the use of social media for
business. ‘‘I spent eight years and $4.5 million doing tradi-
tional marketing and only three years using social media,’’
he says. ‘‘It is the only playing ﬁeld that makes sense any-
more. All of your time should be spent there. The ROI is far
more profound in social media.’’
The lesson to be learned in all of these examples is that
small companies can have a big impact. Let me say it again:
Thanks to the Internet, social media, and online video in
particular, small companies can have a big impact! No
longer do you have to pay media gatekeepers to get your
message to the masses or hire expensive ad agencies to
produce media on your behalf. You can do it yourself,
effectively and inexpensively.
Blendtec took $50 and parlayed it into millions. You
might say they just got lucky. I mean, every now and then
someone does win the lottery, right? I prefer to think of
companies like Bizzuka and Blendtec and entrepreneurs
like Hegedus-Garcia and Vaynerchuk as models for small
businesses to follow. An inexpensive camcorder combined
with a little imagination can provide big beneﬁts.
BENEFITS TO USING ONLINE VIDEO
There is no question that, thanks to sites like YouTube,
Google video, Hulu, Miro, Vimeo, and many others, the use
of online video is growing quickly. Over 60 percent of the U.S.
population will watch an online video in 2009, according to
September 2008 report from ABI Research. In case I have not
provided enough evidence to convince you to jump into the
fray, let me continue my attempts.
Online video improves search results. Every major
search engine now uses what is known as a universal
search. That means that, in addition to pulling data from
traditional Web sites, and blogs, search engines index con-
tent from multimedia sites as well.
Think of the beneﬁts your company will accrue by domi-
nating search results. Video, along with blogs and podcasts,
142
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

can provide welcome assistance in obtaining highly-ranked
search engine results.
Let me add one more salient fact. YouTube is now the
second largest search engine on the Internet, having sur-
passed Yahoo in 2008! Had you never thought of YouTube as
a search engine? While it may not have been created with
that purpose in mind that is what the video-sharing site has
become.3 If you don’t have a presence there, why not?
Online video appeals to the way people learn. Some
people are quite content to learn by reading, while others
learn aurally and still others visually. Using the sight and
sound that full-motion video provides increases your site’s
usefulness by appealing to alternative learning styles.
Online video presents a 360-degree view of your
company. Using various types of content, including video,
makes it easier for customers and prospects to get a feel for
who you are and what you do.
GOALS FOR BUSINESS USE OF ONLINE VIDEO
Benjamin Wayne, CEO of video platform company Fliqz
(www.ﬂiqz.com), shared his thoughts on goals small busi-
nesses should focus on when considering the use of online
video. ‘‘Companies should use video in ways that drive key
business initiatives rather than using video for the sake of
video,’’ says Wayne, who outlined the following goals.4
Use Video to Drive Additional Trafﬁc
‘‘Search engine syndication works in such a way now that
video content is more likely to show up on the front page in
search returns,’’ says Wayne. He also suggest that sites that
use e-mail marketing should promote video at the top of a
newsletter, where people are more apt to click on it, and
include a permalink to the video as well to encourage viral
propagation.
Use Video to Create a More Engaging Experience
Video is highly engaging and involves more senses than the
written word or audio. ‘‘Get video on the home page to pull
people into the site. 80 percent of trafﬁc will click on video
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
143

[over] any other,’’ suggests Wayne. He also recommends
using a video gallery. ‘‘A Realtor I know has . . . four times
. . . [the] response rate when video is integrated into the
property listings on his site.’’
Use Video to Increase Rate of Conversions
Wayne says video can be used implicitly and explicitly to
encourage conversions. ‘‘Implicit conversion is more soft
sell. It includes the content of the video plus that which
surrounds it on the page. Use the entire page to help drive
home the sales point,’’ says Wayne.
Explicit conversion, on the other hand, include the video
watermarks, which should include your brand on the start
screen and end screen. Wayne says 50 percent of the viewers
will drop out before the end of video, so it’s important to
include something to promote your brand at the beginning.
Somewhat surprisingly, he also says that ‘‘if the video is
longer than 90 seconds, people will begin to drop off. If you
want 75 percent of audience to see the video, make it 90
seconds or less. Online video is not TV migrating online.
Break the content into clips and give a title to each clip.’’ He
also recommends making the thumbnail image link to the
clip because it helps ensure a better response rate.
SIX WAYS BUSINESSES CAN USE ONLINE VIDEO
Video Blogging/Podcasting
The topic of video blogging and podcasting could take up
more than an entire chapter itself—it could be an entire
book! In fact, quite a number of books on the subject have
been written, including Video Blogging For Dummies, pub-
lished by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Here, though, it is not my
intention to do any more than put video blogging and pod-
casting on your radar.
Video blogs (vlogs) are a form of blogging that uses video
as the medium. They may also be syndicated using a special
form of RSS called an enclosure, where viewers can sub-
scribe and receive updates as new video makes its way to the
blog. That’s the podcasting aspect. (We discuss podcasting
in chapter 12 and RSS in chapter 14.) One of the more
144
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

popular channels for such syndication is iTunes, although
sites like Miro also syndicate video content.
If you keep in mind what was said earlier about how
ﬁndable video is in the search engines, that’s reason enough
to consider incorporating it into your blog, even if you don’t
create a full-blown video blog. This becomes particularly
salient if no one else in your industry is doing it. There’s a
lot to be said for being a ﬁrst-mover.
Product Demonstrations
Halo Supply, a manufacturer of oilﬁeld services equipment
based in New Orleans, uses video created in-house to dem-
onstrate their products. While not quite as exciting as seeing
a rake or iPhone ground to powder in a blender, their videos
do make a convincing case for why their products are popu-
lar in the industry. To create the videos, Halo’s Webmaster,
Tyrus Smith, uses a consumer-grade camcorder, edits the
videos using desktop software, and uploads them to the
company’s YouTube channel and Web site.
Using video in this way can make material more believa-
ble because the viewer can see it in action. Product demon-
strations can also be accompanied by customer testimonials
to reinforce and add credibility to the marketing message.
How-to Videos
By moving product training to video, companies can save
many valuable (not to mention expensive) man-hours. Cus-
tomers appreciate the convenience of being able to view the
videos at their leisure rather than having to schedule live
training. Over time, companies can build a complete library
of training and customer support videos.
Streaming Video
Set this book aside for a moment and visit Stickam.com.
What you will see is live, interactive streaming video. Much of
the programming lacks anything that even resembles cre-
ativity (like the webcam stuck in the corner of a radio studio,
for example), but the interactive component makes it engag-
ing nonetheless. One of the best uses for streaming video is
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
145

to livecast events and conferences. Even our president uses
live streaming for many of his addresses.
Online Video Ads
Though the day of the 30-second spot may be over, thanks
to companies like Turnhere and Spotrunner online video
advertising is gaining a strong foothold. Turnhere can shoot,
edit, and publish a one-minute video ad for about $1,000
using one of 6,000 professional videographers located
across the country. Videos are then uploaded to listing
services and search sites like Yellowpages.com, Citysearch,
and Kudzu.com, as well as YouTube. Turnhere says the day
of slick Mad Men style advertising is over. Realism is the
order of the day, and their videos take on a documentary
style full of information.
Viral Videos
I’ve already gone into detail about one company, Blendtec,
using viral video. It’s a good gig if you can get it. The problem
is that videos designed to go viral often don’t. It’s hard to craft
a campaign that can guarantee viral and word-of-mouth
spread, but if you’ve got a good idea up your sleeve, it’s
certainly worth a try.
EQUIPMENT NEEDED TO CREATE VIDEO CONTENT
Stating the obvious, you need a video camera. That being
said, you don’t need an expensive one. I often use the RCA
Small Wonder, which cost under $200 and is suited to most
applications. It’s similar to the more popular Flip video
camera, which has received more buzz on the Internet.
However, in my opinion, the Small Wonder is a better cam-
corder, offering more features at a lower price. It’s just not
as ‘‘sexy.’’
One of the signal advantages of using either the Small
Wonder or Flip video camera is that you can plug it directly
to your computer’s USB port and easily upload video con-
tent. Both also provide for uploading to YouTube directly
(more or less). Webcams are another option, and the quality
146
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

of embedded cameras is much better than in past years.
In addition, many cell phones offer acceptable video fea-
tures that can be easily uploaded to your computer as well.
Of course, if you have the budget, nothing is as nice
as having a professional-grade camcorder. Prosumer-level
cameras can be purchased anywhere from $3,000 to
$6,000.
For editing software, I recommend Camtasia Studio.
At $299, it’s not expensive, and it comes with plenty of
easy-to-use editing features. While it’s designed more for
screencasts, I’ve used it successfully for more general video
production. Of course, Windows Moviemaker is free and
comes loaded on PCs, and nothing beats iMovie and Final
Cut Pro for the Mac.
One more free option speciﬁcally designed for use in
screen captures is Jing. It can capture still images or video.
Jing was created by Techsmith, the same company that
makes Camtasia Studio.
YOUTUBE AND OTHER VIDEO SHARING SITES
Once you create your video, where do you put it? Aside
from your Web site or blog, there are a number of video-
sharing sites, YouTube being the most well-known. I have
to be honest in saying that I have mixed feelings about using
YouTube for business purposes, considering that it is extre-
mely entertainment-oriented. One alternative I recommend
is Viddler (www.viddler.com). Quite a number of small busi-
nesses use Vimeo, but they explicitly state in their terms
of service that it is not for commercial use. In fact, an
account I had was deleted for that very reason. (I learned
it pays to read the terms of service ﬁrst!)
There are a number of white-label video services avail-
able as well. I’ve already mentioned Fliqz, which is afford-
able for small business. Brightcove is a popular option,
but it is better suited to enterprise or corporate use. Viddler
also offers a reasonably priced premium version well-
suited for business use. If you’re interested in streaming
live video, then Ustream or Stickam are good options to
consider.
Lights! Camera! Action! Use Online Video
147

CONCLUSION
Chad Hurley, CEO and co-founder of YouTube, had this to
say about the future of online video5:
In ten years, we believe that online video broadcasting
will be the most ubiquitous and accessible form of
communication. The tools for video recording will con-
tinue to become smaller and more affordable. Personal
media devices will be universal and interconnected.
Even more people will have the opportunity to record
and share even more video with a small group of friends
or everyone around the world.
Over the next decade, people will be at the center of their
video and media experience. More and more consumers
will become creators. We will continue to help give people
unlimited options and access to information, and the
world will be a smaller place.
If you have yet to give video a try, what are you waiting
for? Grab your camcorder and start driving more trafﬁc to
your site, creating higher levels of engagement and convert-
ing more prospects into customers.
148
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER TWELVE
Podcasting
Overlooked, Underutilized
Marketing Tool
Maybe you don’t have a face for video. Then how about a voice
for radio? If so, a podcast may be just the marketing tool for
you. Podcasting, as we will see in a moment, can be either
audio or video. It’s not the media that makes it a podcast.
Something called RSS does that. But I’m getting ahead of my-
self. One thing is for certain, podcasting is an underutilized,
overlooked marketing tool that offers a number of beneﬁts.
WHAT IS A PODCAST?
Apple’s Web site deﬁnes podcasts as ‘‘an episodic program
delivered via the Internet using an XML protocol called RSS.’’
(Thought you’d love that.) Let’s deﬁne it more in layman’s
terms.
Remember when you had to scour the newspaper or
TVGuide to ﬁnd your favorite television shows, then gather
at the appointed time to watch? Later, TiVo and DVRs came
along, allowing you to record programs for viewing as it ﬁt
your schedule. Apply that same methodology to the Internet
and you have podcasting.
149

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Podcasts are digital media (music, the spoken word, or
video) distributed over the Internet and downloaded onto
your computer, MP3 player, or mobile device to watch or
listen at your convenience. They are ‘‘asynchronous’’ in that
they are not time-frame dependent, and can be consumed at
a different time than they were created, a function ofﬁcially
known as time-shifting. MP3 is the most popular ﬁle format.
The important thing to remember in what differentiates
a podcast from, say, streaming audio or video is the ability
to subscribe to a particular show via a special type of RSS
feed. (We cover RSS in more detail in chapter 14.)
Though the same content can also be made available by
direct download or streaming, a podcast is distinguished
from most other digital media formats by its ‘‘ability to be
syndicated, subscribed to, and downloaded automatically
when new content is added,’’ according to Wikipedia.1 The
ability to subscribe to a show and have it downloaded when
new content is posted for retrieval is the key factor. That’s
what makes a podcast a podcast. Make sense?
There are a couple of explanations about how the term
evolved. The most popular is that it’s a portmanteau of
‘‘iPod’’ and ‘‘broadcast.’’ Another is that ‘‘POD’’ is an acronym
for ‘‘Personal On-Demand.’’ Choose whichever version most
appeals to you. Also: You don’t have to have an iPod (or ‘‘i’’
anything) to consume podcasts. Any portable media player
will do.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF PODCASTING
Practically speaking, podcasting began in 2001 as a collab-
oration between former MTV VJ Adam Curry, early Internet
entrepreneur Tristan Louis, and Dave Winer, one of the true
pioneers of the Internet. Winer had created a technology
known as RSS, a method for syndicating Web content. A
special form of RSS, called an RSS enclosure, enabled the
transfer of digital media content from one place to another,
such as from a Web site to your iPod.
(I know it sounds very geeky, but think of an RSS
enclosure as an envelope in which you put a letter. When
your computer or MP3 player receives the envelope, it simply
plucks out the media ﬁle and stores it until such time as you
150
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

choose to consume it.) Anyway, using RSS, the three created
the ﬁrst podcast prototype, and the genre was born.
In the early years, some technical expertise was required
in order to create podcasts, as the technology had not
evolved to where it is today. Now, creating a podcast is as
easy as picking up the telephone and dialing a number or
uploading the ﬁle to a blog. (I outline three different ways to
create a podcast later in the chapter.)
Podcasting has grown in popularity, too. Research ﬁrm
eMarketer projects that growth will continue at least through
2013, when there will be 37.6 million people downloading
podcasts on a monthly basis, more than double the 2008
ﬁgure of 17.4 million.
Established traditional media entities such as NPR, CNN,
and Fox News are repurposing content from radio or televi-
sion for use as podcasts, which has aided in its growth and
adoption. iTunes, the most popular podcast ‘‘catcher,’’ has
also contributed signiﬁcantly to its growth. Even retail giant
Wal-Mart has jumped on the bandwagon.
BENEFITS TO USING PODCASTS
The key advantage of podcasts as marketing tools is that
they are highly targetable. As with blogs, you can create
podcasts about any topic. It is truly a niche-marketing tool in
that respect. Convenience is another factor. People can
listen or view the content when it suits them and take it
with them wherever they go. Podcasting is also a way to
distinguish yourself from your competition, especially if they
don’t use podcasting themselves.
‘‘The podcast medium has opened up a whole new way of
doing business. Podcasting represents an extremely efﬁcient
and effective way to communicate with customers, employ-
ees, and even investors,’’ said professional podcaster Michael
Harper, CEO of Podcast Tune-up. ‘‘Its simplicity is what
makes it so powerful as a tool! Don’t be fooled though; to
be successful, rules must be followed and effort must be given
to organize and produce a winning show!’’2
Even if you don’t have a voice for radio (audio in this
case), there is no need to worry. As with all forms of social
media content, the emphasis is on reality—real content with
Podcasting
151

true voices. It’s a departure from the broadcast radio stereo-
type. That is not to say you shouldn’t aspire to good produc-
tion values—it’s just that you don’t need to sound like NPR’s
Carl Kasell to create a podcast.
PODCASTING RESOURCES
So you have cleared your throat, warmed up your vocal cords,
and are willing to give podcasting a try. Where do you start?
To help, I have pulled together a list of podcasting resources:
Podcasting Software
Audacity (http://audacity.sourceforge.net): Free, easy-to-
use audio editor and recorder for Windows, Mac OS X, GNU/
Linux, and other operating systems. Audacity is my choice
for desktop editing. Don’t be put off by the fact that it carries
no price tag either. It’s a very good entry-level digital mixer.
GarageBand: ForuseonMacsaspartoftheiLifesoftware
suite, GarageBand turns your Mac into a full-feature record-
ing studio. Though more popularly used for recording and
mixingmusic,it’sjustasusefulforrecordingthespokenword.
Audacity or GarageBand facilitate recording of audio
ﬁles, but they don’t create podcasts. Remember, that’s the
role RSS plays. For Mac users, Apple does offer a complete,
end-to-end podcast production software package called Ap-
ple Podcast Producer, which manages the process of record-
ing content, encoding, and publishing podcasts for playback
in iTunes and on iPod, iPhone, and Apple TV. Podcast
Producer is only available as part of Mac OS X Server,
however, which limits its use. Don’t worry. You don’t need
that to create your podcast. In fact, you don’t even need a
computer. You can record a podcast using a telephone.
Podcasting Sites
Blog Talk Radio (www.blogtalkradio.com): Blog Talk Radio
is a free Internet radio service that allows you to record live
just by picking up the phone and calling a speciﬁed number.
Once the program is recorded, it is available for on-demand
download. If you have an account, you can also submit the
programs to iTunes. Blog Talk Radio allows for up to ﬁve
152
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

callers in addition to the host, so it is ideal for interactive
panel discussions or for those who may want to feel like
Rush Limbaugh and take calls from listeners.
TalkShoe (www.talkshoe.com): Like Blog Talk Radio,
TalkShoe enables users to create live Internet radio shows
or interactive podcasts. It, too, turns the program into a
podcast. One signiﬁcant difference is that, using its Shoe-
Phone application, TalkShoe can handle many more call-
ers—up to 250, in fact. (I would hate to be the moderator for
that conversation!) TalkShoe also has both Facebook and
iPhone applications.
GCast (www.gcast.com): Remember that audio ﬁle you
created with Audacity or Garageband? GCast is a site where
it can be uploaded and encoded as a podcast. That’s just one
option: The other is, as with Blog Talk Radio or Talkshoe, to
record a podcast using the phone. (The difference here is that
it is not live Internet radio.) GCast hosts the audio and
creates the RSS feed that enables listeners to subscribe to
your content. The service is free to use as well.
Podomatic (www.podomatic.com): Podomatic is another
podcast hosting site,also free, that allows youto uploadaudio
recordings or record on the site via a webcam or microphone.
Users get their own page where the podcasts are displayed.
Utterli (www.utterli.com): Another free podcasting site
is Utterli. I have to admit, though, that Utterli is a bit hard to
deﬁne. It’s a hybrid, part microblogging, part-podcasting site
where you can upload multiple types of media, from text to
images, video, and audio. Like many of the services men-
tioned above, you can also call in using a special number and
PIN and record an ‘‘utter.’’ Users can subscribe to your utters
via SMS or e-mail.
One of the more proliﬁc users of Utterli is public relations
professional Doug Haslem. Here he provides a thorough ex-
planation of how he uses Utterli, a platform he refers to as
a ‘‘multimedia mobile posting and social networking tool.’’3
I use Utterli to create shortish blog posts to cross-post
to DougHaslam.com. I can post from anywhere, using
any mobile phone. This means I can do a quick blog post
from a trade show, for example. More regularly, I do
mini-posts in the mornings before I go to work. I mix a
Podcasting
153

photo, short text (1,000 characters) and a short audio
version together. I tend to have any Utterli go through
Twitter, then I manually post to my blog the ‘‘Utters’’ I
want there.
I can also do video, photo, audio and/or text and mix
them together any way I want for a post. I suppose you
can do that other places, but the ability to do it here in
conjunction with the mobile posting referenced above is
pretty valuable.
There is a pretty active social network on Utterli, so on
occasion after posting I will listen to others’ audio posts
and often respond. Plus, my blog posts will also show if
anyone responded via Utterli, which is nice on the blog. I
would say, though, that the Utterli social network is less
important to me than the ability to cross-post, post via
mobile and mix media.
Links to Sites Containing an Aggregate
of Podcast-related Resources
Podcasting Toolbox (http://mashable.com/2007/07/04/
podcasting-toolbox/): This list of over seventy resources
from popular social media site Mashable contains resources
including podcast hosting, recording and advertising sites,
podcast creation software, and podcast resource guides.
Robin Good Podcast Directory (http://www.master
newmedia.org/podcast_directory/): This is an ever-growing
list of some 80 podcast search engines and directories to
which you can submit your podcast.
Podcasting Equipment
If you decide that the telephone or computer’s microphone
is no longer sufﬁcient and want to take your podcast to the
next level in terms of professionalism, here are some
resources:
BSW (http://www.bswusa.com/podcast.asp): BSW is a
leading supplier of podcast recording and editing equipment.
They offer an inexpensive podcast starter package that comes
with a studio-quality microphone, a mixer with USB output to
synch it with the computer, and all the accessories.
154
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Blue Snowball USB microphone (http://www.bluemic
.com/products/snowball): Not only is this microphone cool-
looking, it sounds great as well. It plugs directly into your
computer via USB cable. No other software is needed.
Zoom H2 and H4 portable recorders: These come
highly recommended for both portable and studio use.
They are available at the BSW site and on Amazon.com.
Professional Podcasting Services
If you would rather outsource the production of your podcast
to true professionals, I recommend Podcast Tune-Up (www
.podcast-tuneup.com), a company that provides education,
training, and production services.
EASY WAYS TO CREATE A PODCAST
Blog Talk Radio—Live Internet Radio
Web content management company Bizzuka uses Blog Talk
Radio to produce a weekly Internet radio program called
User Friendly Thinking. The show is co-hosted by Bizzuka
CEO John Munsell and me, and we interview Internet mov-
ers and shakers.
We chose BTR for a number of reasons. First, it was free
to use. Second, it was easy. The host manages an online
switchboard that identiﬁes callers and has a special host
number and PIN. Everyone else, up to ﬁve additional callers,
dials in using a guest line. It’s really that simple. Once the
program starts, it is recorded for on-demand download later.
Listeners can also subscribe using an embedded RSS feed or
iTunes. Third, we found it to be the most convenient way to
facilitate conversations with guests from across the country
and even the world. The program is broadcast live at a
scheduled time, but we ﬁnd most of our listeners download
the archived version.
Audacity—Easy to Use Desktop Recording/Editing
If having guests call in is not an issue, or if everyone involved
with the podcast is on the premises, and you don’t intend to
broadcast the show to a live audience, I highly recommend
Audacity for its ease of use. Recording is facilitated with one
click, and you can layer multiple tracks to include music or
Podcasting
155

other pre-recorded audio. You can export to a number of
formats, including MP3. Your audio ﬁles can then be
uploaded to the podcast hosting sites mentioned above for
archiving and podcast encoding.
Using Your Blog to Publish Podcasts
I would be remiss if I didn’t mention that certain blog plat-
forms are well suited to podcasting—TypePad and Word-
Press in particular. TypePad recognizes an audio ﬁle when it
is uploaded and does the heavy lifting by adding podcasting
enclosures to your blog’s RSS feed.
WordPress is not so intuitive and requires the use of a
plug-in(http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/podcasting/).
However, the plug-in provides several features, including full
iTunes support, a dedicated podcasting feed, support for
multiple ﬁle formats, and a player that can be included in
any post and is easy to use.
Submitting to iTunes
Finally, unless you have a WordPress blog and are using
the aforementioned plug-in, you will want to submit your
podcast to iTunes for additional syndication and exposure.
This resource provides instruction on how to go about it:
http://podcastingscout.com/how-to-submit-your-podcast-
to-itunes-music-store.
THREE EXAMPLES OF BUSINESS-ORIENTED PODCASTS
Paul Dunay, Buzz Marketing for Technology
Paul Dunay, global managing director of services marketing
for Avaya, covers the technology marketing beat with his
Buzz Marketing for Technology podcast series. He has been
podcasting since 2005 after reading an article that sparked
his enthusiasm.
‘‘I remember reading a news item that Apple was going to
allow MP3 ﬁles to be posted to iTunes. It didn’t make a big
impression until one night in bed it hit me—MP3 ﬁles
+iTunes—that could be great AND I know how to do that,’’
exclaimed Dunay. ‘‘I couldn’t sleep that night at all—I
had tons of ideas, literally 15 sheets of paper ﬁlled with them.’’
156
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

So excited was Dunay that he recorded and uploaded
content to iTunes within one week. ‘‘It took iTunes about a
month to get it posted. We got our ﬁrst podcast up there
dated August 2005 and beat our main competitor by one
week. We were the ﬁrst consulting ﬁrm to get there and my
boss was ecstatic!’’4
Dunay now records an average of two or three podcasts
per month containing interviews with marketing and tech-
nology innovators. He broadcasts them using the podcasting
application Veotag, which allows podcasts to be ‘‘tagged’’
with clickable labels identifying and segmenting sections of
the content.
‘‘After I did my ﬁrst VeoTag I was hooked. The ability to
jump to the right question and not have to listen to me drone
on for 20 minutes is invaluable,’’ said Dunay. ‘‘You also get
great SEO as a result of the labels because they are index-
able by Google.’’
In regard to equipment, Dunay says he has about
ﬁve different systems: everything from a digital voice re-
corder to home studio. He highly recommends BSW, the
company referencd earlier. ‘‘They know me by ﬁrst name,’’
he says.
Dunay gives the following advice to those considering the
use of podcasting as a marketing tool:
 No ‘‘shovelware’’—you need to make and record for
this medium.
 Have
a
very
conversational
format—think
radio
talkshow.
 Use a strong call to action.
 Commit to a series—I suggest weekly.
 Keep it short—ﬁve to seven minutes is good.
 Cost can be anywhere from zero dollars to a thou-
sand—don’t let that scare you.
 Post the content on iTunes, but don’t expect a lot of
trafﬁc. iTunes doesn’t refer trafﬁc to Web sites.
You can access Dunay’s podcasts by visiting his blog,
Buzz Marketing for Technology (http://buzzmarketingfor
tech.blogspot.com/).
Podcasting
157

Wayne Hurlbert, Blog Business Success
Wayne Hurlbert, president of Blog Business World, hosts the
program Blog Business Success, one of the longest-running
programs on Blog Talk Radio. In the following interview,
Hurlbert talks about why he started podcasting and why he
chose Blog Talk Radio, and he offers some advice for others
interested in using the medium.5
What prompted you to start podcasting?
I have been podcasting since 2006. I was intrigued by the
possibility of reaching an entirely different audience
through the medium of audio. At the same time, I liked
the idea of deepening the conversation with my existing
blog readership by adding an audio component. The
opportunity to interview experts, and discuss various
business-related topics, was an idea that would add
value for my audience as well.
Why did you choose to use Blog Talk Radio as
opposed to doing something similar to what Paul
Dunay does with his Buzz Marketing for Technology
podcast?
I chose Blog Talk Radio for several reasons. I discovered
their new service when they reached out to me as a blog-
ger to become involved with their vision. When I looked
over their interface, it was easy to use and required no
special software or downloads. All that was required
to start a show was a telephone or VoIP connection.
The personal approach of the Blog Talk Radio manage-
ment and staff also impressed me, as they understood
customer service and engagement. I was attracted, as
well, to the combination of the live streaming of the show
over the Internet, and the recording of the show as a free
on demand podcast download. Through my connection
with Blog Talk Radio, I am able to reach a much wider
and more diverse audience than I could ever achieve as
an independent podcaster.
What role or purpose does your podcast serve? What
goals do you hope to achieve?
My goal has always been to help others by providing
valuable information for business people to grow their
158
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

companies successfully. By interviewing knowledge-
able guest experts, and having them share their ideas
with the listeners, I hope that business owners and
managers will discover techniques for building success-
ful organizations.
What topics do you cover? And, is it always interview-
based?
My show is always interview based to provide the widest
possible range of ideas for our listeners. The interview
format also provides an opportunity for the guest to
share knowledge with others. My guests range from
small business people to C-level executives. Many of
my guests are business book authors looking to share
ideas. Other guests are successful businesspeople with a
genuine desire to help others. Topics that have been
prominent on my show are social media and blogging,
sales and marketing, business management, ethical
business, personal ﬁnance and investment, personnel
management and training, and leadership. My show
focuses on the guest, and on their sharing of ideas
with the listening audience.
Other than the telephone, do you use any special
equipment?
I use no other equipment besides the telephone. Blog Talk
Radio provides a wonderful chat room, listener phone-
in opportunities, and a connection to Twitter. The all
inclusive system works very well for my requirements.
What advice might you give a small businessperson
who is considering the use of podcasts for marketing?
When using podcasts, it’s crucial to be authentic. Let
the real you shine through the conversation. Whether
the podcast is solo, or with one or more guests, it’s
important to share ideas and add value. The podcast
should never be one long sales presentation. In fact, I
believe the podcast audience is best served by sharing
useful information and ignoring sales and marketing
considerations.
The podcast builds a person’s reputation as a thought
leader on its own. To add sales and marketing messages
Podcasting
159

beyond the absolute minimum amount could negate the
value of the podcast. Keep the podcast a source of valu-
able information and add real value for the listeners, and
your podcast will be a success for everyone.
Susan Bratton, Personal Life Media
Susan Bratton is the co-founder and CEO of Personal Life
Media, Inc., a multimedia lifestyle brand that produces forty
weekly podcasts covering everything from alternative health
to politics to technology.
In this interview, Bratton shares the Personal Life Media
story along with advice for others interested in using
podcasts.6
What is your vision for Personal Life Media? What is
its purpose?
Personal Life Media is a podcast and blog network which
currently has forty shows and growing, that focus on deep
conversation and frank discussions around deeply personal
subjects including business, relationships, sustainable living,
spirituality, wealth-creation, careers and hobbies like digital
photography and family history/genealogy.
Why did podcasting become the medium of choice?
Why not video, similar to what Gary Vaynerchuk is doing?
Our target audience covers the age range of 35 to 55. They are
very busy people with careers and family and are more likely to
multi-task by listening to a podcast while doing other things.
Audio is a medium that lends itself to deep discussions and
frank conversations. You can ‘‘work on yourself’’ while you are
multi-tasking, making it perfect for our busy fans.
You intended to start with a single podcast, but
instead, turned it into an entire network. Was it your
intention for it to become a business?
It was my intention to create a publishing business. I launched
a series of sixteen shows in 2007, and we’ve been adding to
our roster ever since. Some of our relationship experts have
amassed thousands of avid fans and had over a million down-
loads of their show!
160
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

What are some of the beneﬁts to using this medium,
especially from a business perspective? What would be
some advice you would give to a small businessperson or
marketer considering the use of podcasting?
Corporate podcasts can be excellent for reaching out to a new
audience, telling your story, deeply explaining some of the more
complex aspects of your business and creating an ongoing
connection to your customers and prospects.
If you prefer talking to writing, podcasting can be a better me-
dium for you than blogging. One thing I’ve noticed is that the
hostsofour showdolovetotalk,evenwhentheyarenotinfrontof
a mic. If that’s you, consider podcasting. It’s free, except for some
initial equipment purchases, it’s episodic and it gets you into an
entirely new distribution channel—iTunes. Often, you can own
your vertical in podcasting as it’s still not a very crowded space.
If you can’t produce your own audio show, there are excellent
resources like Blog Talk Radio, National Podcasting Systems,
and others who provide tools or can produce your show for you.
In your view, how important is it that programs
maintain a degree of professionalism? What might be
some standards you would want to see enforced?
I vehemently disagree with anyone who suggests a podcast or
vidcast can be done with less than professional conduct, but do
agree that the aforementioned tools, many of which are less
than ‘‘broadcast quality’’ are perfectly acceptable today.
You as the host must be buttoned up. Get your intros and
outros down pat. Stick to your show format, don’t do something
different every week. It’s confusing to the audience. Be reliable,
professional and personable. And be the advocate for your
audience. Always keep them #1 in your mind. Be in service
to them, not to your brand or corporate message. That’s what
will make your messages stand out.
Any other thoughts on the use of podcasting for
business communications and marketing?
I like integrating the content into a blog or Web site and creating
an RSS feed to which people can subscribe from that blog or site
or ﬁnd in iTunes. To me, that’s critical. Being everywhere your
prospect might like you to be. Make it easy for them to ﬁnd you.
Podcasting
161

CONCLUSION
Podcasting may be a neglected medium, but it is one that
offers signiﬁcant advantages to both the professional mar-
keter and small businessperson alike. It is easy to record
and produce, affords listeners the beneﬁt of being able to
multi-task while they consume the content and, for those
who prefer talking to writing, is a preferable alternative to
blogging. It is worth your while to add a podcast as part of
your overall social media marketing strategy.
162
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
PR 2.0
Introducing the Social Media
News Release
Allow me to make a confession. I hate writing press releases.
Most often this is because the news I’m writing about isn’t
really news at all, except to my own company. Plus, there
are the obligatory third-party quotes, such as ‘‘We’re very
excited to have so-and-so join us. . . .’’ (There are lots of
excited people in press releases, I’ve noticed.) Add to that lots
of spin, and you have the makings of a traditional press
release.
Journalist Tom Foremski said in his now legendary blog
post Die! Press Release! Die! Die! Die!1 that, ‘‘Press releases
are nearly useless. They typically start with a tremend-
ous amount of top-spin, they contain pat-on-the-back
phrases and meaningless quotes. Often they will contain
quotes from C-level executives praising their customer focus.
They often contain praise from analysts, (who are almost
always paid or have a customer relationship.)’’
Not only that, but some 3,000 press releases are syndi-
cated daily via wire services. Unless you’ve got a PR ﬁrm
following up, making calls or sending e-mails to journalists
163

and bloggers, it is an insurmountable task to even get your
release read! Hardly seems worth the effort, doesn’t it?
So, if not to inform the press, what is the real value of a
press release today? In my view, the value is three-fold: as a
tool for search engine optimization (SEO), direct marketing,
and social media engagement.
Press Releases as SEO
When it comes to online marketing, practically everything
revolves around being ﬁndable via Google and other such
engines, and there is no reason press releases can’t serve
that role as well.
‘‘A press release written with SEO in mind can do much
more than the author originally intended if the right key-
words are used, and links are included that point to the
corresponding page(s) on your site along with an image or
video for universal search results,’’ said search marketing
expert Brian Bille. ‘‘You’ll not only share news to make your
PR department happy, but accrue even more value via
inbound links to your site.’’2
Press Releases and Direct Marketing
As author David Meerman Scott explains so well in his
bestselling book, New Rules of Marketing and PR, we are
no longer beholden to the media gatekeepers.3 Thanks to
syndication via Google and Yahoo! News, blogs, and RSS
feeds, we can now go directly to the audience we want to
reach with our message.
Don’t get me wrong. I’m not suggesting that mainstream
and trade press channels are irrelevant. After all, getting a
story picked up and published in a trade publication is still
valuable. It’s just not as valuable as it used to be. Why not
take the shortcut and go directly to the consumer rather
than the long way around with the media? After all, now ‘‘we’’
are the media. We are publishers and our Web sites are media
properties. It’s best that you start looking at things that way.
Press Releases and Social Media
I want you to forget everything you have ever learned about
writing press releases and introduce you to a new concept
called the Social Media Release (SMR).
164
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

The traditional press release was born over one hundred
years ago at a time when ‘‘all the news that’s ﬁt to print,’’ as
the New York Times put it, was published in newspapers. As
I’ve established, those days are gone. The social media
release (and notice I did not use the term ‘‘press’’) is born
of the time in which we now live, an era in which newspapers,
radio, and TV are faltering, and the Web is predominant.
This new format enables users to incorporate video,
audio, images, PowerPoint slides, and any other form of
multimedia content that can easily be shared via the social
Web into blogs, social networks, microblogs, RSS, and more.
SMR’s don’t completely do away with the traditional release
format, as that is included as well. It’s just much more ﬁnd-
able, ﬂexible, sharable, and conversational than the old text-
based release ever could be. It was born from social media
and is native to it.
‘‘The days of creating and pushing one press release are
over. These are the days of reaching diversiﬁed and equally
pivotal communities when, where, and how they choose to
be reached,’’4 says public relations pundit Brian Solis, a
man globally recognized for his views and insights on the
convergence of PR, traditional, and social media.
In 2006, inspired by Foremski’s rallying cry calling for
the death of press releases as we’ve known them, Todd
Defren, principal at public relations agency Shift Commu-
nications, introduced the concept of social media releases,
which incorporated multimedia, social bookmarking, RSS
feeds, Twitter, and more into the format. He created a
template in the form of a PDF and circulated it across
the Web.
The ﬁrst time I looked at Defren’s SMR template I recall
being impressed with how novel it was and, at the same time,
how difﬁcult it would be to pull it off. This wasn’t your
grandmother’s press release. There were lots of bells, whis-
tles, and moving parts—video, audio, images, links, RSS
feeds, social media bookmarking, and much more.
It seemed like a daunting task that I was not ready to
tackle. Social media consultant Jason Baer agrees. ‘‘ The
hang-up with social media releases has been actually getting
them built,’’ said Baer. ‘‘Most PR folks are not Web program-
mers, and the very nature of what makes a social media
release useful (tags, links, multimedia) makes it tricky to
PR 2.0
165

execute if your deﬁnition of high tech is inserting a footer in
Microsoft Word.’’5
PITCH ENGINE MAKES SMR CREATION SIMPLE
In August 2008, public relations professional Jason Kintzler
did all the hard work for me by creating a social media
release platform called Pitch Engine (www.pitchengine
.com). For the ﬁrst time, creating a new media release was
so easy that even the most non-tech savvy of us could do it.
Essentially, Pitch Engine is a social media release build-
ing application that enables users to embed video from
YouTube, Blip.tv, Flickr, and Seesmic, display PowerPoint
slides using Slideshare, and upload images from your com-
puter’s hard drive.
The application is as easy to use as completing a form. In
fact, that is how the interface is styled, and it includes ﬁelds
for 140-character Twitter pitches (it even has a link built in
that allows users to automatically add the content in a tweet),
summary information, bullet-point news facts, and the full
release. Links can be added to related Web sites, PDFs, or
Figure 13.1
Todd Defren SMR Template
166
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

other ﬁles. There is also a ﬁeld for keyword tags as well as a
shortened URL. Company boilerplate information is included
in the right-hand column.
Pitch Engine uses the ‘‘freemium’’ model: Releases are
free, though they are only housed on the site for 30 days.
Premium services like the archiving of releases and the
creation of a branded newsroom are available at rates easily
affordable by small businesses.
Functionally speaking, since Pitch Engine is the literal
incarnation of what Todd Defren envisioned in his template,
it would be logical to conclude that it served as Kintzler’s
inspiration for the platform. However, that was not the case.
In fact, Kintzler wasn’t thinking in terms of social media at
all. ‘‘Pitch Engine was born out of frustration,’’ he said. ‘‘In
addition to the release itself, journalists would want high-
resolution photos, video, or other materials, and I found it
very difﬁcult to pull all that together in an e-mail.’’6 Instead,
Kintzler would upload all the material to a USB drive and
Figure 13.2
Pitch Engine Screenshot
PR 2.0
167

send it to the media, a practice that could be both time-
consuming and expensive, depending on how many media
outlets he was trying to reach. Kintzler’s initial goal was to
create something that was simple to use and gave journalists
all the information they needed.
It wasn’t long, however, before social media entered the
picture. Kintzler was introduced to Defren’s template and
even started an online community for PR professionals and
others to discuss how to bring PR and social media together.
‘‘The community was a way for me to crowd source develop-
ment and gather feedback,’’ says Kintzler.7
Thousands of companies large and small have now used
Pitch Engine, which now has quite a fan following, including
the aforementioned Solis, who joined the company as a
strategic advisor.
Though Pitch Engine does syndicate releases to Google
News, it is not a wire service in the traditional sense of the
word. Instead it relies on social networks and word of mouth
for viral spread of the message. There is also a real-time
‘‘pitchfeed’’ on the home page of the Web site that is search-
able by industry and keyword that journalists and bloggers
will ﬁnd helpful.
PRWEB COMBINES TRADITIONAL, SOCIAL,
AND SEARCH
Another tool I’ve found to be very helpful that is a bit more
mainstream is PRWeb (www.prweb.com). While it contains
some of the same features as Pitch Engine, its emphasis is
on the release itself, which takes on a more traditional look
and feel. You can upload images and video, though at the
time of this writing you cannot embed content from third-
party sites.
PRWeb is less of a social media tool and more of an
SEO tool, and that’s precisely why I advocate its use. Part
of the user interface incorporates keywords, and keyword-
optimization is built in as well. Plus, it is a wire service in
that it syndicates releases to news media and online news
sources like Google and Yahoo!.
According to the PRWeb Direct Web site (http://www
.prwebdirect.com/about.php): ‘‘We are heavily invested in
168
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

search technologies. Search engine trafﬁc plays a vital role
in the success of your news release. Journalists increas-
ingly rely on major search engines for their research.
Consequently, every press release distributed through our
network is optimized for maximum organic search engine
inclusion. Search engines can then crawl naturally and
efﬁciently to index your press release. Our exclusive tech-
nology and unmatched infrastructure provide the best avail-
able search trafﬁc directed to your news items.’’ PRWeb is so
conﬁdent of its service that it guarantees inclusion of press
releases in major search engines.
Because PRWeb has such authority with Google, the
chances are good that a keyword-optimized, thematically
relevant press release would do well in terms of ranking
highly in search engine returns. I’ve seen it happen over and
over again.
Unlike Pitch Engine, PRWeb does not offer a free option.
Prices range from $80 to $360, with service offerings scal-
ing the higher the price point. I settle for the $200 SEO
release, which I ﬁnd meets most of my own needs. If you
create a large number of releases, you may wish to reserve
PRWeb for those which merit the greatest exposure due to
the cost. However, if getting Google’s attention is of impor-
tance to you, I can think of no better tool for the money than
PRWeb.
USE PITCH ENGINE AND PRWEB IN TANDEM
When possible, I suggest using both Pitch Engine and
PRWeb in concert. Since the Pitch Engine version of the
release provides the most ﬂexibility and interaction, I would
link to it from the PRWeb version in order to generate greater
exposure. You could even style the Pitch Engine SMR to be
more conversational in tone and reserve the PRWeb version
for the more formal language expected from a traditional
release.
Regardless, using them together is the best of both
worlds. You get all the beneﬁts—social media engagement,
search engine optimization, and direct marketing. It’s a
powerful combination. And who knows, maybe mainstream
media will read it too!
PR 2.0
169

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
CREATE A SOCIAL MEDIA NEWSROOM
A logical extension of the social media release is the social
media newsroom. Pitch Engine offers this as a premium
option, but it is conceivable to create one on your own
Web site.
One company that did this was Anheuser-Busch, which,
with the help of Brian Solis, created a site called AB-Extras
(www.ab-extras.com), a social media destination for fans of
Budweiser that was designed to tell the backstory behind the
ads shown during the 2009 Super Bowl.
You may say, ‘‘But I’m not Anheuser-Busch. I’m a small
business and can’t afford a high-powered PR ﬁrm to create
something like this for me.’’ Don’t fret. The wonderful thing
about this and all the social media tools I’ve discussed in this
book is that they are easy and inexpensive to create.
Even Anheuser-Busch, with all their millions, used the
free WordPress.org blog platform to build their newsroom.
There is no reason you couldn’t do the same thing using that
or another popular blog platform. For example, the PR ﬁrm
Figure 13.3
AB-EXTRAS Screen Shot
170
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

Wolfstar uses the TypePad platform for its newsroom (www
.wolfstarnewsroom.com).
Pitch Engine also offers its own social media newsroom
function that archives releases created there.
Since the main criteria for these newsrooms are that they
be capable of archiving all forms of media, allow for user-
interaction, and be imminently shareable, blogs serve the
purpose very well.
CONCLUSION
Think with me for a moment. Over the course of the last six
chapters I’ve talked at length about how you can use blogs,
social networks, online communities, microblogs, videos,
and podcasts to build a strong presence on the Internet
Figure 13.4
Wolfstar Newsroom
PR 2.0
171

and in social media. The social media release and newsroom
are where all of those components can come together to even
further maximize your exposure.
Allow me to once again reference Brian Solis: ‘‘What lies
ahead is nothing less than remarkable. The social media
release is no longer an ‘if ’ or ‘when.’ Thousands of SMRs
are live and wild in the social mediasphere thanks to the
inventive, resourceful, inspired champions who’ve helped
ensure their vibrancy, effectiveness, and residence as a
permanent ﬁxture in the day-to-day toolbox of communica-
tions professionals.’’8
The path to meaningful PR communications has been
cleared. I trust the next press release you write will be in the
form of an SMR.
172
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Other Social Media
Marketing Tools
In the last several chapters I have outlined seven proven,
strategic tools to grow your business using social media. I
could just as easily have included seven more, each deserv-
ing a chapter of its own. In lieu of that, I want to reference
several of the other popular categories of tools. While you
retain your focus on those previously mentioned, I would
suggest that these not be overlooked, for each has its own set
of features and beneﬁts.
SOCIAL MEDIA TAGGING AND BOOKMARKING
Instead of bookmarking sites via your browser’s bookmark
function, why not share the fun and go social, using sites like
Delicious and StumbleUpon. These belong to a category
known as social bookmarking and are a way to organize,
collate, and categorize the Web using a classiﬁcation struc-
ture called ‘‘tags.’’ You are then able to share these book-
marks with others, which is where the social part comes in.
Tags are nothing more than labels applied to a given book-
marked resource. Tagging is a bottom-up, user-generated
form of categorization that allows people to use whatever
173

vocabulary is helpful to them. While this may seem a bit chao-
tic and messy, it has become the de facto standard for anno-
tating and classifying content on the Web. Practically every
form of social media site, from photo-sharing to book-
marking to blogs, uses tagging. You might even notice some
sites have what is referred to as a ‘‘tag cloud’’ to visualize this
structure.
While tags are useful as a means of classiﬁcation, they
also provide value for searches. For Google and other search
engines, those tags are nothing more than keywords index-
able by the engines. Not only that, sites such as Technorati
(www.technorati.com) use tags as the sole method for cate-
gorizing content indexed on the site. Further, most blog
platforms have a ﬁeld just for tags in the posting interface.
A few moments ago I referenced two social bookmarking
sites: Delicious and StumbleUpon. I would like to brieﬂy
describe the purpose each serves, along with the beneﬁts of
using each from a business perspective.
Delicious (www.delicious.com)
I use Delicious religiously as my default bookmarking ser-
vice whenever I want to gather resources for use in writing
blog posts or articles, or for any other reason. In fact, the site
proved to be extremely valuable in doing research for this
book; it enabled me to quickly and easily save posts, Web
sites, and articles that I could come back and refer to later.
There is even a plug-in for the Firefox browser that makes the
job as simple as right-clicking the mouse and picking Deli-
cious from the sub-menu that appears. Because Delicious is
Web-based, I can access the information from any computer,
Figure 14.1
Tag Cloud
174
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

wherever I happen to be at the time. That’s just one of the
advantages to using the site.
Another is the ability to share bookmarks with others.
That’s why it’s called social bookmarking, after all. Delicious
is a useful tool for project teams, workgroups, or entire
departments that need to collect, store, manage and share
information collaboratively. Imagine how much better that is
than using e-mail to send resources back and forth.
StumbleUpon (www.stumbleupon.com)
StumbleUpon is a bookmarking service that uses a browser
toolbar (it only works with Firefox) that allows you to book-
mark sites you like and share them with other ‘‘stumblers,’’
as users are known. Once you ﬁnd a site you would like to
share, you click the thumbs-up icon in the toolbar, and a
dialog box appears that asks for a description of the site’s
content and provides a ﬁeld for tags.
I am a real fan of StumbleUpon for one very good reason:
It can be a source of tons of trafﬁc to your Web site. I recall
the ﬁrst time I checked the trafﬁc statistics on my blog and
noticed that referrer after referrer came from StumbleUpon.
If increased trafﬁc is of beneﬁt to you, then I would encour-
age you to ask friends to bookmark your content.
These are only two of the many social bookmarking sites
on the Internet. Others include Magnolia, Reddit, Digg, and
Furl, to name just a few.
Make Your Content Sharable
You may be wondering how to go about making sure
your content gets bookmarked by others. Let me suggest
two options. One is an application called ShareThis (www
.sharethis.com), which allows content on any site to become
sharable. ShareThis includes links not only to all the sites
mentioned above, but to a bevy of others as well, including
MySpace, Facebook, Yahoo Bookmarks, and Windows Live
(over 20 in all).
ShareThis also enables posting of content to blogs and
includes a forward to a friend feature. You simply place the
ShareThis button on any Web page that you wish to make
sharable. There are options for automatically embedding it
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
175

in blogs—Wordpress, TypePad, and Blogger speciﬁcally—so
that every post becomes sharable. Another similar service is
AddThis (www.addthis.com). I have used both and ﬁnd them
very easy to set up and install.
CUSTOMER REVIEWS AND RATINGS
While the most inﬂuential word-of-mouth recommendations
come from those you know personally, online ratings and
reviews can have signiﬁcant inﬂuence as well. A study by
the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business1 exam-
ined the relationship between the number of online reviews
and sales.
Reviews Increase Sales
‘‘Using data collected from a large online retailer of electronic
products over a six-year period, the researchers found that
the number of reviews has a signiﬁcant positive effect on
sales of products that are perceived favorably by consumers,
while volume has a signiﬁcant negative impact on sales of
products with poor consumer ratings,’’ the study said.
I personally experienced this beneﬁt regarding a book I
co-authored in 2006, titled Realty Blogging. A number of
positive ratings and reviews (and one negative one) were
posted on the book’s page at Amazon.com, and I can testify
that they served to elevate book sales. Not only that, the
book was favorably reviewed on real estate social network
ActiveRain.com, and a number of the site’s members made
purchases as a result.
Other Beneﬁts of Ratings and Reviews
Groundswell, the phenomenal new book by Forrester Re-
search analysts Charlene Li and Josh Bernoff, suggests that
ratings and reviews allow you to ‘‘tap into customers’ enthu-
siasm.’’2 The authors cite eBags.com, a company that has
experienced 30 percent annual growth year after year for the
eight years it has been selling handbags and luggage online.
The company ‘‘turned customers into a powerful asset,’’ said
the authors, and it now places their ratings and reviews
‘‘front and center’’ on the site.
176
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

The authors listed two signiﬁcant beneﬁts to using rat-
ings and reviews:
 Reviews increase the buy rate: Seventy-six percent of
customers use online reviews when making purchases.
 Leverage with suppliers: eBags knows more about
the products it sells than the people who manufacture
them.
There are a number of beneﬁts in addition to those
mentioned in Groundswell:
 Search engine optimization: Reviews increase the
amount of original content on the site. If that content is
topically relevant, it stands to reason that it will help
increase search engine returns.
 Increased user engagement: Visitors will return more
oftentoread recently updatedreviews.Itisevenbetterif
RSS feeds can be tied to product reviews so that
updated information is delivered to subscribers.
 Increased trafﬁc from return visits: If your Web site
offers a rating/review system and your competitors’ do
not, the customer will visit you and not them. You gain
competitive advantage.
 Increased trust: If word of mouth is a highly trusted
source (and it is), the fact you offer a rating/review
system will lend itself to increased trust in your site.
 Word-of-mouth marketing: Some rating/review sys-
tems also include a recommendation component,
which allows site visitors to notify a friend about a
product via e-mail.
CUSTOMER SERVICE APPLICATIONS
The social Web has given birth to a number of new customer
service applications known as idea aggregators. Basically, a
customer can submit an idea, suggestion, question, or com-
plaint, and those are voted up or down by other customers
and commented on. It is a way for companies and customers
to interact, engage, and learn from each other well beyond
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
177

the level facilitated through the typical customer relation-
ship management system or FAQ engine. Two examples of
this type of application are Get Satisfaction and SalesForce
Idea Exchange.
Get Satisfaction (www.getsatisfaction.com) is an objec-
tive third-party site where consumers can submit ideas,
questions, and complaints about any business. Companies
get access to this data for a premium and can ‘‘claim’’ their
page and assign employees as moderators.
SalesForce Ideas (www.salesforce.com) is implemented
bythesponsoringcompanyandisreminiscentofthewayDigg
works in that it allows users to submit ideas that are voted
and commented on. Ideas that rise through the ranks gain
consideration from the company and may be implemented.
Dell uses this application with a site they call Ideastorm.
Thesitewasstartedin2007asawaytogaugewhichideaswere
most relevant and important. To date, approximately 12,000
ideas have been submitted by Dell Users. If you own a Dell
that has a backlit keyboard, you can thank fellow Dell cus-
tomers who used Ideastorm to submit, vote on, and promote
theidea.That’sthereasontheimprovementwasimplemented.
RSS: THE PLUMBING SYSTEM OF THE INTERNET
If there was a Web 2.0 tool that deserved of its own chapter,
RSS is it, and I should probably be ashamed for not making
one. RSS was created by Netscape, and its origins can be
traced as far back as 1997. Do not let that fact escape you.
RSS predates virtually every form of social media technol-
ogy, yet it gets little credit for the service it provides.
RSS, which stands for Really Simple Syndication among
other things (Really Stupid Sounding is another interpreta-
tion) is essentially the plumbing system of the new Internet.
Let’s put it this way: If it weren’t for RSS, there would be no
Web 2.0, at least not from a systems development stand-
point. Yet, it is one of the most ignored and misunderstood
technologies in use today. If anything, I want this chapter to
pay homage to this humble yet vital application.
The best way I know to explain how RSS works is to use
the analogy of the paperboy. Not that you read your daily
newspaper, but if you did, how would you prefer to get it?
178
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

I’d like mine delivered, sitting on my doorstep every morn-
ing. That way, I don’t have to go to the newspaper ofﬁce
or make a trip to the local convenience store. Instead, it’s
delivered to me.
That’s exactly how RSS works. Instead of having to
remember to visit a particular Web site, the content of
that site can be delivered to you via RSS. Two things are
required for that to happen:
 The content must have what’s known as an RSS feed
attached to it.
 You must have what’s known as an RSS reader to
receive it.
More and more content is being ‘‘RSSiﬁed.’’ In the early
days, blogs were almost the only sites you would ﬁnd that
had feeds associated with them. Now, any site that has
frequently updated content, including major mainstream
news sites such as CNN, have feeds attached.
How do you determine which ones do and which don’t?
Usually, you will notice in Figure 14.2, which has become
the standard for all sites carrying feeds.
That solves the ﬁrst problem. What about the second, the
RSS reader? Those are available in abundance, and you
probably use one without even realizing it. For example, if
you use iGoogle or have MyYahoo as your home page when
you log onto the net, it’s a safe bet that you have some type of
RSS feed to which you’ve subscribed.
If that’s not the case, you can use these as your reader.
Google also offers a stand-alone reader called Google Reader
(fancy that). Bloglines (www.bloglines.com) is another popu-
lar reader, as is Newsgator (www.newsgator.com). Firefox and
the latest Internet Explorer browsers have them, as does the
most recent edition of Microsoft Ofﬁce Outlook, which allows
you to have your e-mail and RSS feeds together in one
application.
You gain access to these feeds by subscribing, which is
usually as simple as clicking the RSS feed icon. In the rare
event that you do that and a page of cryptic HTML-like code
appears, go back to the original page, right-click the icon,
and copy the URL associated with it. Then go to your reader
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
179

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
and paste it into the required ﬁeld. Your reader will ﬁnd it
and all will be well. Once you’ve subscribed, content will be
dropped into your reader any time the site is updated, almost
in real time.
There are a number of advantages to using RSS. Unlike
e-mail, it is not subject to spam. In fact, it’s one of the only
forms of online communication that spammers have yet to
ﬁgure out how to inﬁltrate. You receive information only from
sites to which you have subscribed. No more, no less. It’s a
beautiful thing, really.
Its value from a publishing standpoint should not be
taken lightly. If you have a blog, then RSS is most likely
already enabled. However, that may not be the case if your
site is built using some other platform, like a content man-
agement system or Dreamweaver. If you have frequently
updated content in any form—blog posts, news releases,
online calendars, or e-mail newsletters (anything that
moves, frankly), make sure it is RSS-enabled. Not to do so
is to turn away a guaranteed source of trafﬁc. One resource
to help you with that is Feed for All (www.feedforall.com),
which is software designed to make any site RSS-enabled.
Figure 14.2
RSS Icon
180
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW
www.Ebook777.com

I should make mention of a very popular application
known as Feedburner (www.feedburner.com), an RSS feed
management and syndication service that makes your
feed more portable so that it is formatted for all major
directories. Feedburner even provides statistics on feed
subscription and other valuable metrics. It also has an
ad network bloggers can use to monetize their feeds with
advertising.
If you still require a bit more explanation, the best
resource I know of on the net is ‘‘RSS in Plain English,’’ a
short video which can be found by going to CommonCraft
.com. You can ﬁnd it on YouTube as well. Just search for the
phrase in quotes. I promise, once you’ve seen the video,
you’ll know everything you need to about RSS.
PHOTO-SHARING
Sharing images uploaded to the Web on sites like Flickr
(www.ﬂickr.com)
and
Photobucket
(www.photobucket
.com) is another very popular activity that has implications
for business use. For example, one Web design company I
know uploads images of new sites as they are developed. It’s
a way to show off their expertise. Another company shares
product images as well as behind the scenes photos of
employees and company activities such as picnics. It’s a
way for prospective customers to gain better insight into the
company.
Of course, photos are tagged with keywords that are
searchable by Google and other engines, so these sites
become a source of trafﬁc to your Web site and provide
real SEO value.
A WORD ABOUT WIKIS
A wiki is software that lets users work collaboratively to
create and edit content. The word is Hawaiian for ‘‘quick,’’
but I have no clue as to why it garnered that name. (Maybe
the same person that coined the term ‘‘blog’’ created this
one as well.) The most popular wiki in existence is the online
encyclopedia Wikipedia, which contains more than nine
million entries made by 85,000 contributors.
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
181

I’m not suggesting you need anything on the scale of
Wikipedia, but the software is very useful for project teams
or workgroups. Like the social bookmarking site Delicious
that I mentioned earlier, a wiki is a one-stop resource for
collaboration. Depending on the platform chosen, users can
upload and edit documents, video, photos, and text.
Wikis serve a number of uses, from planning a meeting
or corporate event, to archiving internal documents, to
working on a business plan or proposal. I’ve even seen
some TV networks creating fan sites for popular shows
where fans of the show can update or edit information.
You might suggest that this sounds like a formula for
trouble. After all, who knows what kind of content could be
uploaded? However, quite the opposite is true, as commu-
nities tend to police themselves. That’s certainly proven true
of Wikipedia, which has thousands of volunteers who fact
check and edit data submitted to the site.
Earlier versions of wiki software tended to be a bit
‘‘geeky,’’ requiring a certain scripting language to format
information. If you’ve ever added or edited anything in
Wikipedia you know what I’m talking about. However,
over the years newer versions of wiki software have gotten
about as easy to use as Microsoft Word. One wiki platform I
really like is Web Paint (www.wetpaint.com). It is truly easy
to use and requires little if any technical expertise, thanks
to the WYSIWYG editing capabilities.
MOBILE MARKETING: THE AGE OF THE iPHONE
HAS ARRIVED
I could not end this chapter without talking about a technol-
ogy that is very much in the news these days but which has
yet to peak: mobile marketing. The iPhone, to put it mildly,
was a game changer. It’s the all-in-one device that, despite the
small screen, provides powerful access to the Web
From a marketing perspective, the most important
aspects of iPhone technology are the applications, of which
there are hundreds. Think about it. Let’s say an iPhone
owner downloads a branded application that offers some
type of utility. If the application is deemed useful, it could
literally become anchored on the device for life.
182
SEVEN PROVEN STRATEGIES TO GROW

Not only that, according to TNS Global, 74 percent of the
world’s digital messages were sent through a mobile device
in January 2009, a 15 percent increase over the previous
year.3 In emerging markets, the number is even higher.
Even though I don’t cover this topic extensively, it would
pay to keep an eye on the mobile technology space. It will
only grow. There will come a day, and that may not be long,
when we will bypass ﬁxed devices altogether in favor of
mobile communications. When this happens, you can be
sure marketers will not lag far behind.
CONCLUSION
Now that you’ve been introduced to quite a number of social
media marketing tools in this section of the book, we move
on to the really strategic part: developing a social media
engagement plan of action.
Other Social Media Marketing Tools
183


PART III
PUTTING THE
TOOLS TO
GOOD USE
A SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING
PLAN OF ACTION


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
A Brief Word About Web
Sites, E-mail Marketing,
and Search Engines
This section outlines a simple, three-step process for social
media engagement: Listen, Engage, and Measure. Before we
get to that, we need to take a step back and think about other
forms of online marketing that play equally important roles.
In fact, I will go so far as to say that before you begin using
social media, three elements need to be in place: You need to
have an engaging Web site, you should at least consider
using e-mail as a form of marketing, and you should keep
search engine marketing in the forefront of your mind.
CREATE AN ENGAGING WEB SITE
The Day of the Online Brochure is Over
Remember the early days of the Internet when Web sites
were little more than electronic brochures, static relics of the
days when most companies barely noticed the Web? Be-
cause content never changed, visitors weren’t inclined to
return. Neither were search engines.
187

Thankfully, those days are long gone, and now Web sites
provide value to both groups of visitors, human and ma-
chine. Even with all this talk of fancy Web 2.0 paraphernalia,
I believe the company Web site still has relevance. However,
because of the inﬂuence of social media, in order for it to
maintain its standing in the future, changes will be required.
The corporate site will have to become an aggregate of
proprietary and social content and become a conduit for
social interaction.
The Internet Is More About Connections
and Less About Destinations
I’m going to make an assertion that some may ﬁnd arguable.
I believe that, in its current iteration, the Web is less about
‘‘destination silos’’ and more about ‘‘shared connections.’’ In
other words, it’s no longer just about getting visitors to come
to our Web site. In fact, that’s almost an arrogant attitude
that suggests the Web is about ‘‘me, myself, and I.’’ That may
have been the way the Web operated in a former time, but it is
not the way it operates now. These days, it’s about ‘‘we, us,
and them.’’
A perfect example of this mindset was a campaign early
in 2009 that the candy company Mars embarked upon for
their Skittles brand. Instead of creating the typical brand
site, Skittles.com was nothing more than a ‘‘widget’’ that
resided in the upper left-hand corner of the browser. Rather
than taking visitors to pages on its site (which would have
been difﬁcult to do given the small size), links in the site’s
navigation menu took them to other places on the Web where
the brand had a presence.
Click on the ‘‘Friends’’ tab and the Skittles Facebook
public proﬁle appeared. Click ‘‘Chatter’’ and a Twitter search
page for the word Skittles came into view. Click ‘‘Media’’ and
you were taken to Skittles’ YouTube channel. Similarly, click
one of the product links and you were escorted to a Wiki-
pedia page containing product information.
Needless to say, this campaign created quite a stir. In my
view, it was a recognition that what consumers had to say
about the brand was as important as what Mars itself had
188
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

to say. If nothing else, it got people talking about Skittles, if
not actually purchasing the candy.
Disregard Skittles execution of their campaign for a
moment and focus on the underlying philosophy that drove
it. This extreme example supports the claim that the Web
has changed from a one-way broadcast medium to a multi-
directional conversation. I would even recommend that sites
now include, in addition to the primary navigation, a social
media navigational structure linking to all the other places
where a company has a presence on the Web. In so doing,
the company Web site becomes a hub connecting visitors
to a variety of destinations. In fact, one ad agency I know
of commits fully half the real estate on their home page to
aggregating content from their blog, Twitter, YouTube, and
Flickr feeds.
Applications like Facebook Connect, mentioned in chap-
ter 8, are designed to do just that—serve as conduits to
connect visitors on a given Web site to members of their
social graph inside Facebook, enabling both to interact with
the content contained on the site.
Figure 15.1
Skittles
A Brief Word About Web Sites
189

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Creating an Engaging User Experience
Think about how and why you use the Web. Chances are,
you use it when you are looking for something speciﬁc, like a
product, a service, information, or advice. When you are
looking for that speciﬁc something, which sites annoy you,
and which do you most appreciate?
Do you enjoy sites with pop-up windows, ‘‘click here to
enter’’ pages, blinking banner ads, or ﬂash animations that
have dozens of transitions before you ever see the ﬁrst bit of
content? Or, do you eventually do business with sites that
load quickly, are well designed, and make the path to the
information you are seeking obvious and accessible?
Visitors on the Web are task-oriented. They aren’t ‘‘surf-
ers’’ so much as they are on a mission. They’re following an
information ‘‘scent trail.’’ If your site can quickly and easily
facilitate that search, providing answers to their questions
and the information they seek, they are likely to return. If
not, access to millions of other sites is just a mouse-click
away. That’s why it is important that you provide an engag-
ing experience.
‘‘Engagement involves creating a design that visually
makes an impression consistent with the messages that
brought them there. It involves creating a design that directs
them efﬁciently to where they want to go and creating a
navigation process that is logical and helps people accom-
plish their task quickly,’’ said John Munsell, CEO of Web
development company Bizzuka.
‘‘The designmustmake a goodﬁrstimpressionandgetthe
message across. The message needs to be one that says,
‘We’re professional (visually appealing), we’ve got the solution
to your problems (consistent marketing messages), we’re
eager to help you (obvious access to search, contact and
FAQs), and here’s where you’ll ﬁnd what you need (intuitive
navigation)’,’’Munselladded.‘‘In otherwords, simplycreating
a pretty Web site does not constitute engagement.’’1
Blogs Are the New Web Sites
Once upon a time, Web sites were Web sites and blogs were
blogs. It wasn’t difﬁcult to tell the difference. (Of course,
blogs are Web sites, but you know what I mean.) That was
190
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE
www.Ebook777.com

then; this is now. With newer, premium WordPress themes
like Revolution and Thesis, for example, it’s become much
more difﬁcult to distinguish one from the other. Conversely,
traditional content management system (CMS) platforms
are incorporating more ‘‘bloggy’’ types of functionality. Given
that, there is no reason for any company to have a static
site—not when an engaging Web presence is within easy
reach.
DON’T FORSAKE THE USE OF E-MAIL
There was a time when I predicted that e-mail would go the
way of the albatross in terms of its usefulness as a marketing
tool. After all, with the increasing prevalence of spam, spam
ﬁlters that often catch valid e-mails and send them to the
junk folder if not blocking the e-mail altogether, and
crowded inboxes, how could it continue to be effective as
a marketing tool? Or so I thought. Despite its woes, e-mail is
ingrained in the psyche of the Internet and is not going
anywhere. Nor should it.
E-mail Is Still a Very Potent Form of Online Marketing
For a time it was fashionable to dismiss e-mail as a market-
ing tool. With the advent of blogs, RSS, and social networks
like Facebook and Twitter, many predicted its demise. While
it’s true that people now use social networks and blogs more
than personal e-mail, according to a report from Neilsen
Online, e-mail is far from dead! In fact, it appears to have a
very bright future.2
Consider these facts:
 According to an October, 2008, report by the Direct
Marketing Association, the return on investment for
e-mail was $45.06 for every $1 spent, as opposed to
non–e-mail Internet marketing’s $19.94.3
 E-mail provided more than double the effectiveness of
other online marketing methods.
 By the end of 2008, e-mail was estimated to have
driven $28 billion in sales and is projected to drive
$32.6 billion in sales in 2009.
A Brief Word About Web Sites
191

 A survey of B2B marketers in November, 2008, noted
that 68.3 percent intended to increase spending on e-
mail marketing in 2009 (source: B2BOnline.com).
 The DMA estimates spending on e-mail marketing (in
the United States) will increase from $600 million in
2008 to $700 million in 2009.2
A study from e-mail reputation-monitoring ﬁrm Habeus
shows that ‘‘consumers primarily connect with one another
by using e-mail’’ and that ‘‘E-mail is expected to remain an
oft-used communication tool, despite the rise of social net-
works like Facebook.’’3
I agree that e-mail can be a pain. We’re all plagued with
overcrowded inboxes and information that often gets lost or
sequestered away in some folder, becoming virtually im-
possible to retrieve. Still, that doesn’t change the fact that
old-fashioned, opt-in e-mail marketing is an effective tool
when best practices are followed. E-mail is tried and true,
and it has withstood the test of time.
E-mail and Blogs: A Marketing One-Two Knockout Punch
I have long advocated using blogs and e-mail as complemen-
tary online marketing strategies. Blogs serve a customer-
acquisitionfunction,whilee-mailservesacustomer-retention
role. In fact, there are numerous ways blogs and e-mail can
play well together.
 Build lists: Incorporating the newsletter subscription
form, as previously mentioned, is a way for the rela-
tionship ﬁrst established with the blogger to progress
to a relationship with the sponsoring company.
 Use e-mail to solicit blog content: By mentioning
the company blog in the e-mail newsletter, a bridge is
created between the two. In addition, asking readers to
submit suggestions for blog content or even inviting
readers to submit content (guest posts) will further
reinforce the relationship.
 Use old e-mail content for blog content: Repurpos-
ing valuable content that may be languishing in the
e-mail newsletter archive is one way to give it new life.
192
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

 Use blog content for e-mail newsletters: Blogs are
good ‘‘seedbeds’’ for the germination of ideas that
can be expanded on later or ﬂeshed out for use in
other forms, including e-mail.
 Use blogs to ﬁll the gaps between publication
cycles: Something else to think about in terms of
the relationship between blogs and e-mail has to do
with the number of times consumers are touched
using either medium. For many companies, e-mail
newsletters are relegated to monthly syndication.
That means the prospect or customer is only contacted
twelve times per year—not nearly enough to establish
a ‘‘top-of-mind’’ relationship. Even with weekly distri-
bution, that still leaves six days out of the week when
the customer does not hear from you. Blogs are a way
to ﬁll the gap, especially for those customers who
subscribe to the blog’s RSS feed. With regular posting,
customers can be touched much more often.
The ideal scenario would integrate blogs and e-mail into
a single platform. To my knowledge, the only company
doing that at present is iContact. Barring that, one path
to integration is the use of applications like FeedBlitz,
Zookoda, or Feedburner, which take blog posts and turn
them into e-mails that can be scheduled for daily, weekly,
or monthly distribution. An opt-in form is added to the
blog sidebar for readers to use in subscribing. And there
is always CTRL-C and CTRL-V for copying and pasting
of content from the blog to the newsletter, or vice-versa.
E-mail is without peer as a tried-and-true marketing
technique. Blogs have entered mainstream awareness to
the degree they are no longer considered tangential. It’s be-
coming commonplace to see a blog associated with a com-
pany’s Web site. Since both are content-centric, they pair
very well. (I call them a digital ‘‘peanut butter and jelly
sandwich.’’) That’s why I feel strongly that some company
should create an integrated blog/e-mail marketing platform.
The bottom line is, when used in concert, blogs and e-mail
can serve up a marketing haymaker. I heartily encourage
using both.
A Brief Word About Web Sites
193

How Does E-mail Marketing Fit in with Social Media?
Some would contend that social media applications like
Twitter and Yammer are replacing e-mail. I prefer to think
of them as supporting it in an ancillary manner by taking
some of the burden off insofar as anecdotal message sending
is concerned.
But, honestly, can you name one social network platform
that does not use e-mail? Don’t they all default to it in some
fashion, whether it is account creation, service notiﬁcations,
or member-to-member communications? Though e-mail
serves a more utilitarian function in this respect, it is a
highly useful one nonetheless.
Some would argue that younger people don’t like e-mail,
opting for the use of SMS instead. However, once they enter
the workforce, the rate of e-mail adoption rises. It has to.
E-mail is still the standard for business communications,
for the foreseeable future anyway. At least until ‘‘E-mail 2.0’’
takes its place.
‘‘E-mail marketing could not be better suited to enhance
your social media efforts,’’ said Aaron Kahlow, managing
partner of consulting ﬁrm Business Online. ‘‘It is the key
ingredient in launching a successful social media marketing
campaign. The rise of social media is pushing the evolution
of e-mail marketing from blast campaigns to more personal,
one-to-one engagements. So the short answer is e-mail is a
perfect marriage with social media.’’4
MARKETING VIA SEARCH ENGINES
One More Time with Feeling: Google Is the New Yellow Pages
I mentioned earlier in the book that I didn’t know where the
Yellow Pages directory is in our house. (I still don’t.) Google
has become my new Yellow Pages. It is my default source
for ﬁnding everything, especially since Google created its
browser, Chrome, which integrates the search query and
URL ﬁelds into one. It has become a magic mirror I can
ask any question, and it instantly returns useful informa-
tion, more or less. With the growing prevalence of local
search is it any wonder the old print Yellow Pages directory
has become obsolete?
194
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

The outlook for search marketing is bright. Search vol-
ume continues its upward climb, as does spending on
search, both organic and paid.
AdAge, in its 2008 Search Marketing Fact Pack, said that
search volume rose 20 percent over the previous year, 2007,
and that search marketing spending approached $14 billion
in 2008. Search marketing, especially in hard economic
times, will only continue to grow.
‘‘During uncertain times everyone looks for the most
affordable ways to drive new trafﬁc to their site,’’ says search
marketing expert Brian Bille.
One of the ways most often overlooked, especially by
small businesses, are free listings through local search.
‘‘Listings are a win-win. Not only are you claiming your
business listing and making sure no one hijacks it, but
you are also giving your business a fair chance in ranking
via local search,’’ Bille adds. ‘‘Claiming and editing your
listing is quite easy. Each major search engine features
simple, step-by-step directions.’’5
Search Is Now Universal
Another reason to place continued emphasis on search
marketing is because all the major engines—Google, Yahoo,
MSN, and Ask—now use what is known as blended or
universal search. (The latter is Google’s term.) Data is pulled
from multiple databases and it’s no longer unusual for
results to include video, images, product information, or
news stories. Social media tends to fare well in returns,
which is yet another reason to have a strong presence on
sites like Facebook, Flickr, YouTube, and Wikipedia. It’s all
about creating content that search engines can consume.
CONCLUSION
Now that you’ve got your Web site working for you, are using
e-mail as a marketing tool, and are ensuring that every piece
of content you create appeals to Google, it’s time to move on
into a more intentional social media engagement action
plan. The next chapter is where it all starts, by putting
our ears to the ground and listening.
A Brief Word About Web Sites
195


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Listening Is the New
Marketing
Marketers are known for talking, not listening. That is not
to suggest we have not used tools like focus groups, user
surveys or other research instruments in the past. It’s just
that, in the era of the participatory web, listening is not an
option; it is a mandate.
Social media provides an unﬁltered opportunity to learn
at a grassroots level what people really think about your
brand, products or services. Indeed, listening to the ground-
swell of consumer-generated content is the new marketing.
It has even given birth to an new industry called Online
Reputation Management (ORM).
MONITORING AND MANAGING YOUR
ONLINE REPUTATION
Why to Listen
People are talking and they are using the social web—blogs,
social networks, wikis, forums, and video—as their mouth-
piece. Take, for example, what happened on Twitter follow-
ing the Super Bowl. There was an outcry, even a backlash,
197

against domain registrar Go Daddy for its controversial
advertising. More than a few people went so far as to transfer
their domains to other service providers!
While this was barely a blip on Go Daddy’s radar in so
far as the net effect on its bottom line, the publicity cannot
have been good. The effect of word of mouth in social media
is not constrained to large companies, either.
Recently, I spoke at a gathering of local hospital market-
ing directors on the topic of social media. In preparation, I
visited a couple of healthcare rating and review sites to see
if any of the hospitals represented might be mentioned. Oh
boy, were they! One hospital in particular was dealt a num-
ber of severe blows in terms of negative reviews. Another
experienced quite the opposite effect.
Don’t kid yourself. Reviews from ‘‘average people like
me’’ are powerful. They not only inﬂuence consumer atti-
tudes and behavior, but often show up prominently in
search returns.
What to Listen For
There are three metrics involved in ORM: Share of voice, tone
of voice, and trends over time.
Share of voice. This is a measurement of how much
people are talking about you. For many small businesses, it
is often the case that nothing is being said. That’s almost as
bad as if people are talking negatively. When nothing is being
said, it is vital that something be done to stimulate conver-
sation. There are a number of ways you can do so, which I
will cover later in the chapter.
Tone of voice. This is a gauge of whether the conver-
sation is largely positive or negative and is often referred
to as ‘‘sentiment analysis.’’ If the sentiment is positive, you
should try to reward those who speak well of you. That
will presumably encourage them to do even more. If the
tone is largely negative, it is incumbent upon you to get to
the root of the problem, if a problem exists. Fix the problem
and the tone will likely change. If misinformation is being
spread, you must engage the critics and correct their
misunderstanding.
198
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

Bizzuka, the company I serve as marketing director,
experienced this very issue a number of months ago. A
blogger had written some factually incorrect information
about the company and its content-management system.
Even worse, that post was displayed prominently on Google
search returns for the word ‘‘Bizzuka.’’
Two actions were taken. First, Bizzuka’s CEO responded
to the post with a comment which added much needed
balance. Second, we engaged in a content marketing strat-
egy using blogs, YouTube videos, Flickr photos, online press
releases and a number of other online media.
While our primary intent was to provide consumers with
useful content, a secondary beneﬁt was that the critical post
was driven off the front page, replaced instead by Bizzuka-
generated content.
Trends over time. It is important to monitor both the
above metrics over time in order to see the effects of your
advertising, marketing, and PR efforts.
BENEFITS TO MONITORING YOUR
ONLINE REPUTATION
There are a number of key beneﬁts associated with listening.
First, you will be made aware of a crisis long before it has an
opportunity to escalate to a point where overcoming negative
sentiment becomes a costly, lengthy affair. Need I remind
you of what happened with bicycle lock company Kryptonite
when it was discovered that one of their locks could be
opened with a Bic pen?
Second, you will know where the conversations are tak-
ing place, whether on Twitter, in blogs, forums, or even in the
mainstream press. If you know where the conversation is
happening, you’ll know where to go to respond. For example,
Dell receives thousands of mentions each day on Twitter, so
they have a dedicated team whose job is to monitor that
channel and respond as the need arises.
Third, you will know what topics are being discussed.
You may learn that, residing within the bounds of the con-
versation is a marketing idea just waiting to be turned into
a campaign that you never would have discovered had you
Listening Is the New Marketing
199

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
not been listening. Related to that, you will also become
aware of keywords people are using with regard to you—
keywords you can incorporate into your SEO, pay-per-click,
or content marketing efforts.
Fourth, you will ﬁnd who the inﬂuencers are. While
everyone’s voice matters, it must be acknowledged that
some matter more than others. Once you have identiﬁed
the more important inﬂuencers, you can build relationships
with them that may result in their extending that inﬂuence
on your behalf. Regarding inﬂuencers, I am not suggesting
that the most inﬂuential are always the ones with the most
fans or biggest following. In social media, it’s not a matter of
how many, but who. Some of the people with the smallest
number of followers can easily have great inﬂuence. And, by
the way, some of the tools I’m going to mention in a moment
will not only show you the ﬁrst-generation inﬂuencers, but
those that relate to them as well.
TWO WAYS TO MONITOR YOUR ONLINE REPUTATION
The DIY Approach
One way to monitor your online reputation is to employ the
DIY approach using tools like Google Reader or Bloglines to
subscribe to RSS feeds from Google and Yahoo! news alerts,
Technorati, Twitter search, and Google blogsearch using
relevant keywords (refer to chapter 14 for detailed instruc-
tions on the use of RSS and how to subscribe to feeds). If you
really want to be diligent you can add feeds from sites like
BoardReader.com, a search engine for forums and discus-
sion boards, and from Yahoo and Google groups as well.
If you don’t mind spending a little money, a very afford-
able alternative to doing it yourself is Trackur (www.trackur
.com), an inexpensive software application that performs
the same functions, only better, faster, and much more
comprehensively.
The key element that will make your monitoring efforts
most useful is your choice of keywords. I recommend includ-
ing keywords and phrases from the following categories:
brand names, products, services offered, the name of the
company owner, CEO and C-level executives, industry terms,
and, last but not least, competitors. Online reputation
200
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE
www.Ebook777.com

monitoring is not just for your own company; it’s also a good
source for gathering competitive intelligence.
Hire the Pros
While using the DIY approach is easy on your pocketbook,
you are likely to miss important information. If your bud-
get allows, a number of software applications are avail-
able from companies such as Radian6, Techrigy, and
ScoutLabs to help you monitor your online reputation
more comprehensively.
Unlike Trackur, these tools go beyond basic aggregation
of information to provide more detailed insight, including
sentiment analysis and trend tracking. They pull data from
all quarters of the social media sphere, including blogs,
social networks, image and video sites, chat rooms, forums
and micro-blogs, and mainstream media as well. The tools
range in price from a few hundred dollars per month to a few
thousand. The beneﬁt is that they do the hard work for you,
saving you time and hassle.
Once the data is crunched and compiled, these applica-
tions offer nifty reporting features, including charts and
graphs. They can also alert you to a pending crisis, allowing
you to respond more quickly than you might otherwise, since
information is gathered in more or less real-time depending
on the application used.
‘‘Customers are talking (whether you like it or not) and
embedded in all that chatter is great information, if you can
unlock it with the right tool,’’ says Jennifer Land, CEO of
ScoutLabs, a company that provides reputation monitoring
software. ‘‘ There are inﬂuencers to meet, new product ideas
to develop, feedback on your marketing campaigns, net
promoters to meet and help amplify their voices, or PR
nightmares brewing that can be remedied if caught early.’’1
Here is a list of popular online reputation monitoring
tools and their price ranges. Keep in mind that prices are
subject to change.
Lower Cost
Trackur (www.trackur.com): At under $20 per month,
Trackur is, by far, the least expensive. However, it lacks
Listening Is the New Marketing
201

the more advanced features (sentiment analysis, for example)
offered by the others. Still, if basic aggregation of information
is all you need, then I highly recommend Trackur.
BrandsEye (www.brandseye.com): According to their Web
site, BrandsEye is the only tool that comprehensively tracks
every online mention of your brand, while having the capa-
bility to generate a precise score that accurately reﬂects the
state of your online reputation. The ORM tool scans the
entire Web using a multitude of tracking tools, ultimately
capturing every single relevant mention of your brand.
Brandseye offers three price ranges: One dollar per month
for bloggers, $95 per month for small businesses, and $350
per month for large companies.
Moderate Cost
BuzzGain (www.buzzgain.com): Billing itself as more than a
social media monitoring solution, BuzzGain reveals partic-
ular inﬂuential voices and corresponding conversations.
Pricing ranges from $99 to $999 per month and is based
on annual company revenue.
ScoutLabs
(www.scoutlabs.com):
ScoutLabs’
platform
offers similar features to other, more advanced tools such
as persistent searches, sentiment analysis, trend tracking,
and real-time reporting. However, the ScoutLabs dashboard
is primarily designed for use by teams of brand managers.
When you sign up for the service, you’re allowed to invite an
unlimited number of colleagues into your workspace. Prices
are based on the number of workspaces as well as the number
of concurrent searches. The more workspaces needed (based
on the number of teams) and the more searches, the higher
the cost. Prices listed on the Web site range from $99 to $749,
with enterprise pricing available as a custom quote.
Higher Cost
Techrigy (www.techrigy.com): Techrigy’s SM2 platform
offers something none of the others mentioned here cur-
rently offer: a database of more than one billion conversa-
tions dating back to 2007, a feature they term the Social
Media Warehouse (SMW). Most other providers only go back
202
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

three to six months. This is especially good for establishing a
baseline, though not as essential as it applies to real-time,
ongoing monitoring. Techrigy’s pricing is based on a ‘‘free-
mium’’ model, which means they do, in fact, offer a free
version. However, pricing shoots up dramatically beyond
that, starting at $500 per month for 20,000 search results.
Radian6 (www.radian6.com): Radian6 is likely the best-
known of the ORM software providers. It is primarily designed
for use by public relations, marketing, and customer support
specialists, either agency or corporate. Their pricing is scaled,
so it can be used by the startup and also the multinational,
and it’s affordable in both cases. It also depends on whether
the company sees social media marketing/word-of-mouth
as an add-on or the core of what they are doing, according to
Radian6 CMO David Alston. He indicates that if it’s their
core business then a two-person shop would be a potential
customer, but if it’s only an add-on, then Radian6 is unlikely
to be a good ﬁt.2
In a manner of speaking, using these tools is still a form
of DIY, but of a higher order. If you don’t have the time,
resources, or expertise to manage this information yourself,
there are plenty of agencies that will do it for you—for a price,
of course. These companies will more than likely be using
the same software I have listed above, but will do the grunt
work of day-in, day-out monitoring and provide professional
analysis and recommendations for ways to improve your
online reputation.
CONCLUSION
What if you listen and you ﬁnd no one is talking? That’s good
information to know too, don’t you think? It’s imperative
to jump-start the conversation using some of the tools out-
lined in the second section of the book. On the other hand, if
a conversation already exists, then you have a place to start.
I refer to this as getting a seat at someone else’s table. Listen
to what’s being said, and respond when appropriate.
Find ways to reward those who speak well of you, and, in
an honest, courteous fashion, address those who spread
misinformation. You will be amazed at what you can learn
Listening Is the New Marketing
203

just by engaging the groundswell in either respect. It’s good
research.
I cannot imagine a company not wanting to listen to the
conversation taking place around their brands, products,
services, industry, and competition. It is less critical for
small businesses of course, but as we’ve seen, even they
are not immune to the effects of social media. For large
companies, it is an imperative. With the many tools available
at all price points, there is really no excuse for remaining
uninformed.
This chapter outlined the ﬁrst step of the three-step
social media engagement strategy. Now that you’ve listened,
what do you do? We cover that subject in chapter 17.
204
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Now That You’ve
Listened, It’s Time
to Engage
For years, I was a dedicated Star Trek fan (Trekkie). My
favorite series was Star Trek: The Next Generation. My favor-
ite character was the resolute, stalwart leader, Captain
Jean-Luc Picard, and my favorite line was his forceful in-
struction, ‘‘Engage.’’
It’s time to follow Captain Picard’s dictum and do just
that. You’ve listened to the groundswell. You know what
people are saying and whether the sentiment is positive,
negative, or somewhere in-between. It’s time to make a
commitment to enter the conversation and begin to put
the tools we discussed in the second section of the book
to good use.
I suggest two ways of doing so. One is a more passive
form of engagement; that is, joining the conversation that’s
already taking place. The other is more proactive and has to
do with starting a conversation about your company,
brands, products, and people. This chapter will delineate
some of the ways you can use both tactics to ‘‘engage’’ the
conversation.
205

JOIN THE CONVERSATION: GET A SEAT
AT SOMEONE ELSE’S TABLE
I often use the idea of ‘‘getting a seat at someone else’s
table’’ to describe how brands should ﬁnd communities of
interest wherever they may exist and join as co-participants.
Imagine yourself walking into a restaurant and, while wait-
ing to be seated, overhearing a conversation taking place at
a nearby table. The participants seem to be enjoying the
discussion and you note that it’s something of interest to
you. So, you mosey over to the group and ask if you can join
in. Maybe they will be receptive and maybe they won’t.
That’s precisely the sort of thing you are doing when you
join Facebook and other social networks. You are asking for
a seat at the table of those already participating there.
Thankfully, it’s been my experience that most are welcom-
ing, so long as you play by the community’s rules.
But which is better? To get a seat at someone else’s table
or set a table of your own and invite them to join you? I
suggest the answer is both/and, not either/or. In fact, in
order for anyone to even know about your ‘‘table,’’ the
introduction will likely take place inside a third-party site.
And in order for you to win the right to even extend an
invitation, you need to be actively participating in one or
more of these third-party sites. A basic rule of thumb in
social media—participation is the price of entry.
So rather than just insisting that people come to us, we
should go to them. And where are they? On social networks,
on blogs, on Twitter, and on sites like YouTube, Flickr,
Ustream, and Digg—anywhere and everywhere their friends
are, and that’s where you should be too. In fact, your custom-
ers expect you to be there, and they wonder why you’re not!
How do we know where to ﬁnd them? The last chapter told
us, remember? We start by listening, putting our ears to the
ground (or rather, the groundswell). That will tell us not only
where they are butalso what they’re saying. Once we know that,
we will have the fulcrum we need to enter the conversation.
Four Ways to Respond
Comment on Blogs. Writing a salient comment on a
topically-relevant blog serves a number of purposes. First,
206
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

it makes you part of the conversation. It also helps you get
the attention of the blogger, who may return the courtesy on
your blog. Thirdly, because the comment form includes a
ﬁeld for your URL, it’s a means by which you can generate
trafﬁc to your site. Unless the blogger uses what’s referred to
as a ‘‘no-follow tag,’’ your comments can be indexed by
Google, too. Not only that, if the blogger is widely read
and if your comments are on-target, chances are you will
pick up a portion of his readership as your own.
Internet technology consultant Dave Taylor once told me
to leave three comments on other blogs for every one post
that you write on yours. I still think that’s advice worth
heeding.
Participate in Forums and Message Boards. Forums
date back to the earliest days of the Internet, yet remain
popular. It’s not unusual to see them integrated into social
networks, and some communities are built with forums as
the foundation. For example, Best Buy’s customer commu-
nity (http://forums.bestbuy.com/bb/) is based on forums.
One derivative of this genre are question-and-answer
sites such as Yahoo! Answers. In fact, these types of forums
abound both at the large-scale aggregate level and in niche
verticals. An example of the latter, Trulia (www.trulia.com),
a real estate search engine, has a question/answer com-
munity called Trulia Voices where agents offer advice and
opinion to questions asked by home buyers and sellers.
More than a few have gotten new clients using that
technique.
These types of sites can be very effective in driving
highly-targeted trafﬁc to your Web site because you can
select only those questions whose subjects you specialize
in and where you can provide the most value. Your answers
are a calling card inviting others to come knocking on your
door rather than you knocking on theirs.
Join Niche Communities. I believe that becoming an
active participant in a topically relevant niche community
is one of the best ways to bring attention to your business
offering. Usually, numbers in these groups are relatively
small, from a few hundred to a few thousand, so it’s much
easier to receive notice, especially if you are an active
contributor.
Now That You’ve Listened, It’s Time to Engage
207

Being active is key. Contributing content will aid you in
becoming a recognized community leader. (Remember the
one-percenter idea we discussed earlier in the book?) Keep in
mind that most members of these communities are ‘‘lurk-
ers,’’ people who consume content but rarely create any, so
contributing makes you a member of a signiﬁcant minority.
It also helps your standing with community organizers, as
they love members who jump in with both feet and contrib-
ute. Make sure those contributions follow the unwritten
rules of social media and add value to the community rather
than merely calling attention to your own company, prod-
ucts, or services. That’s spam, and it will get you booted
quickly by any moderator who’s paying attention. Your
proﬁle is the place where you can show your wares. Those
interested will ﬁnd their way there, believe me.
If you have more than one member of your staff who can
participate, it’s not a bad idea to spread yourselves out over
a broad spectrum of communities. Since it’s unlikely you’ll
be able to afford the time to actively participate in more that
a few communities, having others who can lend time and
energy is certainly a tactic worth deploying.
Respond Using LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter and
Other Social Networks. I’ve touted the beneﬁts to social
networks like these in chapter 8, so I’ll be brief here. I can
hardly conceive of having a presence in social media that
does not include participation in each of these ‘‘big three’’
networks and others like them.
START A CONVERSATION: SET A TABLE OF YOUR OWN
Not a day that goes by that I don’t reﬂect on how to leverage
social media, including social networks, for marketing pur-
poses. I have tried a number of approaches, some of which
have been successful and some of which have not. One idea
that has genuine potential is what I referred to earlier as
‘‘setting a table of your own.’’
What I mean by this is that you establish a social media
presence with your company brand or product at the center.
That is not to suggest the only reason people would visit the
site is to talk about you. It is to suggest that you are providing
208
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

them a meeting place where your brand is undeniably pres-
ent. Let me suggest four ways this could be done:
Start a Blog. Need I say more about the value blogging
provides than I’ve already said? A blog can serve as a foun-
dational component to any social media marketing strategy.
Apparently I’m not the only one who thinks this, as it has
become commonplace to see Web sites containing blogs.
Create
an
Online
Community.
As
social
media
matures, we’re going to see a proliferation of smaller, niche-
targeted online communities and social networks much
more suited to individual needs and interests than the mas-
sive ones we know today. Yours could be one of those.
If you have little or no budget for such, do not worry. Sites
like Ning enable you to set up a branded social network at
little or no cost and in only a few minutes. If you don’t want
Google ads to appear on the site, you can upgrade for a
nominal fee. (I would suggest that you join a Ning community
ﬁrst and learn the ropes before creating one.)
I referenced one such community, Twittermoms, in
chapter 9. The founder, Megan Calhoun, wanted to connect
with other moms on Twitter, but found it impossible to
relegate connections to just that group. Necessity is the
mother of invention (pun intended) as they say, and Calhoun
found creating a niche community to be the answer.
Set up a Facebook Public Proﬁle (Business page).
While participating in Facebook at the personal level cer-
tainly qualiﬁes as getting a seat at other people’s tables,
creating a proﬁle for your business is a way to establish a
table of your own right in the middle of the most popular
‘‘restaurant’’ on the planet. Considering the likelihood
that your customers or constituents are already there,
it is an idea I heartily endorse. In fact, it is a tactic I
would place second only to blogs . . . and it would be a
close second, too.
Start a Weekly Podcast or Video Show. Follow in the
footsteps of social media afﬁcionados like Gary Vaynerchuk
(mentioned in chapter 11) or Paul Dunay (mentioned in
chapter 12) and start creating multimedia content such as
a weekly-scheduled audio podcast or video show syndicated
on such sites as Blog Talk Radio or YouTube. It’s yet another
Now That You’ve Listened, It’s Time to Engage
209

way for you to build a following (and by ‘‘following,’’ I mean
back to your Web site).
While reaching out to customers and prospects at
‘‘tables’’ where they sit is an essential part of any social
media marketing strategy, it’s even better when you can
invite them to join you at a table of your own making.
Whether you use one of my recommendations or something
else altogether, I encourage you to create a table of your own.
CONCLUSION
You’ve listened to and engaged the groundswell by joining
in ongoing conversations and starting some of your own.
Now, it’s time to close the loop and measure the effective-
ness of your efforts. That’s the subject of the next and
ﬁnal chapter.
210
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Measuring the
Effectiveness of
Your Social Media
Marketing Plan
The days of ‘‘touchy-feely, warm-and-fuzzy’’ thinking about
social media marketing are over, if such days ever existed in
the ﬁrst place. The CEO wants to know if it has ROI potential
and can positively affect the bottom line. Everyone from real
estate agents to CMOs at F1000s are asking, ‘‘Does it work?’’
and ‘‘If so, how?’’ This is especially true when the economy
turns sour and marketing budgets are tight.
A report released in March 2009 by the Aberdeen Group1
stated that 68 percent of what it terms ‘‘best-in-class’’ com-
panies planned to increase their spending on social media.
The report also revealed, somewhat paradoxically, that ‘‘the
investment in social media marketing is not always easy to
justify in terms of ﬁnancial outcomes.’’ In fact, over half of all
companies indicated that it was ‘‘either somewhat difﬁcult
(39 percent) or very difﬁcult (20 percent) to make the busi-
ness case for investing in social media marketing initia-
tives,’’ said the report.
211

Though certainly in its nascent stages, social media mar-
keting is still marketing, and is therefore, subject to statistical
scrutiny. This chapter presents an attempt to close the loop
on your three-step social media marketing action plan
by providing some insight into how social media can be
measured.
HOW SOCIAL MARKETING MEASUREMENT DIFFERS
FROM OTHER FORMS OF ONLINE MEASUREMENT
Social media measurement is about return on investment,
certainly. If itdoesn’t affect that metric, its usefulness, at least
in the eyes of the CEO or small business owner, is marginal.
The CEO has to answer to the board and the small business-
person simply does not have time to fool with things that have
no bearing on proﬁts and losses. While I hope that the many
case studies and examples contained in this book have al-
ready convinced you of its efﬁcacy, I too want to hold up a
‘‘plumb line’’ and determine its worth in measurable terms.
Having said that, social media measurement is not al-
ways about ROI in the sense of the monetary value it pro-
vides, but ROI in terms of return on inﬂuence or ROE, return
on engagement, values which are often harder, though not
impossible, to measure.
I’m going to suggest that any attempt to measure social
media must contain elements of all three in order to ade-
quately represent its full impact. Traditional metrics like page
views, time spent on site, site trafﬁc, and number of conver-
sions apply, but that’s far from the whole of it. Measurements
like number of retweets, blog post comments, and number
of friends on a social network are important as well. In the
paragraphs that follow, I will attempt to shed light on each
of these.
DON’T MEASURE EVERYTHING; DO MEASURE
THE RIGHT THINGS
Which metrics apply depends on the form of social media
used. Trying to associate page views with Twitter is obviously
misguided, but is useful where a blog is concerned. Of course,
what is measured depends on your overall marketing goals,
212
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

whether to generate leads, drive sales, or increase brand
awareness. Establishing what you are trying to accomplish
will determine what metrics should be collected.
As a case in point, suppose your blog is a separate
entity from the main company Web site. Let’s also suppose,
due to the blog’s ability to garner favorable returns in
search engines, it serves as a ‘‘beacon,’’ shining light on
the more static site with a view toward driving trafﬁc to it.
In this case, the measurement of greatest importance is
not how many people visit the blog, but how many visit
the main site as a result of ﬁrst coming to the blog. Your job
at that point is to ﬁnd more and better ways to make the
blog a conduit to the main site.
While I put great emphasis on keeping editorial content
pure of any overt sales message, having a strong call to action
conspicuously placed on the blog’s sidebar is an absolute
must. Suppose your call to action is to drive e-mail newsletter
subscriptions. It makes sense, then, to have the subscription
form above the fold in clear view of the reader.
Alternatively, let’s say you decide to use Twitter as a
customer service tool much the way companies like Dell,
Comcast, and Zappos do. What measurements are impor-
tant? In this case, the metrics would be similar to those
used by a call center, such as average speed of answer, how
quickly an issue was resolved, or how many customers were
engaged. Don’t assume that just because a company is using
Twitter instead of a traditional call center, those numbers
don’t matter. They do, and more and more companies are
beginning to see the value. Though Twitter has that ‘‘warm
and fuzzy’’ feel, it’s a very useful customer service resource
nonetheless.
When you look at the concept of social media measure-
ment at the meta level, it seems pretty complicated. Taken on
a case-by-case basis, however, it’s easier to comprehend.
QUANTITATIVE VS. QUALITATIVE METRICS
Quantitative metrics are relevant in most cases. However,
trying to gauge the value of social media on hard numbers
alone is like trying to ﬁgure out if you have a good marriage.
Numbers will only get you so far. For example, how do you
Measuring the Effectiveness of Your Social Media
213

determine the level of a person’s online inﬂuence? Sure,
you can see how many followers they have on Twitter or
friends in Facebook, but does that tell the whole story? I
hardly think so. Where social media is concerned, it’s not
always a numbers game. For example, it’s not how many
eyeballs read your blog, but who those eyeballs belong to.
The quality of your readership, in terms of their own inﬂu-
ence, lends just as much credence as the quantity.
For a moment, let’s look at some of both kinds of metrics
to see which might be worth applying in a speciﬁc case.
Standard Measures
Which of the standard quantitative metrics apply in social
media? Here’s a short list:
 Unique visits
 Total visits
 Time spent on site
 Page views (this has less relevance today thanks to
technologies like AJAX)
 Bounce rate (only view single page before leaving site)
 Referrers
 Click-throughs and other conversion metrics
 Keywords
 Search engine entries
 Organic search ranking
Under which circumstances do those metrics apply? I
would suggest any site where content is a chief concern—
blogs or wikis, for example. Also, any sites where emphasis
is placed on numbers of visitors or members, such as forums
or online communities. While we’re at it, let’s not forget the
Google spider. Any site that you wish it to crawl on a regular
basis qualiﬁes. Of course, that’s all of the above and more!
Social Media–Speciﬁc Measures
If social media was merely one-way communication, stan-
dard metrics alone might sufﬁce. But, people are talking to
214
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

each other and that mandates an entirely new set of quanti-
tative metrics. Some that apply include:
 Blog-post-to-comment ratio
 Number of RSS feed subscribers
 Twitter retweets
 Number of videos shared
 Customer sentiment gauged via ratings and reviews
 Number of times a blog post was bookmarked using
Digg or Delicious
So much for quantitative analytics. What about qualita-
tive, things like ‘‘awareness,’’ ‘‘engagement,’’ and ‘‘inﬂu-
ence?’’ How are those measured? It has to be more than
just a hunch or gut perception, right? As much as I would
like there to be clear-cut, completely objective standards,
social media measurement has yet to reach that bar. Some of
it is still subjective, based on the marketer’s judgment.
Also, terms like ‘‘awareness’’ and ‘‘inﬂuence’’ mean dif-
ferent things to different people. To the Web metrics analyst,
inﬂuence equals conversions. To the online reputation mon-
itor it means the number of times a given individual is
referenced in blog posts, while to the PR pro it may mean
the number of Twitter followers, Facebook friends, or blog
readers a person has.
I’m reminded of the story of the ﬁve blind men and the
elephant. Each one touches a different part of the elephant,
and then all ﬁve disagree over what the animal must look
like. That’s an apt analogy of the state of social media
measurement at this point.
Does that mean we take a wait-and-see approach until
things become more standardized? I think not. Remember
what I said at the outset of this chapter—social media
marketing is still marketing. As a case in point, let me
reference a long-standing model with which most marketing
and PR people would be familiar.
The Three ‘‘Outs’’
‘‘Social media is really an online cousin of PR,’’ says Ali
Behnam, co-founder of Web analytics software company
Measuring the Effectiveness of Your Social Media
215

Tealium (www.tealium.com). ‘‘Social media measurement
refers to the practice of evaluating the results of social media
and public relations programs, so we need to go with PR
measurement as a framework, the main elements of which
are the three ‘outs’: Outputs, Outtakes and Outcomes.’’2
‘‘Outputs equate to who is talking about you, Outtakes,
what they are saying about you, and Outcomes measure
the impact on your business,’’ states Behnam. To put it
terms practitioners of social media can understand, ‘‘Out-
puts equal Awareness, Outtakes equal Inﬂuence, and Out-
comes equal Action,’’ he says.
Behnam suggests that most of the tools used to mea-
sure social media deal with the ﬁrst two pillars, outputs
and outtakes, while Web analytics tools deal with the last
pillar, outcomes. He cites a particular instance where he
was reading a blog post that referred to Webinar software
and that listed a number of companies offering such.
Rather than click from the blog to the Web sites of any of
those mentioned (Behnam said there may not have even
been hyperlinks to facilitate such action), he Googled a
couple that interested him.
‘‘Reputation management software would report a men-
tion of the company name on the blog, but would never know
to associate it with my click-through from Google to the
company’s Web site. That’s the purview of whatever ana-
lytics package the company may be using to measure trafﬁc
on their site,’’ said Behnam. ‘‘Reputation monitoring soft-
ware covered who was doing the talking (outputs) and what
they were saying (outtakes), but would not have accounted
for the resulting action taken (outcomes).’’
Behnam further suggests that trafﬁc from social media
comes as either a click-through, which means the person
clicked to reach their destination, or a view-through, which
means they didn’t click, but typed in the URL directly or
went to Google to ﬁnd the site instead. ‘‘Our research has
shown that as much as 80 percent of social media trafﬁc is
view-through, and only 20 percent is click-through. That’s
why reliance on both forms of measurement, reputation
monitoring and Web analytics, is necessary,’’ he added.
The difﬁculty in tying all three elements together—
outputs, outtakes and outcomes—seems to be the nexus
216
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

of the problem where measuring the ROI of social media is
concerned. In response, Behnam’s company created a soft-
ware application, Tealium Social Media, that provides the
‘‘missing link.’’ It can take outputs and outtakes reported by
an ORM solution such as Techrigy and tie them directly to
outcomes being reported in Google Analytics or other ana-
lytics software.
Does this mean the answer to the social media measure-
ment dilemma is better software? In many respects, I believe
it does. And because the need is so great, I expect we will see
rapid advances in the near future. Behnam’s application is
certainly the ﬁrst step in the right direction.
SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Google Analytics
I look at GA as foundational to just about every other form
of measurement. I like it for a whole host of reasons. First,
it’s free. Second, it’s easy to use. Third, it provides pretty
sophisticated reporting. Fourth, it integrates into other
Google tools, such as AdWords. Plus, you know it’s safe
to use. I would say that Google Analytics should be used by
default on any site.
Online Reputation Monitoring Software
I covered a number of these applications in chapter 16, so let
me just tout some of the beneﬁts here as it applies to
measurement. Not only can you gain valuable quantitative
data, but these tools also enable you to tap into the qualita-
tive stuff as well.
Website Grader (www.Websitegrader.com)
This free tool by Hubspot measures the marketing effective-
ness of a Web site by providing a cumulative score that
factors in things like Web site trafﬁc, SEO, social popularity
and other technical factors. It also provides basic advice on
how the Web site can be improved from marketing and SEO
perspectives.
Measuring the Effectiveness of Your Social Media
217

Tealium Social Media (www.tealium.com)
Tealium Social Media lets marketers measure the ROI of
their social media marketing and online PR initiatives
using the same metrics as other digital marketing chan-
nels, such as pay-per-click, e-mail and banner advertising.
The solution helps users decide which social media initia-
tives to invest in and which to drop, as well as which media
outlets or categories drive the most trafﬁc and conversions.
Twitter Inﬂuence Tools
Two tools (or should I say ‘‘twools’’) that measure a person’s
inﬂuence on Twitter are Twinﬂuence (www.twinﬂuence
.com) and Twitalyzer (www.twitzlyzer.com). Twinﬂuence
bases its rankings on metrics such as ‘‘reach,’’ the number
of followers a person has, and ‘‘social captial,’’ the number of
followers each of the person’s followers have. Twitalyzer, on
the other hand, considers several factors to determine
inﬂuence:
 Reach: measured by the number of followers you have
 Authority: measured by the number of times you are
‘‘retweeted’’
 Generosity: measured by the number of times you
‘‘retweet’’ others
 Clout: measured by the number of times you are
referenced by others
 Velocity: measured by the number of updates you
publish over a seven-day period
CONCLUSION
Measuring the effects of social media will become easier
to do over time, in part because new software tools for this
purpose will be made available. In the meantime, we have
to use a combination approach with emphasis given to
standard measurements and to those speciﬁc to social
media.
I encourage you to use the same approach toward social
media marketing as you would when gauging the effects of
218
PUTTING THE TOOLS TO GOOD USE

more traditional forms of online marketing. Think ﬁrst about
your goals and objectives, then ﬁgure out which forms of
social media would be useful to reach them and what key
performance indicators would be applicable relative to that.
You cannot divorce the measurement from the medium
itself.
Measuring the Effectiveness of Your Social Media
219

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

CONCLUSION
There’s a line from the ﬁlm The Shawshank Redemption that
often comes to mind when contemplating the future, and
that includes contemplating the future of social media mar-
keting. It’s a line Red, the character played by Morgan
Freeman, says (narrates, actually) as he is on the bus head-
ing to Mexico in search of his friend Andy. The part that
comes to mind is ‘‘. . . a long journey whose conclusion is
uncertain.’’
That could be said of social media marketing. It is still so
new, barely ﬁve years old by some folks’ estimation, that no
one really knows what the outcome will be as it matures over
time as a marketing genre. Will it simply become part of an
integrated approach that includes traditional media and
other, more direct forms of online marketing? Or, will it
replace some or much of what we know as marketing and
advertising today?
Young though it may be, social media has crossed the
chasm into the mainstream. Millions across the globe use it
to entertain themselves in the company of others, gather
feedback, glean information, or simply connect with friends
and family. If for no other reason than our customers are
using social media, our presence there is demanded as well.
For a moment, let’s hit the high points of the information
The Digital Handshake has tried to convey. The ﬁrst section
outlined ﬁve consumer trends that are turning the world
upside down:
221

 Consumer skepticism and resistance to advertising
 Current state of media fragmentation
 Growing trend toward consumers’ being in control of
marketing/advertising messages
 Pressure businesses face to improve targeting of their
marketing and advertising to increase relevance and
minimize waste
 Companies being held to a higher level of account-
ability than ever before
People are talking and we had better be listening and
then engaging in the ongoing conversation happening wher-
ever social media is present. Like the Cluetrain said and I
reiterated throughout this book, ‘‘Markets are conversa-
tions,’’ and ‘‘participation is marketing.’’
In the second section, I explained and outlined the advan-
tages to using seven of the most proven tools in social media
today: Blogs, social networks, online communities, micro-
blogging tools like Twitter, podcasts, videos, and social media
news releases. (I even threw in a few more for good measure in
chapter 14.) Lastly, I laid out a simple yet workable plan of
engagement: Listen, engage, and measure.
However, none of that means anything if you are un-
willing to put the tools of social media to work in a strategic,
thoughtful fashion. It doesn’t have to cost much money,
though it will take a substantial amount of time. Prepare
yourself for that inevitability.
The good news is that you don’t have to eat the entire
elephant in one bite. You can ease into it by joining a social
network like Facebook, starting a blog, or interacting via
Twitter. You will ﬁnd that it isn’t necessary to engage in every
form, though being widespread has much to recommend it,
not the least of which is the ubiquitous presence you will
eventually gain on Google.
Referring to the ‘‘journey’’ idea once again, ‘‘the joy is in
the journey.’’ It really is. Along the way you will make lifelong
friends, some of whom will become colleagues, business
partners, and customers. You will learn a great deal about
yourself in the process, what makes you tick and you will
222
CONCLUSION

learn about others as well. Hopefully, you will come to ap-
preciate the unique value of every person you encounter and
realize that each of us has something worthwhile to say.
Ultimately, you may come to ﬁnd that you are a better, more
caring, generous person because of your involvement. That
has much greater value than any dollar amount that could
be assigned.
I challenge you to take the information gleaned from this
book and put it to use for six months. If, by then, you have
not seen a discernible difference in your business (and life
for that matter), let me know. We will sit down together and
analyze what you did (or didn’t do) and focus on why you
were unable to reach your desired goals and objectives.
I’m going to play the role of optimist, though, and suggest
that we will never have that conversation. Instead, I believe
we will have one of a very different kind, where you exclaim
with enthusiasm the great assortment of beneﬁts, both
business and otherwise, that you have achieved through
your involvement in social media.
With that said, let me be the ﬁrst to extend a ‘‘digital
handshake’’ and welcome you to what could very well be the
most enjoyable journey you will ever embark upon in your
life. I know it has been for me and for countless others as
well. That is why I wrote this book.
Conclusion
223


NOTES
Preface
1. Ninth Edelman Trust Barometer, http://www.edelman.com/
news/ShowOne.asp?ID=175
2. Pew Internet & American Life Project, Teens and Social Media,
http://www.pewinternet.org//media//Files/Reports/2007/
PIP_Teens_Social_Media_Final.pdf.pdf
Introduction
1. Wall Street Journal Online, Blogging Becomes a Corporate Job:
Digital ’Handshake’?, http://online.wsj.com/public/article/
SB111748967859946439-lyDSWAT2rsOktwsVXgMQ7NQQV
2U_20060531.html?mod=rss_free
Chapter One
1. Bloom, Jonah. Consumer reviews and recommendations are
marketers’ most powerful tools. Advertising Age, February 13,
2006.
2. Smith, Julien, and Brogan, Chris. Trust economies: Investiga-
tion into the new ROI of the web. http://www.changethis.com/
44.04.TrustEconomy.
3. Zane Safrit, ‘‘Is Advertising Dead?’’ SWOM. http://www.the
swom.org/forum/topics/1306361:Topic:22092.
4. 2006 Annual Edelman Trust Barometer. http://www.edel
man.com/image/insights/content/FullSupplement.pdf.
225

5. Neeleman, David. Our promise to you. YouTube.com, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=-r_PIg7EAUw.
6. Godin, Seth. Permission Marketing. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1999.
Chapter Two
1. Anderson, Nate. 2008: Year of information overload? http://
arstechnica.com/old/content/2007/12/interruptions-info-
overload-cost-us-economy-650-billion.ars.
2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_overload.
3. Simon, Herbert A. 1971. Designing organizations for an
information-rich world. In Computers, Communication, and the
Public Interest, ed. Martin Greenberger (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins Press), 40–41.
Chapter Three
1. How businesses are using Web 2.0: A McKinsey Global Survey.
The McKinsey Quarterly, March 2007. http://www.mckinsey
quarterly.com/Business_Technology/Application_Management/
How_businesses_are_using_Web_20_A_McKinsey_ Global_
Survey_1913?gp=1.
2. CMO Council. Giving customer voice more volume. http://
www.cmocouncil.org/resources/form_customer-voice.asp.
3. Johnmar, Fard.FromCommand & Control toEngage& Encour-
age. http://www.envisionsolutionsnow.com/pdf/Ebooks/
Engage_and_Encourage.pdf.
4. http://www.facebook.com/pages/2x-Ultra-Tide-Presents-
Americas-Favorite-Stains/10963072348.
5. http://www.facebook.com/pages/Austin-TX/Dustin-Meyer-
Photography-wedding-and-portrait-photography/
44045706053.
Chapter Four
1. http://www.selfgrowth.com/articles/Articles_Small_Business_
Marketing.html.
2. Wilson, Ralph. Niche marketing: How to deﬁne a unique e-
business niche. Copyright 2001. http://www.wilsonweb.com/
articles/niche-marketing.htm.
3. http://www.har.com.
226
NOTES

Chapter Five
1. Moms and Motrin. The New York Times, November 17, 2008.
http://parenting.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/11/17/moms-
and-motrin/.
2. Amy Gates, e-mail interview with the author, February 18,
2009.
3. Pete Blackshaw, http://notetaker.typepad.com/tell3000/2008/
11/motrin-moms-tel.html.
4. David Alston, ‘‘Will Motrin ofﬁcially join Twitter and bring their
own beat back?,’’ http://tweetpr.com/?p=28.
5. Jarvis, Jeff. ‘‘Dell lies. Dell sucks.’’ http://www.buzzmachine
.com/archives/2005_06_21.html.
6. Richard Binhammer, interview with the author, March 15,
2009.
7. Fung, Mei Lin. You can learn from ‘‘Dell Hell.’’ Dell did. http://
www.customerthink.com/article/you_can_learn_dell_hell_
dell_did.
Chapter Six
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_media. (date of access:
November 2008.)
2. Ibid.
3. Marketers are ‘‘sick’’ of Web 2.0 says MENG survey. http://
www.conversationalmediamarketing.com/2009/01/
marketers-sick-of-web-20-says-meng-survey.html.
4. Morrissey, Brian. ‘‘Forrester: Agencies need to reboot,’’ http://
www.adweek.com/aw/content_display/news/digital/
e3i55bff7bc1a68ecef566a2850d389d8f3.
5. Search engines are the No. 1 source for consumers looking for
local businesses, http://www.webvisible.com/press.asp?
ID=8.
6. Burn, Enid. Adults outnumber teens on social networks.
http://www.clickz.com/3632374.
7. http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/
2006/10/More_than_Half_MySpace_Visitors_Age_35.
8. Spending on conversational marketing to outpace traditional
marketing by 2012, according to New Society for New Com-
munications Research Study, conducted by TWI Surveys,
Inc. for Joseph Jaffe. http://www.newcommreview.com/
?p=845.
9. Ines Hegedus-Garica, interview with the author, March, 2009.
Notes
227

10. Neilsen, Jakob. ‘‘Participation inequality: Encouraging more
users to contribute,’’ http://www.useit.com/alertbox/partic-
ipation_inequality.html.
11. Godin, Seth. Tribes: We Need You to Lead Us (New York, New
York: Portfolio, 2008).
12. John Jantsch, blog post, ‘‘Don’t Be Boring,’’ December 12,
2008, http://www.ducttapemarketing.com/blog/2008/12/27/
dont-be-boring/
13. Cluetrain Manifesto, http://www.cluetrain.com.
14. Risley, David. ‘‘Twitter marketers and gaming the system,’’
http://www.davidrisley.com/2008/08/11/twitter-marketers-
and-gaming-the-system/.
Chapter Seven
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog.
2. Doc Searls, blog post, ‘‘Blind Bloggers Frisk the Elephant,’’
December 12, 2003, http://doc-weblogs.com/2003/12/09#
blindBloggersFriskTheElephant.
3. David Crockett, interview with the author, November, 2005.
4. Blood, Rebecca. The Weblog Handbook: Practical Advice on
Creating and Maintaining Your Blog (New York, New York:
Basic Books, 2002).
5. http://technorati.com/blogging/state-of-the-blogosphere//.
6. http://www.universalmccann.com.
7. Mack Collier, e-mail interview with the author, February,
2009.
8. Brian Clark, blog post, ‘‘Blogging is Dead (Long Live Value
Blogging),’’ http://www.copyblogger.com/blogging-is-dead/)
9. Gardner, Sussannah. Buzz Marketing with Blogs for Dummies.
(Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005).
10. The Cluetrain Manifestor, http://www.cluetrain.com.
11. Survey Finds 15% of Fortune 500s are Blogging, July 22, 2008,
http://www.prweekus.com/Survey-ﬁnds-15-of-Fortune-
500s-are-blogging/article/112584/.
12. Morissey, Brian. ‘‘Forrester: Consumers Distrust Corporate
Blogs’’ AdWeek, December 9, 2008, http://www.adweek
.com/aw/content_display/news/digital/
e3i4bd301b9abd26e41d2a4fc3b30731040.
13. eMarketer, ‘‘Blogs Can Ease Customer Communication,’’
http://www.emarketer.com/Article.aspx?id=1006838.
14. Bill Austin, quote from online discussion, LinkedIn Bloggers
group, March, 2008.
228
NOTES

15. Blogging is Dead (Long Live Value Blogging), http://www.copy
blogger.com/blogging-is-dead/.
16. Chaney, Paul. Blogs and email: A One-two Marketing Punch,
http://www.practicalecommerce.com/articles/740-Blogs-and-
Email-A-One-Two-Marketing-Punch.
17. Patterns in Unstructured Data, Discovery, Aggregation, and
Visualization, http://www.seobook.com/lsi/lsa_deﬁnition.htm.
18. John Jantsch, ‘‘The bottom line on blogging,’’ Kansas City
Star, March 14, 2006. http://blogs.zdnet.com/Brill/?p=223).
19. Michael Brito, phone interview with the author, February,
2009.
20. Brian Bille, interview with the author, March, 2009.
Chapter Eight
1. Carnegie, Dale. How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People (New
York, New York: Simon & Schuster, 1936).
2. MarketingProfs, log post, ‘‘How to Use Social Media to ‘Win
Friends and Inﬂuence People,’’’ December 31, 2008, http://
www.mpdailyﬁx.com/2008/12/how_to_use_social_media_to_
win.html.
3. Ibid.
4. ‘‘Fastest Growing Demographic on Facebook: Women Over
55,’’ http://www.insidefacebook.com/2009/02/02/fastest-
growing-demographic-on-facebook-women-over-55/.
5. Make Lazerow, blog post, ‘‘Branded Applications: Holy Grail or
Graveyard?’’ December 8, 2008. http://www.buddymedia.
com/blog/branded-applications-holy-grail-or-graveyard.
6. David Meerman Scott. E-book, Lose Control of Your Marketing.
http://www.davidmeermanscott.com/documents/Marketing_
ROI.pdf.
Chapter Nine
1. Dan, Ana. Branding Online Communities for Customer Engage-
ment, http://www.customermanagementiq.com/article. cfm?
externalID=572.
2. http://www.tribalizationofbusiness.com/.
3. Connie Bensen, interview with the author, February, 2009.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid.
6. Mary Brandel, ‘‘Social Networking Behind the Firewall.’’ Com-
puterworld.com, August 11, 2008.
Notes
229

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
7. Ben McConnell, e-mail interview with the author, February,
2009.
8. Megan Calhoun, phone interview with the author, February,
2009.
9. John Jantsch, e-mail interview with the author, February 23,
2009.
10. Jerry Bowles, blog post, ‘‘Online Business Communities—
Who’s Winning? Who’s Losing?’’ July 18, 2008. http://www
.socialmediatoday.com/SMC/40773.
11. Online Community Best Practices, Forrester Research, Febru-
ary 2008.
Chapter Ten
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microblogging.
2. Why Companies Need to Join Twitter, http://www.slideshare
.net/warrenss/why-companies-need-to-join-twitter-
presentation.
3. Tony Hsieh, article, http://twitter.zappos.com/start.
4. Richard Binhammer, interview with the author, March 15,
2009.
5. Tony Hsieh, e-mail interview with the author, February 23,
2009.
6. Amy Wood, phone interview with the author, February 2009.
Chapter Eleven
1. Ines
Hegedus-Garcia,
phone
interview
with
the
author,
January 2009.
2. Gary Vaynerchuk, phone interview with the author, February,
2009.
3. Statistic comes from TechCrunch blog post: http://www
.techcrunch.com/2008/12/18/comscore-youtube-now-25-
percent- of-all-google-searches/?rss.
4. Benjamin Wayne, phone interview with the author, March
2009.
5. ‘‘The Future of Online Video,’’ http://googleblog.blogspot
.com/2008/09/future-of-online-video.html.
Chapter Twelve
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Podcast.
230
NOTES
www.Ebook777.com

2. Michael Harper, phone interview with the author, February
2009.
3. Doug Haslem, e-mail interview with the author, March 7,
2009.
4. Paul Dunay, e-mail interview with the author, March 25, 2009.
5. Wayne Hurlbert, e-mail interview with the author, March 31,
2009.
6. Interview with Susan Bratton, Personal Life Media.
Chapter Thirteen
1. ‘‘Die! Press Release! Die! Die! Die!,’’ http://www.siliconvalley
watcher.com/mt/archives/2006/02/die_press_relea.php.
2. Brian Bille, interview with the author, February 13, 2009.
3. Scott, David Meerman. New Rules of Marketing and PR: How to
Use News Releases, Blogs, Podcasting, Viral Marketing and
Online Media to Reach Buyers Directly (Hoboken, New Jersey:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007).
4. Brian Solis, e-mail interview with the author, April, 2009.
5. Jason Baer, blog post, ‘‘PitchEngine Takes the Mystery Out of
Social Media Releases,’’ August 15, 2008, http://www
.convinceandconvert.com/uncategorized/pitchengine-takes-
the-mystery-out-of-social-media-releases/.
6. Jason Kintzler, phone interview with the author, March 2009.
7. Jason Kintzler, phone interview with the author, March 2009.
8. Brian Solis, e-mail interview with the author, April 2009.
Chapter Fourteen
1. Ross School of Business, ‘‘Pump Up the Volume?’’ July 2007,
http://www.bus.umich.edu/NewsRoom/ArticleDisplay.asp?
news_id=10072.
2. Charlene Li and Josh Bernoff, Groundswell: Winning in a World
Transformed by Social Technologies (Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press, 2008).
3. eMarketer, ‘‘Three-Quarters of the World’s Messages Sent by
Mobile,’’ March 2009, http://www.emarketer.com/Article.
aspx?R=1006995.
Chapter Fifteen
1. John Munsell, interview with the author, March, 2009.
Notes
231

2. Dan Brownlow, ‘‘Why Do Email Marketing?’’ March 2009,
http://www.email-marketing-reports.com/basics/why.htm.
3. Social Networks and Blogs Now 4th Most Popular Online
Activity, Ahead of personal e-mail, http://www.nielsen-
online.com/pr/pr_090309.pdf.
4. Aaron Kahlow, ‘‘How does email marketing ﬁt in with social
media?’’ June 12, 2009, B2B.com, http://www.btobonline.
com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080612/FREE/
173319454.
5. Brian Bille, interview with the author, March 2009.
Chapter Sixteen
1. Jennifer Land, e-mail interview with the author, March 25,
2009.
2. David Alston, interview with the author, March 2009.
Chapter Eighteen
1. The ROI on ‘‘Social Media Marketing: Why it Pays to Drive Word
of Mouth,’’ http://www.aberdeen.com/summary/report/
benchmark/5639-RA-social-media-marketing.asp.
2. Ali Behnam, phone interview with the author, March 2009.
232
NOTES

INDEX
Abbot Laboratories, 99–100
Aberdeen Group, 211
ABI Research, 142
AboutUs online directory, 79
Accountability
customer anger, 27–28, 35
Dell example, 32–35
Kryptonite example, 26–30
Motrin example, 30–32
ACT! (Sage software), 99
ActiveRain network, 71, 176
AdAge blog, 141, 195
AddThis, 176
Advertising. See also Company case
studies; Marketing, online
distrust of, 3, 5–8
fragmentation of, 9–13
Internet, 41–42, 45–46
interruptive, xi, 6–7, 13
old-style, 9–10, 15–19
video (online), 146
Advertising Age, 3
Adweek, 41
AdWords (Google), 217
AIM, 117
AiMA, xxiii
AJAX, 214
Alignment, business–community,
103–104
Alston, David, 32, 203
Amazon.com, 4, 155, 176
American Cancer Society, 41
Analysis metrics
blogging-related, 62
caveats, 104
e-mail-related, 191–192
engagement, 22
Facebook’s Lexicon, 90
Feedburner, 181
ORM, 198–199, 216–217
social media marketing, 211–219
Anderson, Nate, 226n1 (chap. 2)
Andreessen, Marc, 109
Angie’s List, 35
Anheuser-Busch, 170
Apple computer, 152
Ask, blended searches, 195
Association of Realtors1, 25
Atlanta Interactive Marketing
Association. See AiMA
Audacity software, 152, 155–156
Audience. See Niche marketing
Austin, Bill, 64
Auto-replies, 51, 120, 121
Avatars, 80, 95, 122
Avaya, 156
Awareness, Inc., 112
Baby Boomers, 43
Baer, Jason, 165
Baggott, Chris, 65, 68
Basex (research), 12
Behnam, Ali, 215–217
Bennett, Aileen, 95
Bensen, Connie, 103
Bernoff, Josh, 176
233

Best Buy, 101, 104, 207
Best of the Web, 79
Bianchini, Gina, 109
Big Idea, The, 141
Bille, Brian, 164, 195
Binhammer, Richard, 34, 129
Biznik, 93
Biz Stone, 117
Bizzuka
and Blog Talk Radio, 155
links to, 78–79
ORM, 60, 199
video marketing, 138–139
Web design, 190
BlackBerry, 134
Blackshaw, Pete, 32
Blended searches, 65, 78–79, 195
Blendtec, 140–141, 146
Blip.tv, 166
Blog Business World, 158
Blog Catalog, 75
Blogger (blog tool), 176
Blogging
advantages of, 63–68
business models, 68–76
company-use percentages, 16
deﬁned, 55–57
Dell-related, 32–34
directories, 75
e-mail integration, 192–193
participating in, 206–207, 209
podcasts and, 156
prelaunch guidelines, 57–63
trends, 57, 63–64, 76
usage rates, 42, 45, 57
video, 144–145
Web site integration, 190–191
Bloglines, 179, 200
Blog Talk Radio, 152–153, 155, 158, 209
Blood, Rebecca, 56
Bloom, Jonah, 3
Bloomberg, Toby, xxiii
Blue Shirt Nation, 101, 104
Blue Snowball, 155
BoardReader.com, 200
Bookmarking, 75, 173–176
Bowles, Jerry, 112, 113
Brandel, Mary, 229n6 (chap. 9)
Brand image, negative, 27–35
Brand message. See Message, marketing
BrandsEye, 202
Bratton, Susan, 160
Brewer, Jay, 26, 65
Brightcove video services, 147
Brito, Michael, 70–71
Broadcast media. See Advertising
Brogan, Chris, 4, 50, 72–73
Brownlow, Dan, 231n2 (chap. 15)
Bruner, Rick, 73
BSW, 154, 155
B2BOnline.com, 192
Buddy Media, 89
Budweiser beer, 170
Burn, Enid, 227n6 (chap. 6)
Burn After Reading (Coen brothers), 29
Burson-Marsteller, 63
Business Blog Consulting, 73
Business 2.0 magazine, 28
Business marketing. See also Social
media marketing
blogging model, 68–71
niche targeting, 98–101
online video model, 143–146
podcasting model, 156–162
press releases, 163–166
social networking, 82–83
Twitter model, 123–128
Web 2.0 paradigm, xix–xx
Business Online, 194
Businessweek
Blendtec coverage, 141
on blogging, 63
online directory, 79
as site sponsor, 113
BuzzGain, 202
Buzzmachine blog, 32
Buzz Marketing for Technology, 156–157
Buzz Marketing with Blogs for Dummies
(Gardner), 60
Calhoun, Megan, 107–108, 209
Camcorders, 138, 146
Camtasia Studio, 147
Carey, Robin, 112
Carnegie, Dale, 80, 82, 94
Case studies. See Company case studies
CBS Early Show, 141
Cell phones
usage rates, 42
for video, 147
Chaney, Amie, xxiii–xxiv
Chrome, Google, 194
Clark, Brian, 58, 65
Classiﬁed ads, 45
Clearspace, 112
Click-through rates
234
INDEX

for Facebook Ads, 89
as metric, 214, 216
Cluetrain Manifesto, The (Jantsch), 50,
61, 80, 222
CMO Council, 16–17
CNN
Facebook collaboration, 77
and podcasting, 151
Twitter and, 132
Coca-Cola, 10
CollectiveX Groupsites, 111
Collier, Mack, 17, 58
Comcast, 213
Command-and-control marketing,
15–17
Comments, blog
negative, xiii, 59
particpating in, 206–207
CommonCraft, 181
Communications revolution, xix–xxvii
Communities, online
creating, 101–104, 209
deﬁned, 71, 113–114
and lead generation, 113
managing, 104–108
participating in, 205–210
platforms for, 109–113
versus social networks, 97–98
targeting, 71–72
types of, 98–101
Community Participation Pyramid, 48
Company case studies
Abbot Laboratories, 99–100
Blendtec, 140–141
Blog Business World, 158–160
Buzz Marketing for Technology,
156–157
Dell computers, 32–35, 128–129
Dustin Meyer Photography, 18–19
Intel, 70–71
Kryptonite bicycle locks, 28–30
Lauller, Charles, 84–85
Motrin, 30–32
Personal Life Media, Inc., 160–161
Procter & Gamble, 18
Signs Never Sleep, 68–70
Skittles, 188–189
Twittermoms, 107–108
Twitter-related, 128–133
VerticalResponse, 99
Wine Library, 141–142
WSPA-TV (Spartanburg, SC), 132–133
Zappos, 129–132
Company image. See Online reputation
management (ORM)
Compendium Blogware, 61, 65, 68
comScore, 44
Consumers. See also Customers
empowerment of, xi–xii, 15–19
information overload, 9–13
Internet use by, 42–45
passive versus participatory, 17–19
in rebellion, xiii–xiv, 27–35
as skeptics, 3–8
targeting, 21–26
Content. See also Message, marketing
blog/e-mail integration, 192–193
business versus personal, 128
classiﬁcation of, 173–176
e-mail-generated, 192–193
management systems, 64
niche communities, 105, 107, 108
and SEO, 66–67
sharing, 175–176, 208
value-added, 65, 94
Conversation, online. See also
Engagement
joining, 205–210
markets as, 222
role of, 94
Conversation Prism Graph, 38
Conversion rates, 40, 144
Copyblogger, 58
CPM rates, 40, 110–111
Craigslist, 45
Crockett, David, 56
Curry, Adam, 150
Customer Collective, The, 112, 113
Customers. See also Consumers
communities of, 98–100
feedback from, 176–178
as message spreaders, 73
reviews by, 176–177
Customer service
idea aggregators, 177–178
providers, 99
Twitter for, 116, 131
Dan, Ana, 100
Data measurement. See Analysis metrics
Defren, Todd, 165–166, 167–168
Delicious
blogging links, 75
bookmarking, 173, 174–175
Kryptonite case, 29
as metric, 215
Index
235

Dell, Michael, 33
Dell computers
Bizzuka buzz, 139
brand image repair, 32–35
customer feedback, 178
as microblogger, 116, 128–129
Twitter monitoring, 199, 213
Deloitte research, 101–102
Demographics, as niche, 124
Diabetes Control for Life, 99
Dickson, Tom, 140
Die! Press Release! Die! Die! Die!
(Foremski), 163
Digg, 75, 175, 178, 215
Digital handshake, deﬁned, xxii
Direct marketing, press releases and,
164
Direct Marketing Association (DMA),
191–192
Directories
blog-related, 75
podcast-related, 154
SEO and, 78–79
Twello, 125–127
Discovery channel, 141
Documentation, value of, 50
Dreamweaver, 180
Drupal, 111
Duct Tape Marketing (Jantsch), 39, 110
Dunay, Paul, 156–157, 209
Dustin Meyer Photography, 18–19
EA (video games), 112
eBags.com, 176–177
eBay, 107
Ecademy, 92
Echo Boomers, 43
Edelman (PR ﬁrm), 4–5
Edelman, Richard, 5
Edelman Trust Barometer, xiii
Editing software
podcasting, 152, 155–156
video, 138, 147
wikis, 181–182
Education
and online video, 143
Webinars, 107
Edwards-Musa, Stephanie, 25–26
eHarmony, xxiv
Ellen Degeneres Show, 141
E-mail
marketing via, 191–194
popularity of, 63
eMarketer
on blogging, 63
on mobile marketing, 231n3 (chap. 14)
on podcasting, 151
Employee communities, 100–101, 131
Engadget, 28, 70, 141
Engagement
customer, 99–100
passive, 205–208
proactive, 208–210
role of, 94
site appeal, 187–190
via Twitter, 127–128
Enron, 27
Envision Solutions, 17
Equipment
online video, 138, 146–147
podcasting, 152, 154–155
ESPN, 112
Facebook
Bizzuka proﬁle, 138–139
blended searches and, 65, 78
for business, 82–83, 85–91, 209
CNN collaboration, 77
falling CPM rates, 40
Inside Scoop link, 70
marketing examples, 18–19
as marketing tool, 222
as message facilitator, 74
participation in, 208
real estate marketing, 25
as relationship facilitator, xxiv
SEO, 195
ShareThis links, 175
Skittles campaign, 188–189
for small businesses, 46–47
TalkShoe apps, 153
TV marketing, 133
usage rates, 42
user proﬁle, 44, 86
Feedback, customer
beneﬁts of, 176–178
via blogging, 68
via microblogging, 116
and online communities, 98–100
Feedblitz, 193
Feedburner, 181, 193
Feed for All, 180
Feeds, RSS, 178–181
Final Cut Pro, 147
Firefox, 174, 175, 179
Flickr
236
INDEX

blended searches and, 65
for businesses, 47
image sharing, 181
Inside Scoop link, 70
and Pitch Engine, 166
SEO, 195
Flip (video camera), 146
Fliqz, 137, 143, 147
Fohboh, 101, 110
Following
developing, 208–210
guidelines for, 120
targets, 124–125, 127
Food Network, 141
Forbes blog, 141
Ford, ‘‘Drive One’’ campaign, 15
Foremski, Tom, 163, 165
Forrester Research
on blogging, 51, 63
on customer reviews, 176
marketing trends, 41–42
online communities, 113–114
Forums, online, 207
Fox News, 151
Fragmentation, market, 9–13
Friending, online business card, 80
Fundraising, Internet, 41
Fung, Mei Lin, 227n7 (chap. 5)
Furl, 175
GarageBand software, 152
Garcia, Ines. See Hegedus-Garcia, Ines
Gardner, Susannah, 60
Gates, Amy, 30–31
GCast, 153
GEICO, 21
General Motors, 10
Generation C, 43–44
Generation Y, 43
Geography, as niche, 124
Get Satisfaction, 178
Gizmodo, 28
Go Daddy controversy, 197–198
Godin, Seth, 7, 41, 49
Google
blended searches, 195
blog indexing, 207
brand image ratings, 35
business proﬁles, 79
Jaiku platform, 133
metrics, 214, 217
ORM, 200
results analysis, 62
RSS feeds, 179
SEO, 66–67, 72, 157, 164, 222
SMRs and, 168
tagging, 174, 181
video, 142
versus Yellow Pages, 43, 194
Google Analytics, 23
Groundswell (Li and Bernoff), xx,
176–177
Guerrero, Ricardo, 128
Habeus, 192
Halo Supply, 145
Harper, Michael, 151
Harte, Beth, 81
Harte Communications, 81
Hashtags, 123, 125
Haslem, Doug, 153
Healthcare companies
Abbot Laboratories, 99–100
McNeil Consumer Healthcare,
30–32
Hegedus-Garcia, Ines
as business model, 142
online marketing, 47–48
in Project Blogger, 71
social networking, 139–140
Hirshberg, Gary, xxii
History Channel, 141
How-to videos, 145
How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People
(Carnegie), 80
Hsieh, Tony, 118, 129
Huba, Jackie, 106
Hubspot, 217
Hulu, 10, 137, 142
Hurlbert, Wayne, 19, 158
Hurley, Chad, 148
Hyatt, Michael, 61
Iams pet food, 35
iContact, 193
Idea aggregators, 177–178
Ideastorm (Dell), 178
Identity, online. See Avatars; Proﬁles
iGeneration, 43
Iles, J.D., 68–70
iLife software, 152
Image, company. See Online reputation
management (ORM)
iMovie, 138, 147
Indexing, document. See Latent
semantic indexing (LSI)
Index
237

Indicators, performance. See Analysis
metrics
Inﬂuencers
following, 124–125
guidelines for, 49–50
measuring, 218
one-percenters, 48–49
and ORM, 200
peer-to-peer, 3–5
quality of, 214
targeting, 72–73
visionaries as, 104–106
Information
democratization of, 38
overabundance of, 12–13
Inside Scoop (Intel), 70–71
Instant messaging. See Messaging
Intel, 70–71
Internet, user statistics, 42–45
Internet Retailer Magazine, 141
Interruptive advertising, xi, 6–7, 13
iPhones
mobile marketing, 182
podcasting, 152
usage rate, 45
video, 137
Yammer for, 134
iPods, 137, 150, 152
iTunes, 137, 145, 151, 152, 156–157
iUpload, 112
iVillage Live, 141
Jaiku, 133
Jantsch, John
on blogging, 68
on KickApps, 110
on social media, 39, 50
Jarvis, Jeff, 32–33
JetBlue, 6, 8
Jing, 147
Jive Software, 112
Johnmar, Fard, 17
Joomla, 111
Joost, 137
Judy’s Book, 4
Justin.tv, 137
Kahlow, Aaron, 194
Kassell, Carl, 152
Keywords
and blogging, 62–63, 66, 72
as niche target, 125
and ORM, 200
and Twitter, 124
KickApps, 110–111
Kim, Peter, 42
King, Alex, 75
Kintzler, Jason, 166–168
Kodak, 112
Koelling, Gary, 104
Kramer, Jim, 141
Kryptonite bike locks, 28–30, 199
Kudzu.com, 90
Kyte, 137
Land, Jennifer, 201
Latent semantic indexing (LSI), 67
Lauller, Charles, 84–85
Lazerow, Mike, 89
Leadership. See Inﬂuencers
Leads. See also Trafﬁc
blogging and, 71–76
Facebook, 90
via microblogging, 116
networking for, 78
online communities and, 113
LeFever, Lee, 97–98
Li, Charlene, 176
Liability issues, 60
Link baiting, 73–74
LinkedIn
blended searches and, 65, 78
blogging group, 64
for business, 46, 82–85
participation in, 208
as relationship facilitator, xxiv, 77
Links
blogging, 70, 73–76
for SEO, 67
Listening. See Online reputation
management (ORM)
Lithium Technologies, 112–113
Louis, Tristan, 150
Lurkers, 48, 105, 208
Mad Money, 141
Magnolia, 175
Maker’s Mark Ambassadors, 107
Marketing, online. See also Company
case studies; Social media marketing
beneﬁts of, 37–42
guidelines for, 48–52
Internet-use statistics, 42–45
measuring ROI, 211–219
mobile, 182–183
versus old-style, 15–19
238
INDEX

small businesses and, 46–48
Web 2.0 advertising, 45–46
Marketing Executives Networking
Group, 40
MarketingProfs, xii
Marketing tools, online
customer reviews, 176–177
customer service, 177–178
e-mail as, 191–194
mobile communications, 182–183
photo sharing, 181
podcasting, 151–152, 162
RSS technology, 178–181
search engines, 194–195
tagging and bookmarking, 173–176
Web sites as, 187–191
wikis, 181–182
Marketing to the Social Web (Weber), xx
Mars candy, ad campaign, 188–189
Mashable, 154
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 49
Mass media. See Advertising
McConnell, Ben, 106
McDonald’s, 112
McKinsey survey, 16
McNeil Consumer Healthcare, 30–32
Measuring results. See Analysis metrics
Media. See Advertising; Social media
marketing
Megatrends (Naisbitt), xxii
Menchaca, Lionel, 34, 128
Mentoring, social media, 49
MerchantCircle, 35
Message, marketing. See also Content
blogging and, 58
control of, 15–19, 59
customer engagement, 100
and social networking, 95
targeting, 22–26
Message boards, 207
Messaging. See also Twitter
microblogging as, 115–118
tips for, 122–123
user proﬁle, 44–45
Metrics. See Analysis metrics
Meyer, Dustin, 18–19
Miamism, 47
Microblogging
case studies, 128–133
deﬁned, 115
guidelines/etiquette, 119–128
miscellaneous platforms,
133–134
participatory marketing, 134–135
Twitter as archetype, 115–119
Microsoft
blogging guidlines, 59
Moviemaker, 147
podcasting software, 152
RSS feeds, 179
ShareThis links, 175
Millennial generation, 43
Miro, 137, 142, 145
Mobile marketing, 182–183
Moran, Ed, 102, 103, 104
Motrin pain reliever, 30–32
Movable Type, 61, 71
Moviemaker (Windows), 147
MP3 players, 150, 156–157
MSN, blended searches, 195
Munsell, John, 60, 155, 190
MyBlogLog, 75
MySpace
business applicability, 93
ShareThis links, 175
usage rates, 42
user proﬁle, 44
MyVenturePad, 112, 113
Mzinga, 112
Nacht, Richard, xxiii
Naisbitt, John, xxii
Naslund, Amber, 81
National Podcasting Systems, 161
NcNeil Consumer Healthcare,
30–32
Neeleman, David, 6, 8
Netﬂix, 10
Netscape, 109, 178
Networking, online. See Social
networking
New Rules of Marketing and PR (Scott),
164
Newsgator, 179
Newsletters
as customer interface, 104–105
e-mail, 192–193
Newspapers
decline of, 10, 11, 45
versus SMRs, 165
News releases. See Press releases, online
Newsrooms, social media, 170–171
New York Times
Kryotonite story, 28
Motrin story, 30
New York Times Company, 112
Index
239

Niche marketing
blogging, 64, 65, 71–76
deﬁning target, 21–26, 71
online communities, 97–101
participating in, 205–210
for small businesses, 46
Nielsen, Jakob, 48
Nielsen Online, 43, 191
Nike, 15, 21, 112
90-9-1 Principle, 48
Nine Ways to Maximize Your Marketing
Dollars During the Recession
(Bizzuka), 138
Ning, 99, 109–110, 209
Northwestern Mutual, 112
NPR, 151
NYTimes blog, 141
Obama, Barack, 77
‘‘One-percenter’’ concept, 49, 208
Online communities. See Communities,
online
Online reputation management (ORM),
197–204
beneﬁts, 199–200
blog monitoring, 60
deﬁned, 123, 197
e-mail monitoring, 192
image repair, 27–35
metrics, 198–199, 216–217
services for, 200–203
Twitter monitoring, 116, 123–124
value of, 197–199, 203–204
ooVoo, 137
Openﬁre, 112
Open-source platforms, 111
Oracle, 112, 113
ORM. See Online reputation
management (ORM)
Outcomes, as metric, 215–217
Outputs, as metric, 215–217
Outtakes, as metric, 215–217
Owyang, Jeremiah, 113
Participatory marketing
deﬁned, xix, xxv
engaging in, 205–210
etiquette, 81–82
social media as, 13, 80, 94, 222
Partner/vendor communities, 101
Performance indicators. See Analysis
metrics
Permission Marketing (Godin), 7
Personal Life Media, Inc., 160
Pew Internet & American Life Project,
xiii–xiv
Photobucket, 181
Photos, sharing, 181
Pitch Engine, 166–168, 169, 170–171
Pitching products
on podcasts, 159–160
social networking taboo, 80, 94
on Twitter, 121, 128
Platforms
blogging, 61, 64
microblogging, 133–134
online communities, 109–113
Plaxo, 92
Plurk, 133–134
Podcast Producer (Apple), 152
Podcasts
beneﬁts of, 151–152, 162
business-oriented, 156–162
creating, 155–156, 209–210
deﬁned, 149–150
equipment, 152, 154–155
history of, 150–151
resources for, 152–155
vlogs, 144
Podcast Tune-Up, 151, 155
Podomatic, 153
Powerpoint, SMRs and, 166
Practical Ecommerce online directory, 79
Presence application, deﬁned, 117
Press releases, online
beneﬁts of, 163–166, 172
newsrooms, 170–172
Pitch Engine, 166–168, 169
PRWeb, 168–169
Print media. See Advertising
Procter & Gamble, 10, 18, 21, 112
Product demos, online, 145
Proﬁles, online
Bizzuka, 138–139
Facebook, 209
LinkedIn, 84
niche-community, 97–98, 208
personal versus company, 91
reasons for, 78–79
Project Blogger, 71
PRWeb, 65, 168–169
Public relations. See Press releases,
online
Radian6, 32, 81, 201, 203
Radio
240
INDEX

ad revenue, 45
versus SMRs, 165
1960s-style, 9–11
Ratings, customer, 176–178
Reach, as metric, 10, 218
Real estate
niche marketing, 25–26
social networking, 47–48
video marketing, 139–140
Realty Blogging (Nacht and Chaney),
xxiii, 176
Redbook, 108
Reddit, 75, 175
‘‘Relay For Life,’’ 41
Replies. See Responses
Reputation. See Online reputation
management (ORM)
Research
in blogging, 58
in online community creation, 102
value of, 50
Resource utilization, 103
Responses
automatic, 51, 120, 121
channels for, 206–208
via Twitter, 122–123, 127–128
Return on investment (ROI)
marketing-related, xx
measuring, 211–219
tracking, 21–22, 62
Retweets, as metric, 215, 218
Reviews, customer, 176–178
Revver, 137
Ribbit, The, 133
Risley, David, 51
Robin Good Podcast Directory, 154
Robin Good Top, 55, 75
Ross School of Business, 176
Rotten Tomatoes, 4
‘‘RSS in Plain English,’’ 181
RSS technology
blog-related, 61
company-use percentages, 16
creator of, 150
explained, 178–181
icon for, 180
for podcasting, 149–151
Safrit, Zane, xxiii, 4
Sage
annual meetings, 107
customer support, 99
as Lithium user, 113
Sales
customer reviews and, 176
e-mail-related, 191–192
SalesForce Ideas, 178
Sanchez, Rick, 132
SAP, 112, 113
Scott, David Meerman, 65, 95, 164
ScoutLabs, 201, 202
Search engine optimization (SEO)
blogging and, 64–67, 69
customer reviews and, 177
importance of, 194–195
metrics, 217
podcasting and, 157
press releases as, 164
proﬁles, 78–79
SMRs and, 168–169
social networking for, 222
tagging and, 174, 181
video and, 142–143
Search Marketing Fact Pack, 195
Searls, Doc, 56
Seesmic, 137, 166
Sentiment analysis, 198, 201, 202
SEO. See Search engine optimization
(SEO)
SERPS, deﬁned, 78
Share-of-voice metric, 198
ShareThis, 75, 175–176
Shift Communications, 165
ShoePhone, 153
Signs Never Sleep, 68
Simon, Herbert, 13
SiteCatalyst, 23
Site Meter, 62
Skepticism, consumer, 3–8
Skittles campaign, 188–189
Slideshare, 166
Small Wonder (RCA), 146
Smith, Julien, 4
Smith, Tyrus, 145
SMRs. See also Press releases, online
creating, 166–168
deﬁned, 164–166
as SEO tool, 168–169
SMS, 117
Social graph, 82, 120
Social media marketing
beneﬁts, xix–xx, 38, 221–223
blogs, 55–57
company-use percentages, 16
deﬁned, 38–42
guidelines, 48–52
Index
241

Social media marketing (continued )
measuring ROI, 211–219
microblogs, 115–116
news releases, 163–166
niche communities, 24–26, 97–98
participating, 134–135, 205–210
podcasts, 149–150, 162
and press releases, 163–166
via search engines, 194–195
for small businesses, 46–48
social networks, 77–79
tools for, xxiv–xxv
tracking, 197–204
Twitter (see Twitter)
video, 137–138
Social media releases. See SMRs
Social Media Today LLC, 112
Social Media Warehouse (SMW),
202–203
Social networking
consumer empowerment via, xi–xii
leveraging, 208–210
as marketing tool, 221–223
proﬁles, 98
usage rates, 42–43
Social networks
best practices, 79–82
business applications, 77–79
Facebook, 82–83, 85–91
guidelines for participation, 93–96
LinkedIn, 82–85
versus online communities, 97–98
second-tier players, 92–93
Twitter, 82–83, 91–92
Society of Word-of-Mouth. See SWOM
Solis, Brian
Anheuser-Busch SMR, 170
Conversation Prism Graph, 39
and Pitch Engine, 168
on SMRs, 165, 172
on social media, 38
Spamming issues
e-mail-related, 191
in niche communities, 107, 208
Plaxo and, 92
RSS advantage, 180
and Twitter, 125
Spiders, deﬁned, 72
Sta.rtup.biz, 110
StatCounter, 62
State of the Blogosphere (Technorati), 57
Stickam.com, 137, 145, 147
Stonyﬁeld Farms, xxii
StumbleUpon, 75, 173, 175
Super Bowl
Budweiser backstory, 170
Go Daddy controversy, 197–198
SWOM, 106–107, 109, 110
‘‘Swomies,’’ deﬁned, 106
SXSW Interactive Conference, 130
Tagging, 173–176
TalkShoe, 153
Target market. See Niche marketing
Taylor, Dave, 207
Tealium software, 215–217, 218
Technology, people versus, 102–103
Technorati, 57, 174
Techrigy, 201, 202–203
Techsmith, 147
Television
ad revenue, 45
online on-demand, 137
versus SMRs, 165
1960s-style, 9–11
Twitter and, 132–133
Text messaging. See Messaging
Thomas Nelson Publishing, 61
Thunder Show, The, 141
Title ﬁeld, blog, 66
TiVo, xiii, 7, 11
TNS Global, 183
Today Show, The, 141
Tone-of-voice metric, 198–199
Tonight Show, 141
Top ten lists, 73
Trackur, 200, 201–202
Trade publications, 164
Trafﬁc. See also Leads
via customer reviews, 177
generating, 71–76, 90, 207
via StumbleUpon, 175
via video, 143–144
Trends
consumer empowerment, 15–19
consumer rebellion, xiii–xiv, 27–35
consumer skepticism, 3–8
Internet-user, 42–45
media fragmentation, 9–13
negative, 51
niche marketing, 21–26
online video, 137–138, 148
summarized, xxiv, 221–222
tracking, 199, 201, 202
Tribalization of Business (Deloitte),
101–102
242
INDEX

Tribes
Seth Godin on, 49
social networks as, 41, 42
Tribes (Godin), 49
Trulia, 207
‘‘Trust Economies’’ (Brogan and Smith), 4
Trust issues, xiii, 3–8, 177
Twello, 125–127
Twinﬂuence, 218
TWI Surveys, Inc., 45
Twitalyzer, 218
Twitter
Bizzuka presence, 139
blended searches and, 65, 78
and Blog Talk Radio, 159
for business, 46–47, 82–83, 91–92
case histories, 128–133
deﬁned, 118
Dell story, 34, 128–129
versus e-mail, 194
falling CPM rates, 40
Go Daddy controversy, 197–198
guidelines/etiquette, 119–128
Kryptonite story, 29
as marketing tool, 222
measuring results, 213, 218
as message facilitator, xxiv, 74
microblogging archetype, 115–119
Motrin story, 30, 32
negative trends, 51
participation in, 208
real estate marketing, 25, 47–48
Skittles campaign, 188
and SMRs, 166
WSPA-TV story, 132–133
Zappos story, 129–132
Twittermoms, 107–108, 109, 110, 209
TypePad, 61, 156, 171, 176
Universal McCann report, 57
Universal searches. See Blended
searches
University of Michigan, 176
User Friendly Thinking (Bizzuka), 155
Ustream, 137, 147
Utterli, 153–154
Value added
blog-related, 58, 65, 94
podcast-related, 159–160
social media and, 49–50, 208
via Twitter, 121
by Twittermoms, 108
Vaynerchuk, Gary, 141–142, 209
Velocity, as metric, 218
Vendor/partner communities, 101
Veotag, 157
VerticalResponse, 99, 110
Viddler, 137, 147
Video, online
advantages of, 142–143
for business, 143–146
case studies, 138–142
equipment, 138, 146–147
podcasting, 209–210
trends, 137–138, 148
usage rates, 42
Web sites, 137, 147
YouTube, 69, 137, 147
Video Blogging for Dummies (John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.), 144
Vimeo, 137, 142, 147
Viral marketing, 61, 146, 168
Vision, company, 104–106
Vlogs, 144
Wall Street Journal
on company site failures, 102
on corporate blogging, xxii
on using resources wisely, 103
Wal-Mart, 151
Warren, Neil Clark, xxiv
Wayne, Benjamin, 143–144
Webcams, 146
Weblog Handbook, The (Blood), 56
Web Paint, 182
Website Grader, 217
Web sites, creating, 187–191
Web 2.0
as ad medium, 45–46
customer interfacing, 100
marketers’ view of, 40
as new paradigm, xix
RSS technology, 178–181
WebVisible, 43
Widmer, Kathy, 30–31
Wikipedia
on blogs, 55
business proﬁles, 79
on information overload, 12
on microblogging, 115
on niche marketing, 24
on podcasts, 150
preeminent wiki, 181–182
SEO, 195
Skittles campaign, 188
Index
243

Wikipedia (continued)
on social media, 38
on Twitter, 116–117, 118
Wikis, 181–182
Williams, Evan, 117
‘‘Will It Blend’’ videos, 140
Wilson, Ralph, 24–25
Windows. See Microsoft
Wine Library, 141–142
Winer, Dave, 46, 48, 150
Wired magazine, 141
Wolfstar newsroom, 171
Women’s Wisdom Network, 110
Wood, Amy, 132–133
WordFrame, 111–112
Word-of-mouth
company monitoring of, 16–17
customer reviews, 177
guidelines from SWOM, 106–107
Pitch Engine and, 168
as trust generator, 3–5
via Twitter, 116
via viral videos, 146
WordPress
blog platform, 61, 64
Budweiser backstory, 170
for podcasting, 156
ShareThis links, 176
themes, 191
Workbench, The, 110
WorldCom, 27
Wright, George, 140
WSJ blog, 141
WSPA-TV (Spartanburg, SC), 132
Yahoo!
blended searches, 195
customer reviews on, 4, 35
ORM, 200
Q&A forum, 207
RSS feeds, 179
ShareThis links, 175
SMRs ad, 168
versus Twitter, 117
versus YouTube, 143
Yammer, 134, 194
Yellow Pages
versus Google, 43, 194
old-style, 22
Twitter, 125–127
Yelp, 4, 35
YouTube
as archetype, 69, 137
Bizzuka videos, 139
Blendtec videos, 140–141
business caveat, 147
customer reviews on, 4
founder of, 148
Halo Supply video, 145
Inside Scoop link, 70
JetBlue’s apology on, 6
Motrin story, 30
and Pitch Engine, 166
podcasting on, 209
RSS info, 181
as search engine, 143
SEO, 195
Skittles campaign, 188
uploading to, 146
Zappos
case study, 129–132
microblogging, 116
Tony Hsieh at, 118, 129
Twitter metrics, 213
Zookoda, 193
Zoom recorders, 155
Zuckerburg, Mark, 86
244
INDEX

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
PRAISE FOR THE DIGITAL HANDSHAKE
“Social media is now an essential component to
excellent marketing. Paul Chaney, a real-world marketing
executive himself, provides both a strategic overview and a
tactical blueprint to exactly what you need to know for success in 
the digital world. This is no academic tome, it is practical and
useful advice you can apply to grow your business today.”
—DAVID MEERMAN SCOTT
bestselling author of The New Rules of Marketing & PR
and World Wide Rave
“There’s no one better qualiﬁ ed to explain the power of social 
media than Paul Chaney. He’s done it with our audience for years. 
If you want to understand how online conversations, opinions, and 
recommendations affect you and your business, read this book.”
—KERRY MURDOCK
Publisher, Practical eCommerce magazine
“A handshake is a symbol of trust in business, and Paul Chaney 
shows you how to use social media, today’s form of handshake, to 
engage your customers and build trust like never before.”
—JOHN JANTSCH
bestselling author of Duct Tape Marketing
“The Digital Handshake evokes the new marketing relationships 
of today, where it’s not about artiﬁ cial marketing speak, but real 
relationships—the only difference being, those relationships may 
be conducted digitally instead of in person. You couldn’t ask for a 
better small business guide to today’s changed online landscape. 
Paul Chaney is the person to help you navigate it.”
—ANITA CAMPBELL
small business expert and Editor, Small Business Trends
www.Ebook777.com

