
The Complete
E-Commerce
Book
DESIGN, BUILD & MAINTAIN A SUCCESSFUL
WEB-BASED BUSINESS
2nd Edition
by Janice Reynolds 
San Francisco and New York

Published by CMP Books
An imprint of CMP Media LLC
Main office: CMP Books, 600 Harrison St., San Francisco, CA 94107 USA
Phone: 415-947-6615; Fax: 415-947-6015
www.cmpbooks.com
Email: books@cmp.com
Copyright © 2004 CMP Media LLC. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 1-57820-312-0
For individual orders, and for information on special discounts for quantity orders,
please contact:
CMP Books Distribution Center, 6600 Silacci Way, Gilroy, CA 95020
Tel: 1-800-500-6875 or 408-848-3854; Fax: 408-848-5784
Email: cmp@rushorder.com; Web: www.cmpbooks.com
Distributed to the book trade in the U.S. by: 
Publishers Group West, 1700 Fourth Street, Berkeley, California 94710
Distributed in Canada by:
Jaguar Book Group, 100 Armstrong Avenue, Georgetown, Ontario M6K 3E7 Canada
Cover design by Robbie Alterio 
Text design by Brad Greene, Greene Design
Printed in the United States of America
04  05  06  07  08     5  4  3  2  1
Stay informed: Want to receive email news updates for The Complete
E-Commerce Book? To subscribe and receive occasional updates,
changes, and news related to this book, please send a blank email to
ecommerce@news.cmpbooks.com

Table of Contents
iii
Preface
1
Chapter 1: The E-Commerce
Phenomenon
5
The E-Commerce Decision
6
The Essentials
8
Why Go to the Web?
9
Website Models
11
Conclusion
20
Chapter 2: Designing
Your Website
23
What’s Your Line?
24
Target “Your” Customers
24
Your Website’s Blueprint
25
Design
31
Conclusion
41
Chapter 3: The Devil is 
in the Details
43
Domain Name
44
Digital Certificates
48
Merchant Account
54
Check Processing
57
Other Payment Options
58
Conclusion
60
Chapter 4: Server Hardware
61
The Small Website’s Server 
Specifications
62
Server Specifications for a Robust 
Website
63
The Terminology
64
Sample Website Server 
Configurations
67
Conclusion
70
Chapter 5: Redundancy
71
Backup
71
Uninterruptable Power Supply
72
RAID
77
Mirroring
80
Conclusion
81
Chapter 6: Connectivity
83
DSL
84
ISDN
86
T-1/E-1
87
Web Host’s/ISP’s Connectivity
88
Conclusion
90
Chapter 7: Security
91
Develop a Security Plan
92
Layer Your Security
93

Common Website Security Measures
95
Internet Fraud
104
Security Resources
106
Conclusion
107
Chapter 8: Infrastructure 
Software
109
The Operating System
109
Your Web Server
113
Log Analysis Software
119
Databases
124
Database Publishing
133
Conclusion
139
Chapter 9: E-Commerce
Solutions
141
HTML Editors
143
Shrink-wrap E-Commerce Software
144
All-in-One Website Services
147
Commerce Servers
150
Conclusion
153
Chapter 10: Adjunct Software
155
Online Auction
155
Peer-to-Peer
161
Weblogs
167
Conclusion
173
Chapter 11: Quality Assurance
175
The QA Plan
175
Server Error Log
179
Other Items to Check
179
Test and Retest
180
Continual Quality Assurance
180
Quality Assurance Plan Guidelines
181
Focus Groups and Surveys
182
Conclusion
183
Chapter 12: Website 
Maintenance and Management
185
Establishing a Maintenance and
Management System
185
Avoid Simple Errors
186
Software
187
Links Management
187
Content Management
190
Hardware and Infrastructure 
Maintenance
190
Conclusion
192
Chapter 13: Consultants 
and Vendors
193
Selecting a Consultant
193
The Consultant Contract
197
Website Developers
198
Vendor Selection
200
Conclusion
203
Chapter 14: Web-hosting 
Services
205
The Web-hosting Service Models
206
Types of Hosting Accounts
209
Different Hosting Needs
210
Finding the Right Web-hosting 
Service
215
The Complete E-Commerce Book
iv

Service Level Agreements
230
Conclusion
231
Chapter 15: Search Engines 
and Directories
233
Search Engines
234
Directories
236
Hybrid Services
236
Designing for Search Engines
245
Yahoo!
246
Sponsored Listings
246
Conclusion
247
Chapter 16: Marketing 
Your Website
249
The Marketing Plan
249
Implementing Your Marketing Plan
253
On-site Marketing Techniques
254
Data Mining
267
Conclusion
271
Chapter 17: Customer Service
273
The Problem in a Nutshell
274
Create A Customer Service Strategy
275
Automation is the Key
281
Call Centers
289
Conclusion
292
Chapter 18: Logistics and 
Order Fulfillment
293
It’s Still All About the Customer
294
Mired in the Small Parcel Dilemma
297
Logistics
298
Have a Plan
300
Shipping
306
International Orders
308
Fulfillment
308
Fulfillment Models
312
In-House Solutions
317
Outsourcing
326
Conclusion
337
Chapter 19: Final Thoughts
339
Factors that Can Slow Growth
339
Globalization
341
Appendix: Computer Basics
343
Glossary
353
Index
369
Table of Contents
v

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Preface
The dot-com bubble has burst, but e-commerce isn’t dead — online sales are still grow-
ing impressively. In the U.S., Forrest Research reported that 2002 online sales were up
nearly 50 per cent compared with the year before. And in the U.K., the Interactive
Media in Retail Group said that 2002 online shopping grew 19 times faster than tra-
ditional retailing venues. Furthermore, as of December 17, 2003, The Street.com
reports “e-commerce sales are up 20% to 35% this holiday season [2003].” In fact,
numerous experts predict that Internet shopping is likely to continue to outgrow
brick-and-mortar sales for the foreseeable future because consumers are recognizing
and exploiting the benefits of Web shopping.
A late 2003 eSpending report found that 62 percent of the online shoppers inter-
viewed described themselves as satisfied with the experience, while less than 7 percent
were dissatisfied. This means that online shoppers are also more confident about secu-
rity, and thus, more comfortable spending money online.
2003 was the year that e-commerce proved it is not a “flash in the pan.” The Web
is now a common shopping venue for the average consumer. 
You are reading this book because you want to get in on this shopping bonanza.
However, building and running a successful website isn’t as easy as it might first appear.
Like the first edition of The Complete E-commerce Book, this edition provides select com-
parisons of various tools needed to construct, design, and run a successful e-com-
merce website. New to this second edition are sections on auctions, peer-to-peer file
sharing, and weblogs. As such, this edition provides details on how to build an online
auction site or incorporate auction features into an existing site. The same holds true
for peer-to-peer file sharing and weblog technology. Furthermore, the reader is given
suggestions on how to turn a file sharing venture or a weblog into a moneymaking
venture, whether as a new e-commerce venture or as an add-on to an existing website.
Adding an auction, peer-to-peer file sharing, and/or a weblog to an established e-com-
1

merce business are great ways to grow a community, create repeat customers, and
build a loyal consumer base.  
The technology that makes the Web a wonderful place to do business also makes
it scary. Why?  Think about it — the Web is unstructured, uncensored for the most
part, and it speeds up the exchange of information between businesses and their cus-
tomers — at a speed that, if you are not careful, you will not be prepared to handle.
Your customers can find your business by a click of a mouse and make purchases eas-
ily but they also expect easy access, prompt delivery, and good customer service. This
book gives you the tools to understand the technology and issues involved; thus,
enabling a business to adapt quickly and to make the changes necessary to prosper
on the Web. 
The tools that are now available enable e-commerce operators to create more excit-
ing, dynamic websites. This second edition addresses these new products. There is a new
chapter, “Search Engines and Directories,” where you will find a lengthy discussion
on how to design your website to receive a high “ranking” within the various search
engines and directories. 
This second edition also delves further into security issues. The Internet is a play-
ground for hackers and other nefarious individuals. If an e-commerce operator isn’t care-
ful, his or her website can become a vehicle for fraud. But, like in the real world, there
are steps you can take to keep out the “bad guys.” This book is peppered with new
advice on how to protect your website, your servers, and your data. 
For those readers who already have an established brick-and-mortar business, an
online presence helps to give them a competitive edge. Understanding the basics of
e-commerce and its technology is necessary for any executive in a company that is
already on the Web, thinking about moving to the Web, or has business partners who
have moved to the Web. For a successful web presence you need not only a well-designed
and easily maintained website, you also must bring together product knowledge, mar-
keting, distribution and other skills that may not be present in a brick-and-mortar
business. The Complete E-commerce Book helps you to ask the right questions and set
realistic goals, and to make the right decisions as you move to the Web. 
I wrote this book with both the entrepreneur and the non-technology executive in
mind. Both can, at times, find e-commerce and its obscure technological terms con-
fusing. When it comes to making the decision to adopt new technologies, an execu-
tive relies on his or her information technology (IT) personnel. However, executives
who rely exclusively on these technical gurus for significant input into their business’
overall strategy are just asking for trouble. Why?  While non-technology executives
The Complete E-Commerce Book
2

should consult with the IT managers on how technology can relate to their business’
overall strategy, executives must take responsibility for understanding the evolving
technologies so that they can make the best decisions possible to ensure the success of
their e-commerce venture.
Janice Reynolds
Oley, Pennsylvania
February 5, 2004
Preface
3

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 1
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
It is hard to fail, but it is worse never to have tried to succeed. 
In this life, we get nothing save by effort.
—Theodore Roosevelt
Despite the spectacular dot-com bust of a few years ago, the Internet has markedly
changed the way we do business, whether it’s finding new streams of revenue, acquir-
ing new customers, or managing a business’s supply chain. E-commerce is mainstream
— enabling businesses to sell products and services to consumers on a global basis.
As such, e-commerce is the platform upon which new methods to sell and to distrib-
ute innovative products and services electronically are tested. 
The Web’s influence on the world’s economy is truly astonishing. The business
world knows that the Web is one of the best ways for business such as manufacturers
to sell their products directly to the public, brick-and-mortar retailers to expand their
stores into unlimited geographical locations, and for entrepreneurs to establish a new
business inexpensively.
Thus, it is important that the executive in the 21st Century know 1) where tech-
nology stands in the business processes of his or her company, 2) how technology relates
to the company’s strategies, 3) how rapidly technology changes and evolves, and 4) how
the company and its business partners will respond to the changing technology. 
In the high flying 1990s, many people jumped on the e-commerce bandwagon after
reading the many highly publicized dot-com “success” stories. Admittedly, most were
written to raise the entrepreneurial blood pressure. What many forgot, though, was
5

the old adage: If it looks too good to be true, it probably is. They didn’t use their innate
intelligence and failed to proceed with caution. 
Nonetheless, the ascendancy of e-commerce has expanded the business environ-
ment so that even a small start-up can compete with well-established business names
and product brands. Yet, when you consider joining the e-commerce commerce com-
munity, keep in mind that selling products and services on the Web presents a unique
set of challenges. This book will help you take on those challenges. 
Note: U.S. Department of Commerce reports show that U.S. online retail sales totaled $14.33 billion during
the fourth quarter of 2002. The reports further show that this amount represents an increase of 28.2% over
the same period in 2001.
✪
THE E-COMMERCE DECISION
For both the entrepreneur and the established brick-and-mortar business, setting up
a virtual business on the Web can be a great way to expand your market — BUT you
MUST first educate yourself as to how to proceed. Extending an existing business to
the Web or starting a new Web venture without understanding e-commerce is like try-
ing to hit a baseball with one arm tied behind your back and a blindfold on. It is not
simple and it is not easy to build a successful business on the Web. It takes a tremen-
dous amount of planning. Without a clear understanding of the process and clearly
defined goals, establishing a successful website can turn into a difficult, complicated,
and costly project. 
Back during the dot-com craze, the author read a Tom Friedman column in The
New York Times entitled “Amazon.You: For about the cost of one share of Amazon.com
(AMZN), you can be Amazon.com.” In that column Friedman told the story of a small
Midwest online book-selling operation that cost around $150 a month to run. That
small bookseller used the same wholesalers as the competition, including Amazon.com,
but his net on each sale was better. Friedman stated that the site “offers Millions of
Books at Great Prices” including, a John Grisham book for $2.60 less than Ama-
zon.com. Mr. Friedman’s point was that for the cost of just a few shares of Amazon.com
stock, and a good, clearly developed idea, a savvy small entrepreneur could compete with
a “Web Giant.” 
The Brick-and-Mortar’s Decision
Are you the owner of an established, traditional business considering a move to the
Web? If so, before moving to the Web, you must first determine the benefits of a Web
presence. To do so, ask yourself some hard questions:
The Complete E-Commerce Book
6

✸What are your business goals and how will a website support them?
✸What do you want to achieve with a website?
✸Will a website deliver new customers or more sales from current customers?
✸Will it offer better customer support?
✸Will it bring good publicity? 
✸When is the right time to create a website for your business?
✸Will this venture adversely affect your brick-and-mortar business?
In other words, if you build it will they come?  Forget the hype. Determine if and how
a website can enhance your business’s bottom line. Then determine the amount of
money you must invest before you turn your first profit from the website.
Any way you look at it, the decision to extend an already successful business onto
the Web is a tough call. Before moving forward, considerable research is necessary;
without the appropriate technical knowledge and the understanding of the ins-and-
outs of e-commerce, it is easy to get lost.
On the technical side, your first sequence of goals should be: 
✸Learn what it takes to build various kinds of websites.
✸Determine what kind of website you want to build.
✸Build it. 
✸Continue to improve and update it.
You must take care that your existing business doesn’t suffer as you and your staff
gain the necessary knowledge and proficiency in the technologies needed to purchase
and to implement the equipment and software needed for a website. Do you have any
idea how much time, effort, and money you must invest in order to have a viable e-
commerce site, one that will produce a reasonable return?  Take the time to find out.
An Entrepreneur’s New Web Venture
Most of what applies to a brick-and-mortar business also applies to an entrepreneur’s
new web venture. But a new e-commerce business also must strive to leave the starting
gate with an extremely high performance level if it is to establish its brand name effec-
tively. If it stumbles, in all likelihood that new web-based business will not positively
imprint its brand name on the public and therefore will not be in a position to exploit
the opportunities available to an innovative web entrepreneur. 
For an entrepreneur, the secret to a successful web-based venture is finding a niche.
The first step for a fledgling entrepreneur is to determine your niche market — a
defined group of potential customers sharing common characteristics that delineate
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
7

their interest in specific products and/or services. A niche market makes it easier to
plan a credible marketing strategy. When you know your niche market, you can tai-
lor your site’s content to appeal to that market. Examples of websites built to serve a
unique niche market include 4mdogbooks, platesusa.com, and Gary’s Belt Buckles,
which can be found at www.abn1.net/buckles.
Once you decide on your niche market, and your product or service, ask the fol-
lowing questions:
✸Is your product easy and economical to ship?
✸Who are your suppliers?  Can you depend on them for quality products and for
prompt delivery? 
✸What is your price point (the price just above the point where lowering the price
will increase your sales but not increase profits)?
✸How will you draw customers to your website?
✸How will you differentiate yourself from the competition?
✸How will you accept orders and process payments? 
✸What type of fulfillment facilities will you use to ship products?
✸How will you handle returns and warranty claims? 
✸How will you provide customer service?
✸What size e-commerce site would you want to build?
✸How will you build your new website?
✸How much will it cost to build the website, and can you afford it?
✪
THE ESSENTIALS
You can’t just open an online store and expect customers to flock to it. Find out if
your niche market is one that you can reach through a website. How?  Does your niche
market have an identifiable need for your web offering?  Do they have the wherewithal
to pay for it?  Is the niche group sizeable, i.e., will it provide enough business to pro-
duce the income you need?  If the answers are yes, you have found a good niche. Now
dig deep within that niche to understand the consumer behaviors that drive it. 
Every e-commerce operator should assume that his or her customers are sophisti-
cated shoppers who demand prompt delivery of a product that is exactly as portrayed
on their website. The most common mistake made by inexperienced web operators is
to fail to be responsive to their customers’ order processing and fulfillment needs.
But those services are the very underpinnings of all successful e-commerce ventures
— neglect those areas and you have a business catastrophe. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
8

To help in the follow-through, you and your customers must be able to track the
status of each purchase. Most new e-commerce businesses, however, fail to integrate
this necessary backend support. 
Another “must” is to make certain that your customers know that your web-based
business will not only deliver a value online that cannot be found offline, but that it is just
as responsive with customer service issues as the most well-regarded offline business. 
By keeping customer service and product fulfillment as an immediate priority you
can build a valuable relationship with your customer. In doing so, you earn that cus-
tomer’s loyalty. That helps to stem the natural flow of attrition as customers who pur-
sue the lowest price find that the trade-off is a void in the cut-rate business’s customer
service department. 
Another common problem for new e-commerce businesses is misinterpreting the
power of the Web. Yes, a website with the right infrastructure can economically automate
transactions. However, the real power of the Web is its role as a relationship-building mag-
net — through its ability to provide numerous opportunities for interactivity. If you
are careless with automated processes — this very real advantage will vanish. 
Use your website to provide not only useful and interesting information about
your products/services, but also about your entire niche market. The group that makes
up a niche market always yearns for more information. They will return time and
again to your website if they are appealed to on the basis of their special interests —
detailed articles and content-rich advertising specifically targeted to them. 
The dot-com bust of 2000 was a failure of business plans; the concept itself has
not failed. And while numerous news articles over the last few years detail how vari-
ous websites lost sales and customer confidence due to inadequate prelaunch plan-
ning, there have also been many successes, especially in the small business arena. 
✪
WHY GO TO THE WEB?
The Web opens up a whole new market for goods and services. It creates opportunity
for a multifaceted arena that offers new efficiencies for sales, marketing, customer
service, shipment tracking, inventory monitoring, and many other aspects of the total
business model.
Choice has always been the Holy Grail for consumers. Today’s consumers have a
wide variety of commerce choices: traditional businesses, mega discount stores, cata-
logs or direct market mail, and the Web. The Web, taken as a whole, is a powerful
medium where consumers browse, research, compare, and then buy online or, after
doing their “window shopping” online, make the purchase at a brick-and-mortar busi-
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
9

ness. Businesses that keep in mind the consumers’ desire for choice, and integrate
into their website the appropriate means for customer interactions, will succeed.
This being said, the Web will not open vast new markets for every business. How-
ever, it can extend a significant degree of power to businesses that recognize how to
leverage the efficiencies of this new arena. A good example is 3Com (www.3com.com)
which, through its website:
✸Offers products and services to a global audience.
✸Provides many different technical support features online.
✸Offers software downloads including drivers, updates and fixes, which prior to the
website would have been mailed to the customer.
✸Offers an online store.
✸Provides an educational center with online courses.
In short, 3Com’s business and customer base didn’t change — the Web changed
the way 3Com services its market — it did not create a new market. Still, overall, 3Com’s
business is enhanced by its web presence.
Big companies with plenty of technical expertise and buckets of money have always
been able to build their own e-commerce systems, complete with a secure server, a
high-speed Internet connection, and custom software. Luckily, costly e-commerce bar-
riers are rapidly tumbling allowing any business to have a credible web presence. What
was once expensive and difficult is quickly becoming affordable and easy to use. 
Look Before You Leap
Established businesses shouldn’t jump rashly onto the e-commerce bandwagon. They
must first institute a well thought out plan upon which to build their e-commerce
business model. If you neglect this important step, you risk losing your already estab-
lished identity, your good reputation, and your customers. Two examples of not look-
ing before leaping are the widely reported Toysrus.com 1999 holiday shopping season
fiasco and the KbKids’ website problems. According to survey conducted by Robert-
son Stephens, a leader in Equity Research, Investment Banking and Sales & Trading,
in early 2000, 44% of the shoppers surveyed stated that due to their unhappy experi-
ences with KBKids.com, it was unlikely that they would shop on the online toy retailer
again. Perhaps if these retailers had scaled down their initial online effort as Bloom-
ingdales.com did, their website and reputation would have fared better.
Both websites have learned from their mistakes. KBkids.com completely redesigned
its web operation. But before creating the new website the KBkids.com designers, web
The Complete E-Commerce Book
10

producers, and writers conducted surveys and usability studies, participated in con-
ference calls and held one-on-one meetings with KBkids.com shoppers. The result is
a new sleek, innovative website with many customer-friendly features along with the
functionality and back-office features needed to keep customers happy. 
Toysrus.com took another tack — partnering with the etailing giant, Amazon.com.
The two companies entered into a ten-year deal that draws on each company’s core
strengths. Amazon.com fulfills orders, handles customer service, and uses its expert-
ise in front-end site design to build a powerful customer-support environment. Toys-
rus.com and parent company Toys ‘R’ Us identifies, purchases, and manages inventory,
using its clout to get the hottest toy lineup. Revenues are split, and risks are shared.
The Challenge
Creating a business model for e-commerce starts with the following basic challenge:
Can you define your company?  Next, can you state your goals for the company?
Finally, — within the aforementioned context — can you state what role e-commerce
can play in helping your company maintain or change its identity? Th
The Top 10 Website Categories as of September 2003
Unique Visitors as of 
Unique Visitors as of 
Category
August 2003 
September 2003
% Change
Retail-Food 
8,324,000 
9,732,000 
16.9%  
Weather 
38,100,000 
41,757,000 
9.6%  
Sports 
48,169,000 
52,633,000 
9.3%  
Retail-Flowers/Gifts/Greetings 
23,576,000 
25,373,000 
7.6%  
Entertainment-TV 
44,085,000 
47,154,000 
7.0%  
Hobbies-Lifestyles-Food 
22,959,000 
24,322,000 
5.9%  
Hobbies/Lifestyles-Home 
26,384,000 
27,909,000 
5.8%  
Online Trading 
10,739,000 
11,256,000 
4.8%  
Entertainment-Music 
62,210,000 
65,116,000 
4.7%  
Table 1.  As this table indicates, online sales are growing steadily along with the total number of
Internet users (148,811,000 in August 2003 to 150,045,000 users in September 2003). Source: com-
Score Media Metrix.e
✪
WEBSITE MODELS 
There are eight basic website models — ranging from the simple static pages of a
brochureware site to richly interactive online gaming sites, to online stores chock full
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
11

of products, to online auctions. Many websites combine several of these basic mod-
els. However, each model has unique characteristics that distinguish it from the other
models and it is important to understand these differences.
Brochureware Site
A brochureware site is a marketing site that electronically aids in the buying and sell-
ing process. A traditional business often will build and maintain a brochureware site
as a marketing tool with the objective of promoting the business and its products/serv-
ices. A brochureware site is sometimes an adjunct to a business’ technical support
division providing online documentation, software downloads and a Frequently Asked
Question (FAQ) section. Such a website can provide detailed information about the
business’s products/services, contact information including the business’s address,
telephone numbers, and email addresses. It can also be a tool to provide the public
copies of a company’s annual reports, press releases, and employment opportunities.
Revenue from this kind of site is generated indirectly by creating an awareness of the
business’ products/services. All transactions occur offline. 
Savvion develops business process management software that improves business
performance and reduces costs within and across functional business units. Its web-
site, www.savvion.com, is a good example of a high-quality brochureware site. It is
clean, fast loading, and has all of the elements of a good website. To demonstrate the
variety of businesses that take advantage of the Web to expand their business oppor-
tunities visit the following brochureware websites: Rolledsteel.com, Cohenhighley.com,
Hayproperty.com.au, and Paulcato.com.
As you can see, you don’t need to be a corporate giant to benefit from a brochure-
ware site. In addition to the websites listed in the previous paragraph, here are two
other examples of small businesses that use the Web to their advantage. First, is a local
Chevrolet dealership in Reno, Nevada that has made the most from its brochureware
site. Visit Championchev.com and you will find that the website is positioned to pro-
vide the sales and repair departments with additional sales, while reducing the busi-
ness’s overhead by eliminating many of the telephone calls requesting directions to
the business, hours of operation, etc. The second is a Tennessee pharmacy that dis-
penses information and speeds prescription refills via their website. To check out the
innovative ways this small business uses the Web to its and its customers’ advantage,
visit Wilsonpharmacy.com. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
12

Online Store
An online store is a website where consumers buy products or services. This type of
site is most commonly referred to as an e-commerce site or a “B2C” (Business to Con-
sumer) site. In addition to most, if not all, of the content found in a brochureware
site, an online store displays products/services along with detailed information (e.g. spec-
ifications and pricing) usually from a database with search features, and a method for
online purchase. An online store must also provide extensive information about the
products/services offered that not only aids in attracting consumers, but gives them
enough confidence in the seller and the products/services to take the next step — mak-
ing an online purchase. 
One question the author is often asked is “what should an e-commerce site offer —
online order processing, just a toll free number, or both?” The answer is: Offer both.
If you choose to take online payments, you must provide a secure, reliable, cost-
effective system for authorizing payment and managing transactions. The best sys-
tems are based on the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) and/or Secure Electronic Transactions
(SET) encryption technology, which provide the encryption of data and generate and
display a “results page” to the customer following the transaction. 
Further, a successful online store must be designed with the ability to store orders
in a database or as tab-delimited text files so the data can be imported into an invoic-
ing system. Then the website must be able to intelligently route encrypted email to
the order fulfillment division.
A good example of a large online store is Healthtex.com. This is a great site in every
respect. To see how a small brick-and-mortar business uses a web presence to enhance
its bottom line, visit Parkaveliquor.com, where you will find an attractive, well-designed
and fully functional e-commerce site that benefits both the storeowner and the cus-
tomer. Other good online stores you might want to use as guides when designing your
website include the Treliske Organic (www.nzsouth.co.nz/treliske), which offers “Cer-
tified Organic” Wool, Knitwear, Beef and Lamb; Badcataviation.com, a great toy airplane
store; and Soccer Books Limited (www.soccer-books.co.uk) where you can find a huge
selection of books, video and DVDs relating to the sport of soccer.
Another avenue that an entrepreneur might want to consider is to team with a
large e-commerce site such as Amazon.com or e-bay.com to provide the e-commerce
end while the entrepreneur provides the site’s “content.” Good examples of such a site
are www.dolls-for-sale.com and www.politinfo.com.
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
13

Subscription Site 
A subscription site targets a specific niche market that places a value on expert infor-
mation, service, or a digital product delivered in a timely manner. Technical newslet-
ters, access to research information, and graphics, music and computer game downloads
are all examples of products and services that can be sold for a monthly fee, an annual
subscription, or a small per transaction fee. While the revenue from such services and
products should be able to fund the operating costs of a subscription site, in most
instances, the income may not be substantial — the exception are sites that offer video,
music, and/or computer game downloads. 
A subscription site can process payments offline and provide via email a user’s
name and password for access, or it can provide a secure, reliable, cost-effective online
system for authorizing payment and managing transactions. Again, the best systems
are based on Secure Socket Layer (SSL) and/or Secure Electronic Transactions (SET)
technology to encrypt the data, and generate and display a “results page” to the cus-
tomer following the transaction. 
E-commerce technology continues to become more sophisticated, and with every
advance the financial prognosis for a subscription site should improve. A good exam-
ple of a subscription site is iEntertainment Network (www.iencentral.com). This world-
wide game and entertainment site offers both free ad-supported and fee-based online
game channels. The site also offers a variety of monthly subscription plans. 
The website Content-wire.com offers another example of a good subscription site
that uses both banner ads and subscriptions for its revenue stream. This website offers
a niche editorial product that covers a narrow vertical technology sector — web-based
commerce. As such, it provides up-to-date news articles, produces features on a vari-
ety of subjects, and offers a good bit of research material. Although this website could
be better designed, it is functional and the average surfer will find it easy to use. Because
the site does derive some of its revenue from banner ads, some information offered is
free (use it!). Note that surfers who pony up $100 or $200 for a subscription, there is
much more data available for your perusal. 
A sub-model that increasingly is finding favor is the website that offers down-
loadable content — via a subscription account, a la carte basis, or a combination of
both. The most popular website within this sub-model is the new Napster.com.
Although this digital music destination bears the same name as the famous, but
defunct, peer-to-peer file sharing website, that business model is in its past. The cur-
rent Napster.com is a digital music catalog site that also offers many rich community
features for its customers. The new Napster.com allows consumers to choose how
The Complete E-Commerce Book
14

they want to experience music, offering both an a la carte store and a premium sub-
scription service. 
Not all digital music sites follow the subscription model, however. Apple’s
iTunes.com website, which at this writing offers more than 400,000 songs from a wide
variety of musicians for less than a dollar per song, states that its iTune website offers
music without the need to “agree” to complicated rules. There are no clubs to join,
and no monthly fees — if you like a song, you just buy a downloadable copy of it for 99¢. 
Check these sites out; they might give you some ideas on how you can make money
from your own website. 
Advertising Site
An advertising site is a content laden site, whose revenue base is the dollar amount
derived from banners, sponsorships, ads, and other advertising methods. The traffic
the site draws is the measure of its value. Recognized rating firms measure its value
and then advertising rates are based upon that value. Important note: Very few sites can
be supported entirely through advertising dollars. 
Two good advertising sites are Cnet.com and Howstuffworks.com. Both are won-
derful content laden advertising websites that every reader should bookmark. You
should especially read the Howstuffworks website’s explanation of how a web server
works, which can be found at http://computer.howstuffworks.com/web-server.htm. 
Another great advertising site is Thekidzpage.com. Although this colorful site’s
use of “pop-up” ads can be irritating, those ads allow this site to provide all of its great
content for free. Children love to visit this site to play games and parents appreciate the
more than 250 printable coloring books and learning activities. 
But an advertising site needn’t be graphic intensive nor host a variety of pop-up ads
to be successful. Cases in point are the low-tech websites HomePCnetwork.com and
Hrmguide.co.uk. Although these text-driven sites don’t offer a lot of “bells and whistles,”
they make up for their lack of “eye-appeal” by their informative, easy-to-use content. 
Online or Cyber Mall
A simple and easy way to sell products/services online is to open a shop in one of the
many cyber malls on the Web. Online malls generally offer turnkey solutions for store
creation, payment processing, and site management. For example, most cyber malls
offer a template for implementing a catalog of products, a shopping cart application,
and a form generator — allowing small businesses to quickly set up shop on the Web.
The templated applications employed to set up a business’s catalog and the ease of
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
15

payment processing are tempting to a novice. These cyber malls also provide a high
level of “click traffic.” If you are new to the Web and would prefer to first “dip your
toe in the water,” a cyber mall may be the answer.
A cyber mall’s biggest promise is to deliver more traffic to your “front door” than
you would be able to do if you go it alone. Since you will be relying on the cyber mall’s
marketing savvy, make sure you verify that it can deliver. But note that the only “front
door” which is advertised is the cyber mall’s address, not your online store’s address. 
Most cyber malls offer a purchasing system, which enables a web start-up to avoid
up-front shopping cart software costs, but a fee is accessed on each purchase — that fee
will eventually exceed the cost of the software. 
You need to ensure that the cyber mall you choose is one in which your online store
can flourish. Consider the pros and cons of establishing your online store in a cyber
mall including the restrictions and costs that some cyber malls impose. Then con-
sider the option of setting up your own purchasing system and independent identity.
For, in reality, a cyber mall is just a list of links categorized by store and product type.
Any number of cyber malls can help you get your website up and running in record
time. Yahoo! Store, probably the most popular cyber mall on the Web, includes an
easy tool that lets you register your own domain name (http://www.ourname.com)
or, if you already have a domain name, they will help you transfer it. You are also given
the option of using stores.yahoo.com/yourname, which does not require an up front
registration fee. Freemerchants.com offers an easy and inexpensive way to set up an
e-commerce site. Of course, like many cyber malls, with Freemerchants.com you are
required to design your new website using Freemerchants.com’s own online Store
Builder (to which you can add your own graphics and backgrounds) — you upload
sites or pages created in other programs to the freemerchants.com servers. 
Or perhaps you would like to avail yourself of the services of a cyber mall that caters
to a niche market. Regional cyber malls are one example of this type of online serv-
ice. Danapointharbor.com promotes not only local online shops, but also other local
industries and activities in the Dana Point Harbor, California area. And Outer-
banks.com does the same for the North Carolina Outer Banks region. There are many
of these regional services; if you find the concept interesting, check out what’s avail-
able in your area. 
Perhaps you want to present your product to a more defined niche, like the Indian
artifacts mall at www.arrowheads.com/main.htm or TIAS.com’s antiques cyber mall.
Such an arrangement might be just the ticket to introduce your new e-commerce busi-
ness to your targeted niche market. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
16

Business-to-Business Site
All of the website models discussed in this book are built to serve either the individ-
ual consumer or the consumer and business customers. But a business-to-business site
is built to serve other businesses; if the business also wants to serve its individual
consumers, it usually builds a separate retail site to serve those customers. This book
doesn’t deal with the minutiae of B2B sites, since B2B sites, while using some of the
technology discussed in this book, often also need other technology to further their
goals of providing products/services to other businesses rather than individual con-
sumers.
The growth of B2B e-commerce is explosive. For some businesses, B2B e-commerce
already influences value chains, distribution channels, customer service, and pricing
strategies. Others look to B2B for ways to leverage this new technology to increase
sales, profits, customer loyalty, and brand preference. For detailed information on
creating a viable B2B business model read books such as, B2B: How to Build a Profitable
E-Commerce Strategy, by Michael J. Cunningham; The eMarketplace: Strategies for Success
in B2B eCommerce, by Warren Raisch; and B2B Application Integration: e-Business-Enable
Your Enterprise, by David S. Linthicum.
Auction Site
Auctions have been around for thousands of years. Traditionally, a person offers an
item for sale and potential buyers bid on the item. The bidder willing to pay the high-
est price for the item wins the bid and takes the item home — the same with online
auctions. The main difference between traditional auctions and web-based auctions is
that the actual bidding and selling takes place over the Internet with interested buy-
ers submitting bids electronically. The person with the highest bid at the timed close
of the auction wins the bid and arranges to receive the item. The auction site acts as the
middleman in the buying and selling transaction process. 
There are a number of ways you can use the auction model. First, you could build an
auction website and let that be your business model. Or you could add an auction com-
ponent to another e-commerce model. Many auction sites are built or sponsored by
major vendors who have an established website, and use their auction site either to
attract customers, or to offer merchandise that is surplus, outdated, and/or seconds.
Many readers, however, will find established online auctions such as those offered
by eBay, Ubid, Amazon auctions, and Yahoo auctions a way to build a credible e-com-
merce business. Using an established auction website to build a web-based business
is inexpensive and allows you to begin making a profit immediately: There are none of
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
17

the expenses of the typical e-commerce model — no advertising costs, no hosting costs,
etc. Auction sites receive billions (yes billions) of visits daily. 
If you use one of the online auction sites as a means to enter the world of e-com-
merce, understand that you are responsible for listing your items on the auction site,
and you assume responsibility for all aspects of your auction listings, including prod-
uct descriptions, identification of quantities, establishment of starting and maximum
bid prices, and shipping. Once the auction closes, it is up to you and the buyer to make
arrangements for payment and shipping.
As online auctions continue to grow in popularity, more and more, entrepreneurs,
retailers, manufacturers, and other businesses see them as a beneficial way to sell sur-
plus goods, while consumers see them as a great way to save money and get great deals.
The largest and best known auction site is eBay.com. For sellers, the ability to mar-
ket your product to millions of daily visitors makes using eBay one of the most effi-
cient ways to sell just about anything. Potential buyers search for items and place
bids on those they are interested in purchasing. At the close of an auction the high-
est bidder is the winner. At that point, the buyer and seller make arrangements for
payment and shipping. 
All you need to become an eBay seller is to register, which is free and only takes a few
moments. However, eBay requires sellers to provide a credit or debit card, as well as
enough details for eBay to check their “bonafides,” i.e. the potential seller provides
eBay with enough information for the auction site to establish his or her proof of
identity by cross-checking against consumer and business databases. If everything is
kosher, the seller obtains an “ID Verified” designation, which enables them to place
items for sale on the auction site. 
Yahoo! also offers an auction service. Its seller requirements are similar to eBay’s, i.e.
there is a registration (free) and all sellers must provide credit or debit card information. 
If you have products that are more niche oriented, you might want to use an auc-
tion site that caters to that niche crowd, e.g. Allbadges.com is a police and fire mem-
orabilia auction site; All Nations Stamp and Coin (www.downtownstamps.bc.ca) buys,
sells and trades international postage, coinage and banknotes; BeerAuction.com spe-
cializes in “breweriana”; and wfpauctions.com specializes in Snoopy and Peanuts col-
lectible items.
Weblog
It’s difficult to define this type of website, mainly due to diversity of models adopted
for individual weblogs (also known as “blogs”). But perhaps the Internet Librarian 2001
The Complete E-Commerce Book
18

describes this interesting web-based genre the best: “A web page containing brief,
chronologically arranged items of information. A weblog can take the form of a diary,
journal, what’s new page, or links to other websites.” 
Weblogs are to words what [the original] Napster was to music. (“Andrew Sulli-
van, Wired Magazine, May 2002”). In that same issue Sullivan says, “Twenty-one
months ago, I rashly decided to set up a web page myself and used Blogger.com to
publish some daily musings to a readership of a few hundred. Sure, I’m lucky to be
an established writer [he also writes of The New Republic and The New York Times] in
the first place. And I worked hard at the blog for months for free. But the upshot
is that I’m now reaching almost a quarter million readers a month and making a
profit. That kind of exposure rivals the audiences of traditional news and opinion
magazines.”
To give you some ideas on how you can turn a profit with your blog, visit Sulli-
van’s weblog — Andrewsullivan.com. Also click on the “Info” button on the left side of
the page and check out his Media Kit.
The key to the popularity of a weblog is the person or people producing it. Since
weblog readers often develop relationships with the weblog author(s), interaction
between reader and author is inevitable. Good weblog examples include Eatonweb.com,
Scripting.com, Gizmodo.com, and Angst-identprone.org.
But you don’t necessarily need to establish a new website to attract a niche audi-
ence of readers. Since weblogs are ideally suited to interaction between people shar-
ing special interests, some e-commerce businesses may want to consider adding a
weblog to their website. A weblog’s capacity for information dissemination and feed-
back potential can tap into the buying power of a blogging community. For example,
Greg Reinacker has a weblog on the Reinacker & Associates website (www.rassoc.com),
although for some reason there is no link to the blog on the home page. The only way
to reach the weblog is to type in the url: www.rassoc.com/gregr/weblog/default.aspx.
Another website that has successfully incorporated blogging into its website is The
Caestecker (Wisconsin) Public Library (www.greenlakelibrary.org). Also check out how
Redmonk.net has incorporated blogging into its content offerings.
Peer-to-Peer Site
Some readers may be toying with the idea of sitting up a peer-to-peer (P2P) site. The
way the Web was originally set up, the website owner posts content on a server (referred
to as “web server”), and the audience connects to that server via a web browser to view
the content. To interact live with other users, everyone connects to the same server at
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
19

the same time. With P2P, however, the computers of individual users are connected
together directly — no central server is necessary. 
Still, a website is often used as an adjunct to a file sharing network to promote the
network and to provide customer service. Peer-to-peer file sharing opens a whole new
range of business opportunities. The original Napster (versus the new subscription-
based Napster) brought P2P to the forefront, although the original Napster wasn’t a
true P2P business model — it operated around a central server. However, it is noted
that the old Napster’s central server concept also was the cause of the business’s even-
tual downfall. (At its peak, the old Napster was perhaps the most popular website ever
created — in less than a year, it went from zero to 60 million visitors per month.) 
Note: As discussed previously, the new Napster doesn’t use P2P technology; rather it is a typical e-commerce
site, with a hybrid subscription model that delivers downloadable music. 
There are many alternatives to the Napster P2P model. One of the more interesting
of these alternatives is Gnutella. Unlike Napster, Gnutella and its variants aren’t soft-
ware at all; rather they are communication protocols similar to the common gateway
interface (CGI) used by most web servers. Any software that implements a Gnutella-
like communication protocol can communicate with other Gnutella-enabled soft-
ware applications. 
There are other P2P technologies available; examples include FreeNet, Publius,
Yaga, and others in various states of completion. All are aimed at using P2P technol-
ogy to allow the free exchange of information unencumbered by censorship and
unmediated by the collection of market data.
It may be difficult to come up with a viable, profit-making business model for this
type of P2P network. However, visit sites such as Bearshare.com, Livewire.com and
Swapper.com, for examples of how current P2P file-sharing networks use websites to
produce income.
✪
CONCLUSION
Sandra Morris, vice president and chief information officer of Intel Corporation, gave
a keynote speech at the Oracle Open World 2002 in Copenhagen, Denmark, where
she put the dot-com bust into perspective by reading an interesting story. 
The economy is stuck in the doldrums thanks largely to the broken promises of
technology. Dazzled by seemingly limitless returns, bankers had funded hundreds
of companies all going after the same dubious markets.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
20

Heedless, individual investors clamored to get into the stock market, driving stock
prices to unheard of levels. Sound familiar yet? Soon, the overheated market crashed,
turning the new heroes of business into goats and scoundrels. Now disillusionment
reigns and nobody knows what’s going to happen next.
The year — 1850. The technology — the steam locomotive. The country — England. 
Morris goes on to say that “Those goats and scoundrels of England, right? The
parallels with the Internet are very strong. Railway mania is what this period of time
is called. Hundreds of companies collapsed, tens of thousands of investors lost their
money. But what happened after that breakdown was phenomenal growth for the
next hundred years in the railway industry in Great Britain.”
The feeding frenzy surrounding e-commerce may be new to this generation, but
the same patterns of behavior occurred in the development of earlier technologies,
including the steam engine, telegraphy, automobiles, airplanes, and radio. Similar to
those culture-changing technologies, many lessons were learned during the e-com-
merce gold rush. Sure, we lost our way a bit, too many thought everything “e” was a
magic bullet. But the technology that fueled that initial Internet bubble is what fuels
the successful businesses of today. So, in the long term, e-commerce changed how
business is conducted — and it is here to stay. 
The E-Commerce Phenomenon
21

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 2
Designing Your Website
Paying attention to simple little things that most men neglect 
makes a few men rich. 
Henry Ford, Sr.
A successful e-commerce business requires a well coordinated plan that takes into
account, among many other elements, design competency, programming abilities
(transactional and database), server configuration, public relations, and sales and mar-
keting abilities. 
However — and even I can’t quite believe I am going to say this — e-commerce is as
much about selling as it is about technology. So, even though this book provides tons
of advice and information on technology, just as in a brick-and-mortar store, the sell-
ing environment, i.e. your web pages, are what will make or break your e-business. You
can have the best product/service in the world; but if your website doesn’t provide
intuitive navigation, offer an easy-to-use process for ordering and fulfillment, and
maintain high standards of quality control, you will never achieve consistent customer
satisfaction. Thus, your web-based business will eventually fail.
A website is an infinite number of web pages connected by a common theme and
purpose. A good design is important to provide your customers with easy access to
all of your website’s pages. Careful consideration of the numerous design possibili-
ties for your website is essential. Note, however, that while this book provides you with
the tools you need to make the right decisions when it comes to designing your web-
site for the e-commerce world, it does not provide HTML and programming tips.
23

There are many good books and websites where you can find the various HTML and
programming information you might need, utilize them, if necessary. 
✪
WHAT’S YOUR LINE?
Ask yourself if your product/service will translate to a virtual market, i.e., the Web. If
the answer is “yes,” decide which website model you want to build and consider what
your website is going to offer. Then build the website and expend your efforts in driv-
ing customers to that website. If you are an entrepreneur find your niche market,
design your website for that market, and then let your customers know you are open
and ready for business. 
If the answer is “no,” a website still may be a necessity — due to the growing power
of web customers who expect the vast majority of all businesses to have some sort of
a web presence. Build a good brochureware site that will drive customers to your brick-
and-mortar business. Use that website to provide detailed information about your
company, your products and services; as the first tier in your customer service sup-
port efforts (FAQs, online manuals and other documentation, knowledge base, etc.);
and perhaps even incorporate a forum for your customers to converse with each other
about your products and services. 
✪
TARGET “YOUR” CUSTOMERS
“Know your customer” is an oft-used but apt phrase — you must decide on your tar-
get market base before embarking on even the early design stage. Here are some reasons
why. If your customers are located outside of North America, you will need to place
a Comment Tag above the body of your website’s home page declaring your site as a
public document. If you omit the Comment Tag your site probably will not be indexed
as a public document and no one outside North America will be able to find it. If your
niche market has an international base, you must consider how you will provide trans-
lations, how you will handle the monetary exchange problems, and how you will deal
with shipment issues. After all, it’s the customers for whom you are building your
website, right? This is just the tip of the iceberg — do your research so you’ll know the
issues you need to address before designing your website.    
What model will your site emulate — a brochureware site, an online store, an auc-
tion site, an advertising, or subscription site? It could even be a combination of one
or more of the website models discussed in Chapter 1. 
What will drive your potential customers to your website?  Your website’s home
page must clearly describe what you are offering and why your customers would want
The Complete E-Commerce Book
24

it. You must craft your online offering so that the products/services meet the wants and
needs of your targeted customer base — just like a conventional business. And like a
brick-and-mortar business, you must determine what price the market will bear and
what your profit margin will be.
✪
YOUR WEBSITE’S BLUEPRINT 
One of the most difficult parts of building a website is deciding exactly what to build.
There are many e-businesses out there with ill-conceived concepts and laughable rev-
enue models. To avoid these crippling mistakes, you need a clear vision of what you
want to accomplish. To help, consider the following questions.
✸What are the objectives of your new website? 
✸How will the new website produce income? 
✸What makes your new website unique?
✸How will you ensure on-time delivery?
✸How will you manage and maintain your website?
✸How will you convey your trustworthiness and the high quality of your prod-
uct/services?
✸If you have a brick-and-mortar business:
– How will you use your website to drive customers to your offline business and
at the same time to provide an e-commerce alternative?  
– How will you combine your dot-com seamlessly with your traditional business
into a new incarnation called “click-and-mortar”?
Your answers are the basis for the next step in building a successful website, which
is the development of a comprehensive e-commerce business plan, that plan will serve
as your website’s blueprint. Use that blueprint to lay out the strategy needed to imple-
ment the technology that is necessary to gain the most leverage within your current
or planned business model. Each aspect needs to be carefully coordinated — techni-
cal issues, content, marketing, front-end design, infrastructure, software, and, of
course, sales. 
There are three essential elements to a website blueprint: a storyboard, a site descrip-
tion, and website content. Successful websites are the ones that manage, through the
proper utilization of a blueprint, to combine content, communication and market-
ing features within a fast-loading, easy-to-use and interesting home page that runs
on a robust and scalable infrastructure.
In addition, you must establish a realistic budget and a timeline, with milestones
Designing Your Website
25

clearly defined. As you define your site through your blueprint always be aware of
the compatibility issues which must be considered throughout the decision making
process — the extendibility and scalability of all the hardware, software, and con-
nectivity decisions.
This can’t be stressed enough — the same principles that apply to establishing a
successful business in the traditional world also apply in the 24-hours a day, 7 days a
week (24x7) e-commerce operation. Moreover, like conventional businesses, great web-
sites can take months to plan and build. Defining exactly what to build, then decid-
ing how to build and market the site is the difference between success and failure.
Storyboard
A storyboard is a tool used in the production of multimedia, video, and film projects
The Complete E-Commerce Book
26
Survey
Community Creation
Catalogs and
Directories
Storefronts
Auctions
Marketplaces
Payments and Billing
Traffic Reporting
Ad Serving
Data Mining
Personalization
Content 
Management
Develop-
ment
Testing
Security and
Certification
Web
Servers
Storage Systems
Mail Servers
Servers
Firewalls
Routers
Databases
Backup
IT / Networking
Industry or
Market specific
Protocols
Procurement
Human
Resources
Relationship
Management
Help Desk
Messaging
Extranet
Search
Figure 1.  The E-Commerce Space. The inner circle contains your “back end” — the hardware,
operating system, and most servers. The middle circle contains the applications and tools that give
functionality to a website. The outer circle comprises the human elements. 

to show a frame-by-frame picture sequence of the action. In this book, however, the
term refers to a non-graphical representation of every web page — the screen elements
and their operations — which, when taken as a whole, constitute your website. Just as
an outline helps to organize your thoughts before you write a paper or report, story-
boards help to organize a visual production such as a website. By using the storyboard
process, you can design your website while clearly envisioning all the possible paths
that a customer might take. 
Thus, your storyboard is the visual representation of how your website will look
to your customers. A good, well thought out storyboard will enable you to marry the
goals and priorities for your website into a good design. 
Here is how: With the proper storyboard, you can map out the progression and
relationship between individual web pages. It lets you visualize how each page will
work within your website before you start building it. 
Designing Your Website
27
Figure 2. This is an example of a simple storyboard that might be used to design a small 
online store.
About Us
Our
History
Staff
Product
1
Product
2
Product
3
Order
Order Form
Payment
Information
Order
Processing &
Confirmation
Informative
Content and
Links
Customer
Testimonials
Our
Products
FAQs
Home Page
Contact Us
Additional
Information
Shipping 
and Return
Information

While tedious, creating a storyboard will save time, money, and many sleepless
nights. Map out every step of your design process so that each detail can be tested,
measured, and validated. 
Very detailed storyboards might include an overall site diagram that shows the
website on all levels: major areas of the site, secondary areas, etc. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
28
Figure 3. All Storyboards should include a basic layout of each individual web page.

To begin the storyboard process, generate a visitor-centric navigational scheme that
defines the type of pages and content needed to provide your website with the necessary
design elements. Take your “home” page for example: Using a single sheet of paper,
describe the buttons, links, and key components that your customer should see when
he or she first opens the link to your website. Then every other web page should be con-
structed in a similar a manner. At each step of the process, incorporate your customers’
wants, needs, and perspectives. And remember that every layer of your website either
precedes or supports specific choices a visitor makes, so your website’s design must
make sense to your visitor so you can turn that person into a repeat customer.
As you lay out the storyboard, there is one essential question you should keep in
mind: What’s the plot? In other words, why is the visitor here — what does your visi-
tor want? Don’t forget that many times a visitor will not reach your website through
the front door, i.e. your home page, so consider all contingencies. Determine as you
outline each web page: What do I want my visitors to do at this point, what do I want
them to feel right now, where do I want a potential customer to go next, and how do
I make it easy for them to get there?
Your final storyboard should allow your visitors to enter your website at any point
— the “about us” page, the “check out” page, the “privacy policy” page — and to know
where they are and to understand how they can get where they want to be quickly. 
Here is a set of suggested guidelines to keep in mind as you create your storyboard.
✸The storyboard should be legible. It can be created using pen and paper and does
not have to be precise, but if using outside help for the design stage, it must be
clearly understood by those people.
✸The storyboard must be complete. Every page should be represented and every ele-
ment on the page should be explained before actual design work is started or any
of it programmed into HTML.
✸Every design and layout element to be included on each page should be noted in
the storyboard —
– Headings
– Text objects/blocks
– Links/Buttons
– Graphics images (photos and other arts).
✸The typeface and print size of the headings should be exactly as they will appear
on the final web pages.
✸The number and the function of the buttons should be clearly indicated on each
page.
Designing Your Website
29

✸Links between pages should be clearly indicated using arrows.
✸Each graphic image should be noted with a box identifying it as a graphic image
with a short note describing the content.
✸Web pages should be numbered for easy reference.
Think in terms of who will see your web pages. Perhaps it will be a potential customer
who has no idea who you are or what you have to offer. Thus, the best way to layout
your storyboard is to track the path of a hypothetical customer, with branches at every
decision point — including those made by the customers and those made by the sys-
tem. Have a meeting with all of your staff — sales and marketing, customer service,
public relations — not just the website staff. Get everyone’s input; cover all the possi-
bilities. For example, in the purchasing process: 
✸Does the site require customer registration before the purchasing process can begin?
✸Is there an option to skip registration but to allow the purchasing process to continue? 
✸If a customer wants to change or to remove an item from the shopping cart, is it
easily done? 
✸At what point does the credit card authorization take place? 
✸Is there a confirmation page that also provides an order tracking number?
Decisions made at this point must not be rushed. Time is needed to study, absorb,
and totally understand what’s required to implement the most creative ideas — the
ideas that will make your website stand out from the crowd.
Use your storyboard as your guide throughout — design, build out, and beyond.
Storyboarding helps not only to improve site navigability, but also to develop con-
tent and web copy. Furthermore, if you hire a web designer to design your web pages,
or a web architect to oversee the entire build out phase, the storyboard will provide
them with the details necessary to provide you with exactly what you want.
The author realizes that both layout and design are subjective topics, but to make
the best first impression design a stylish page with your content laid out in a logical
manner. Use a consistent theme in the colors, styles and fonts throughout your site.  
Site Description
If you are designing an extensive website, you need to provide a detailed explanation
of workflow, data flow, and other items that may not be readily apparent in your sto-
ryboard. That’s where a site description comes into play. A site description explains
how the site functions from web page to web page or section to section. This is a must
for complex sites, such as websites that include an auction element or websites like
The Complete E-Commerce Book
30

3Com.com or Healthtex.com. That is because oft-times such websites have people
who are not intimately familiar with the website’s design elements and infrastructure
doing the programming to support the website’s more complex elements. 
Website Content
Now is the time to begin thinking about exactly what content you want on your web-
site. What digital art (e.g. photos of products) will be needed? Is there to be written
content? If so, who is the author and how will the content be delivered — MS Word,
Adobe Acrobat, ASCII text, etc.? 
You should have the initial content ready for the designer(s) (which could be you)
while the website is still in production mode. This is so you can be sure that your con-
tent will work perfectly with the overall design elements when it comes time to launch
your website (and when subsequent design and content changes are made thereafter).
✪
DESIGN
The successful website starts with a home page that is attractive, easy to understand,
and fast loading. Think of your home page as the cover of a good book — it should
entice the customer to look deeper into the site (book) and return to it often as a
resource. Another way to put it is that your home page, the first page the online con-
sumer will see, is like the window of a store. It is your showcase, storefront, and call-
ing card — all rolled into one. Online, your competition is just a click away — careful
design and targeted content are important guardians against customer defection. 
Your website’s design and content will greatly influence your customers’ percep-
tion of your business, which will, in turn, affect their purchasing decisions. Your pages
should be laid out in such a manner that navigation through your site is intuitive and
stress-free — so much so that your customers develop a comfort level in doing busi-
ness on your site. How do you manage that?  Read on!
When designing your site, there are certain categories of rules or guidelines that
you should follow. The acronym SPEC can be used to help you to remember the key
categories:
Stickiness and traffic generation
Content
Search engines 
Performance
Speedy downloads
Tables
Designing Your Website
31

Ease of use 
Site Navigation
Content visibility
Viewable Site
Frames
Java
Plug-ins
Stickiness and Traffic Generation
A sticky website entices a visit to stay within its pages a bit longer than they otherwise
might; over time that leads to a familiarity with your website. The more familiar some-
one is with a business — online or off — the more comfortable they are when it comes
to making a purchase. Thus, a sticky website is one that keeps visitors not only within
its web pages, but also keeps them coming back for more. This dynamic is created
with a mix of good content and good design. 
Content
An important sales adage is — CONTENT IS KING. “Content” is your website’s offer-
ing — the product, the graphics, the marketing material, banner ads, i.e., everything
that makes up the pages of a website. Good content gives a website a high “stickiness”
rating. In other words, good content entices customers to stay within your website,
and encourages them to return to your website time and time again. 
Your website has taken the first step towards being a success when you follow the
Internet’s golden rule — Provide Useful Content. Independent of which e-commerce
business model you adopt, the content must be presented in such a manner as to draw
a visitor’s immediate interest and even more importantly, it must turn that visitor
into a loyal customer. Your content should include all the information necessary for
a customer to make intelligent purchases in an easily accessible way. 
By keeping the content of your website fresh and new, your customers will be more
likely to “bookmark” your website, or at least a specific page within your website.
Curiosity is a powerful lure and customers will come back to your site repeatedly just
to see what is new. It’s the useful and up-to-date information that will keep your cus-
tomers coming back time and again. 
Search Engines
Make a list of the top ten terms that your customers could use to search for your web-
site when using a search engine. Then incorporate these words in your web page con-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
32

tent, i.e. make sure your web pages include text relevant to those ten terms. The major-
ity of search engines do not index by keyword submissions alone, they send out spiders
to crawl your site to check that the keywords you submitted are relevant to the content
contained within your website. Why?  Because disreputable website owners, especially
pornographic and gambling sites, submit numerous keywords that people use every
day in their search criteria that have nothing to do with the content of the website.
These same unscrupulous owners will also insert unrelated words and phrases into
their meta tags. (See Chapter 15 for a full discussion on how to design your website
to obtain optimal search engine ranking.) 
Performance
Long download times are unnecessary and unprofitable. Making a potential customer
wait for your website to download is a surefire way to increase your competitors’ bot-
tom line, not yours. 
There are many reasons why a page may load slowly, e.g. the size of the pipe to the
Internet, the traffic hitting the web-hosting service and/or the server hosting your
website, the robustness of the web server, etc. But at this juncture, you just need to
ensure that your website’s design is not a contributing factor when a customer expe-
riences a slow download. So keep your home page less than 200 KB in size. By doing
this, your website will load in less than 20 seconds with a 56K modem. 
If you must display graphics on your home page, keep in mind the different graphic
formats that are available, each with its own qualities and capabilities, and what is best
to use in specific situations. Web-based images consist of two basic types: those captured
from nature and stored in digital format, and those created entirely on the computer. 
Most web-based images use “indexed color” which is only 8 bits (one byte) of color
per pixel. This means that the image can display only 256 colors. Don’t panic — it isn’t
quite as bad as it sounds — you can choose your 256 colors from a huge palette of 24-
bit colors. If you pick the right colors, even a color photo can be made to look pre-
sentable on your website. Many programs such as PhotoShop and Paint Shop Pro will
let you reduce the number of colors (color depth) in an image, while selecting the col-
ors closest to the original.
GIF and JPEG (also known as “JPG”) are the most commonly supported formats
throughout the world. “GIF” stands for “Graphics Interchange (or Image) Format.”
CompuServe developed the GIF format so that its subscribers could send image files
to each other and the images could be viewed on different kinds of computers. A GIF
is good for images that have solid colors, text, and line art. A GIF can be used to rep-
Designing Your Website
33

resent images generated by drawing programs used by computer artists. However, a
GIF does not compress photos very well; especially images that have subtle texture or
color gradations, or that are 16- or 24-bit color.
JPEG stands for “Joint Photographic Experts Group.” (In the DOS world, JPEGs
were called “JPGs” because DOS filenames were restricted to having only a three-let-
ter extender.) JPEG is perhaps the best format to use for photographs since it sup-
ports full 24-bit color. 
To sum up: Web-based GIFs are better for solid and flat colors, exact detail, sharp
edges, black and white images, images with transparent areas, simple animations and
small text. Use JPEG for images with continuous tones, such as photographs or images
with gradient fills.
But also remember that the higher the quality/resolution of the graphics, the larger
their file size. The larger the file size, the longer it will take for the web page to load.
Note: One solution to the size versus resolution issue is to use thumbnail JPEG images on the home page and
then link these to corresponding full-size images on another page. This way you give the customers what they
want — detail and a fast load time. A good example of an e-commerce site using this technique is Artcut.com.
Tables
Using HTML tables on a web page allows the organized and specific arrangement of
data. The data can be text, images, links, forms, form fields, other tables, etc., arranged
into rows and columns of cells (individual units). Tables let you control the look of
your website by breaking your pages into precise segments while controlling the place-
ment of text and graphics. You can create columns and grids that can contain images
and text. Cells can be utilized as templates or style sheets to give a uniform look and,
through use of color, add visual contrast to your website. Be careful though, if you
use colored cells in your table, some browsers might not display the cell in color unless
there is text or an image in it. For example, older browsers can only see the background
color described in the <BODY></BODY> tag. Also Netscape’s handling of empty table
cells give web designers fits. That is because Netscape browsers have a well-known bug
that prevents the browser from displaying empty table cells. There is a “work around,”
but it means the designer is required to add a bunch of code to the table if you want
your empty cells to display background colors when your website is accessed via a
Netscape browser. 
There are also other problems with tables. They may load more slowly than plain
text since some browsers must “place” the items in a table, which means the table
won’t be shown until all the text and graphic items have downloaded. However, you can
The Complete E-Commerce Book
34

mitigate this problem by breaking a long table into smaller tables and specify the
height and width for all the images. This fix allows the browser to size the table before
the images, which in turn, results in a faster download. Another advantage to using
a series of smaller tables instead of one long table is that it is easier to change the
page’s design in the future.
You also must deal with the fixed-width problem. When you add a variable width
table, the horizontal dimensions readjust with the browser width. A fixed width guar-
antees the final appearance. But the variable width can take better advantage of the
situation if the browser has a larger width setting to begin with. Use trial and error
testing to find the optimal combination of fixed and variable widths for the different
parts of the table. 
Some WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) web page editors (this is software)
have problems with tables. Be careful, if you are doing your own design work — what
your editor displays on the screen may vary greatly from what you see in a browser
(See Fig. 4). 
Designing Your Website
35
Figure 4. Use tables to align objects and accentuate with color and image backgrounds. However,
when using tables be aware that what your WYSWYG web design software shows what you and
what visitors actually see may be different.

Test your table-based pages with a variety of browsers and don’t forget to use dif-
ferent browser widths. Also test the page scrolling function by using your mouse to
pull down the arrow on the bar (which your browser automatically brings up on its
far right side of your page) to see if the page jumps rather than scrolling smoothly. 
Ease of Use
A simple, easy-to-understand navigational design ensures your customers quick and
effortless travel through the multiple pages on your website. Your customer should
never be more than three clicks away from what they want to find. Without fast, intu-
itive, and simple navigation capabilities, your customers will not take the time and
effort to navigate your site, regardless of how good your content, product and/or serv-
ice might be. 
Site Navigation
Design your home page to allow customers access to all areas of your website from
your home page. Consider using graphics and image maps — a clickable picture (when
you place your cursor on it, the cursor turns into the “link select cursor”) — as an
attractive means of navigation. But remember the users who surf the Web using text-
only browsers by also inserting text links (a typewritten description not dependent
on an image) at the top or bottom of each web page. 
As you drill down into the site, continue a uniform navigation scheme, i.e., the cus-
tomers can go to the same position on any page to perform a specific function. Don’t
forget to institute “targeted” text links (i.e. text that you can click on and be trans-
ported to a specific section of the website), especially in pages that are long or divided
into topics or resources. By doing so, you allow the customer more easily to find what-
ever they may be looking for. Targeted links can be an expedient form of navigation,
supplementing the scroll bar. 
Structure your site’s design to support future growth. But even when designing
for future complexity (e.g. the addition of an auction section or adding a shopping
cart), always keep the customer’s view in the forefront. For example, don’t make the mis-
take of asking your customer to remember a certain product ID or code when it comes
to filling out the order form — keep it simple. 
Avoid orphan pages — pages that although there is a link leading to the page, the
page offers no link to leave the page. Such pages give a potential customer a choice
that might lead out of your website, because to continue their search they must either
hit the back button on their browser, or close the page and go elsewhere. To avoid this
dilemma, always consider all possible navigational paths a visitor might take and then
The Complete E-Commerce Book
36

ensure that there is a series of relevant links available on each page providing your
potential customer with some very good reasons for him or her to stay in your website.
Content Visibility
Design your website so that it is technically accessible to the greatest number of peo-
ple. Just as customers come in all shapes and sizes so do the equipment and the soft-
ware that they use to access the Web.
Viewable Site 
Test your design with as many browsers (including their various versions) as you can
find — Netscape, Microsoft Internet Explorer, Macintosh, Opera, AOL, and a text-only
browser such as Lynx. Don’t forget the customers that surf with their browser’s “turn
off graphics” option activated. In other words, make sure the technologies you select
can accommodate the many browsing options your customers will be using. 
Frames
Also called framesets, frames are a programming device that divides web pages into
multiple, scrollable regions. This allows you to present information in a more flexi-
ble and useful fashion. Of course, frames have their own set of problems. A browser’s
back button can produce unexpected results, particularly if the user is working with
an old browser, such as Netscape prior to version 3.0.
Visitors who have problems with their sight or are otherwise physically impaired
may be using text-to-speech software that reads aloud web pages. Frames confuse such
software.
Even for the non-physically challenged, a cursor may not work with a framed site
unless you actually click in the frame you want to scroll. 
In addition, frames can make it more problematic to print. For example the Prince-
ton Online website, which is designed around frames, actually has a web page devoted
to helping its visitors print information available on that website (see Fig. 5). But, even
worse, framed websites may be invisible to certain search engines and directors (such
as Yahoo!). Frames increase the file size and the number of total words that make up
the website, thereby decreasing keyword weight and perhaps causing an adverse effect
on your website’s search engine listing. Also, when customers are brought to your
website via a search engine, they sometimes won’t enter through the front door, i.e.,
home page, and therefore can’t see the frame that would normally be holding the page. 
Exercise caution if you choose to offer links to other web pages within a framed
page. The linked page can accidentally load within the framed page on your website;
Designing Your Website
37

particularly if the correct code is not inserted (such as _blank, top, parent, self, or your
own designated frame) to keep external sites from loading within your frameset. This
can be confusing to the visitor as well as raising the possibility of copyright infringe-
ment, since the user may think that the information appearing in your frame is your
information.
When advertising one particular aspect of your site in other media, simply pro-
viding a main URL address is no longer good enough. In the case of a framed site you
must give the public additional instructions about how to find the frame and the page
that they want. If you give out that page’s address alone, the rest of the frameset
becomes inaccessible.
Conversely, if another site wants to link to a particular page on your site, they’re
out of luck. Frames generally restrict external-to-internal links only to the home page,
unless you once again want to find yourself on a page minus the rest of the frameset.
In other words, if a website wished to link to an internal page of your website (like
your FAQ section) it couldn’t — it would only be able to link to your home page. 
Creating a non-frame site is the best approach to make it accessible to the largest
number of users. All things considered, it is better that you design your website using
tables, which offer some of the same functionality as frames but with fewer limitations.
Java 
Java is a high-level object-oriented programming language (a set of grammatical rules
for instructing a computer to perform specific tasks) developed by Sun that is all of the
following: 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
38
Figure 5. The Princeton Online website found that so many visitors experienced problems 
when trying to print information available on its frame-based website that it crafted a “print help”
web page. 
This website uses frames.
The part of the page you last clicked on is what will print.
Just remember to CLICK on the part of the page you want to print.
OR
The bottom of each page has a link to a non-frames version.
Click on the NO FRAMES button and print the page.
(Please use the BACK button to return.)

✸Simple
✸Architecture-neutral
✸Object-oriented
✸Portable
✸Distributed
✸High-performance
✸Interpreted
✸Multithreaded
✸Robust
✸Dynamic
✸Secure
All of the preceding buzzwords are explained in “The Java Language Environment”,
a white paper written by James Gosling and Henry McGilton. You can download a
PDF version of the paper from http://java.sun.com/docs/white/.
Note: Programming languages, while simple compared to human languages, are more complex than the “machine
language” computers actually understand. A computer operates using binary numbers, i.e. it only understands
ones and zeros. However, humans have a hard time with the long strings of ones and zeros that are the heart
of machine language programs. We work better with decimal numbers and words. That is where programming
languages come into play — they are the bridge between the word-using human and the binary-using computer.
Probably the most well known Java programs are Java applets. These programs,
written in the Java programming language, can be included in an HTML page, much
in the same way an image is included. When a customer uses a Java technology-enabled
browser to view a page that contains an applet, the applet’s code is transferred to the
customer’s system and executed by the browser’s Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
With java applets you can add to your website anything from a small animation
to a sophisticated program that displays a 30 second movie. The applets can either
run in the same HTML page or in a popular (but sometimes annoying) “pop-up” win-
dow that opens as a separate window when surfing a website. To see examples of
sophisticated applets that runs within the same HTML page visit www.really-
fine.com/reallyfineart.html and www.crownnet.co.uk/portfolio/vr-appletpano.htm. 
For other examples of what can be done with Java Applets, go to Jars.com. Sun also
offers a number of free “tried and true” Java applets that you can use on your website.
To see what’s available go to http://java.sun.com/openstudio/index.html; also visit
http://java.sun.com/applets, which offers a number of other Java resources.
Although Java applets, if built correctly, can enhance the functionality of your web-
Designing Your Website
39

site, they could become a crippling factor if used extensively. This is because Java
applets may take extra time to download and some applets can be very demanding,
which may cause problems for the customer’s computer (especially if the machine is
an older or low-end model). 
Furthermore, if you are trying to reach as many people as possible, keep in mind
that not everyone viewing your site will have a Java-enabled browser or have the “Java-
enabled” feature turned on. So, if you would like to use applets, use them only when
it is not important that everyone coming to your site have the ability to view the infor-
mation contained in the applet. Another suggestion — if possible, never use them in
your home page. Also, don’t design your entire website so that it can only be viewed with
Java-enabled browsers. Why?  Because, when customers who have browsers that don’t
support Java come to your site, they see — instead of your website — an irritating mes-
sage stating that the site requires a Java-enabled browser.
Also, when deciding on whether or not to use a pop-up window (i.e. a java applet),
keep in mind that some customers find pop-up windows disconcerting.
Plug-Ins
Generally, plug-ins are software modules that run on the viewers’ local machine and
add to the functionality of an application. Typically, web browsers use plug-ins so
that they can display a wider range of formats. For example, an Acrobat plug-in is used
to view documents in Acrobat format (PDF documents). Most video and audio for-
mats require a plug-in to be viewed or heard. For instance, a QuickTime plug-in is
needed to view movies in QuickTime format. When a customer tries to view some-
thing that requires a plug-in, which their browser does not support or they have not
previously installed, they will get a message asking them whether they would like to
install the plug-in. 
Plug-ins are free for the most part, but downloading and installing them requires
some sacrifice on the part of the customer. Some plug-ins are quite large taking a
considerable amount of time to download on a 56K modem, and space availability
may become an issue for the customer — a minimum of 3MB is usually required for
a plug-in. One more consideration is that many plug-ins are not backwards com-
patible with previous versions. This means that even if a user has previously installed
the required plug-in, there is no assurance that it is the correct version. For example,
if a customer has the Macromedia Flash 3.0 plug-in and you use Flash 4.0 on your
website, the customer will need the Flash 4.0 plug-in to view your site, since the 3.0
version will not work.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
40

Thus plug-ins can create a great barrier between your customer-base and your con-
tent. In fact, a number of recent studies show that less then 10% of the Web population
use plug-ins. Furthermore, these same studies also indicate that many potential cus-
tomers might be intimidated by plug-in based content. Yet: If you know that your tar-
get market is technically astute, plug-ins may help to put your website ahead of its
competitors.
If you are unsure about the technical prowess of your target market, and you want
to, say, offer an important document in PDF format, then also provide a text only ver-
sion that is easily viewable by all customers. 
If you build your site with Macromedia technology, understand that it will be view-
able only if the customer’s browser supports the exact version your website is using.
Otherwise, the customer is required to first upgrade his or her Macromedia plug-in
before they can view that content. It is strongly recommended that you also provide an
HTML-only version so that all of your customers can view at least one version or the
other of your website. The author isn’t against Macromedia technology — it allows
you to design a great looking website. But at the same time, the reader must under-
stand that although Macromedia allows you to build a eye-catching site, it doesn’t do
much good if your target audience cannot access it. 
For an example of a website that incorporates all of the advice set out in this section,
visit the website of Brown Beattie O’Donovan LLP, (www.bbo.on.ca).
✪
CONCLUSION
You can design a website that is brilliantly complex, employing all the latest technol-
ogy or you can choose to design a simple site without sacrificing attractiveness or effi-
ciency. If you keep your customers in mind and design your site to accommodate the
lowest denominator (technologically speaking) in your customer base, you will have a
fighting chance of succeeding on the World Wide Web.
Don’t skimp on any of the essential elements to your website’s blueprint. All three
— storyboard, site description, and website content — are indispensable. For every
hour you spend planning and getting all the details right, you save yourself the cost and
time of at least three days’ of remedial tinkering and development. Every decision you
make now will define and limit the future growth and evolution of your website. 
You are now ready to build your website.
Designing Your Website
41

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 3
The Devil is in the Details
It isn’t so much that we have a new economy, as we have a new
understanding of the importance of technology in the economy.
—Paul Romer, Professor of Economics
Stanford University
You’ve chosen your e-commerce model and found the perfect products/services to
offer on your e-commerce site. You’ve also thoughtfully planned your website. Using
your blueprint and storyboards you’ve completed the design of your website. It is now
time to extend everything to the Web.
The basic e-commerce website should: 
✸Store any number of products that have been selected by the customer prior to the
actual processing of the purchase. This system is normally referred to as a “shop-
ping cart,” processing is usually referred to as “check out.” 
✸Provide a secure server with SSL encryption for transactions, email transmission,
and storage.
✸Accept credit cards and offer automatic, real-time processing. But offline process-
ing via an encrypted email form is also a viable option if you choose to forego the
following options.
– Allow the customer to leave the site, return at a later time, and still find past
items in their shopping cart. 
– Allow cross selling, i.e.; offers a similar product to the one that the customer is
interested in, if the chosen product is unavailable. 
– Provide processing status though a numbered tracking system.
43

Add to this list: acquiring a domain name, a merchant account, and a digital cer-
tificate, and you are in the e-commerce business.
✪
DOMAIN NAME
Let’s first look at choosing a web address a/k/a domain name. A domain name is your
web business’s cyber address — it’s also known as your site’s URL (Uniform Resource
Locator). You’ve no doubt seen the many “dot-com” advertisements — www.[name].com
(or .org or .net). That is a domain name or web address. It’s how the public will find your
web-business unless you have opted for the cyber mall concept.
While you can choose just about any combination of words or numbers for your
domain name, we recommend a catchy, easy-to-remember name that can serve to
quickly evoke your business and/or the products and services it offers. Come up with
several options. 
In your quest for the perfect domain name remember:
Your online business depends on the customer correctly typing your URL — the
shorter the better. And please, don’t put your entire name or your company’s name
in the address. No one wants to input www.the-one-and-only-genuine-original-widget-
company.com. Find something simple.
If your brick-and-mortar business has a well-known name that is already branded,
re-enforce that brand online, don’t create an entirely new “web name.” Remember that
brands are expensive to promote, particularly new ones.
Think twice before you use “web” or “.com” in your name. Yes, we know .com is
probably part of your URL but it is not necessarily part of your name, which will, by
necessity, be branded. Why?  Because technology and the growth of the Internet are
moving at breakneck speed and “web” and “.com” will, in the future, appear stale and
dated. In the new world of fast moving technology your business should always pres-
ent the image of being on the cutting edge. 
Competition for rights to domain names has exploded. Many people and compa-
nies have registered not only the domain names they use, but names they think may
be valuable in the future. Check the Network Solutions’ WhoIs directory (www.net-
worksolutions.com/cgi-bin/whois/whois) to see if your chosen domain name is avail-
able. If your ideal domain name isn’t available, you might consider contacting the
owner of that particular domain name to try to purchase the rights. 
Once you have chosen your domain name / web address / URL, the next step is to
register it so you can have an exclusive home for your online business. Registering
your chosen domain name with a domain registration site ensures that you “own”
The Complete E-Commerce Book
44

that specific web address; at least as long as you continue to renew your ownership
by paying the required annual fee. The process itself is easy, but there is much you
need to know to begin this process. 
First, understand the Internet’s system, known as the “Domain Name System,”
which keeps track of the millions of computers that are connected to its byways. The
Domain Name System (DNS) allows data packets to find their way to their destination. 
Every computer on the Internet has a unique address called an “IP address” (IP
stands for “Internet Protocol”). But that address is a rather complicated string of num-
bers, which is hard for the average person to remember. 
The Devil is in the Details
45
THE IP ADDRESS
A global, static IP address is a unique 32-bit binary number representing just one resource on
the Internet, at any given time. These global addresses are assigned by one of three Regional
Internet Registries (RIRs) worldwide that collectively provide IP registration services to all regions
around the globe. The American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) covers IP addresses in
the geographic areas of North America, South America, the Caribbean, and sub-Saharan Africa.
APNIC (Asia Pacific Network Information Center) and RIPE (Reseaux IP Europeens) cover their
own specific regions. 
An IP address’s 32-bit binary number is actually made up of four bytes of information, and
each byte can be represented by an eight-bit binary number or “octet.” Since we find it easier
to read and write numbers using digits from 0 to 9 instead of giant binary numbers consist-
ing of just ones and zeroes, IP addresses are expressed as four decimal numbers, each sepa-
rated by a dot. This format is called “dotted-decimal notation.” The IP address is also called a
dot address, because periods are used to separate four sets of decimal numbers, each between
0 and 255, representing all 256 possible combinations of eight bits (00000000 through
11111111). Each of the decimal numbers is called a “quad” because four of them make up
the IP address. Thus, an IP address is also sometimes called a “dotted quad.” 
Here’s an example:
Figure 6. The theoretical decimal range of IP addresses is from 0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255.
When translated into binary numbers, that’s 00000000.00000000.00000000.00000000 to
11111111.11111111.11111111.11111111. Actually, we’re restricted from using all zeroes for the indi-
vidual computer (or host) part of an address (it’s an address used for routing, representing the
originating network) or all ones (used for broadcasting to all other computers on a network).

When you type in or click on a link such as www.microsoft.com, that domain name
(www.microsoft.com) has no meaning for your computer, but its associated IP address
is a different matter — it is what’s used to connect your browser with the Microsoft
site. Thus, when you input “www.microsoft.com,” your computer sends a message to
a DNS server on the Internet for the Microsoft website’s IP address, and that 32-bit
binary number is used to connect your browser with the Microsoft site. There are mil-
lions of computers, millions of websites, and millions of IP addresses.
It’s easy to see how the DNS simplifies using the Internet through the exchange
of a familiar string of letters (the “domain name”) for an arcane IP address. So instead
of typing 216.239.51.99, you can type, www.google.com, to reach the popular search
engine website. 
In the final analysis, the Domain Name System was established to provide a
“mnemonic” device that makes it easier for people to remember Internet addresses.
Registering Your Website’s Domain Name
When you register a domain name, you are inserting an entry into a directory of all
the domain names and their corresponding computers on the Internet.
To register your new domain name you must use the services of an accredited reg-
istrar. Domain names ending with .biz, .com, .info, .name, .net or .org can be regis-
tered through many different registrars that compete with one another. 
Note: InterNIC maintains an up-to-date list of accredited registrars, which can be found at www.internic.net/reg-
ist. For information on the registrar accreditation process or to lodge a complaint about an accredited regis-
trar, visit www.icann.org/registrars. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) is
a non-profit corporation charged with the responsibility of managing IP address space allocation, protocol param-
eter assignment, domain name system, and root server system.
The registrar you choose will ask that you provide various contact and technical
information as part of the registration process. The registrar is then charged with
keeping records of the contact information and submitting the technical informa-
tion to a central directory known as the “registry.” This registry can be accessed by
any computer on the Internet any time information is needed to send an email mes-
sage or to find a specific website. 
The registrar also will require that you to enter into a registration contract. That doc-
ument sets forth the terms under which your registration is accepted and maintained
by the registrar. 
ccTLDs. Some readers may also want to register a domain name using a two-letter
The Complete E-Commerce Book
46

The Devil is in the Details
47
THE TOP LEVEL DOMAIN SYSTEM
To understand the Top Level Domain (TLD) system, you must grasp the role that the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) plays as the technical coordination body
for the Internet. As such, ICANN provides a global forum for developing policies for the coor-
dination of some of the Internet’s core technical elements, including the Domain Name Sys-
tem (DNS). This non-profit organization operates on the basis of consensus, with affected
stakeholders coming together to formulate coordination policies for the Internet’s core technical
elements in the public interest. The policies are then implemented by the agreement of the
operators of the core elements, including generic Top Level Domains (gTLDs) registry operators
and sponsors, country-code Top Level Domains (ccTLDs) managers, regional Internet (IP
address) registries, and root-name server operators.
Originally, the agreement to implement coordinated policies for the Internet was informal.
But, as the Internet grew in commercial importance, operators and users of the Internet con-
cluded that a more formal set of written agreements must be established. One of ICANN’s
activities is to work with the other organizations involved in the Internet’s technical coordina-
tion to document their participatory role within the ICANN process and their commitments
to implement the policies that result. These have included agreements with Network Solutions
(now VeriSign), which operates the .com and .net gTLDs; the companies responsible for oper-
ating the “unsponsored” TLDs (.biz, .info, and .name); the organizations sponsoring the “spon-
sored” TLDs (.aero, .coop, and .museum); Public Interest Registry, which operates the .org
gTLDs; more than 150 ICANN-accredited registrars; the regional Internet registries; and the
Internet Engineering Task Force.
Let’s look more closely at the Top Level Domain system. There are several types of Top Level
Domains (TLDs) within the Domain Name System. They include:
■ccTLDs. As previously discussed, this refers to two letter country-code top level domain names.
They have been established for more than 240 countries and external territories. Designated
“managers” manage the ccTLDs according to local policies that are adapted to best meet
the economic, cultural, linguistic, and legal circumstances of the country or territory involved.
■gTLDs. Most TLDs with three or more characters are referred to as “generic” “gTLDs.” Origi-
nally, only seven gTLDs (.com, .edu, .gov, .int, .mil, .net, and .org) were created, although
domain names may be registered in only three of these (.com, .net, and .org) without restric-
tion; the other four have limited purposes. As the Internet grew, various discussions occurred
concerning additional gTLDs, leading to the selection in November 2000 of seven new TLDs.
Four of the new TLDs (.biz, .info, .name, and .pro) are unsponsored (uTLDs). The other three
new TLDs (.aero, .coop, and .museum) are sponsored (sTLDs). Generally speaking, an unspon-
sored TLD operates under policies established by the global Internet community directly through
the ICANN process, while a sponsored TLD is a specialized TLD that has a sponsor repre-
senting the narrower community that is most affected by that TLD. The sponsor thus carries
out delegated policy-formulation responsibilities over many matters concerning the TLD.
■.arpa. This special TLD is used for technical infrastructure purposes. ICANN administers
the .arpa TLD in cooperation with the Internet technical community under the guidance of
the Internet Architecture Board.
For more information on the details of TLDs, go to http://www.icann.org/tlds.

The Complete E-Commerce Book
48
country-code, known as country-code top-level domains or ccTLDs. The use of ccTLDs
was introduced by Dr. Jon Postel, the Internet architect originally entrusted with respon-
sibility for deployment of the Internet’s domain name system. His objective for the
DNS system was to enable local Internet communities worldwide to develop their own
locally-responsive and -accountable DNS services, and to encourage all parts of the
world to “get online.” That original initiative has grown into the ccTLDs used today
to document various countries’ (and territories’) relationships with ICANN. Examples
of such ccTLDs include .ae (United Arab Emirates), .au (Australia), .ca (Canada), .fr
(France), .jp (Japan), and .uk (United Kingdom). Such registrations are administered
by what’s known as “country-code managers.” To identify the manager for your spe-
cific country-code, and for information about ccTLD registration requirements, see
the IANA ccTLD database, which can be found at www.iana.org/cctld/cctld-whois. 
✪
DIGITAL CERTIFICATES
Digital certificates (also referred to as “authentication certificates,” “SSL server cer-
tificates,” and “digital IDs”) are the key to providing customer transaction security.
A digital certificate is a message sent by one party to another at the beginning of a
secure Internet session. The certificate verifies the sender’s identity and vouches for
that person’s/organization’s integrity. Just as a driving license is used to validate a
motor vehicle driver, a digital certificate establishs the identity of someone in cyber-
space. These digital IDs hold a mapping between a user and an encryption key. This key
is private to the user and only he or she can use it. Digital certificates also contain the
information necessary to allow users to exchange data securely and to transact busi-
ness over the Internet.  
You obtain your digital certificate from an organization called a “Certificate Author-
ity” (CA). The certificate is virtually impossible to forge because the final requirement
of secure communications is non-repudiation: a message’s source must be able to be
proven beyond a reasonable doubt upon demand. 
Technically, a Digital Certificate is a small piece of unique data used by encryption
and authentication software. This digital ID establishes a user’s credentials when
doing business or other transactions on the Web. It does this by attaching a small file
to the data transaction. That file contains: the certificate owner’s name, a serial num-
ber, expiration date, a copy of the certificate owner’s public key (used for encrypting
messages and digital signatures), and the digital signature of the certificate-issuing
authority, allowing the recipient to verify that the certificate is genuine. 
Once an Internet client (i.e. your customer’s web browser) requests a secure ses-

The Devil is in the Details
49
sion, your web server sends the client/browser its digital certificate information, which
contains the following: 
✸The public key.
✸The certificate’s serial number.
✸The certificate’s validity period.
✸The web server’s official domain name.
✸The domain name of the CA that issued the certificate.
This information is encrypted using the private key of the CA that issued the cer-
tificate. Upon receiving your digital certificate information, the customer’s web browser
validates it by checking the following criteria:
✸Validity — is it valid for the current date?
✸Ownership — does it belong to the server that sent it?
✸Certificate Authority — is the CA that issued the digital certificate known and
trusted? (To do this, the client/browser checks the CA’s own certificate, which is
signed by the CA itself.)
✸Public key — can the CA’s digital signature be decrypted using the CA’s public key.
(Most web browsers contain a list of the public keys of the best-known CAs, so they
do not need to search the Internet for them.)
If the certificate fails any of these tests, the client/browser issues a warning to the
customer. The customer may then choose either to continue with the session or to
discontinue the session. 
Digital certificates can be issued in chains. For example, a large CA might issue a cer-
tificate to a smaller CA, which issues a certificate to a still smaller CA, which issues
end-entity certificates to e-commerce websites. This type of procedure helps to dis-
tribute the task of administering digital certificates. When a customer’s browser/client
receives a certificate from a chain, it checks the certificate of every CA in the chain as
described above, until it reaches the self-signed certificate of a top-level CA. 
Perhaps this scenario will help the reader better to understand how a digital cer-
tificate is used in e-commerce. (Also see Fig. 8.) Let’s assume a customer fills in his or
her credit card details on a form at a website and then clicks the buy / send / submit
order button, which causes that customer’s credit card information to be sent as lit-
tle bits of electronic data from the customer’s PC to another computer, via the Inter-
net (which is made up of a network of computers, wires, cables and other connections).
If not careful, the customer’s data can be intercepted by malicious third parties (this
is why transaction security is vital in e-commerce). Such security is provided by spe-

The Complete E-Commerce Book
50
Figure 7.  A typical e-commerce related digital certificate scenario. Digital certificates 
are one of the primary keys to effective e-commerce security because they provide the means 
for verifying identity. 
1. Customer makes a selection.
5. Customer sends the
gateway the encrypt-
ed premaster secret
using the gateway’s
public key.
7. Customer and gateway separately
calculate the master secret.
8. Customer and gateway separately cal-
culate the session key.
9. Customer ends the handshake.
Handshake
Complete
10. Gateway ends the handshake.
Internet
Customer   
Gateway       
Gateway       
Gateway      
2. Customer requests a secure
connection.
4. Customer validates the certificate and decrypts the
CA’s digital signature using the CA’s public key —
trust is established
3. Gateway sends cus-
tomer its digital certifi-
cate which includes its
public key signed by
CA using CA’s private
key + info needed to
continue the session.
6. Gateway decrypts the
premaster secret.

The Devil is in the Details
51
cially-configured servers and encryption technology, which ensure that the data trans-
ferred between the customer’s PC, the website, and any other destination (such as the
computer responsible for processing the credit card) has been turned into a special
encrypted code that is difficult to unencrypt, and thus unusable if intercepted. 
SSL
Central to the digital certificate process is the secure socket layer (SSL) standard, which
standardizes the way web browsers and web servers communicate with each other
using encrypted data. All but legacy web browsers are set up to conduct secure exchanges
of electronic information using the SSL standard. However, a secure exchange can’t
take place unless there is a digital certificate installed on the web server in question. The
Figure 8. To see what your customer might see when accessing your website via a Netscape
browser, we will use Amazon.com’s secure server feature. When a customer signs onto
Amazon.com using the site’s “sign in using secure server option,” Amazon’s digital certificate is
invoked. To view the digital certificate information, the customer just right clicks any place on the
page. That action will bring up a menu and at the bottom of that menu is the selection “View Page
Info,” click it. That will bring up a “Page Info” window with several tabs at the top, choose the tab
entitled “Security.” Next will be a window that begins “Web Site identify verified” and in the middle
of that window is a “view” button, click on that button to bring up the “Certificate Viewer.” There
the customer can see the details of the Amazon.com digital certificate as shown in this graphic. 

visitor’s web browser uses the digital certificate to authenticate the server and to ini-
tiate the encryption process. The browser uses the certificate not only as a stamp of
approval, but also to access the information needed to activate the SSL process. If
there is no certificate, then the browser (and thus your potential customer) can’t be
sure that the server is a reliable partner with which it can exchange data.
Here’s an illustration. A potential customer finds your website, and selects products
that he or she wants to purchase. When that customer initiates the credit card transac-
tion, one of the first items of business is for his or her web browser to authenticate your
web server by examining its digital certificate. The examination ensures that the cer-
tificate has not passed its “best before date” (i.e. it is still valid) and the organization
that issued the certificate is on its list of approved certifiers. The browser may also check
that the domain name of the website/server it’s communicating with matches the one
listed on the digital certificate. Once the browser determines that your server is approved
for the secure exchange of data, it will continue with the secure transaction. Since the
browser also has a record of that organization’s public key, it will use this key to decrypt
and to validate the certifier’s coded digital signature carried on the certificate.
If the browser can’t authenticate the certificate then it will issue an appropriate
warning to your customer so that he or she can make the decision whether or not to
continue with the transaction.
Note: Some readers may wonder how a browser knows if the CA is trustworthy. Web browsers come with their
own pre-approved list of CAs. One of the checks that a browser makes before committing to a secure connection
is to compare the CA listed on a server’s digital certificate with its own list of approved CAs. To see what I mean,
go to your Microsoft IE browser and click on the “Tools” menu, then check on “Internet Options,” followed by the
“Contents” tab, and then “Certificates.” This will allow you to see a list of pre-approved CAs. If the CA is not
on this approved list, then the web browser will invite its user to decide whether or not to trust the certificate.  
This entire digital certification process follows a standard known as SSL — a process
that virtually all browsers and web servers can use to send each other encrypted data.
Obtaining Your Digital Certificate
As you should understand, the secure exchange of data through SSL takes place only
when the web server has a digital certificate installed. If this license to conduct secure
transactions is not present, then SSL is not activated, meaning it isn’t possible to pro-
vide a secure transmission of information for your customers.
There are two ways to obtain a digital certificate: Your hosting service owns a dig-
ital certificate that you might be able to use for a fee or you can purchase your own
certificate. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
52

The best option is to submit the proper paperwork and setup fee to a “certifica-
tion authority,” which is charged with reviewing a website’s credentials (actually the cre-
dentials of the business or person operating the website). Only after the authority is
satisfied that the applicant is a legitimate business operation and the genuine owner
of the website in question will a digital certificate be issued. 
Note: Certification authority licensing is a mish mash. In the U.S., the various States have licensing authority,
which may be exercised by, for example, the Secretary of State in one instance and the Department of Com-
merce in another. In other countries, a governmental agency generally issues and oversees certification author-
ity licensing. As an example, in Malaysia it’s the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission.  
A certification authority (also known as a “certificate signer,” or a “signer author-
ity”) will award you a digital certificate (after performing a background check) in
return for a fee. There are numerous certification authorities eager to provide e-com-
merce sites with a digital certificate for your server. Once the certificate (which is in
the form of a data file) is obtained, it must be installed on your server to activate the
server’s SSL features.
If a website wants to be able to conduct secure transactions but doesn’t have a dig-
ital certificate, it can use someone else’s server and certificate. The least expensive
method is to use a hosting company’s certificate. But this option has a drawback —
you will need to use one of your hosting service’s domain names in any secure URL.
Thus, when a customer clicks a button to send his or her credit card information the
customer’s web browser will indicate a different URL, e.g. https://www.xyzhost-
ingservice.com/www.yourcompany.com/order.htmlname/oderform.htm instead of
your URL, e.g. https://www.yourcompany.com/orderform.html.
This may cause confusion on the customer’s end, and that confusion could pre-
vent the customer from completing the transaction.
Note: Most web-hosting services require that an e-commerce website have a digital certificate before they will
allow the website to use their services. This is a good thing — digital certificates not only allow a website to
accept credit card orders securely, but also it helps to keep hackers at bay. 
Two of the largest certification authorities are VeriSign and Thawte (which is owned
by VeriSign), but there are also other reliable certification authorities including Entrust,
Equifax, Globalsign, and RSA Security, to name a few. 
For those readers residing in the EU, the European Certification Authority Forum
(ECAF) maintains a list of European Supervisory Authorities (www.eema.org/sa_matrix.
asp), which may be useful when searching for a Certification Authority. 
To wrap up, digital certificates are widely used by e-commerce websites, especially
The Devil is in the Details
53

to provide security for credit card transactions online. If a website has a digital cer-
tificate, a customer can verify that the website displayed on their computer screen
actually is what it appears to be, e.g. your website, not some imposter masquerading as
your website in order to intercept your web visitors’ communications. 
Note: For more information on digital certificates, download the free SSL Guide, which can be found on Verisign’s
website  (www.verisign.com) and the technical introduction to digital certificates offered by Microsoft (it can be
found at http://www.microsoft.com/technet/treeview/default.asp?url=/technet/security/prodtech/cyrpto/Certs.asp).
✪
MERCHANT ACCOUNT
We’ve addressed how you can receive credit card information securely through the use
of SSL and digital certificates, but the actual processing of the credit card requires
that you have a “Merchant Account.” A merchant account is a business account at a
financial institution that functions as a clearing account for credit card transactions.
While there are many different payment methods, most e-commerce sites will want
the ability to accept credit card payments from customers. There are two ways to
process credit card payments: offline or online. Both require a merchant account and
credit card terminal. 
Although many people equate a merchant account with a checking account, set-
ting up a merchant account is a bit more complicated. A plethora of businesses, in
addition to traditional financial institutions, are eager to set you up with a merchant
account. Thus, there is an enormous variety in the deals offered. Prior to making a
final decision as to what company you will use for your merchant account, do your
homework — learn about the process, talk to others who have existing accounts regard-
ing their experience with their provider.
Offline Order Processing
If you have a brick-and-mortar business, it
is likely that you already have an existing
merchant account as well as a credit card ter-
minal. Thus, you initially may want to con-
tinue with your current set-up for your new
e-commerce site. Of course, that means only
offline credit card processing, which would
work like this: A form would be included on
your website so that after a customer types in
the billing and shipping information, the
The Complete E-Commerce Book
54
Figure 9. A typical credit card processing
process.

information is relayed to you through encrypted email. You then process the infor-
mation manually using your existing credit card terminal.
Note: Some customers may want to pay via their Debit/ATM card. Processing this type of payment is basi-
cally the same as processing a credit card except that the order amount is deducted from the customer’s
checking account. Websites that provide this type of payment option can usually forego the need for check
processing. However, before making a final decision on this matter, check with your Merchant Account
Provider for details on how they might handle Debit/ATM card processing and obtain their pricing infor-
mation for such service.
Real-Time Credit Card Authorization 
Does your current e-commerce software allow integration with real-time credit card
authorization systems?  Do you process credit card transactions prior to product ful-
fillment?  If the answer to both of these questions is yes, then you might need real-time
authorization capability. (A real-time credit card authorization account doesn’t require
you to lease or to purchase equipment or to install software on your computer.)
If you want your customers’ credit cards processed instantly 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week, and the funds deposited into your business checking account within 48 - 72
hours, open a real-time credit card processing account after your merchant account
is approved. Contact a real-time Internet processing company such as AuthorizeNet.com
or Cybersource.com. 
With a real-time credit card authorization account, authorization occurs at the
time of sale; the processing network receives the authorization information from your
merchant terminal and checks the databases of the financial institution that issues
the card for available balance and reduces the available balance (but no money changes
hands). This authorized transaction is then stored in a local database called a “batch.”
Settlement occurs once per day for any authorizations that have accrued for that busi-
ness day. When a settlement or auto-settlement has been executed, the transaction,
minus any merchant fees, will be approved for transfer to your bank account and the
funds will arrive in fewer than three business days. (Settled batches, or closed batches,
are stored for later access.)  
There are specific requirements that an e-commerce site must meet before it can open
a real-time credit card processing account. Advantage Communications Enterprises, a well-
known web design and marketing firm in Kalamazoo, Michigan has provided a list of
items needed to establish a real-time credit card processing account, they include:  
✸A shopping cart.
✸Software or CGI scripts used to store products and orders. 
The Devil is in the Details
55

✸Hosting for Storefront. 
✸An Internet connected web server.
✸Business banking account.
✸Internet-ready merchant account.
✸A bank or merchant processor who has access to an Internet connected process-
ing network (to enable high-speed/real-time authorization). 
✸A gateway to the “processing network.” 
✸A high-speed provider with access to processing network. (There are banks and
merchants that provide gateway services, and there are gateways that provide mer-
chant services.)
For more information about real-time credit card processing, visit Advan-
tagecommunications.com.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
56
Authorization request
Authorization request
Approval code
Approval code
Interchange request with auth. code
Sale amount minus interchange fee
Sale amount minus discount
percentage
Merchant’s bank
account
Acquiring bank 
Authorizing a credit card sale
Later on the sale draft is captured
Acquiring bank 
Merchant’s point
of sale unit
Card issuing bank
Merchant’s point
of sale unit
Card issuing bank
Sales draft with authorization code
Figure 10.  Steps in transaction processing when there is a website has established a real-time
credit card processing account. Compare with typical credit card transaction depicted in Fig. 9.
Graphic courtesy of Advantage Communications Enterprises of Kalamazoo, Michigan. 

✪
CHECK PROCESSING
The more payment options you can provide to your customers, the more competitive
your website. Some of your customers will prefer to pay by check, but accepting a
check online can be problematic. Purchasing products/services by check negates the
instantaneous nature of e-commerce — if you wait for a check to clear before ship-
ping. To speed things along, some businesses will ship on the receipt of a check, at
least until they are burned once too often by a bounced check.
When you process a check online you aren’t required to have a signed instrument
from the customer, all that’s required is the information that’s on the customer’s reg-
ular check. There are a number of ways to accept checks online; some allow you to
provide speedy order fulfillment, others require that a prudent e-commerce operator
wait several days to ensure the check clears before shipping the order. 
Let’s first examine the do-it-yourself method. This method requires that you have
a program to print out a hard copy of your customers’ checks before depositing them
into your bank account. (The ensuing process is the same as a traditional business
that accepts customers’ checks, i.e. to prevent fraud, you shouldn’t ship the mer-
chandise until the check clears.) If you are interested in going this route, check out
vendors such as CheckMAN (www.checkman.com), Intell-A-Check (www.icheck.com),
and Vcheck (http://softwaresolutions.net/vcheck). 
To help you better understand these check processing programs, let’s take a quick
look at how the Intell-A-Check 6.0 application suite facilitates the processing of checks.
When your customers pay by check, they provide information about their checking
account by filling out a form on the website. Intell-A-Check uses this information to
automatically create a check or automated clearinghouse transfer that can be deposited
immediately into your bank account and immediately credited against a customer’s
account. You don’t need to worry about not being paid because Equifax, the leading
provider of consumer information in the U.S., guarantees Intell-A-Check checks. Another
benefit of Intell-A-Check — the customer and the website avoid credit card fees.  
Note: Most check programs require that you purchase specific “check paper” for printing the customers’ checks.
But, in many cases, these programs do not require that you use any special, expensive magnetic-type ink for
printing the checks — generally printing the checks on your Inkjet or laser printer is satisfactory. This is because
most banks now use optical, rather than magnetic, devices to process checks. However, to be safe, contact your
local bank and make sure they will be able to accept checks that you print from your computer before investing
in check acceptance software.
Now let’s look at the method that will allow speedy shipment of ordered products.
This method requires that you use a transaction service, which will verify that the
The Devil is in the Details
57

information on the online check is complete. These transaction companies charge a
setup-up fee in addition to a per-check and/or a percentage fee. Many of these serv-
ices will, for an extra fee, also guarantee the check. The extra fee may be well worth it
since the transaction service must reimburse you if the check doesn’t clear. Of course,
there are specific conditions that must be met for this scenario to play out. 
Caveats:
✸Most of the transaction companies in business today only process U.S. checks.
✸If you decide to use an online check transaction service, be sure that the service
can perform check verification in real-time. 
✸There is not much involved in processing a check online, so don’t sign with a serv-
ice that changes a high transaction fee, and don’t pay a discount (percentage) rate
on check transactions — unless the checks are guaranteed. 
Finally, be aware of fund holds on check transactions, and know when funds will
be available.
Note: Some readers may also want to investigate the feasibility of using a Secure Gateway Companies’ Virtual Ter-
minal. Some virtual terminals can accept check transactions (e.g. AuthorizeNet) by running a check verification
against a national database of bad check writers, thereby reducing the incidence of returned checks. Some Secure
Gateway Companies’ that provide virtual terminals will even re-submit returned checks automatically. 
✪
OTHER PAYMENT OPTIONS
Due to the requirements for establishing a merchant’s account, many small e-com-
merce operators will need to find another method for accepting credit card payments.
If you fall into this category, don’t despair. There are still means by which you can sell
your merchandise online. Two of the most widely used methods are online escrow
services and email payment services.
Online Escrow Services
In the e-commerce world, trust is viewed as the intermediary element that will deter-
mine if businesses and users are willing to embrace the online economy. Online escrow
services have been identified as one of the key business infrastructures necessary to
help provide that trust and confidence between buyers and sellers. 
When credit card fraud occurs, the e-merchant loses his goods, is charged for the
costs, and must pay the issuing bank a charge-back fee. On the other hand, online
consumers face the risk that they may not receive the goods, the goods that arrived
are not as described, or the goods are damaged. 
When you contract with an online escrow provider, the escrow service acts as an
The Complete E-Commerce Book
58

impartial trusted third party that facilitates buying and selling by providing both the
seller and buyer with trust, security, and convenience. These middlemen hold your
customer’s payment (whether via check, money order, or credit card) in trust, awaiting
confirmation that the goods are as expected. Through the escrow service, the buyer
and seller agree in advance as to how the goods and funds will be exchanged, along
with a return policy. 
Here’s how the typical escrow service works: The buyer pays the total purchase price
to an escrow provider, which holds the customer’s money in trust. The seller ships the
merchandise directly to the buyer. If the buyer accepts the merchandise, the escrow
service pays the seller. Otherwise, the buyer returns the merchandise to the seller (in its
original condition) and receives a refund from the escrow service. 
It’s that simple — of course the escrow service charges a fee for its services. Some
of the escrow services you might want to check out include Escrow.com, Escrow Online
(www.escrowonline.org), Canada Escrow Online (www.escrowonline.ca), Secure-Com-
merce.com (also offers a multi-currency escrow service), and Cash-Escrow (http://
secure.cash-escrow.net), which is a European escrow provider.
Be careful, though. In the U.S., the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has recently
begun pursuing fraudulent online escrow services. Premier-Escrow.com is one such serv-
ice that, according to the FTC, set up a fake escrow firm and then directed buyers and sell-
ers of merchandise to use that firm. And although a website would ship merchandise
to the buyer, the site never receive payment from the escrow service and buyers would
make payments to the fake service, but never receive their merchandise. The FTC says
that it has also shut down two other alleged fraudulent escrow services and that 53 sep-
arate actions have been taken by various states concerning the same type of fraud scheme. 
Here are some suggestions of steps you can take to protect yourself from being a vic-
tim of a fraudulent escrow service:
✸Be wary if a buyer is insistent upon using a specific escrow service.
✸If you are asked to deal through a service that you are unfamiliar with, call the
company — this may help you to determine whether it sounds legitimate. 
✸Check out the service’s website. Many fake escrow services set up websites that are
intended to mirror real escrow services. Are there grammatical errors and/or other
simple mistakes? Is there odd wording, especially where the fake escrow service’s
name has been substituted in place of the real escrow service?
✸Check the Whois registry (www.networksolutions.com/en_US/whois/index.jhtml)
to see if the online registry information fits with the corporate information on the
site. If there are discrepancies, check them out. 
The Devil is in the Details
59

✸Check with your local Better Business Bureau. 
If you have any doubts about a specific escrow service, don’t do business with that
company. 
Some other steps you can take to ensure you are using a legitimate service is to
check with your bank to see if it offers an online escrow service or can recommend
one. Or bypass the escrow services altogether and use Western Union’s BidPay (www.bid-
pay.com). The buyer purchases a money order online using a credit or debit card, Bid-
Pay sends a confirmation email to the seller within minutes with information on when
your money order is scheduled to be sent. According to the BidPay website, “there is
absolutely no fee for sellers unless you choose a payout option other than a money
order (i.e. a cheque in British Pounds).” 
Email Payment Services
Email payment services can be used as either your primary, or as a secondary payment
processor. The most popular of the email payment services is probably PayPal (at least
in the U.S.). PayPal makes sending and collecting money easy. PayPal integrates seam-
lessly with existing financial networks, allowing anyone to send money from their
credit card or bank account. Thus, with PayPal, any website can accept credit card pay-
ments from all of its customers. For more information, visit the website at www.pay-
pal.com.
If you live in the U.K. you might want to check out the popular NoChex.com. Any-
one with an email address and a U.K. bank debit card can take advantage of this easy-
to-use payment service.
For an email payment service with a global perspective check out Xcompte.com.
Its services are available in multiple languages and numerous currencies.
✪
CONCLUSION
The design and pre-build details — domain name, digital certificates to ensure data
is kept secure, and payment acceptance — are among the first steps you must take
when extending an e-commerce site to the Web. But there are still a number of steps
to take before you have a viable e-commerce website. The path you take to open your
doors to the online public may differ from the path taken by your competitors, friends,
and colleagues. The following chapters will guide you through some of those diverg-
ing paths.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
60

Chapter 4
Server Hardware
If only foresight were as good as our hindsight!
—Anonymous
Behind the friendly face of many websites is a sophisticated system of servers, hard-
ware and software. Servers are the backbone of any good website. A server is a com-
puter on “steroids” with a very fast permanent connection to the Internet and subsystems
that protect against power outages, hackers, and system crashes. (The combination of
hardware, operating system, and server software constitute a “server.”) 
The raw performance of web servers, application servers, HTTP servers, and data-
base servers is the key to customer satisfaction and future scalability. Slow response
times are frustrating to customers and can impact the flow of data through the trans-
action-processing pipeline. This affects other components of your back office, includ-
ing network connections and, in the end, reflects negatively on your bottom line.
Nevertheless, for e-commerce sites that deal with thousands of customers at any given
moment while also dispensing hundreds of thousands of unique page views per day,
achieving peak performance and allowing for future growth is a somewhat mysteri-
ous art.
Unless you have a specific reason for running your own servers, outsource to a web-
hosting service. You can do this through a co-location arrangement, an enterprise
contract (leasing servers, applications and technical service), or rental of server space
(virtual hosting). (See Chapter 14 for a complete discussion on hosting solutions.)
Whether hosting the site yourself or outsourcing to a hosting company, it is advis-
able to learn about the necessary hardware requirements.
Let’s begin by considering what is needed to set-up a small website that doesn’t use
intensive graphics and is destined to serve a limited number of simultaneous visitors. 
61

✪
THE SMALL WEBSITE’S SERVER SPECIFICATIONS 
For many small entrepreneurs and brick-and-mortar businesses, the main barrier to
building their own website is the cost. The good news is that the hardware necessary
for hosting your own website is no longer expensive or difficult to set up. 
Note: Before you can understand the interrelations of the components needed to build a website, you must
understand the basic terms and workings of a computer. The capabilities of your CPU, bus systems, power sup-
plies, hardware and software are all part of the foundation upon which the website is built. If you are well
versed in this technology read on. However, if you feel you need a refresher course on the inner workings of a com-
puter, go to Appendix A: Computer Basics, where you can find a brief explanation of the various components that
make up a computer.
Server Needs
The first step in determining your server needs is to determine your hardware require-
ments. In this section we discuss the bare-bones server specifications for a website
that will be hosted on premises by a business with a limited budget. However, it is rec-
ommended that you build a web server with components that are in excess of the bare-
bones recommendations. 
A normal server, whether a web server or otherwise, consists of a computer (the
hardware), an operating system (usually some flavor of Unix or Windows), and one
or more pieces of software (the applications). The software can be web server software,
email server software, commerce server software, etc. 
For security reasons, your web server should be exclusive, i.e., stand-alone. If the
web server is tied to your business’ internal network, install another computer to house
a firewall; position it between your internal network and your web server. 
Memory is important. While as little as 64 MB of RAM is sufficient for a small
static web server that does not house a database, always install as much memory as
your budget will allow. Also if you anticipate more than moderate traffic from the
get-go, expect to use a database to drive your site while means you must load your
server with as much memory as it can hold. The same holds true for websites that
plan to use a lot of graphics and/or sound.
Consider how much hard drive space your software and web pages will need. Again,
if your website is a static brochureware site, you will most likely only be running an
operating system, web server software, and traffic analysis software on your server,
thus a 1 GB hard drive will be sufficient. For other website layouts, it is suggested that
you install the largest drive your budget will allow. 
When it comes to processors, the general rule of thumb is to go for the fastest
The Complete E-Commerce Book
62

processor your budget will allow. However, if you have a limited budget, a web server
running older technology, such as a 233 MHz Pentium with MMX, should work just
fine for a static website. (Don’t use anything slower — doing so will limit the number
of simultaneous connections your web server can handle, and it will take a longer time
to load each page.) To handle more than moderate traffic, or more processor inten-
sive web design (e.g. numerous graphics, database, interactive content), choose a later
Pentium model and load it with as much memory as possible. 
All web servers should also be equipped with an uninterruptable power supply
(UPS) and some kind of backup, which can be as simple as floppy disks, a Zip drive
(an inexpensive external drive), or a read/write CD drive.
To sum it up, it is possible to design a static brochureware website with a com-
puter running a 233 MHz Pentium CPU with MMX, 64 MB of RAM and a 1 GB EIDE
drive, if that is all your budget will allow. However, to grow, your website will eventu-
ally need a computer on “steroids.” So, while working within the constraints of your
budget, go for the fastest processor, the most memory the computer can take, the
largest SCSI drive with a RAID set-up, backup protection such as a read/write CD or
tape backup system, and attach everything to a robust UPS system.
✪
SERVER SPECIFICATIONS FOR A ROBUST WEBSITE
The face of large e-commerce websites is deceptively simple. The friendly web pages
of bookseller Amazon.com or PC retailer Dell Online (previously called Dell.com) hide
the fact that huge, pulsating server farms with sophisticated load balancing and fault
tolerance are quickly brokering the customers’ web clicks through a maze of database
accesses, cached data, and network routes. 
Deciding upon the server hardware to run your website will probably engender a hard
fought battle among your entire technical team —designers, programmers, and IT
staff. The final server hardware configuration will be based on a “best guess” in that
no one will be able to reliably predict the data traffic load that the hardware will ulti-
mately carry. Keep in mind that as your website grows your server configuration will
need to adapt not only to your evolving business, but also to whatever new technology
comes along. 
In the server world there is a saying: “You can never have too much capacity.” In
other words, the demand for disk space, memory, and available processing power
seems to max out faster than anyone can predict. Web servers and other applications,
such as database servers, can quickly expand beyond the limits of any single platform. 
Server Hardware
63

Server Needs
A suggested configuration for a robust website’s server includes a Dual Pentium III
933 MHz or better; 512 MB RAM or better; Dual SCSI (10,000 RPM) drives; and Raid
5 configuration.
Note: The Dell e-commerce site consists of 75-plus Dell PowerEdge servers, each with one or two processors
and anywhere from 256 Mbps to 2 Gbps of RAM. Because anywhere from 3000 to 4000 simultaneous shop-
pers visit the online store during peak hours, Dell also crafted solutions that can maintain the state of customer
transactions in the event of system failures.
✪
THE TERMINOLOGY
Whether going it alone or using a hosting service, you will need to have a basic under-
standing of the technology used. Here are some of more common terms you might
encounter during your research. 
Processor Architecture 
“Processor Architecture” pertains to the overall organizational structure of the com-
puter processor unit (CPU), commonly referred to as the “processor” or “microprocessor.”
The main elements of any processor architecture are the selection and behavior of the
structural elements and the selected collaborations that form larger subsystems that
guide the workings of the entire processor. (For more detailed information on how
microprocessors work visit www.howstuffworks.com/microprocessor.htm.)
The microprocessor industry is highly competitive. Consider many factors when
selecting your processor architecture including performance, scalability, open/pro-
prietary architectures, on-chip functions, advanced functionality, software availabil-
ity and, of course, cost.
The Athlon (K7) is a Pentium III-class CPU from AMD with clock speeds ranging
from 500MHz to 650MHz. Using a 200MHz system bus, the chip contains the MMX
multimedia instructions and an enhanced version of AMD’s 3DNow 3-D instruction
set. The Athlon plugs into a slot, known as Slot A, which is similar to the elongated slot
used by Pentium IIs and IIIs. 
The Hewlett Packard PA-8000 is based upon the older PA 2.0 architecture. This
64-bit processor with a superscalar architecture can execute four instructions per cycle
with its two integer ALUs (arithmetic logic units), two shift/merge units, two float-
ing-point units, two divide/square root units, and two load/store units.
The IBM POWER4+ microprocessor is a “server on a chip” that contains two one-
gigahertz-plus processors, a high-bandwidth system switch, a large memory cache and
I/O. IBM’s POWER family of microprocessors is among the most widely used in the
The Complete E-Commerce Book
64

industry and can be found in Nintendo game consoles, Apple computers, and some of
the world’s most powerful supercomputers and storage systems.
The Intel Xeon is a Pentium CPU chip designed for server and high-end worksta-
tion use. The Xeon plugs into Slot 2 on the motherboard and its L2 cache runs at the
same speed as the CPU. Xeon introduced the System Management Bus (SMBus) inter-
face, which includes a Processor Information ROM (PIROM) that contains data about
the processor and an empty EEPROM that can be used by manufacturers to track
their own information such as usage and service information. Xeon chips can address
64GB of memory.
The MIPS Technologies R10000 Microprocessor is a four-way superscalar archi-
tecture capable of executing four instructions per cycle, which are then appended to
one of three instruction queues (integer, floating-point, or address). Each queue can
perform dynamic scheduling of instructions. Although instructions are executed in
order, they don’t need to be, which allows the R10000 to maintain up to 32 active
instructions at a time that are in the process of being executed. It has five independ-
ently operating execution units (2 integer ALUs, 2 floating-point units, and a load
store unit for generating addresses). 
The Sun Technologies’ UltraSPARC (Scalable Processor ARChitecture) is an open
reduced instruction set computer (RISC) specification to which anyone can build
compatible chips and in which a microprocessor is designed for very efficient han-
dling of a small set of instructions. The UltraSPARC architecture scales very well, rang-
ing from low power notebooks and portables to multi-million dollar Cray scientific
research supercomputers. The UltraSPARC based systems dominate the UNIX server
market and provide the processing power behind many of today’s robust web-host-
ing services and Internet Service Providers (ISPs). 
Clusters
One way to surpass the limitations of a single server is clustering. Clusters are essen-
tially multiple servers that are used as a single unified resource through the use of
software, switches and routers. The inter-connection of multiple servers sharing
resources results in greater availability due to the ability of the other systems in the
cluster to assume the workload of a failing resource. 
Maintaining access to data is a key element of the concept of high availability and
if your server is running but can’t reach critical data, your web-based business can
come to a standstill. Clusters depend on: strong data sharing models, systems that
can co-exist at different software release levels, the ability to dynamically vary systems
Server Hardware
65

off-line, and robust recovery models that are able to keep everything up and running.
A cluster also must be able to perform load balancing. This allows processing to be
evenly distributed among the various machines that comprise the cluster. In extreme
cases, the software will automatically exclude a failed server from the cluster, allow-
ing the working servers to take up the slack. 
To the network’s devices and your administrator, the cluster appears as a single
server. This streamlines your network management efforts. 
Load Balancing Switches and Routers
Other load bearing solutions include load balancing switches and routers that dis-
tribute traffic to a group of servers, sharing the load among them. 
The first versions of load balancing routers were designed specifically to support
Internet traffic, especially web servers. They used a round-robin algorithm, distribut-
ing requests to each server in sequence. Newer load balancing router algorithms pro-
vide a more even load distribution across a group of web servers. They react to the
traffic coming through the load balancer and distribute the traffic according to the load
on each server. Some balancers can check to see if a system request is for data that is
residing in a server’s cache, thus making it easier for that server to respond quickly.
They also provide monitoring of the actual load level on each server in real time, allow-
ing each server’s load to be kept perfectly balanced.
In a server farm configuration, the servers are usually identical computers that are
large enough to handle only a fraction of a website’s total traffic. The number of
servers needed varies. Some web operators opt for a few large servers and others choose
several smaller, less expensive servers. With either option, the load-balancing algo-
rithm can be a simple round robin, or may be more sophisticated, taking into account
each server’s current load. A server farm configuration provides high availability since
multiple machines can take on additional processing in the event of the failure of any
single server. This type of server configuration is cheaper and easier to implement
than a high availability cluster since the servers don’t need to be aware of each other.
Only the load-balancing component is aware of all of the servers. In the event of a fail-
ure, there is no complex failover process. Instead, the system just stops sending requests
to the failed server and routes traffic to the remaining servers. In this way, you get
both availability and scalability.
Web server load balancing produces a cost-effective way for websites to respond to
growth spurts without the need to replace equipment every few months with a new,
higher-capacity system.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
66

Rack Units
A rack unit is a vertical shelving system to mount servers. Racks can be freestanding
or else bolted into the floor or wall. Racks generally hold rackmountable computers
that are 19 inches wide and have faceplates that allow the computer to be affixed to the
rack’s frame via screws. Two or more rackmount servers can comprise a high-avail-
ability groupware (sharing data across a distributed system) and web-server system.
Mounting servers in racks helps with space problems and allows for ease of manage-
ment when it comes to the formulation and assignment of security measures and
redundant power supplies.
Generally each “layer” of a rack holds one 19-inch rackmount computer, but smaller
computers from companies such as Crystal Group, Swemco and APPRO allow for up
to four or more PCs to share a shelf on a rack. 
Multiple-CPU Servers
A multiple-CPU unit is a good choice for websites that demand high-end computing
environments. It is a viable option used to satisfy the server consolidation require-
ments of very large websites that offer, in addition to products and e-commerce options,
services such as free email, chat rooms, streaming video, etc. 
The choice of a multiple-CPU unit should take into consideration the need for the
flexibility in mixing and matching components in a rack. Choose multiple-CPU units
if you are unsure of exactly what your needs are now or what they might be in the future. 
Another advantage of multiple-CPU servers is that redundant power supplies are
among the basic requirements (not an added feature) for an enterprise class system
such as the 8-CPU Intel Servers. Consider, however, that these multiple-CPU units
can cost in excess of $20,000.
Server Cabinet
A server cabinet is a metal cabinet designed to house rack-mounted servers (some also
house tower configured systems). A good server cabinet will usually have a slotted
front door, a perforated steel rear door and a perforated top panel to assure maxi-
mum airflow. There is room for fans or blowers to be added, which are usually nec-
essary. The side panels usually lift off for easy and quick component accessibility. 
✪
SAMPLE WEBSITE SERVER CONFIGURATIONS
Let’s examine some sample real life configurations that might be found running a
robust website.
Server Hardware
67

Simple Website
You can build a website around an inexpensive server configuration as discussed pre-
viously, but your website would be limited in the number of simultaneous visitors it
could handle. A better choice would be a simple, relatively inexpensive web-server con-
figuration that could reliably run a website that serves, on average, around 500,000
pages per month, such as:
✸Silicon Graphics Inc. Challenge S with a 180 MHz IP22 MIPS R5000 CPU and 128
MB RAM, and file systems consisting of (1) 3GB SCSI (system) and (2) 4GB dif-
ferential SCSI2 (web pages).
✸The software might include the Unix IRIX 6.2 OS, Apache 1.3.1 web server soft-
ware, and Perl 5.003 CGI Development Platform.
✸Tape Backup 8mm DLT.
✸ISP connection via either a symmetrical DSL line (i.e. a high-speed line that pro-
vides the same speed for both upstream and downstream data loads) or a fractional
T-1/E-1 line.
✸Everything would be plugged into a robust UPS. 
Complex Website
Now, let’s look at a couple of configurations that might reliably be used to run a more
complex website:
Example 1
✸Dell Pentium III 500 MHz equipped with 256 MB PC100 RAM, Dual 9GB Ultra-
Wide SCSI drives, the necessary number of network cards, and Raid V Backup.
✸The software might include Windows NT Server 4.0/ Windows 2000 Enterprise,
Internet Information Server 4.0 (Service Pack 5.0), MDAC 2.1x, and a ColdFusion
4.0 Professional Server.
✸ISP connection via a T-1/E-1 line.
✸Everything plugged into a robust, long life UPS.
Example 2
✸Dual Pentium III 450MHz processor equipped with 1024 MB of RAM, and run-
ning Linux, RedHat-6.2 install, Linux Kernel 2.2.20, Apache 1.3.9, and Perl 5.
✸Backup would be handled by a 70GB RAID-5 array.
✸ISP connection via dual fiber-optic T-1/E-1. 
✸Everything plugged into a robust, long life UPS.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
68

Enterprise Website
Now let’s move up to a complex website running not only a web server but also other
servers including a database server. This type of site might run a very expensive, but nec-
essary, high-end configuration such as: 
Example 1
✸One Sun E450, 250 MB RAM, three 400 MHz UltraSPARC II processors with 4 MB
cache, eight 9 GB (10,000 RPM) hard drives with backup plan, running Veritas’
Volume Manager RAID solution, Solaris operating system, Apache web server, F-
Secure ssh 2.0, and WebTrends Enterprise Reporting Server for Solaris.
✸One Sun E250, 128 MB RAM with one 400MHz UltraSPARC II Processor with 2
MB cache, five 9 GB (10,000 RPM) hard drives with backup plan, running Veritas’
Volume Manager RAID solution, Solaris operating system, Apache web server, F-
Secure ssh 2.0, and WebTrends Enterprise Reporting Server for Solaris. 
✸One Sun E250, 128 MB RAM with two 400MHz UltraSPARC II Processors with 2
MB cache, five 9 GB (10,000 RPM) hard drives with backup plan, running Veritas
Volume Manager RAID solution, Oracle Database Server Enterprise Server for
2x400 MHz CPUs. 
✸One Compaq ProLiant 1850R, 128 MB RAM, One 500 MHz Pentium III Proces-
sor with two 512 K caches, 4x1-inch Hot Plug Drive Cage and 2x1 Hot Plug Drive
Cage, three 9 GB (10,000 RPM) Hard Drives with backup plan, SMART Array 3200
Controller running Microsoft Windows NT Server 4.0, Microsoft IIS 4.0, Syman-
tic PCAnywhere 8.0 Server.
✸ISP connection via either a dual fiber-optic T-1/E-1 or a T-3 line. 
✸Everything must have a redundant power supply and be hooked up with multiple
network cards.
Example 2
✸Clustered Sun E450s with multiple processors and 1 GB RAM with the Solaris
operating system and Apache web server.
✸A database server with the same configuration except running Oracle 8.1 in place
of Apache. 
✸An e-commerce server running two Dell 450s with 1 GB RAM and the Windows
NT operating system and Microsoft IIS 4.0. 
✸A staging server running two Dell 450s with 1 GB RAM. 
✸A terabyte (TB) of external disk packs and a RAID 5 disk array. 
✸ISP connective via either a dual fiber-optic T-1/E-1 or a T-3 line. 
Server Hardware
69

✸Everything should be powered by redundant power supplies and have multiple
network cards to support High Availability. 
✪
CONCLUSION
A web server can be a simple piece of hardware running fewer than 500 lines of code
that can take web browser commands, retrieve files based on those commands, and
send the files down the wire to the browser. But many e-commerce operations need a
more robust server configuration; some will even need a full-blown enterprise-level
web server set-up. This means the hardware and software can get more involved, but
even then the basics are still simple. 
If you want to host your own servers, the best advice is to create a balanced plan
with each segment working in partnership with each other. An application can run
so fast on Pentium-class hardware that the application can saturate the network before
the database or the server become saturated. This can cause trouble. Everything must
work as a partnership. For instance, while database access techniques and web appli-
cation performance are important, the size of web pages (particularly when graphics
and ad banners are included) often have the biggest performance impact. This is
because the slowest thing is getting graphic objects to the users’ browsers.
Those of you that are hosting your own website, remember that the key is to design
everything as a system. You can’t design your web server without regard to your data-
base and other applications.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
70

Chapter 5
Redundancy
Caution, though often wasted, is a good risk to take.
—Josh Billings
Redundancy is a safety measure where you install multiple units of all of your criti-
cal hardware devices so that if a unit fails the system can continue uninterrupted.
Redundancy of two, three, or more times may be used to support the operations of a
website including its switches, routers, and other components.
✪
BACKUP
Server crashes and hard drive failures are inevitable due to equipment failure, light-
ning, power outages, simple age or defect-related failures, bugs, hackers, viruses, and,
of course, human error. The most basic method of saving your data is to “backup.”
All backup solutions have one thing in common — they involve copying data from
your hard drive(s) to a second media, from which you can restore your data in the
event that your hard drive(s) or your server fails.
If you create and maintain your own website, keep local and up-to-date backups
of all files. At a minimum, a daily backup should be made of all the data on your server,
so that if the data is erased or modified in error, much of it can be restored. Backup
should be a ritual and scripted so it becomes a part of your daily routine. 
Institute a backup plan that allows you to get your website up and running in sec-
onds. Meeting your website’s backup needs requires:
✸A secure place to keep your backed-up files that is accessible at all times. 
✸A combination of software and hardware to handle the backups.
71

✸A tape backup on your server, allowing you to perform your own data backups
remotely. 
✸An online backup service (if you don’t use a tape backup) where you can transfer your
data electronically to a secure location. Or you can use the service to schedule auto-
matic backups of selected files. 
The general idea in all cases is to backup fully all of your data to tape every week
or two. Every other day perform a modified backup on a new set of tapes each day. At
the end of each week, take the set of tapes from the previous week and move them to
off-site storage. 
There are two kinds of modified backups, each with significant differences: 
Differential Method (one full backup + several differential backups): With this method,
you back up only the data that has been modified since the last full backup. This is
done when you set the backup software so that it will leave a file’s “archive flag”
unchanged after the back up is completed. This method gives you redundancy — the
original full backup and the most current differential backup. Using the full backup
and the latest differential backup, one can safely restore an entire hard drive. This
method requires a lot of tape space, however.
Incremental Method (one full backup + several incremental backups): This method
backs up the files that have been modified since the last backup, whether full or incre-
mental. Setting the backup software to clear the file’s “archive flag” after it is backed
up does this. This requires minimum tape space but may require several tape backup
sets to find a lost file. To restore an entire hard drive you must restore the full backup
and then restore each incremental backup in the cycle. 
Get the biggest and fastest backup system you can afford.
When mapping out a backup plan, consider all the costs including hardware, soft-
ware, and staff time. It usually takes at least an hour to back up a single server. Man-
ually backing up several servers weekly, semi-weekly, or daily represents a considerable
amount of man-hours. 
One good reason for using a reliable web-hosting service is that most provide
planned scheduled backup services. A good web-hosting service will have a backup
system that is designed to prevent the loss of data that a website might experience
due to server crashes, hard drive problems, and hackers. 
✪
UNINTERRUPTABLE POWER SUPPLY
An uninterruptable power supply (UPS) is a device with a built-in battery that sits
The Complete E-Commerce Book
72

between the power supply and your server(s). It protects your equipment from power
outages, brownouts, sags, surges, bad harmonics, etc., which can adversely affect the
performance of the system. UPSs are available in numerous configurations. A UPS
that can protect a single web server will cost around $250. If you have a network of
servers, UPS costs can run into thousands of dollars. 
There are two types of website — the ones that have had a power problem and the
ones that will have a power problem. A UPS will be one of the most important pieces
of equipment you will install to help ensure the reliable operation of your website. 
Standby Power Supply 
There are many UPSs with varying capabilities. A “standby power supply” or “offline
UPS” is not a true UPS. It won’t protect your web server. This standby power supply’s
power comes directly from the power line, until the power fails, then a battery-pow-
ered inverter takes over. The time required for the inverter to start providing electric-
ity to your server varies greatly. Some servers might tolerate a standby power supply,
but don’t chance it.
Hybrid UPS
A “hybrid UPS” is a device that uses a ferroresonant transformer to maintain a con-
stant output voltage between the power source and your server, protecting against line
noise. It can maintain output relying on its battery (a secondary power source) for a
limited period of time. If power is not reinstated, a total outage occurs. It is question-
able whether this type of device can actually respond when needed without an accom-
panying interruption in power. There is some debate as to whether a UPS’s ferroresonant
transformer will interact with the ferroresonant transformers in your equipment, pro-
ducing unexpected results. The hybrid UPS system is comparatively cheap, but, if you
choose it, be sure to test it thoroughly with all of your equipment before going on-line. 
True UPS
All e-commerce operators should use “true” UPS systems. While these systems are
more expensive to purchase and maintain than the others we have examined thus far,
this system continuously operates from an inverter with no switchover time and offers
good protection from power problems. 
A true UPS has internal batteries and can absorb small power surges. It continues
to provide power during line sags, negates noisy power sources, and provides power
for a set length of time during a power loss. It provides continuous power independ-
Redundancy
73

ent of the outside power supply. The minimum support you want from any UPS sys-
tem is 30 minutes, enough to survive short outages and other power inconsistencies.
Keep in mind though, as you design your server system that a true UPS generates quite
a bit of heat; so don’t put it in a closed space.
Included in the “true” UPS category are systems that provide:
✸Automatic shutdown and restart of your website’s equipment during long power
outages.
✸Monitoring and logging of the status of the power supply.
✸Display of the voltage/current draw of the equipment and the voltage currently
on the line.
✸Alarms on certain error conditions. 
✸Short circuit protection. 
How to Rate UPSs
When researching your UPS requirements and the various brands and configurations
The Complete E-Commerce Book
74
HOW TO ASSESS YOUR UPS REQUIREMENTS
How much will you pay for the reliability of a true UPS?  To find the answer, decide the minimum
and maximum amount of time you want to keep your equipment running after the power goes
down. To assess the amount of time your system might need supplemental power support—which
can be considerable with tape back-up and CD burners—add up the power requirements of the
hardware you are running by using the equipment manuals (not the rating plates on the equip-
ment). If power is stated in Watts, then multiply that figure by 1.5 (some experts say 2.0) to get
the VA rating, which is the maximum number of Volts Amps the piece of equipment can deliver.
The energy delivering capacity of a power system is measured in Volt-Amps (VA). In the U.S.,
a standard electrical system outlet for the home is rated at 120 Volts of Alternating Current (120
VAC) and 15 amps (depending upon the thickness of the wire), and thus has a rated VA capac-
ity of 120V x 15A = 1800VA. Exceed that limit and you’ll trip a circuit breaker or cause a fire. 
Similarly, for a UPS, an expensive, heavy-duty 300VA device has a lot more capacity than
an inexpensive 100VA device. If you use a 100VA rated device anyway and exceed its rating you
could blow its fuse or it will not work correctly when called upon during a power failure.
In high school you may have been taught that Watts = Volts x Amps, so you might jump to
the conclusion that VA = Watts. It isn’t quite that simple.
Transformer- and capacitor-operated devices have a spec called the “power factor,” which
is a number between zero and one. The power factor represents the ratio of the energy used
by the system to the energy required by the system to make it operate properly. Light bulbs,
space heaters, toaster ovens, etc., use all of the raw energy put into them and so these devices
have a power factor of one. Devices based upon more delicate and complicated electronic
components do not necessarily use all their power rating, all the time, and thus have a power

available, make certain that the UPS vendor offers a support and/or maintenance con-
tract. If not, go to another vendor. There are many options you may wish to consider
before purchasing your UPS. A manual bypass switch is helpful so that when the UPS
is out of operation, power can pass through it to your web server. You also should
know how close the AC output of the UPS is to a sine wave.
An inverter is an electronic device that converts a battery’s DC output to AC through
a switching process, producing a “synthesized” AC, which can be charted as a wave-
form on an oscilloscope or graph paper. Inverters produce two types of waveforms:
The so-called “modified sine wave” and the “true sine wave.”
True sine waves, or sinusoidal signals, are the most common waves that exist. They’re
called sine waves because they have the same shape as the graph of the sine function
used in trigonometry. Sine waves look the way they do because they are produced by
rotating electrical machines such as generators and, indeed, a sine wave’s intensity
(amplitude) at any given instant can be represented by a point on a wheel rotating at a
uniform speed since waves are perfectly “balanced” over successive time intervals.
Redundancy
75
factor of less than one, generally 0.5 or 0.6. Thus, a computer may need 160VA to run cor-
rectly but it actually only uses 80 Watts so the power factor is 80 / 160 = 0.5. Another way to
find the VA is to remember that VA = Watts / Power Factor. 
This also means that Watts = VA x Power Factor. You might be tempted to look at your com-
puter, see the Watt rating of 80 Watts, then run to your friendly neighborhood computer store and
buy an 80 Watt UPS. Bad idea! Things are not that simple, since Watts  = VA x Power Factor, so
80 Watts = 160VA x 0.5 for our imaginary computer. This means that you need a 160VA unit to
protect and supply power for an 80 Watt computer. Unfortunately many UPS manufacturers use
a generous power factor of 1.0 when they advertise the ratings of their VA devices and are thus
listing the rating in Watts instead of in VA capacity. They figure that “Watts” is a more familiar elec-
trical term to non-techies than VA and, besides, a power factor of 1.0 gives the largest value for
the Watt rating, so 80VA x 1.0 = 80 Watts. This causes the unsuspecting consumer to buy an
underpowered UPS. An “80 Watt” UPS may really be an 80VA unit that can actually only handle
a 40 Watt computer! To protect a 160 Watt computer, you would have to buy a 320VA UPS. 
And even if you think you’ve “figured out” what the right size is for your UPS, be sure to add
another 20% capacity for good measure.
What this all comes down to is that, if you want your website to be up and running during a
blackout, then you will need a very robust UPS. Your UPS will rely on its battery (DC) to AC con-
verter, which means an expenditure of power. Just to give you an idea at what you are looking at,
the author will hazard a guess that a 1250 VA UPS could probably operate during a blackout
for around 5 hours and a 2000 VA UPS could operate during a blackout about 8 hours. 
Before purchasing a UPS, be sure to ask the vendor about guarantees; if the guarantees
don’t fit your needs, find another vendor.

On the other hand, a “modified sine wave” is not actually a sine wave, but a stepped
wave, which is the kind of wave a pendulum produces, and is not as smooth as a sine
wave. But “mod sine” inverters cost half the price of sine wave inverters, thus lower-
ing the cost of a UPS. However, they can cause electrical noise on a circuit, and digital
clocks and timing circuits can be confused or even be occasionally damaged.
Sine wave inverters in a good UPS deliver true sine wave AC output power with
high efficiencies from storage batteries. They have high surge ability and low idle cur-
rent draw. Because of the pure sine wave, the expense is greater than a modified sine
wave inverter.
If your UPS does not output a pure sinusoidal waveform, do not put a surge pro-
tector between the UPS and the server since a surge protector can mistake the non-
sine waveform as a power surge and send it to ground; that will damage the UPS. Some
experts think that most computers use a switching-type power supply that only draws
power at or near the peak of the waveform, therefore the shape of the input power
waveform is not important. It is the authors’ opinion that it is worth spending a little
more for a UPS with pure sinusoidal output especially for a UPS that must continu-
ally provide a waveform to the computer. 
Check what useful operational information the UPS itself provides via displays,
etc., such as the power or percentage load the unit is drawing, the battery level and
power quality. Most UPSs use lead-acid batteries with a life span of only a few years
but no battery memory. Therefore they should be run “dry” as few times as possible. 
Maintenance
As your UPS ages, its battery life will become shorter. Be vigilant in monitoring the
active support time. When your website has no one accessing it (or you can take it off
the Internet for a few minutes) and you’ve completely backed up you hard drive(s),
test your UPS and its failure modes. Simulate a power outage by throwing the circuit
breaker that has the UPS on it (don’t pull the plug from the wall) to check the UPS. If
you don’t have your UPS-protected website on an isolated circuit, you could install a
Ground Fault Interrupter (GFI) socket (GFI sockets are the electrical switches with a
red and a black button you have in your house or office). 
Power problems are inevitable and beyond your control. Therefore, a UPS is one
of the most crucial items you can purchase to keep your website up and ready for
action.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
76

✪
RAID
RAID, which is an acronym for “redundant array of independent (or inexpensive)
disks,” should be a part of all but the smallest websites. By purchasing a good UPS
you’ve protected your site against power problems. Now you need to protect your web-
site against data problems and drive failure. That’s where RAID comes in. Although
some may feel that a RAID system is too expensive, give it serious thought. 
A RAID system links the capacity of two or more hard drives that are then viewed
as a single large virtual drive by the RAID management software. By doing this it is
possible to improve data storage reliability and thereby achieve fault tolerance. 
A basic RAID system includes RAID functionality built into a controller and two or
more hard drives. While RAID software can implement RAID in a server without a
special drive controller, the efficiency and performance leaves much to be desired.
Don’t use it. 
RAID can be found in many different configurations and in just as many price
ranges:
✸A floor-standing cabinet.
✸A complete system in one full-size drive bay.
✸A self-contained system with its own redundant power supplies, etc. 
✸In RAID Levels 3 and 5, drives can be hot swapped (you can change drives without
shutting down the server) and the RAID controller and reconstruction software
will automatically rebuild any lost data.
RAID Levels
Although there are many different RAID levels, the most common ones used for web-
site operation are listed below.    
RAID-0 divides each file into blocks and distributes these among multiple disks
in a process called “disk striping.” This provides high performance since more than
one disk is read and/or written to simultaneously. A file can now be input with one
revolution of four disks as opposed to four revolutions of one disk. Unfortunately
RAID-0 doesn’t have the one key feature you expect from a RAID subsystem: Data
redundancy, hence no fault tolerance. When you read that a system supports RAID-0
it really means that although the system has disk striping, it isn’t actually RAID at
all. RAID 0 is used for high performance situations such as video editing and is gen-
erally not used for web servers, unless a high performance database also must be put
online.
Redundancy
77

RAID-1 is the easiest and, for a small website, can be one of the least expensive
ways to protect your website’s data from a hard drive failure. With RAID 1, as the data
is written it is simultaneously copied or mirrored onto a second disk which is con-
nected to a common disk controller and, voila! You have data redundancy. RAID-1 is
considered to be the most common, secure, and reliable form of RAID. However, as
your need for data storage increases, your costs can become considerable. At such a
point you would look for another storage method such as RAID-3 or RAID-5.
Before going further into RAID technology we should explain parity data in the
form of a type of Error Correcting Code (ECC), which avoids the cost of duplicating
disk drives in their entirety. There is a method of transmitting binary data where an extra
bit (the “parity bit”) is added to each group of bits. If parity is to be odd then the extra
or parity bit is assigned either a one or zero so the total number of ones in the character
will be odd. If the parity is even, the parity bit is assigned a value so that the total num-
ber of ones in the character is even. In this way errors can be detected.
The author knows that this explanation probably appears as clear as mud to the
reader, but stay with me and hopefully it will become clearer.
By using RAID with parity, when a drive fails the ECCs and binary value of the
striped bytes or sectors can be used to recover data from a failed drive by comparing
The Complete E-Commerce Book
78
Figure 11.  RAID-0 — Data is divided and striped across multiple drives. RAID-0 is typically used to
increase a system’s performance, but this type of RAID offers no data protection. 
Figure 12.  RAID-1 — Data is completely copied or “mirrored” onto a second disk. This type of
RAID offers good data protection, although this is expensive for a large website.

data on the still-functioning drives to the parity data that sits on a special parity data
drive. The RAID system then can re-create the data on the failed drive.
This is similar to how one solves a missing variable in an equation. For example,
3+5=8, where “3” is a bit on one drive, “5” is a bit on another drive, and “8” is the data’s
parity information stored on a third drive. If the drive storing “3” fails, you could recal-
culate it by solving for X in the equation X+5=8, so X=3.
Or, to state it in very simple terms, parity-based systems calculate the data in two
drives and store the result on a third drive. Those results can be later used to recon-
struct what was on the other two drives. Now we can continue with our RAID dis-
cussion.
RAID-3 stripes data across multiple disks one byte at a time. Parity is also calculated
bit-by-bit and stored on an extra “parity drive.” All drives have synchronized rotation.
When a drive fails, data is rebuilt transparently in the background from the remaining
functioning drives as the system continues to operate. 
RAID-5 is the most popular high-end RAID technique used today. RAID 5 stripes
data at the sector or block level across a minimum of 3 drives. It also provides stripe
Redundancy
79
Figure 13.  RAID-3 — Data is striped across multiple disks one byte at a time. Parity is also
calculated byte-by-byte and stored on an extra “parity drive.” All drives have synchronized
rotation. Although RAID-3 offers a good data redundancy system, RAID-5 is better.
Figure 14.  RAID-5 — Data is striped across multiple drives in large, sector-sized blocks. 
Drives spin independently. Parity information is striped along with the data. RAID-5 is the most
popular RAID configuration.

error correction information by striping it along with the data evenly over the drive
set. This results in excellent performance and good fault tolerance but it still lags
behind the performance found with RAID-1 disk mirroring. Most of the high-end,
pre-configured RAID set-ups are RAID-5. A RAID-5 system with preconfigured drives,
RAID-5 software, adapter cards, and the necessary cables, is easy to purchase and to
set up. 
RAID-10 is really just a combination of RAID-1 and RAID-0, i.e., mirroring and
disk striping. While expensive, RAID-10 is a reliable, comprehensive RAID set-up and
should be considered when operating a large, full-blown e-commerce website.
Some kind of RAID storage is necessary for your website and there are certainly all
types and levels available. To learn more about RAID systems, read Richard Grigonis’
book, Fault Resilient PCs (Miller Freeman). 
✪
MIRRORING
Mirroring of a website is the creation of multiple websites that are exact duplicates of
an existing website. Only high-traffic sites should consider adopting a mirroring
model.
A website can use mirrored sites in many ways:
✸To improve the download speed to your customer by providing more than one
server in more than one location with the identical information. Therefore, when
traffic becomes too heavy for one geographical site (or one server) to handle, your
system can hand off the additional traffic to the mirrored site.
✸Live standby servers where data contained on the primary servers are seamlessly
mirrored on the standby servers. In the event of an unplanned outage, such an
infrastructure can keep a website running efficiently, including both hardware and
software.
✸When a website uses a system that generates dynamic HTML, it can create a mirror
of the site with fixed HTML for search engine indexing purposes, along with spe-
cial scripting that can direct customers automatically to the “real site.” 
Since you are creating a duplicate of your site in every way, including the software
and the hardware, the costs can be astronomical. To help you to decide whether to
implement a mirror site, consider the costs that come with a site being down because
of a natural disaster at the servers’ location or a hacker attack.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
80

✪
CONCLUSION
Despite the most compelling design, and innovative programming, there are many
reasons that a website can fail. One of the keys to minimizing site failure is redun-
dancy. The power and data redundancy discussed in this chapter are a good start to
ensure that your website is always available, but other types of redundancy also should
be considered when building a website. For example, using industry-grade equipment
and ensuring your site has more than one route to the Internet. 
Redundancy
81

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 6
Connectivity
Take care of the minutes and the hours will take care of themselves.
—Anonymous
“Connectivity” is a buzzword used in Internet circles to refer to the ability of com-
puters to link to networks, and therefore to the Internet. This chapter deals with the
bandwidth aspect of connectivity, i.e., the amount of data that can be transmitted in
a fixed amount of time. Although this chapter does not provide a complete education
on connectivity and bandwidth, it does provide the information you will need to make
an intelligent connectivity decision. 
The first step is to estimate the amount of bandwidth you will need to feed data
from your web server to your customers. 
Bandwidth (in the Internet context) is the number of bits per unit time that can
be carried across a communications line. The basic unit of bandwidth measurement
is bits per second (bps), but most commonly you’ll see it expressed Kbps or Mbps,
which stand for kilo-bits per second and mega-bits per second, respectively. The rate
at which your connection transfers data is measured in the same bits per second. This
bandwidth determines how fast data is transmitted to and from your web server and
also how many requests can be serviced simultaneously. Even with a robust server, if
you do not have sufficient bandwidth for the number of customers coming to your
website, delays or failures will occur. 
Select a way of delivering bandwidth that is scalable to meet your website’s future
needs while at the same time limiting additional costs and frustration. For example,
although a small website can get by with a business-class DSL connection, this solu-
tion does not have much scalability. If you can afford it, you should choose to go with
83

at least a burstable or fractional T-1/E-1 line. A large or enterprise website may want
to go with a T-3 connection.
Since your website should be accessible to everyone on the Web, and you hope to have
many visitors to your site, plan for lots of bandwidth. A website offering streaming
video, lots of audio, or one that receives a large amount of traffic would need a T-1/E-
1 connection all to itself. 
In addition to the number of simultaneous customers, think about the speed at
which data is sent to your customers. This is determined by connection speed and
data size. It should take fewer than five seconds to send a page of type. Even with the
additional bandwidth demands of graphics, audio, or video, a page should load in
fewer than 30 seconds. 
Once you’ve determined the amount of bandwidth needed for your web server
(whether self-hosted or outsourced to a web-hosting service), consider whether your
website will offer other services that require increased bandwidth such as email, chat
rooms, streaming audio or video. If so, be sure to include enough bandwidth to cover
those services.
If running a self-hosted site, you should understand that the Internet connection
comes through a router. A network interface card connects your web server to the
router — a high-performance network card will prevent a bottleneck between your
Internet connection and your web server.
Whatever size bandwidth you end up using, know that most Internet service
providers (ISPs) or web-hosting services will take care of most of the details of getting
the line installed. But you should still understand that your local telephone company
is needed to provide the piece of the connection (the “local loop”) that brings the
Internet to your door. Then, if your web-hosting service has a point of presence (POP)
co-located with your telephone company’s central office (practically all do), you’ll be
able to connect with them using just a local loop. Otherwise you’ll have to rent a ded-
icated line to wherever the “on ramp” happens to be.
It is up to the web host (whether or not an ISP) to ensure that their POPs are capa-
ble of delivering the bandwidth and the response times that their customers need.
Ultimately, these providers must be able to expand their POP as they increase their
customer base and add new services.
Now let’s look closer at the high-bandwidth services available. 
✪
DSL
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) technology brings high-bandwidth transmission to
The Complete E-Commerce Book
84

homes and small businesses over ordinary copper telephone lines. “xDSL” refers to
different variations of DSL (e.g. ADSL, HDSL, and RADSL) that provide high-band-
width transmission of up to 10 Mbps over your local telephone company’s ordinary cop-
per wire lines. Installation of Asymmetric DSL (ADSL), a popular version of xDSL,
appeared in 1998 and soon exploded to offer service throughout the United States
and elsewhere. In many areas it has replaced ISDN (discussed later in this chapter). 
DSL works by placing special line conditioning and transmission equipment on
both ends of an ordinary copper line from your location to the local telephone com-
pany’s central office. Because this connection uses a much broader range of frequen-
cies to transmit digital data than a standard analog phone line, higher speeds are
possible. Your data is then routed from the telephone company’s central office to your
web host/ISP over high-speed trunk lines, then out to the Internet.
DSL offers several advantages over an ISDN connection. Even a “lite” ADSL con-
nection offers from 384 Kbps to 1.5 Mbps of Internet bandwidth as opposed to 128
Kbps with ISDN, i.e., DSL is at least six times faster. Full-rate ADSL can move 8 Mbps,
thus having the bandwidth of several 1.5 Mbps T-1/E-1s.
Connectivity
85
The Different DSL Technologies
Technology 
Downstream Rate 
Upstream Rate  
ADSL (Asymmetric DSL) 
1.5 to 8 Mbps 
640 to1.5 Kbps  
ADSL Lite, G.Lite 
384 Kbps to1.5 Mbps 
128 to 640 Kbps  
CDSL 
1 Mbps 
128 Kbps  
EtherLoop (symmetrical) 
125 Kbps to 6 Mbps 
Same  
G.Lite 
384 Kbps to 1.5 Mbps 
128 to 384 Kbps  
HDSL (High bit-rate DSL) 
768 Kbps to 2.3 Mbps  
Same  
HDSL2 
1.5 Mbps 
Same  
Hotwire ReachDSL 
512 Kbps
Same
320 Kbps   
Same
IDSL (ISDN DSL) 
144 Kbps 
Same  
RADSL (Rate-Adaptive DSL) 
7 to 8 Mbps 
1 to 1.5 Mbps  
SDSL (Symmetric DSL) 
160 Kbps to 2 Mbps 
Same  
SHDSL 
Many bit rates:
Same
192 Kbps to 2.3 Mbps 
Table 2. DSL comes in a number of  variations. If possible find a DSL service that provides the same
speed both upstream and downstream. Many times such a service is marketed as “business DSL.”

DSL is hundreds of dollars per month cheaper than a burstable or fractional T-
1/E-1 connection. A DSL connection gives you acceptable bandwidth to your web
server at a fraction of the cost. But DSL is not very scalable.
Since most DSL technologies require installation of a signal splitter there is an up-
front installation expense of about $100.00. You also will need to install a DSL router
that is connected to your web server’s network hub, which will cost around $75.00.
Use only a high-speed “business class” DSL service (i.e. a symmetrical DSL technol-
ogy that offers the same speed upstream and downstream) to host a web server. Your
monthly costs for business-class DSL service should be between $75.00 and $300.00.
✪
ISDN
In some areas, the only “high-speed” service offered will be ISDN (Integrated Services
Digital Network). ISDN is an access technology that uses digital transmission with a
bandwidth of up to 128 Kbps over your local telephone company’s ordinary copper
wire lines. However, unlike your local telephone service, which transmits analog signals,
ISDN can, over these same wires, transmit multiple digital signals simultaneously.
There are two ISDN user interface standards: Basic Rate Interface (BRI) and Primary
Rate Interface (PRI). 
✸ISDN BRI is defined as consisting of two 64 Kbps B-channels and one low-speed 16
Kbps D-channel (used only for signaling).
✸ISDN PRI standards vary according to the geographic region the service serves. In
the U.S. and Japan, ISDN services based on the PRI interface are defined as 23 B-
channels plus a D-channel (all operating at 64 Kbps), yielding a total of 1.536
Mbps). In Europe, however, ISDN PRI is defined as 30 B-channels and one D-chan-
nel yielding a total of 1.984 Mbps. 
Wherever situated, the slower D channel is always the last channel, (e.g. channel
24 in the U.S. and channel 31 in Europe), and it serves the purpose of call signaling, call
setup, requesting network services, and routing of data over B-channels.
A terminal adapter (TA) is the piece of equipment you install at the end of an ISDN
line in your home or business -– it can be an ISDN phone, a fax machine, or an ISDN
“modem.”
There are two kinds of ISDN TAs, internal and external. TAs can look like modems,
like computer bus cards, or like interface cards for PBXs or routers. Many ISDN phones
and modems have analog jacks on the back that allow you to connect ordinary phones,
fax machines, and other analog, non-ISDN devices.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
86

External ISDN TAs are easier to install (they plug into your PC’s serial or USB port)
but won’t give you maximum performance. Some, such as the Motorola Bitsurfr Pro
or the 3COM Courier, actually look like modems and are often called “ISDN modems.”
The problem with ISDN is that it’s not scalable — you get 128 Kbps (a little over
twice the speed of a 56k modem) and that’s it. Data is routed from your ISDN modem
to your web host/ISP over the same copper wiring that you may have previously used
for ordinary analog phone service, then out to the Internet.
ISDN is available from the local telephone company in most areas in the United
States and Europe for around $150 for installation, $300 for the external
adapter/modem, and a $50 to $100 monthly line fee. But use ISDN only if there isn’t
another, faster option available, e.g. DSL. 
✪
T-1/E-1
A T-1 (E-1 in Europe) line’s data-carrying capacity is 1.5 Mbps (E-1 offers 2.048 Mbps)
within 24 channels (E-1 offers 31 available channels), each channel having a 64 Kbps
data transfer capacity. For most small businesses a full T-1/E-1 line may be overkill
since such service is expensive. However, a fractional T-1/E-1 line or burstable T-1/E-
1 may suit even a small website’s budget. 
A fractional T-1/E-1 is a T-1/E-1 line that is channelized or partitioned, and is
referred to as a “fractional configuration.” If a business does not need a full T-1/E-1 line
it can lease any portion of the 24/31 64 Kbps channels, with the transmission method
and rate of transfer remaining the same. This service is most preferable for a website
that expects its traffic to be higher than 1 Mbps 50% of the time.
A burstable T-1/E-1 is a cost-effective Internet access solution for websites to receive
direct, reliable, high-speed Internet connectivity. You only pay for the bandwidth that
is used rather than for the total size of the circuit and bandwidth, much of which is
often unused. 
Access to the Internet is set at a minimum of 128 Kbps with burstability to the full
T-1/E-1 capacity of 1.5/2.048 Mbps when necessary. Although a monthly minimum is
based on sustained usage of 128 Kbps, burstable T-1/E-1 service always provides the
availability of the full T-1/E-1 bandwidth. An unshared, point-to-point, full T-1/E-1 line
can cost anywhere from $800 to $1500 per month, but a burstable or fractional T-
1/E-1 is less — how much less will be based on the service you need. 
For example, here’s how the cost for a burstable T-1/E-l might be calculated: Usage
is usually monitored every day with SNMP (a network monitoring and control pro-
tocol) to create an end-of-month usage report. Rates are then averaged based on the mid-
Connectivity
87

dle 90% of reported usage for the monthly basis. Reports should be included in your
monthly billing. 
Any T-1/E-1 installation (including burstable and fractional service) will come with
a set-up fee of approximately $5000 that includes:
✸All the local telephone company loop charges and carrier fees. 
✸Full 1.54/2.048 Mbps availability. 
✸Cisco router or other certified network equipment. 
✸T-1/E-1 CSU/DSU. 
✸All T-1/E-1 installation charges. 
✸T-1/E-1 set-up fees. 
✸As many IP addresses as can be justified. 
✪
WEB HOST’S/ISP’S CONNECTIVITY
You also need to consider the size of the pipe of your web host/ISP. When searching
for the best ISP for your self-hosted web server or a web-hosting service to host your
web server, ask pointed questions about their connectivity strength. If you expect
your website to receive say, a million hits a month, then find a service that can pro-
vide you with sufficient data feed, that means the provider must have T-3 and/or
optical carrier lines. 
Here is a quick tutorial to help you understand what these different data feeds
provide. 
T-3/E-3
A T-3/E-3’s (also known as DS3) data carrying capacity is about 45 Mbps with 672
channels, each channel having a 64 Kbps transfer capacity. This type of service is very
expensive and overkill for all but the largest, most popular websites (and websites
offering multiple video streams). Many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) use T-3/E-3
lines as their connection to the Internet backbone.
Even if you feel that your website might need a T-3/E-3 data stream, first consider
using inverse multiplexing (the reverse of ordinary multiplexing, which combines mul-
tiple signals into a single signal). Generally, inverse multiplexing across even eight T-
1/E-1 lines is less expensive than going the T-3/E-3 route. 
Inverse multiplexing speeds up data transmission by dividing a data stream into
multiple concurrent streams. Those streams are transmitted at the same time across
separate T-1/E-1 channels and are then reconstructed at the other end back into the
original data stream. It is a technique commonly used where data in a high-speed local
The Complete E-Commerce Book
88

area network (LAN) flows back and forth into a wide area network (WAN) across the
“bottleneck” of a slower line such as a T-1/E-1. By using multiple T-1/E-1 lines, the
data stream can be load-balanced across all of the lines at the same time. 
Optical Carrier (OC)
The term “Optical Carrier” describes fiber optic networks that conform to the Syn-
chronous Optical Network standard for connecting fiber-optic transmission systems
(commonly known as the “SONET standard”). Fiber optics is a technology that uses
gloss or plastic fibers or threads to transmit data. A fiber optic cable consists of a bun-
dle of fibers or threads, each of which is capable of transmitting messages modulated
onto light waves.
The SONET standard also defines a hierarchy of interface rates that allow data
streams at different rates to be multiplexed. SONET establishes OC leaves from 51.85
Mbps to 2.488 Gbps. The standard OC levels include:
✸Optical Carrier Level 1 (OC-1) offers data speeds up to 51.85 Mbps.
✸Optical Carrier Level 3 (OC-3) is actually an optical carrier with three 51.84 Mbps
multiplexed OC-1 circuit streams on an underlying SONET/SDH circuit and thus
offers data speeds of up to 155.52 Mbps.
✸Optical Carrier Level 3-c (OC-3c) is actually an OC-3 circuit with the three OC-1
lines concatenated into a 155.52 Mbps circuit (used in ATM transmission). 
✸Optical Carrier Level 12 (OC-12) offers data speeds of up to 622.08 Mbps. An OC-
12 line can handle over 400 times more data than a T-1/E-1 line. Some Internet
Service Providers, especially those that also offer web-hosting services, often provide
OC-12 connectivity to the Internet backbone.
✸Optical Carrier Level 24 (OC-24) offers data speeds of up to 1244 Mbps or 1.244
Gbps. Canada is at the forefront in deployment of OC-24 service. Both Le Groupe
Videotron Ltee (the second largest cable service provider in Canada) and Videotron
operate and own more than 2484 miles of installed fiber-optic cable and fiber-optic
infrastructure throughout the province of Quebec. Among Videotron’s product
mix is transmission of its multiplexed signals using OC-24 service. 
✸Optical Carrier Level 48 (OC-48) offers data speeds of up to 2488 Mbps or 2.488
Gbps. The Abilene, which connects regional gigaPops to form the Internet2 net-
work, runs over a OC-48 fiber optic cable. 
✸Optical Carrier Level 192 (OC-192) is the newest SONET interface rate. It offers
data speeds of up to 9.952 Gbps.
Connectivity
89

✪
CONCLUSION
All e-commerce operators need a good understanding of connectivity. The size of your
“pipe” to the Internet has a profound affect on your customers’ surfing experience.
Thus, when searching for a web-hosting service for your website, consider only those
that can offer you at least a T-3 line to the Internet. 
When considering your own connectivity needs (whether for your internal network
or a self-hosted website), neither go too small, nor too large. 
It is impossible to over-emphasis the importance of connectivity. Take the time
and effort to choose the right Internet connection for your website’s needs. Do your
homework. Your pipe to the Internet must be able to provide a continuous data stream
so your website can always perform at its peak, while at the same time, giving you the
most “bang for the buck.” 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
90

Chapter 7
Security
Even the lion must defend himself against gnats.
—Anonymous
The Internet’s openness makes it the perfect platform for e-commerce — it offers an
inexpensive mass communication media and an economy of scale for low-cost distri-
bution. However, the lack of security of web-based transactions and the ease with
which the privacy of online communications can be violated are e-commerce’s main
stumbling blocks. Internet’s very openness means that all communication traveling
over it is inherently difficult to secure. To make matters worse, hacking is an epidemic
that is on the rise.
Ira Winkler, president of the Internet Security Advisors Group in Severna Park,
Md., and author of “Corporate Espionage” (Prima Publishing, 1999) succinctly states
the average e-commerce business’s security dilemma: “To a hacker, you’re just an IP
address. You get hit because you let yourself be an easy mark.” 
Here are some eye-opening figures to contemplate: A study by Gartner Inc. indi-
cates that 50 percent of all small to midsize enterprises were hacked in 2003, with
almost 60 percent of those not even knowing they had been hacked. According to the
Computer Emergency Response Team (better known as “CERT,” www.cert.org), a total
of 82,094 incidents were reported in 2002. But, as Fig. 16 shows, incidents are rapidly
increasing — there were 76,404 reported incidents in just the first half of 2003. 
Don’t be an easy mark. Recognize and appreciate that you are building your busi-
ness in a domain that is, at least in principle, fraught with danger. Thus all e-com-
merce businesses must take the necessary steps to ensure that adequate levels of security
91

are in place. This means, at minimum, firewalls to control the flow of data, monitor-
ing software to protect web pages, and an encryption method to protect transactional
data — consumer information, credit card numbers and your own merchant data.
Supplement that with diligent oversight, which includes reporting and analyzing the
security of your web business’s entire infrastructure. 
✪
DEVELOP A SECURITY PLAN
Although website security is an extensive subject that is well beyond the scope of this
book, this section will discuss the main points of a good e-commerce security plan,
as a piece of a website’s overall reliability architecture. With an effective security system
a website can create an environment that promotes e-commerce and private commu-
nications by establishing a climate that is safe from robbery and fraud. 
Security is a subject most business executives try to avoid since they feel that dis-
cussing their business’ security procedures and policies might add to the risk of an
attack. However, without such a discussion, it is difficult for these same executives to
be aware of the constantly evolving technology that can help a web-based business.  
As you develop your security plan, always be cognizant that a secure e-commerce envi-
ronment requires:
The Complete E-Commerce Book
92
CERT’s Record of Incidents Reported 1988-2003
1988-1989
Year
1988
1989
Incidents
6
132
1990-1999
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Incidents
252
406
773
1,334
2,340
2,412
2,573
2,134
3,734
9,859
2000-2003
Year
2000
2001
2002
1Q-2Q 2003
Incidents
21,756 52,658 82,094
76,404
Total incidents reported (1988-2Q 2003): 258,867
Table 3.  This CERT record of incidents is only the tip of the iceberg — a single incident as recorded
by CERT, while reportedly involving only one site, can actually include hundreds (or even thousands)
of websites. Furthermore, an incident can involve ongoing activity for long periods of time. Graphic cour-
tesy of CERT.

✸Access control, usually managed by a firewall, which regulates the data flow. 
✸Authentication, which binds the identity of an individual to a specific message or
transaction.
✸Data privacy and integrity, which ensures that communications and transactions
remain confidential, accurate and have not been modified.
While there are a number of security concerns that must be addressed by all web-
based businesses, some websites’ security needs will differ from others. For example:
✸Some, but not all, e-commerce operations will necessitate opening up specific data
resources (e.g. databases) to trusted third parties. But while doing so, the e-com-
merce operator must ensure that that same data isn’t accessible by other, unau-
thorized, parties.
✸Most e-commerce sites will want to allow their customers to know how much a
widget attachment will cost as the order is being entered, but that same customer
should not be allowed to see the cost of another customer’s order. 
✸Many sites will want to allow their customers to be able to view, copy, and print
the status of all of their outstanding orders via the business’s website, but at the
same time block those customers from copying the entire database(s) in which the
information is stored. 
Many of today’s systems do not readily handle this level of security, but that is just
what is needed to support a good e-commerce website. Although we won’t visit spe-
cialized security needs as discussed in the preceding bullet list (only you know what secu-
rity systems will best protect those assets), we will look at what it takes, generally, to
protect a website, its contents, and customers. 
✪
LAYER YOUR SECURITY
A website needs a total security architecture, i.e. security that exists in a number of
layers — from the web server, to the applications, to the database, and to the exten-
sions to other subsystems. Most brick-and-mortar businesses will have some kind of
security program already installed, but, in all probability, it is not up to date. And if any
part of the security architecture is not working as planned, then your whole security
set-up is vulnerable.  
Unfortunately, some e-commerce businesses mistakenly use security tools, tech-
niques, and strategies that cannot withstand sophisticated security attacks. Their web-
sites are open invitations to hackers to break into their networks (many times without
Security
93

the business owner even being aware that there was a break in). Once inside hackers can
steal money (from the business’s merchant account), products (by placing fraudulent
orders), and sensitive information including customer identities (by obtaining access
to the business’s databases). Once inside your network, cybercriminals also can com-
mit crimes against other merchants by using the hacked network as their launching pad.
But you can minimize your risk, by implementing some of the many security solu-
tions available that provide efficient data sharing without compromising confiden-
tiality, availability, and integrity of the data. 
Limit outside access. This is the first line of defense for any website. Some methods
for accomplishing this are: 
✸Firewalls.
✸User account security. 
✸Software security. 
✸Additional protection for sensitive data. 
Protect your web server. The second line of defense is optimizing your web server so that
it can resist most hacker attacks. For instance you must install antivirus software.
Implement monitoring and analysis solutions. The next line of defense is putting into
place routine monitoring and, if your budget allows, analysis systems so that you know
who and what is connecting to your systems, and interacting with your servers. At min-
imum, you should install log analysis software (see Chapter 8) that will allow you to
monitor system logs and network traffic for anomalies. Simple log analysis software
allows you to identify attempted security breaches and possibly to track their origin. 
Better yet, if your budget allows, get a good monitoring system that enables you
to analyze internal and external firewall activity and identify attempted security
breaches. There are high-end security monitoring solutions available that can detect
and resolve security vulnerabilities in your web-based business’ systems either on
demand or at regularly scheduled intervals. Look at www.webtrends.com and
www.pgp.com to give you an idea of what is available in the way of security suites. 
Encryption. Then follow through with the next line of defense — encryption. This
refers to a system that uses encoding algorithms to construct an overall mechanism for
sharing sensitive data. Encryption is the security cornerstone for most e-commerce sites. 
Use a Web-hosting Service. The last line of defense is to consider using a web-host-
ing service — a good hosting service will have the financial means to provide the
resources for truly effective website security. These businesses provide a professional
staff that has the skill and wherewithal to keep abreast of the latest news and tech-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
94

nology updates as well as the ability to implement fixes and upgrades at a moment’s
notice. 
✪
COMMON WEBSITE SECURITY MEASURES
Now let’s examine in detail some of the more common security measures you can take
to protect your website from attack by hackers, vandals or other trespassers. 
Routers
Be sure that your router is appropriately configured. A router is an electronic device or,
in some cases, software in a computer, that forwards traffic (i.e. data) between net-
works. The forwarding is based on network layer information and routing tables. A
router is designed to route packets efficiently and reliably, but not securely, thus
although it is a layer in your security package, a router should not be used alone as a
method for implementing a security policy. 
Security
95
DENIAL OF SERVICE ATTACK
One of the most common types of security attack is what is called a “denial-of-service” attack,
i.e. an attacker or attackers use various means to prevent legitimate website users from access-
ing a site. The problem is that the latest forms of denial of service attacks are difficult to counter
since they can happen at any given time and, at the moment, there is no solution to the prob-
lem. A website operator must address each attack as it occurs.
Examples include:
■The “Ping of Death” uses a test packet larger than allowed, which can cause a system crash
or problems with network programs running on the targeted computer. Ping is the acronym
for Packet Internet Groper, a program that tests a TCP network by sending a packet with
an echo request to a designated host’s IP address and then waiting for a reply. 
■Attempts to “flood” a network, thereby preventing legitimate network traffic, and attempts
to disrupt connections between two machines, thereby preventing access to a service.
■The Mail Bomb that sends a flood of mail to a mail server, sometimes overloading it, thus
causing legitimate users not only to be denied service but also to lose mail that had been
sent to their mailbox. 
■Host System Hogging, where a program is actually run on the system of the website that is
under attack causing a domino effect. It ties up the system’s CPUs, the operating system
crashes, the site goes down and, finally, customers can’t access the site.
Not all service outages are outright denial-of-service attacks. For example, some denial of
service attacks might be controlled so as only to cause degradation in network traffic. This, in
turn, slows down the website, but does not block it completely. Your website could also be the
victim of other types of attack such as an attacker using your anonymous FTP storage area as
a place to store illegal copies of commercial software, which consumes disk space, and gener-
ates more network traffic. 

Routers spend all their time looking at the destination addresses of the packets pass-
ing through them and deciding which route to send them on. A router is like a trip plan-
ner. Tell the planner where you want to go and it directs you via the shortest route. 
If you are a brick-and-mortar business running a network of computers, you prob-
ably already have routers for your network, but know that the considerations are dif-
ferent when designing router configuration for your new website. Mainly, you must
configure your router so that it can help to control per-user access from the public
side (the Internet) to your web service and still protect your private network assets. 
Firewalls
Install a firewall. A firewall is a device that controls the flow of communication between
internal networks and external networks, such as the Internet. It controls “port-level”
access to a network and a website. A “port” is like a doorway into a server. For exam-
ple, your Internet request isn’t just immediately sent to a server; instead there is a port
number on the server that is the actual destination of a request. It’s like sending a
message to the server on Main Street in Elmville, New York, USA but forgetting to
provide the specific “building” number. For example, http://www.yourname.com by
default uses port 80 (the building number) on the www.yourname.com server. If a
request arrives at the wrong server or the wrong port, the service handling requests
on that port will ignore the request.
When looking at firewall solutions, you should understand that all firewalls are
technically software — some just come with their own server. You also need to know that
firewall solutions run the gamut from software designed to protect a personal PC to
products that provide a wide range of security, flexibility, and protection. Costs can
range from $50 or less from the personal PC solution (don’t buy this type of software),
to a $10,000 firewall/router solution, to a $100,000+ system that consists of firewall
software, routers, and proxy servers. To ensure you get the right firewall system to fit
your website’s needs, hire an expert in data security (if your budget allows). 
Since firewalls are an important component of network security, some established
businesses take the position of “we already have a firewall therefore we are adequately
protected.” But, it’s more complicated than that. A firewall must be correctly config-
ured to provide effective protection. For instance, if your business already has in place
a router running firewall software, that solution will probably not provide the security
that a website needs — of course, the site’s actual security needs depend on the website
and the applications it is running. 
Here are some examples of firewall configurations you might want to implement. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
96

✸Close off the possibility of unnecessary or unauthorized traffic accessing your
servers.
✸Configure the firewall so that only wanted traffic gets through. 
✸Encrypt most or all traffic between servers.
✸Limit the points of access.
A properly configured firewall also can act as a filter to prevent suspicious requests
from ever arriving at the server or can be configured to drop any request that tries to
address a server or server port that has not been specifically enabled by the policy of the
firewall. More importantly, firewalls can verify that the request matches the kind of
protocol (e.g., HTTP, FTP) that is expected on a particular port. 
Firewalls can be used in various places. For example:
✸Between the Internet and the web server to limit the number of ports and proto-
cols open for use by outsiders.
✸Between the website and the web-based business’s internal network to protect back-
end servers and data by isolating public servers from the rest of the internal net-
work, somewhat like a high fence. 
✸To isolate sensitive website data from other servers through a configuration that
allows access only from the website application servers. This type of set-up is used
to safeguard critical data such as credit card numbers. 
Disable Nonessential Services
Although you should use firewalls as the first line of defense, they are only part of a good
comprehensive security solution. You must also shut down all nonessential ports and
services on production servers. Some of the services, like FTP, are inherently insecure
because they send their password without encryption. Other services such as netstat
and systat actually put forth information that can assist cybervandals with certain
types of attacks on your website. 
Some of the services you should disable on your website’s servers include, but are
not limited to:
✸Mail (SMTP).
✸Finger.
✸Netstat, systat.
✸Chargen, echo.
✸FTP.
✸Telnet.
Security
97

✸Berkeley UNIX”r” commands such as rlogin,rsh, rdist etc. 
✸SNMP. 
User Account Security
A common method hackers use to gain access to a web server is to steal an author-
ized user’s account. Restricting a user’s access to only the needed resources limits the
amount of damage hackers can do to your website. Authentication and authorization
are the two best general ways to restrict access.
Authentication. This verifies that you are who you claim to be. An authentication
system can use login-passwords, digital signatures, and a one-time password (single
sign-on). An example of usage is the need to authenticate a user in order to login to
a web server from a web browser.
Authorization. This defines what a user is allowed to do. It typically is used with an
access control list service (ACLS) or a policy that restricts access to computer resources.
Authorization may be attributed to users, user groups, or user profiles.
User IDs and passwords are the most common means of providing authentication
services with authorization to access specific resources such as file directories, read/write
permission, database access. User IDs are usually easy to figure out, since many are
based on a user’s name. So, make the passwords harder to guess. Still, this won’t solve
all of your problems because there are a number of tools and techniques available that
can be used to decipher a password. 
Here are some steps you can take to improve password security: 
✸Never transmit user IDs and passwords in the clear — use encryption techniques. 
✸Make the passwords a combination of mixed-case letters and numbers.
✸Test your passwords by using a tool like password+ or Password Appraiser v3.20.
✸Keep the number of accounts on production servers to a minimum.
✸Use techniques for encrypting transmissions and certificates for authentication
such as Kerberos (a security system that authenticates users but doesn’t provide
authorization to services or databases, although it does establish identity at log-
on) and SSL for the administrator accounts.
✸Never grant more access to resources than is needed. For example, if an applica-
tion server running your product catalog needs to read its information from a data-
base, it will need a database user account, but this account must not be authorized
to read from other parts of the database (where credit cards are stored), or be allowed
write privileges. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
98

Data Confidentiality
Confidentiality ensures that only authorized people can view data transferred in net-
works or stored in databases. Protecting sensitive data like credit card numbers, inven-
tory, etc. is a difficult problem for web-based businesses. To protect your data, you
first need to identify the information that is sensitive. Once identified you can then take
the necessary steps to make the data harder to retrieve; that can be done by using any
or all of the following methods:
✸Put the data on a separate server behind a firewall. 
✸Separate the data. For example, give a database its own security subsystem and user
authentication process.
✸Restrict the number of user accounts that can read/write the data.
✸Separate write access from read access.
✸Encrypt the data and control access to the encryption key. 
Software Security
Internet applications often require security services such as authentication, data con-
fidentiality, data integrity, and nonrepudiation. The major web server applications
install their own security implementations on top of the operating system.
Any application that processes requests from a user is seen as a separate compo-
nent in a website’s architecture. Applications do handle incoming requests and there-
fore need to ensure that requests stay within permitted boundaries. The first step in
providing some kind of security for these applications is not to trust the correctness
of user input — whenever input is received it is validated. Why?  Because it is possible
to “piggyback” a second command onto an input request to a Unix shell by separating
the two commands by an ampersand (&) or semicolon (;). Therefore, every input request
should be parsed for validity or filtered for suspect content. A second step is to use
separate security subsystems to control access to an application’s resources where
users are authorized and authenticated. This way, the application administrator, not
the system administrator, controls the application’s security system. As such, nor-
mally there is no one person who can control all of the information relating to a web-
site. Also, e-commerce packages usually come with security subsystems to control
their particular resources. 
Nevertheless, a web-based business’s security methods should be centralized to the
largest degree possible. This allows you to limit accessibility to security information and
eliminates the need to extend trust to many administrators. Finally, every application
running on a website must consistently apply a clear security architecture (and must
Security
99

consistently fit within your site’s overall security architecture), making explicit its
operational requirements. 
Another step is to keep abreast of all security alerts for threats against your type
of systems. Once alerted to a new technique for breaking into your type of system,
counterattack with a plug and keep repeating the scenario — plug a leak, the hackers
come up with a new way to break in, plug it, the hackers formulate a new break in,
plug it, and on and on.
It isn’t easy to make an operating system secure, but it can be done if you know
where all the leaks are so you can plug them. Keep on top of your operating system’s
weaknesses, i.e. what is being exploited by hackers — this will allow you to keep (hope-
fully) one step ahead of them.
Firewall applications remove unnecessary, resource-hogging services and at the
same time plug potential security holes. This is easier to do with Unix-based firewalls
than with Windows-based systems since developers have easier access to the Unix code.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
100
MINIMAL WEB SECURITY FOR YOUR WEBSITE
All websites are targets for hackers, but these troublemakers especially like to pick on the small
e-commerce site, because many of such sites don’t have robust security measures in place. For-
tunately, even a small web business can implement relatively inexpensive security against cyber-
vandals. Basic security such as maintaining passwords, encrypting and password-protecting
your business’s data, and monitoring all website visitors is a good start. Although it is virtu-
ally impossible to make any website 100% secure, you can implement security features that so
discourage the would-be hacker, that he or she takes their vandalism someplace else. 
Here are some minimal web security strategies that website owners could take to help ensure
their website is uninviting to cybervandals. While some of these suggestions are inexpensive to
implement, others can cost a bundle. It’s up to the reader to decide how proactive he or she wants
to be when it comes to protecting their e-commerce business. 
First, let’s address the minimal security needed for a self-hosted website.
1. Install a firewall and a router. The cost for this solution can range anywhere from $1,000
to $10,000, depending on the size of your website and the type of protection you want to
install.
2. Put your web pages on a CD-ROM and then have your CD-ROM drive — not your hard drive
— feed the website. While it is relatively easy for some unauthorized individual to access a
server’s hard drive, it is very difficult to penetrate a CD-ROM drive. Note, however, that
while this security method will slow down your website; it is still a good, viable option for small
web businesses. Read/write CD-ROM cost less than $200 and blank disks are dirt cheap. 
3. Although it may be tempting for the novice website owner, don’t put website content in
your server’s administrative account (a file folder that holds operating keys to the network).
This is the first place that hackers look.

Microsoft is much more protective of its code and therefore is not as cooperative with
developers. 
Content Security
The most commonly reported website security problem is website defacement and sab-
otage. In fact, cybervandal-based site defacement is an ever-present and increasing threat
to website owners worldwide. To illustrate this troublesome trend, according to London
security consultancy mi2g Ltd., website defacements totaled 20,371 in the first half of
2002, up 27 percent from the 16,007 recorded in the same period the year before. 
Note: According to mi2g Ltd., over the last seven years, the worldwide economic damage estimate for all forms
of digital attack is at between $118.8 and $145.1 billion (as of August 2003). 
The complexity of many of today’s websites (with their numerous pages, images,
and associated features) means that manual methods such as looking at each piece
of content and repairing it, as needed, are ineffective. Thus today, a website owner
Security
101
4. Protect all server access-control lists with a password and monitor the list regularly to ensure
only authorized users are listed. If a hacker can break into the list, they will add themselves
to it — allowing them to roam your website’s systems at will.
5. Be pedantic about scripting. Errors in CGI scripts (the program language commonly used to
create website features) are notorious as cybervandals most popular point of entry. Use pre-
caution with JavaScripting because this program language is full of places where hackers
can get in and change your website. Set up your website scripts properly. Ask your pro-
grammers how they are safeguarding the JavaScript features created for your website. Finally,
if feasible, consult with a security expert on how to set up your scripts.
6. Use Secure Socket Layer (SSL). This will help to prevent hackers from detecting both pass-
words and credit card transactions as they travel the cyber byways. SSL is part of most e-
commerce software programs, but some website owners turn SSL off to speed up their
customers’ web experience. Accept that although SSL may slow down your server a bit, it
is necessary for the success of your website. 
7. Do you allow your customers to track orders and shipments online or want to provide them
with this amenity? If so, separate the customer-accessible data on a separate network from
the rest of your business. The best way to do this is to isolate the customer-accessible web
server with its databases from your other data assets. 
If you use a web-hosting service, security steps three through seven apply. But also add to your
security to-do list the following:
■Keep an ISP contact list handy in case of a breach. 
■Be proactive in determining the service’s security quotient. (Later in Chapter 14, we discuss
how to determine if a web-hosting service offers adequate security for your website.) 

may want to put in place an intermediate server. Lockstep Systems Inc. (www.lock-
step.com), Tripwire Inc. (www.tripwire.com), Watchguard Technologies Inc.
(www.watchguard.com) and others provide software that resides on an intermediate
staging server to ensure that your site’s content is staged and preserved before deploy-
ment to the actual website. At configurable intervals, the staging server queries your
website to compare files for differences. If an anomaly is found, the contents and/or
files are captured and quarantined by the staging server, and the original content is
restored from the intermediate server’s files. The software also logs the incident and
sends an alert to the website’s administrator.
Monitoring Your Website
Finally, monitor your website’s usage and take a proactive stance on security holes.
To ensure a high level of security, you should:
✸Monitor for break-ins. Institute a user account change report or install a sophis-
ticated network monitoring system.
✸Monitor your logs after an attack, they can tell you how the attack occurred and
might even provide a clue as to the identity of the attacker.
✸Run a security analysis program that can take a snapshot of your site and then
analyze for potential weaknesses in your site.
✸Perform security audits with outside auditors to check for potential security holes
that you might have missed.
✸Back up your website on a scheduled basis so that, if needed, you can recover dam-
aged data and programs.
Security and Certification
Most web-based businesses go further than the security provided at the router and
firewall level. They incorporate such features as encryption of credit card information
and other personal data, digital signatures and trust of identity of network users,
hosts, applications, services, and resources. 
Internet trust services, including authentication, validation, and payment, are
needed by websites to conduct trusted and secure electronic commerce and commu-
nications. Digital certificates provide trust of identity, which enables a website to con-
duct online business securely, with authentication, message privacy, and message
integrity, all helping to minimize risk and win customer confidence.
As explained in detail in Chapter 3, digital certificates (DC) can be compared to a
driver’s license. DCs provide an electronic method by which you can prove the identity
The Complete E-Commerce Book
102

of a specific computer’s owner/operator. For the driver’s license, a credible organiza-
tion (the DMV) assures that the driver’s license is issued to the correct person. The
same is true for DCs, a certification authority (CA) issues digital certificates but only
after verifying the identity of the entity/person. The DC contains among other things,
the name of an entity/person, the entity/person’s public key, the serial number, and the
signature of CA (which was signed using the CA’s own private key). 
Credit Card Security 
With the proper precautions, online purchases are no more dangerous than credit
card purchases made in the physical world. E-commerce systems keep credit card infor-
mation secure by encrypting the information. Most online purchase transactions are
encrypted using the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). SSL is an internationally accepted
standard for the secure transmission of data. Virtually all web browsers and web servers
have standard SSL capabilities built into them. Thus nearly all web browsers and web
servers communicate with each other using SSL. 
As explained in Chapter 3, the SSL-driven process handles all of the security for
most transactions by enabling the customer’s browser to confirm the identity of the
server it’s dealing with, and providing an encryption system that ensures that all data
is transmitted safely. 
There is also a security standard called Secure Electronic Transactions (SET). SET
encrypts a credit card number so that only designated banks and credit card compa-
nies can read the information. SET requires you to obtain a special certificate from
your bank, and then your customers must install special software on their computer.
The software is supplied by various vendors, most of whom seem to have the word
“wallet” somewhere in the name. The “e-wallet” software allows your customer to
input all of their purchasing information (credit card, address, shipping address, etc.)
once and then move merrily through numerous websites that accept that e-wallet
technology, doing “one-click” shopping and avoiding the repeated task of filling out
individual websites’ purchase forms.
So far, U.S. consumers have had little incentive to use the e-wallet applications that
SET requires, and because the SET systems are costly and complex to set up, the SET
standard, although readily accepted outside the U.S., is not widely used by U.S. web
merchants and banks. The main barrier has been that each e-wallet provider has estab-
lished their own unique technical specifications, so many U.S. websites have adopted
a wait and see attitude with regards to SET. 
Also alternative options have emerged for handling credit card transactions over
Security
103

the Web that are easier and cheaper than SET. The next-generation e-wallets use a new
standard — the Electronic Commerce Modeling Language (ECML). This standard
works with any web security software and allows e-wallets automatically to feed cus-
tomer information into the payment forms of participating websites. Visa, Master-
Card, and American Express, with support from America Online, CyberCash, IBM,
Microsoft and Sun, as well as numerous web-based businesses have led implementa-
tion of the ECML standard. 
ECML can be used with any security protocol, including SSL, and Visa and Mas-
terCard’s own version of SET. Therefore, ECML may change the landscape for e-wal-
let companies and websites — increasingly you will find e-wallet services offered by
financial institutions and credit card companies. 
Some of the more popular websites offering e-wallets include:  
✸www.passport.com (.NET Passport e-wallet from Microsoft).
✸www.iliumsoft.com (e-wallet from Ilium Software).
✸www.gator.com (e-wallet from Gator Corporation).
Now let’s review how you can prevent your business and your customers from
becoming victims of Internet fraud.
✪
INTERNET FRAUD
How serious is Internet fraud? To quote Verisign, a company that delivers critical infra-
structure services that make the Internet and telecommunications networks more
intelligent, reliable, and secure, “The threat of online fraud is so pervasive that the
government has begun mandating security requirements for businesses that handle
financial information online.” Although currently such regulations only apply to the
banking community, e-commerce businesses access the financial networks for each
transaction made on their website. Thus, security at the point of sale is an increasing
concern for not only governments, but also for credit card associations. 
These sobering figures show how prevalent Internet fraud has become: 
Gartner Group estimates that fraudulent transactions make up 1.06% of total
online transactions versus only .06% of offline transactions. Gartner also estimates
that in 2003 alone, online transaction fraud will reach $1.8 billion. 
The FBI reported that in 2002 Internet fraud complaints tripled from the year
before; and, sadly, 2003 complaints are above the level reported for the same time
period in 2003.
Although any e-commerce site can be at risk and a single fraud incident may be
The Complete E-Commerce Book
104

serious enough to put a merchant out of business, some websites are at greater risk
for certain types of fraud than others. Some of the higher than average risk categories
include e-commerce sites that:
✸Don’t have robust security defenses — cybercriminals can take advantage of such sites
using sophisticated spidering techniques to enable them to search the Internet for
websites with network vulnerabilities. Criminals then use this information to break
into your network where they can steal your account access information for hijack-
ing or merchant takeovers. 
✸Are highly visible — although you, of course, need to have a high-visibility quotient to
attract customers, fraud attempts are higher for e-commerce sites that advertise
heavily or are media darlings. That’s because cybercriminals understand that web-
sites experiencing high volume traffic spend less time defending against fraud.
✸Sell internationally — it is difficult to validate the address or identity of out-of-coun-
try customers. It is even more difficult to investigate and prosecute fraudulent
activity internationally. 
✸Offer seasonal or special promotion merchandise — criminals know that a website owner
has limited time to spend on fraud protection measures when sales volumes are high. 
✸Sell high-ticket items — criminals fraudulently acquire items that can be resold easily. 
✸Sell downloadable goods (e.g. software, music) — the purchase of these goods doesn’t
require a physical address, which makes it easier for criminals to disguise a fraud-
ulent transaction.
There are steps you can take to significantly reduce your exposure to fraud. These
steps are separated into three levels: the individual transaction level, the account level
(i.e. protecting access to your payment gateway account), and the network level. How-
ever, to protect your business from fraud, you must address each of these levels in an
integrated manner. 
Transaction Level. This is where you ensure that each transaction you process is a
valid transaction. To do this you must authenticate the customer and screen order
for fraud patterns. 
✸Take advantage of MasterCard and Visa’s buyer authentication programs. 
✸Put in place a system that offers address verification service, card security code features,
IP address checks, shipping address validation (e.g. VeriSign’s Payflow service). 
✸Maintain a list of “bad” or fraudulent orders and check all transactions against
that list and a list of repeat customers who have previously transacted legitimate
business on your website. 
Security
105

✸Don’t automatically reject a transaction that seems suspicious. Instead, review such
transactions to ensure that you aren’t rejecting a legitimate customer. 
Account Level. At this level you ensure that only authorized users have access to your
payment gateway account. Also put in place a system whereby you can be alerted for
suspicious account access patterns. For instance: 
✸Lock down administrative access.
✸Change your account password on a regular basis.
✸Monitor account level activity for suspicious patterns that could indicate merchant
account takeover.
Network Level. This is where you ensure your network or “perimeter” is defended
against unauthorized access. As described in this chapter’s “Common Website Secu-
rity Measures” section, protection at this level includes:
✸Locking down network access. 
✸Monitoring firewall activity.
✸Putting in place a system whereby alerts and patches are automatically checked
and installed on all servers, operating systems, and applications. 
✸Investing in regularly scheduled security audits or port scans to identify network vul-
nerabilities.
✪
SECURITY RESOURCES
Some of the websites that offer good, reliable security information include:
✸Cisco Systems Security Products and Technologies (www.cisco.com/warp/pub-
lic/cc/so/neso/sqso/index.shtml).
✸Microsoft Security Advisor (www.microsoft.com/security).
✸Sun Microsystems Software and Networking Security (www.sun.com/security).
✸The digital risk specialists, mi2g Ltd. (www.mi2g.com).
A good website to bookmark for Internet trust issues is www.verisign.com. There you
will find free seminars, white papers covering trust and security issues and other
resources.
Also bookmark the following websites — they can help you to keep abreast of the
latest security threats to your computer systems.
✸Computer Incident Advisory Capability (www.ciac.org/ciac/).
✸Federal Computer Incident Response Capability (www.fedcirc.gov/).
The Complete E-Commerce Book
106

✸Advanced Laboratory Workstation System (www.alw.nih.gov/Security/security-
docs.html).
✸CERT (www.cert.org).
✪
CONCLUSION
If your budget allows, retain a security expert to perform a detailed review of your web-
based business’ internal procedures, network topology and permissions, access con-
trols, hardware, software, and utilities that could possibly compromise your website.  
Please note that even if you set up intricate levels of security, your website is never
completely safe from a determined and skilled attacker. E-commerce operations are
particularly hard to protect since they must be able to interact with their customers.
Therefore, at the very least, build and maintain a good, state-of-the-art firewall and
encrypt sensitive data, such as credit card information. And don’t forget to institute
an on-going program of security monitoring, maintenance, and to perform an annual
security audit. 
Security
107

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 8
Infrastructure Software 
If you do not think about the future you cannot have one.
—Anonymous
If your web-based business is to cross the finish line of the “race for success” you must
choose the right software. When making your software choices consider ease of inte-
gration, scalability, and robustness, i.e., does it work well with other software and
hardware, can it scale as your business grows and as technology changes, and can it
handle large amounts of traffic.
The first software decision to be made is which operating system to use for your
e-commerce business. Next, choose your basic website software: web server, log analy-
sis, and database. Specific e-commerce software is such a broad subject that it has its
own chapter — Chapter 9. Then there is adjunct software, which many of you will want
to consider — those are discussed in Chapter 10. 
Note: Software can be defined at its most basic as computer instructions or data — anything that can be stored
electronically can be software.
✪
THE OPERATING SYSTEM
An operating system (OS) acts as a computer’s CEO — whether it operates on a server
or a desktop computer. Just as a CEO controls all of the operations of a corporation,
the OS controls all of a computer’s operations, such as allocating memory, accessing
disk drives and calling applications, to name just a few. The software applications that
provide the bulk of an OS’s services run on top of the OS. The three most popular
109

operating systems for web servers are UNIX, Linux (a freeware version of UNIX), and
some flavor of Windows (NT, 2000, 2003 Server). 
UNIX
UNIX is an interactive time-sharing OS that comes in many variations or “flavors.”
UNIX is not a single operating system; it is a family of operating systems with each
vendor providing its own version of UNIX. Although these various versions of UNIX
are similar, there are enough differences that you might have problems if you decided
to move (or “port”) your application from one version of UNIX to another. 
Some examples of the various manufacturers’ UNIX versions are:
IBM’s AIX L5, which is an integrated UNIX operating environment that provides
full interoperability and coexistence between 32- and 64-bit applications with processes
that may run concurrently or cooperatively, sharing access to files, memory, and other
system services. The inclusion of Internet technologies such as Java and XML parser
for Java as part of the base operating system enables AIX to be Java-ready for both Java
client and Java server applications. 
Silicon Graphics (SGI) IRIX 6.5, a scalable 64-bit operating system based on UNIX
standards for high-performance graphics and scalable server systems. The IRIX oper-
ating system allows you to take full advantage of MIPS processor-based SGI systems.
IRIX 6.5 was specifically designed for users with the most demanding technical com-
pute and visualization needs, IRIX 6.5 readily scales to tackle huge data sets, com-
pute-intensive problems, and real-time 3D visualization enhancements with ease. 
Compaq/HP Tru64 UNIX V5.1B is a 64-bit operating system offering a choice of
management interfaces, including web-based operations. This system reduces the
complexity of installation, setup, and management compared to other UNIX systems.
It supports multiple terabytes of data, increases performance in file system, storage
management, and system networking, and delivers very high integration between
UNIX and Windows operating systems. 
NetBSD is a free, highly portable UNIX-like operating system available for many
platforms, from 64-bit AlphaServers to Macintoshes and handheld Windows CE
devices. Its clean design and advanced features make it excellent in both production and
research environments, and it is user-supported with complete source code. Many
applications are easily available. 
Santa Cruz Operation (SCO) OpenServer systems are among the most popular of
operating system platforms for small- and mid-sized businesses. The latest genera-
tion of SCO OpenServer systems allows you quickly to expand your computing envi-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
110

ronment as your business’s computing needs grow. SCO’s integrated support for email
and Internet services ensures that your business can leverage the Web to give your
company the exposure it deserves and to communicate more efficiently with cus-
tomers and prospects. Aside from critical business applications, SCO OpenServer
Enterprise System provides various network services including file and print services
for UNIX and Windows systems, email services, web services, Internet connectivity,
and calendar services. Built-in support for Windows File/Print services means that a
single multi-functional server platform can be utilized to run your entire operation,
while the field-proven reliability of SCO OpenServer keeps you in business.
Sun Microsystems (Sun) Solaris 9 is a UNIX operating system. There are various
flavors of Solaris 9 including a SPARC version and an Intel version. If you have the
budget and you are self-hosting your website, the Solaris 9 operating system should be
considered since it sports some hefty security features, including IPSec with Internet
Key Exchange (IKE), extensible password encryption, secure LDAP, and Kerberos. The
Solaris 9’s strength is its enterprise-class reliability and scalability and its mature net-
working kernel. Solaris 9 supports hot-swapping of processors and has a management
console that provides a simple, customizable utility for maintaining and monitoring
Solaris 9 servers, along with wizards for installation of applications.  
Linux
Linux (which is a variant of UNIX) is a free operating system and therefore can be
copied and redistributed without paying a fee or royalty. It is a multi-user, multi-task-
ing operating system that runs on many platforms, including Intel processors. Linux
interoperates well with other operating systems, including those from Apple, Microsoft
and Novell. There are many Linux packages offering a full and rich set of utilities,
connectivity tools, and a development environment. There is even free software avail-
able that turns Linux into a very nice web server. The main drawback is that there is no
formal technical support for Linux. 
Most programs written for either Linux or UNIX can be recompiled to run on the
other system with little reconfiguration. Linux in most situations will run faster than
UNIX on the same equipment. You can download a copy of Linux from the Internet
or purchase an inexpensive CD set. You’ll find Linux is a first rate operating system
with capabilities beyond what you expect from more expensive products.
A crucial issue to consider when making your operating system decision is that
UNIX (and Linux when configured properly) are inherently more secure than Microsoft
products. Since UNIX was designed as a multi-user multi-process platform for inter-
Infrastructure Software
111

connected computers, guaranteeing security has been an issue ever since the begin-
ning. All UNIX vendors publish fixes for their software whenever a security problem
is found. Microsoft is still somewhat secretive about security problems and thus there
can be quite a lag time from the moment Microsoft learns about a security problem and
when the public is notified about it. 
Windows 2000 and Windows 2003 Server
While Windows 2000 Server is essentially an upgrade of Windows NT, Windows 2003
Server is much more. Although both Windows 2000 and 2003 include a bundled web
server — Microsoft’s Internet Information Server IIS — the version is different: IIS 5.0
is bundled with Windows 2000 and IIS 6.0 comes with Windows 2003. 
Both operating systems offer a great array of innovative network tools and busi-
ness features; however these features can cause the OS to be a challenging operating
system to install and maintain, especially if you are unfamiliar with the inner work-
ings of Microsoft operating systems. 
Nonetheless, if you feel you are up to the technical challenges of Windows 2000
Server and/or Windows 2003 Server, these operating systems do offer features that
make building and maintaining a website more productive. For example, there are
numerous ways to access the administrative functions: the “old” Control Panel; an
Explorer-like Computer Management, and a wizard-like Configure Your Server, which
has ample help and support information. Another nice feature is the Microsoft Man-
agement Console (MMC), which makes it easy to access options. 
Windows 2000 Server and Windows 2003 Server operating systems are faster, more
reliable, heavier-duty, and easier to use than the older Windows NT operating system.
Most of their more important server functions, such as, network, storage, and secu-
rity have been centralized; although, TCP/IP and other Internet features are still not
very well organized. Still with the introduction of Windows 2000, Microsoft at last
made inroads into the Internet environment.
Note: The Windows 2003 Server Web Edition is available at a significant discount when compared to the Win-
dows 2003 Standard Edition. 
Windows XP Professional Edition
If you want to use a Windows product for your web server, your best bet is to use Win-
dows 2003 Server Web Edition. However, if you must use Windows XP, get the Pro-
fessional Edition (not the Home Edition) since like Windows 2003 Server the
Professional Edition includes Microsoft’s new Internet Information Server IIS 6.0 ver-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
112

sion, and support for dual processors. As long as you use the Windows XP Profes-
sional Edition along with secure open source and freeware tools (many are available via
the Web), this operating system is adequate for a website’s purposes. But note that
Windows XP doesn’t support Java, which may cause some problems.  Also it may be dif-
ficult to use any web server other than the bundled IIS product.
Note: According to a mi2g Ltd. report, for the twelve months ending September 2003 Linux was the most
breached operating system followed by Microsoft Windows operating systems. The report states that 59.2%
of all overt digital attacks were on systems running Linux and 20.8% were on systems running Windows. How-
ever, the report also acknowledged that the known, onerous difficulties with administering a Windows-based
system — the effort that must be expended in 24/7 configuration management, reboot-patch-reboot (open
source systems usually can be patched without the reboot drill, which is a valuable commodity in an e-commerce
environment), etc. — when compared to open source solutions such as Linux and OpenBSD, the necessity of such
hands-on administration could actually be serving to help Windows-based systems block many attacks. 
The report also found that the reason for most Linux breaches were due to poorly configured or updated third
party applications and servers running on Linux systems. In fact, in mi2g anonymous interviews with hacker
groups, it found that hackers prefer attacking Linux systems because of the plethora of configuration errors
within those systems, which makes mounting attacks easier. However, mi2g also found that individuals hacking
for intellectual gain or fun (rather than cybercrime) are generally more attracted to the perceived greater chal-
lenge associated with hacking well-configured BSD, Linux, Solaris and Unix systems (and any high-profile orga-
nization’s online systems). Although the relative market share of different operating systems ought to be reflected
in the proportion of digital attack suffered by each of them, the precise proportions fluctuate considerably —
generally in a way that is coupled with the preferences of the hackers and the announced vulnerabilities still to
be patched.
In the opinion of mi2g, there were several motivations and issues involved when a Windows-based system was
targeted over Linux or vice-versa, “ranging from the reasons for an attack down to number of vulnerabilities
being announced for Operating Systems, Servers, Applications and Libraries at a given moment in time and
the ease with which the patches can be applied across a large scale deployment.”
✪
YOUR WEB SERVER
Your web server is the software that serves your website’s content to a customer’s
browser (Netscape, Internet Explorer, Opera, etc.). The web server software’s basic
functionality is quite simple — it takes a file name passed through a command, gets the
file and sends it across the Internet so it can be viewed on the requesting computer’s
browser software. The web server software also tracks hits to the site, records and
reports error messages, etc. Server-side technology is used to increase the functional-
ity of a web server beyond its ability to deliver standard HTML pages — for example,
CGI scripts, SSL security, and Active Server Pages (ASPs). 
Infrastructure Software
113

Today’s web servers are used in such a variety of situations that it is necessary for
the tools used to administer them to be quite sophisticated. Thus, more and more
add-on options are available for web-related software development tools. 
All of the major web servers, including Apache, Microsoft IIS, and Netscape Enter-
prise Server, have comparable functionality. This means that your choice of web server
software may be based more on personal preference than on actual hard-core func-
tionality considerations. 
Server 
September Count 
September % 
August Count 
August % 
Change  
Apache 
7,979,368 
66.86% 
7,705,536 
66.94% 
-0.08%  
Microsoft IIS 
2,853,576 
23.91% 
2,765,375 
24.02% 
-0.11%  
Netscape 
112,352 
0.94% 
109,898 
0.95% 
-0.01%  
Zeus 
101,128 
0.85% 
99,044 
0.86% 
-0.01%   
WebSTAR 
94,442 
0.79% 
91,315 
0.79% 
0.00%  
WebSite 
27,543 
0.23% 
28,979 
0.25% 
-0.02%  
Other 
765,715 
6.42% 
711,486 
6.18% 
+0.24%  
Table 4.  Results of the September 2003 Security Space Web Server Survey (11,934.124 websites
responded), which is a survey of web server software usage on the Internet broken down by 86 domains.
To find the latest Security Space Web Server Survey results go to www.serverwatch.com/stats/sspace/.
Courtesy of Jupitermedia Corporation.
Apache
This is the most widely used web server and is probably the most stable and fastest of
the web servers available. As Table 4 indicates, Apache holds the top position in the
web server market space, and has almost three times as many installations as second
place Microsoft IIS. 
Apache was originally based on the httpd code that many say started the Web rev-
olution. Prior to Apache 2.0 (the latest version), Apache was a largely Unix product
that used a number of tricks in order to execute within other operating systems. 
Apache 2.0, however, represents a major rewrite of previous Apache versions. Among
the many changes, one of the most important is that Apache 2.0 supports a wide array
of platforms in more efficient ways. Thus it is now possible to develop Unix- and Win-
dows-specific execution models that make the best use of a specific operating system.
This is because Apache 2.0 provides a new execution environment that separates the
core functionality of the Apache system from the system that supports and processes
requests. Thus Apache 2.0 is easily supported under a wide variety of operating sys-
tems: UNIX (of course), Windows (all versions), Linux, Mac OS X, BeOS, and more. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
114

Apache web servers are released as “open source” with no fee for usage; there are
also a lot of modifications and modules made for Apache. The source code for most
operating systems (all versions of Windows, freebds, many versions of UNIX includ-
ing Linux, etc.) is distributed in what is known as a “tarball.” A tarball is just a source
code directory tree that is packaged with the UNIX tar command and then compressed
into a zip file. The most recent repository of Apache source code can be found at
www.apache.org. 
However, Apache isn’t for everyone — setup and maintenance of the server requires
familiarity with command-line scripting tools. Also, Apache lacks browser-based main-
tenance capabilities or GUI configuration/administration tools. Some users will be
unhappy with the lack of visuals, Wizards, and browser-based administration tools. 
Although there is no official support for Apache, the apache.org website is very
useful. Bug reports and suggestions are distributed via the site’s bug report page.
Other questions can be directed to forums such as the one hosted by Serverwatch.com
and Apache-server.com. Also check out newsgroups such as the one hosted by Google.
Apache gurus can usually be found lurking about all of these sites. Be sure to bookmark
not only the Apache.org site and Apache-server.com sites (they both provide a wealth
of information), but also Apacheweek.com — this site is an essential resource for any-
one running an Apache server. You can also find third-party companies that offer full
commercial support for a fee.
Note: If you would like a basic tutorial on how to install Apache, go to www.serverwatch.com/tutorials/arti-
cle.php/1126341 for “The Newbie’s Guide for Installing Apache.” Bookmark the Serverwatch.com website
— it provides a wealth of information on all kinds of server software. 
Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS) 
IIS receives high marks for superior installation, performance and maintenance. IIS
especially earns kudos for its ease of installation and the quality of its management
interface, which is provided separately from other interfaces. Another good feature is
that IIS can be managed remotely via a web browser. However, IIS can operate only
within a Windows environment.
The IIS 5.0 (included in Windows 2000) and the updated version, IIS 5.1 reflect
only minor changes from the original IIS version 3.0 that came with Windows NT 4.0.
But with IIS 6.0, which is bundled with Windows 2003 Server and XP Professional,
there was an almost complete rewrite of this web server platform. IIS 6.0 sports a new
execution model, better management facilities, and significantly increased performance.
However, IIS 6.0 currently only supports Windows 2003 Server and XP Professional.
Infrastructure Software
115

Although this limits the deployment platforms for IIS-based web services, it also pro-
vides a number of benefits, including greater cooperation with the host operating sys-
tem and easier management and control through a variety of standard OS tools and
utilities. IIS 6.0, paired with Windows 2003 Server, offer admirable levels of integration
with the .NET Framework.
Microsoft provides free online support through its knowledge base, which can be
found at www.Microsoft.com. You can also obtain fee-based per incident service
through the Microsoft Certified Support Center. If you purchase “support incidents”
you can receive quick and knowledgeable technical support through an 800 number.
Netscape Enterprise Server (NES)
This web server runs a distant third in the web server market, but it still offers a “com-
plete” web server package for any website. It provides support for the HTTP 1.1 pro-
tocol plus security enhancements in PKCS #11, FIPS-140 compliance, 128-Bit Step-Up
Certificates, and Fortezza support. (Fortezza, Italian for “fortress,” is a family of secu-
rity products — PCMCIA cards, serial port devices, server boards, etc. – that are trade-
marked by the U.S. National Security Agency and used extensively by the military). It
also comes with a built-in search engine, log analysis tools, advanced content pub-
lishing, server clustering and administrative rights delegation. It supports most Win-
dows operating systems and most of the UNIX family including Digital UNIX, SGI
IRIX, Sun Solaris, and IBM AIX. 
NES is a good web server for a traffic intensive website since it has features such
The Complete E-Commerce Book
116
THE .NET FRAMEWORK
Some readers may have heard all of the buzz about the .NET Framework, but don’t really under-
stand what it is all about. Let’s me see if I can give you a short explanation.
Microsoft .NET is software that connects information, people, systems, and devices. It spans
clients, servers, and developer tools. The .NET Framework is Microsoft’s new programming
model for developing, deploying, and running XML web services and all types of applications-
desktop, mobile, or web-based. 
The .NET Framework is the infrastructure for the overall .NET Platform. The common lan-
guage runtime and class libraries (including Windows Forms, ADO.NET, and ASP.NET) com-
bine to provide services and solutions that can be easily integrated within and across a variety
of systems. The .NET Framework provides a fully managed, protected, and feature-rich appli-
cation execution environment, simplified development and deployment, and seamless inte-
gration with a wide variety of languages. 
For a more detailed overview of .NET, check out Microsoft’s “Getting Starting in .NET” web
page, which can be found at www.microsoft.com/net. 

as SSL 3.0 support with client-side certificate authentication, SNMP and SMTP sup-
port and centralized server management. Technical support is free for the first 90 days
only, then it gets a little pricey; you can opt for “per incident” based support or an
annual subscription based support that ranges from $400 to $600. However, Netscape
offers decent free support on its website (http://wp.netscape.com/enterprise/v3.6/). 
Xitami 
This is a freeware, robust, entry-level web server that will work with just about any oper-
ating system (although Mac support is not currently available). This web server is per-
fect for someone operating on a tight budget, especially if the hardware used for the
web server is an older Pentium. Installation is simple. There are no wizards but there
is a browser-based interface and command-line support that is efficient and intuitive.
Documentation is thorough and makes the process of getting up and running under-
standable for both novices and pros. The website www.imatix.com/html/xitami/ pro-
vides extensive online documentation, help via email, and a link to a discussion group.
Third-party support is available for a fee. 
Zeus
This web server ranked fourth in the September 2003 Security Space Web Server Sur-
vey, and it may be just the ticket if you envision an e-commerce business with room
to grow. Although a bit pricey (around $1400), Zeus is a scalable, secure, and high-
performance web server. Zeus can be found underpinning business-critical solutions
for web-hosting, content providers, and secure e-commerce companies. 
What makes Zeus so popular is that it uses a small number of single-threaded I/O
processes, which are capable of handling tens of thousands of simultaneous connec-
tions. Whereas the front-runner, Apache, uses a dedicated I/O process for each con-
nection request, limiting it to 256 simultaneous connection requests. 
But to handle the kind of I/O processing that Zeus offers you need either very fast
equipment or a good cluster of servers. Fortunately, Zeus comes native with web server
clustering support enabling a set of web servers to act as a single web server for the end
user and allowing the load of serving web pages to be balanced across a set of differ-
ent computers and (assuming your website has the bandwidth) multiple connections.
But unless you need the power Zeus offers, go with another web server because you
will not realize any measurable benefit from Zeus over Apache (or another web server)
unless your website experiences regular high traffic volume. Another possible down-
side to Zeus is that it runs primarily on Unix-based systems, and thus it is difficult to
configure if you are not familiar with the command-line nature of the Unix family.
Infrastructure Software
117

You can find extensive documentation and online support for Zeus products at
http://support.zeus.com/.
Log Files 
Okay, you’ve installed your web server software and even remembered to install and con-
figure a firewall. It’s now time for you to understand your web server log files. 
Your web server creates records — called log files — of everything that happens on
the server. Log files are actually huge files that contain a record of each and every
activity that occurred on your web server. When I say “everything” I mean “every-
thing” — every request for an HTML page, every graphic file requested, every request
to have an active page executed, and every CGI script that ran. The web server con-
siders each of these events a “hit.” When the e-commerce industry first started bal-
lyhooing the amount of traffic a certain site received, it was referring to the number
of hits as tracked by the web server log files. Therefore, the definition of a hit, as far
as web server log files are concerned is: Anything the web server is asked to do when
servicing the demands created by the traffic flowing through its content, i.e., your
website. Please note that the number of “hits” is not an accurate indicator of the
number of people that are actually visiting your site. For the all-important “people
count” or “unique visitor” statistics you need “log analysis software” to interpret
website activity data.
As long as your web server has its logging feature activated, all of the activity on
your website is stored in records. These records keep the details of which pages were
requested, when they were requested and even information, such as, who initiated the
request, the initiator’s IP address and the type of browser used, along with how the
initiator found your website. All of this information is stored in files named “Access
Log,” “Error Log” (such as a page that no longer exists) and “Referrer Log.” By pro-
viding instant, ongoing, fairly exact and specific snapshot of the website’s traffic pat-
terns, these log files provide website owners with a plethora of raw data concerning
their customers.
Because log files provide a record of all user activity, they have great value. You will
even find the historical information useful. Maintain these files either in an encrypted
form on the web server or store them on a separate machine offline. 
Log files are important to the effective management of your website in three dif-
ferent ways. First, there’s the overall “load” placed on the web server. For example, at
any time did the site’s activity exceed the capacity of the hardware and/or software?
If so, this is a “heads up” that you need to improve your site’s ability to handle the
The Complete E-Commerce Book
118

traffic peaks. Perhaps you need to upgrade the server hardware or install a higher-
capacity web server software package. 
Second, there’s the measurement of the traffic or number of visitors that come to
your website, what they look at, and how long they stay. This gives you good insight
into what is succeeding or not succeeding on your web pages and in your marketing
campaigns. 
Third is security. The first line of defense against hackers is your log files. How?
By monitoring your log files on a regular basis, you can spot suspect goings-on. You
should also install trap macros (macros are small simple programs written to auto-
mate specific tasks) to watch for attacks on the server. While you are at it, also create
macros that run every hour or so to check the integrity of “passwd” and other criti-
cal files. (The macros should be programmed to send email to the system manager if
a change is detected.)
Log files expand very fast. If you are using an Internet hosting company to host your
site, it will schedule these files to be rotated in such a way that older log files are regu-
larly deleted. Believe me when I say you want to preserve these files. The easiest way is
to institute a system and schedule wherein the log files are emailed to you automati-
cally for organization and storage. This will guarantee that you will have immediate
access to your data. However, this “raw” data is merely the tip of the iceberg and to be
of any real use it needs to be analyzed — that’s where log analysis software steps in.
✪
LOG ANALYSIS SOFTWARE
Web server log files are a potential treasure trove of information — they provide web-
sites with a profusion of raw data concerning visitors to the site. Historically, log
files were used most for a quick overview of bandwidth problems and basic track-
ing information. But although these logs contain an instant, ongoing, fairly exact and
specific snapshot of your website’s traffic patterns, they are somewhat difficult to read
and to understand. This is where log analysis software is of help. Such software can
take this raw data and tell you if pages are frequently or rarely visited. It analyzes
how the data flows back and forth between your web server and your users, and
gives information about IP traffic, e-commerce, cookies and browsers (vital if you’re
using Java or Active X). Log analysis software crunches the data to show how well
your website is working, the origin and number of visitors, where they are going and
how they found you in the first place. In addition, a detailed click stream analysis
tracks every single click a user makes on your website. Such data is essential for
auditing a specific user’s activity. The more robust (and expensive) software can
Infrastructure Software
119

even offer historical and e-commerce reports reflecting time online and an authen-
ticated user history.
The proper use of log analysis software data gives you valuable insight into how
your website is being used. With some of the log analysis software available today, the
easy-to-get-at statistics can be translated into slick graphs and bar charts for the non-
technical crowd. However, unless taught otherwise, most website operators merely
concentrate on figures such as the total of visitors to the site as a whole or to a par-
ticular page, and the number of banner click-throughs. 
But log analysis software is also useful for finding problems with your site. For
example you can track “error messages” that cause people to leave a site, if you see
many of them in a day’s report, you know you have a problem. You might see an error
message and realize that the message only occurs with a certain browser version.
Another example is security. Chapter 7, which covers website security, offers some use-
ful ways you can use log analysis software to monitor your site and to help find culprits
after a nefarious attack.
Large web-based businesses have astute marketing and advertising departments
that use the results for trend analysis and use the extensive user demographics that
such logs contain (i.e. how are users using the site). If you add to that user-registra-
tion and a responsible use of cookies, then the collected data can be transformed into
a powerful customer intelligence tool.
Traffic Reporting
The traffic report segment of your log analysis software provides data on how much
user traffic your website attracts, who’s visiting the site, where the visitors are com-
ing from, and how your web traffic changes on a hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly
basis. A website traffic report is the simplest way to find out what works and what
doesn’t work. It can provide you with the information necessary to determine which
web pages are not selected or to show a page that is immensely popular. Such reports
could be compiled from the web server logs but it wouldn’t be easy. In fact, without log
analysis software it would be almost impossible to decipher details such as: 
✸The number of unique visitors to your site, when the came, from which countries,
and from which referring sites (e.g. which search engine did they use to find your
site)?
✸What keywords did they use to find your website?
✸Which pages did they access?
✸How long did the visitor stay?
The Complete E-Commerce Book
120

Understanding which outside sources generate page views can give you the oppor-
tunity to execute increasingly effective marketing strategies.
Usually your home page will be the #1 visited page on your site. By analyzing the traf-
fic you can ascertain how your site design is succeeding. If you have a brochureware site,
you’ll now be able to tell if your potential customers go to the target pages. If you run
an advertising site, you can compare the traffic on the web pages with a lot of ban-
ners to a page with fewer banners. If you operate a subscription site, you’ll see what
content is the most examined. If you have an online store, you’ll know which prod-
ucts are the most scrutinized by browsing customers. If the sales figures don’t reflect
the same pattern, you now have a starting point to figure out why.
Conversely, if you find, via the traffic logs, that certain pages are less popular, ana-
lyze why. Traffic to an individual page may be influenced by your site design. There-
fore, if it is the “About Us” page or “Investor Relations” page, don’t sweat it. But if it’s
an important page that offers a new product or service, rethink the design. If traffic
numbers to a specific area of your site disappoint you, look for possible reasons, such
as technical problems. Perhaps you should provide a link on the home page or on a
related content page. If you have an advertising site and you have a page that stands out
as one that your visitors often use to exit your site, figure out why and fix it. Maybe
there’s a banner on the page that that causes a slow load time or an ad that is partic-
ularly irritating. The logs may show that you have traffic on the page but visitors come,
see, and leave. They don’t stay around and explore. Why?
After analyzing the traffic logs, doing your homework, and adjusting your web-
site, wait a month or so and see if the changes helped. If not, try something else. It
could be that your site is just fine but you need more public relations, advertising, or
some other type of promotion such as a give-away. Again, after each little tweak, wait
a month and analyze the logs. You’ll gradually find what works and what doesn’t. 
Browsers and Operating Systems:  Another aspect of log analysis software is that it can
give you statistics on your customers’ browsers and operating systems. (This data is
usually found in your server’s referer log files.) Take the lead from this data to ascer-
tain if your customers use browsers sufficiently advanced so that you can add more
bells and whistles to your site. If the majority of your customers are using the latest
technology, you know you will lose little in traffic if you implement a Java application
or a Flash plug-in.
How do Your Customers Find Your Site? This is important. You must know where your
customers are coming from. Most should be referred to your website from search
engines and directories. The second largest referrer should be from linked sites. Look
Infrastructure Software
121

at this data very carefully, if your top referrers are not Google or Yahoo!, find out why
not. Is it something you can address? If so, do it. (Read Chapter 15, which discusses
how to list your website with search engines and directories.)
Some log analysis software provide advanced reporting solutions such as moni-
toring web, ad, and streaming media servers, testing and checking broken links, and
gauging page download times. This software also has the ability to monitor, to alert,
and to recover server and network devices. 
Note: So-called “packet sniffing” technology has been introduced into the traffic analysis market which elimi-
nates the need to collect and centralize log file data. This technology gets its information directly from the
TCP/IP packets that are sent to and from the web server. 
The products available to help you analyze your website’s usage vary as widely as
the information various businesses request. The “basics” might provide you with the
information you need without the sticker shock, if you are willing to work with lim-
ited options and don’t mind that the presentation of data is “plain vanilla.” More
advanced products offer a variety of in-depth features and give you many customiza-
tion options, including great reports with color graphs and bars.
The cost of the Log Analysis Software begins at “free” for AXS 2.0 (www.
xav.com/scripts/axs/). This product can help you analyze the visits to your web pages.
AXS 2.0 determines where visitors are coming from, charts their flow through your
site, and informs you as to which links they follow when leaving. Also, you can ana-
lyze other information such as the referrer (Google, Yahoo!, MSN, Alta Vista, etc.), IP
addresses, types of web browser, and the dates and the times of each visit. AXS 2.0
then processes the records into meaningful graphs and database listings. 
Two low-cost options: 
3DStats (www.3dstats.com) works with all web servers that use the common log
file format. With 3Dstats, you can create a 3D bar chart showing the daily number of
total HTTP requests (hits), the number of files sent (documents actually transmitted
on behalf of requests), the number of “304’s” (“Not Modified” responses caused by
various caching mechanisms), and a number of other responses (redirections, not
found responses, server errors). 
Absolute Log Analyzer (www.bitstrike.com/analyzer) is a client-based log process-
ing solution designed for web traffic analysis. This log analyzer product is easy to use
and offers feature-rich tools that can generate fast, effective reports of any kind and dis-
play them in a format that’s easy to read and understand. There are three versions of
Absolute Log Analyzer - Lite ($50), Standard ($150) and Professional ($250). All ver-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
122

sions have compatible workspace and database format, although the Lite version con-
tains less statistical capability and has less flexibility while the Professional incorpo-
rates all available log analysis options.
Here are a couple of more costly traffic analysis tools you might want to consider:
Webtrends Log Analyzer (www.netiq/webtrends), which costs around $500, pro-
vides an easy-to-use website analysis solution specifically designed for the small
business.
Sane Solutions’s NetTracker Professional (www.sane.com/products/NetTracker/),
which costs approximately $500, enables you to view the individual clickstream path
of each visitor to your website, to analyze use of dynamically generated web content,
Infrastructure Software
123
Figure 15.  The WebTrends Log Analyzer’s Top Paths Through Site report depicted in this graphic
delivers a click-by-click view of your website’s visitors’ behavior — from their point of entry into
your site, through the subsequent pages they visit, to the exit. Graphic courtesy of WebTrends.

and to measure site effectiveness of banner ad campaigns and response times and page
delivery. The NetTracker Professional also measures site “stickiness” via repeat, new,
and unique visitor behavior analysis. 
Another option is a real-time monitoring and statistical reporting system such as
WatchWise (www.watchwise.com). Each access to a registered website is automatically
stored in real-time on the WatchWise server. It also monitors files that are downloaded
from a registered website. Statistical reports are then generated in real-time, so you
can determine who has downloaded your files. You can view these reports whenever you
wish.
✪
DATABASES
A database is software that enables you to store data, to retrieve it, and to change it
when necessary. With the appropriate database this is done easily and efficiently regard-
less of what the data consists of, or the amount of data you manipulate. 
A database is integral to the design, development, and services offered by most e-
commerce sites. To allow your customers to search your site for a specific product,
you need a database. A database is necessary to collect information about your cus-
tomers. A mailing list is fed from a database. Another example is that of web pub-
lishers who post up-to-the-minute information that is retrieved from a database. Get
the picture?
Don’t think you can build an efficient, productive website with its predestined mul-
titude of web pages, without a database. If you try, your site will quickly become
unwieldy. Templates, file systems and cut-and-paste can take you only so far. The sim-
plest tasks, such as updating your product catalog, adding editorial content, and even
maintaining simple links will eventually overwhelm you. 
But take care not to be careless when implementing a database; first draft a strat-
egy for feeding information into your web pages. For instance, look at the informa-
tional content of your web pages. Then decide how to implement more efficient ways
of managing that content. How is your data currently being stored? What tools are
available that can move it to the Web? Also be sure that the database interface is
designed so that your employees easily can update the information with only cursory
training.
A database can help you create web pages that display every single item in your inven-
tory and keep each and every page current. The easiest way to do this is to create your
web pages on-the-fly (or “on demand”) with a program that “queries” a database for
inventory items and produces an HTML page based on the results of that query. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
124

That’s just a tip of the iceberg. A database does more than simply provide users
with access to information. A database can manage the website, keep links intact, and
enhance the security of the site. Furthermore, it’s actually much easier to maintain a
database (once it’s up and running) than it is to maintain a static website, with its
many individual pages.
Build your e-commerce site around a database. You won’t regret the decision. Now
let’s take a closer look at database technology.
Database Management Systems
Technically, a database management system (DBMS) is a software program designed
to store and to access information used to support the workings of a website. A data-
base can gather, handle and process information in an organizational structure to
facilitate storage and retrieval of information. Once information is entered into a data-
base, a DBMS can manipulate the information so that you can analyze it easily. There
are many different types of database structures, but the majority of them organize
information in the form of “records” and “columns,” or “entries” and “fields.” On a
basic level, a database is somewhat like a set of spreadsheets with rows and columns.
A database will give you the ability to separate your content (your catalog offerings)
from your HTML web page (the graphical design). It typically stores your catalog items
in separate fields and tables as plain text with no formatting. An HTML template is
then designed to provide a structure for the data as it is called from the database so it
will be delivered to the website in a consistent layout every time. Databases allow your
customers to quickly and to accurately search for what they want since the search is
limited to named fields rather than a more
expansive, full-text search. 
Most brick-and-mortar businesses use
databases, so, your IT department should
already have experienced database man-
agers. Still, database integration will pres-
ent special challenges as you join your
database with your website. That’s because
a website demands that the information fed
into its page forms be extracted from the
database (or moved from the user into the
database) in ways that aren’t necessarily a
good fit for most brick-and-mortar rela-
Infrastructure Software
125
Figure 16.  A database = collection of data;
a catalog = definitions for database;
database management system (DBMS) =
software.

tional databases. Also, the rate at which a website’s database receives hits usually far
exceeds the norm found in traditional business applications.
Types of Databases
Before we get into the nitty-gritty of how a database models the data, let’s look at the
major differences between databases, differentiating between analytical databases and
operational databases — since you’ll often hear these terms bandied about whenever
databases are discussed. 
Analytical Databases: An analytical database, which is also referred to as “On Line
Analytical Processing” (OLAP), is a static, read-only database, which stores archived,
historical data used for analysis. On the Web, you will often find OLAPs used for inven-
tory catalogs that hold descriptive information about all available products in a busi-
ness’s inventory. Web pages are generated dynamically by querying the list of available
products in the inventory. The end product is a dynamically generated page display-
ing the requested information pulled from data residing in the database.
Operational Databases: An operational database, which is an integral part of what’s
called “On Line Transaction Processing” (OLTP), manages more dynamic data. An
OLTP database allows you to do more than simply view archived data — you also can
modify that data (add, change, and delete data). Typically, you will find OLTPs used
when it is essential to track real-time information, such as the current quantity and
availability of an item. As a customer places an order for a product from an online
web store, an OLTP keeps track of how many items have been sold and when to reorder
the items. 
Database Models
A good way to conceptualize a database model is both as the “container” for the data
as well as the “methodology” for storing and retrieving the data from the container. 
There are basically three database models used today: text file, relational, and object.
From the standpoint of simple information retrieval, virtually any kind of informa-
tion can be plugged into a database (text, images, sound files, movies), but not all
databases fit every business situation. 
Text File Database
Although it’s debatable whether a text file database is a true database, it is definitely not
“relational.” The best attribute of a text file database is its simplicity. Because of their
simplicity and ease of use for the novice, you might be tempted to use this type of data-
base for your website, but don’t do it. Text file databases are not scalable and there is
The Complete E-Commerce Book
126

generally no concurrent access ability, i.e., two people can’t use the database at the same
time. For those with pre-existing text file databases, the most economical approach is
to bite the bullet now and move the data to a relational or object-oriented database.
Relational Database
A relational database is a collection of “data items” that are organized as a set of linked
tables from which data can be accessed or reassembled in many different ways without
need to reorganize the database tables (a table is referred to as a “relation”). This type
of database looks like a set of interlocking spreadsheets, with each table in the data-
base being one spreadsheet. Relational databases allow simultaneous updates by
numerous individuals. However, there are crucial differences — for example, all the
data in a database column must be of the same type and the database rows are not
ordered. Some of the best-known relational database packages include Microsoft’s
SQL Server, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, and IBM’s DB2.
When designing a relational database, great care is given to “normalize” the struc-
ture of the data. The normalization process is performed by applying a series of rules
to eliminate redundancy and inconsistency. The columns in all of the tables must
depend upon a single key column with values that don’t repeat.
A Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) is a program that enables
you to create, to update, and to administer a relational database. Generally you are
referring to a RDBMS when you talking about relational databases. An RDBMS typ-
ically takes statements written in the extremely popular Structured Query Language
(SQL) and creates, updates, or provides access to the relational database. SQL is a
“declarative” query language, which means that the user specifies what he or she wants
and then the RDBMS query planner figures out how to get it. The RDBMS stores the
data in whatever manner it “wishes.”
Infrastructure Software
127
Figure 17.  A typical client/server scenario consists of a user
making a request of a database from his/her PC. Client software
running on the user’s PC establishes a connection across the LAN
or WAN via TCP/IP sockets to another program (the database
server) running on a more powerful, centralized PC. Once the
connection is verified, the client software sends the SQL queries to
the server, which plows through the data and returns the matching
data back to the client software, which then displays the records
on the user’s PC screen.

You need an RDBMS if you have data that changes fre-
quently. Relational databases have concurrency control to ensure
that the tables won’t get corrupted even if many people simul-
taneously write to and read from the database. 
The term “client/server” was devised to describe how users
work with relational databases. 
If you choose to back your website with an RDBMS, make sure your web server
software can connect easily and deal efficiently with an RDBMS. The web server soft-
ware mentioned in this chapter are all multithreaded, Tcl-enabled dynamic web servers
designed to handle large scale, dynamic websites, i.e. they can deal efficiently with any
RDBMS.
Object-Oriented Database
Generally, when talking about object-oriented databases (ODBMS), most people are
in reality talking about an object-oriented database management system. ODBMS is
a data management product that is specifically designed for use with an object pro-
gramming language and/or is closely coupled with one or more object programming
languages (C++ or Smalltalk). An object database, therefore, provides database man-
agement system functionality to object-oriented programming languages and to the
objects that have been created using those programming languages. In theory, this
approach unifies both application and database development into one seamless data
model and language environment. 
Object-oriented databases have long tantalized the business world with the prom-
ise of less application code, more natural data modeling, and easier-to-maintain code,
but they have taken considerable time to catch on in terms of customer acceptance.
While ODBMSs slowly have begun to move into mainstream website development,
they still lack scalability and there is limited availability of options to access legacy
relational databases. Object-oriented databases may improve both programming time
The Complete E-Commerce Book
128
Figure 18.  For a RDBMS-backed website, the RDBMS client is the web
server program (such as Apache) or perhaps a CGI script spawned in
response to a user request for a URL. The user types a request or some
other text into a form on a web client (Netscape Navigator or Internet
Explorer) and that gets sent to the web server, which is itself an RDBMS
client, or else spawns an RDBMS client (such as a Perl script) which has
or opens a connection to an RDBMS server (such as Oracle). The
retrieved data then travels back from the RDBMS server to the RDBMS
client, to the web server, which relays it back to the user’s web client. 

and response time, but you must be willing to go for a whole package — to write in
an object-oriented language, to switch to a new database, and to accept the inherent
risk of doing things in a new way. But due to two features unique to object-oriented
databases — objects can be heterogeneous (each can contain a different collection of
“owned” data) and objects can contain some inherent “intelligence” — some e-com-
merce sites may find that it pays to go the ODBMS route. 
Object oriented databases include: GemStone, NeoAccess, ObjectStore, and Fast
Objects, to name just a few.
Infrastructure Software
129
Figure 19.  A relational database consists of a set of tables, where each table consists of a fixed col-
lection of fields. An indefinite number of records occurs within each table. However, each record
must have a unique primary key, which is a sort of name for that particular bundle of data. Objects
in an object-oriented database are bundles of data and behaviors. Because objects in an object-ori-
ented database can contain a variety of attributes and data, queries are often performed through a
set of methods. Each object implements these methods in a way that is appropriate for itself. In the
example given here, two methods might be “summarize” and “transport.” Graphic courtesy of IBM.

Differences between Relational and Object-Oriented Databases
Relational databases monopolized the business world until the introduction of object-
oriented databases. The primary differentiation between relational and object data-
bases is that relational databases are built on a row/column paradigm, similar to a
spreadsheet, while object databases treat every item on the website — from graphics, to
audio files, to URLs — as separate objects. This differentiation means that rows of flat
text map well into a relational database structure, but images and sounds do better
in an object-oriented environment. 
Relational databases are terrific for storing data that can be converted easily into a
two-dimensional representation (i.e. text). However, not all objects found on the Web
are amenable to such structuring (i.e. images and sound). Indeed, “flattening out”
complex data structures to fit into tables sometimes resembles fitting square pegs
into round holes. Thus to use a relational database backend for storing images and
sounds, you need special coding that allows the object to be mapped into the entries
of the relational database. This extra coding not only puts an added strain on your
site’s processing power (speed), it also has the potential to introduce intermittent
problems that might have otherwise been avoided. 
An RDBMS also uses the intersection of rows and columns for every instance of
an entity in the database, regardless of whether a particular cell is needed in a partic-
ular instance, while an ODBMS only stores the particular parts of the data actually
used in any specific instance. 
Unlike a relational DBMS, object DBMSs have no performance overhead to store
or retrieve a web of interrelated objects, such as a set of interlocking tables. A natural
one-to-one mapping of object programming language objects to database objects
allows for higher performance management of objects as well as better management
of the complex interrelationships between objects. This makes ODBMSs better suited
than RDBMSs to support website document structures, which have complex rela-
tionships between data. When everything is working correctly, object databases can
operate on complex data, such as images, multimedia, and audio, as efficiently as a
relational database operates on simple text or data.
Final notes:  
✸If you offer images or sounds as a main feature of your website, consider using an
object-oriented database.
✸Relational databases generally store all of the data on a single server, while object
databases can call upon multiple servers. 
✸It is possible to build a website that uses both relational and object databases in a
The Complete E-Commerce Book
130

hybrid system. The relational database can store data such as text and software
downloads and the object database can be used for sound, video, or images offered
up by the website.
Desktop Database Software 
While not a viable solution for most e-commerce businesses, if you are willing to tol-
erate limited capabilities and performance and are operating on a shoestring budget,
you can build a small website using a desktop database software offering. There are
three desktop relational database solutions that have some built-in web capabilities,
although none come near the quality and performance of a high-end solution. Still,
these three products — Microsoft’s Access, Corel’s Paradox, and will, with varying
degrees of success, let you get your data up on the Web quickly and inexpensively —
as long as you allow for some tweaking here and there.   
✸Microsoft’s Access allows you to create a database with its Wizards. It is adequate
when it’s enveloped by and communicates only with other Microsoft products; but
it isn’t happy when forced to interact with other manufacturers’ software. 
✸Corel’s Paradox allows you to create a database with its “Experts” (which are sim-
ilar to Microsoft’s Wizards) and like Microsoft’s Access, Paradox too requires much
effort to interact with other manufacturers’ software.
✸FileMaker Pro is the best of these three products. It is easy to use and has good
documentation and templates that will allow you to build basic databases. It is one
of the simplest and least expensive relational databases you can buy. 
Overview of Robust Database Management Systems
Vendors offer a variety of database management systems that are suitable for e-com-
merce. Each system has its own strengths, capabilities, and challenges. Here are three
of the more popular system:
MS-SQL is a DBMS that is fast, scalable, and free. It offers ease of administration
along with numerous automated features (available only for the Windows NT plat-
form) — but there is a trade-off — much of the SQL Server is not user definable with
almost everything decided automatically by the system. In cases where the system
makes the right choice, this feature works transparently and saves time. However, in
cases where the system makes the wrong decision or choice, it can be a nightmare.
Following along the automatic configuration idea, Microsoft has tried to create a self-
teaching database that examines and adjusts itself to satisfy whatever requirements
are being placed on it at a given time. 
Infrastructure Software
131

ObjectStore Enterprise Edition is a reliable OBDMS for high-performance appli-
cations built for delivery of high-speed, complex web transactions, and dynamic con-
tent needed by today’s web-based businesses. ObjectStore can shorten development
time dramatically by reducing the amount of complex code required. 
The Oracle DBMS provides a wealth of application possibilities along with increased
manageability and improved security. With the JServer option Oracle provides a run-
time environment for Java objects and with the WebDB option, Oracle provide the
ability to manage the content-creation process while also distributing creation tasks
to reduce resource bottlenecks. Oracle addresses the security issue through its “vir-
tual private database” support that allows the attachment of security policies directly
The Complete E-Commerce Book
132
Figure 20.  All of your website’s content is stored in a database. To “publish” that content on your
website, value is added through the use of tools for manipulation, refinement, and presentation.
The production of the content is then achieved by selecting, extracting, formatting, and
postprocessing the content for specific web pages.

to tables and views, thus the same security policy is in place regardless of which appli-
cation is accessing the data. 
✪
DATABASE PUBLISHING
While on the subject of databases, let’s discuss how you might use a database to cre-
ate and to maintain your website’s content. While you might be feeling a little over-
whelmed by now, setting up your website with a database is a big step towards building
a flexible, scalable site. Stay with me as I try to simplify things a bit. There are two
types of web pages — static and dynamic. They both have the same goal — the use of
information stored in databases. 
The action of a website that collects data from a database and then builds pages
from that data is referred to as “database publishing.” With the right interface, even a
novice user can go into a database to update information that can be made available
immediately. 
Maintenance is easy in the database-publishing world — for example, one can cre-
ate an HTML template once and merge that template with new content to provide a
reliable way to put information on your website in a consistent layout. 
Security is also easier since databases allow you to keep the wrong content off a
website through the enforcement of security checks, such as “hide” flags, checking
the date against the date a document is set to be posted, the date a product is set for
delivery, etc. 
Though database publishing can help you manage your website, it may take some
time for you to learn all the ins and outs of the related software tools. Database pub-
lishing requires not only a database, but also it may require extra web server software
and an application server. 
Note: When using database publishing software be sure to perform a number of tests before going “live.” Dur-
ing the tests, check for slow pages, heavy pages, small pages, missing graphics, etc. 
Static Database Publishing
The static website’s information is already prepared in the desired format for use by the
customer. Some website operators will begin their venture into e-commerce by creat-
ing a simple static website paired with a database. This technique is often referred to
as “static database publishing.” With static database publishing, a visitor can’t search
through the database on demand, nor perform many of the fancier dynamic-site tricks.
But, by using a minimal database approach, you ease the burden of data management,
Infrastructure Software
133

while leaving open the opportunity to move to a full-blown dynamic database-driven
site later when business demands a more dynamic environment. 
Note: A static website displays infrequently changing information or data. It’s like putting a snapshot of your busi-
ness’ information onto your website. The contents of a static site can be marketing brochures, white papers,
monthly newsletters, software, or even a small product catalog, etc. This information is not interactive, nor does
it change very often. 
Static database publishing “automatically” generates static HTML pages from a
database, although changes to the database will only show up on the website when
new pages are generated manually and uploaded to the web server. The advantage of
this type of website content management is that you need very little technical expert-
ise and the site is easy to maintain because static database publishing can be per-
formed with any web server — there is no requirement for special features such as CGI
scripts. Thus, if you are using a web-hosting service for your website, you will always
be able to use this method irrespective of who your web-hosting provider may be. 
The disadvantage of static database publishing is 1) the manual interaction required
to upload the newly generated files to the web server and 2) the ability for visitors to
update their information isn’t available. 
Tools for Static Database Publishing: 
DBtoHTML (www.xlinesoft.com). This product can be used to generate web pages
automatically from any ODBC compliant database making it an excellent tool for cre-
ating static HTML pages from a database. Since DBtoHTML doesn’t allow you to cre-
ate an overview of the database’s full contents (and it has no search function), this
product is better suited for databases with a few large records. Cost — $129.
Note: Open Database Connectivity (ODBC), which is a Microsoft standard database access method, is a data-
base common interface. ODBC, in simple terms, inserts a middle layer (a database driver) between an appli-
cation and the RDBMS to translate the application’s data queries into commands that the RDBMS understands.
For an ODBC interface to work, however, both the application and the RDBMS must be ODBC-compliant. 
GDIDB Professional (www.gdidb.com). This product allows you to publish any
ODBC compliant database (or spreadsheet) to your website. GDIDB Professional
enables you to create a large easy-to-maintain website by separating the site design
from the site content since you keep the content in a database. You can even design
your website so its content is driven from your live business database. With GDIDB
Professional you can format your content on your web pages any way you want it, cre-
ate any HTML link structure that you can imagine from your relational database, pub-
lish web pages at the click of a button, minimize upload times by only uploading files
The Complete E-Commerce Book
134

that have changed since the last publication, and automatically publish your data-
base to a pre-set schedule of unattended publishing. One feature that is particularly
interesting is the ability to add form data automatically to the database (with some
additional help from you). Cost — $76 to $220.
The best scenario in which to use static database publishing is when you have a
website that has static content, i.e. it is not changed often. Many brochureware sites fit
this scenario.
Dynamic Database Publishing
Dynamic database publishing differs from its static counterpart in that dynamic pub-
lishing requires the use of certain parameters or keys to search a database in real-time.
Then when the desired data is found, a web page is created for the customer’s use.
Dynamic database publishing also requires Java scripts, CGI programming, ISAPI,
NSAPI, and more. ColdFusion MX, Lasso, and WBSP are some of the more popular
application server software used to transform a database’s data into dynamic web pages. 
A dynamic website can be an online store with an ever-changing product catalog
Infrastructure Software
135
Figure 21.  This graphic shows a typical interaction between a customer’s PC and a website when
the website is built upon a database-driven architecture.

so that when a customer requests information, a database can provide not only the
product but also the current price, colors, sizes and the availability. Car dealerships, real
estate, and ezine (online magazines) sites use dynamic data. 
Dynamic database publishing requires that the website be built upon a database-
driven architecture so the website can produce web pages that instantly respond to a
customer’s query. That means such websites are more difficult to implement and use
than those built via static database publishing techniques because they require that
you and/or your staff possess more technical knowledge and capabilities. There are
also other downsides to building a web-based business around dynamic database pub-
lishing. They include:
✸Unless you carefully design and institute a good maintenance system, a large vol-
ume of traffic on your website can cause data traffic congestion and performance
problems.
✸The web server needs additional features to support dynamic database publishing.
For instance, in order to create dynamic pages your web pages must be able to inter-
act with a supporting program, script, or applet and need to be supported by the web
server via, e.g. CGI scripts, ISAPI, NSAPI, ASP, PHP or JSP (For more information
about these methods, please see Table 5). 
While dynamic database publishing offers far more features than static database pub-
lishing, it requires a lot more time and effort to build such a website. Still, if you have
content that will change frequently (e.g. a news site, an auction site, or want to pro-
vide your customers with dynamically generated pages in response to their queries)
dynamic database publishing is your best choice. 
Note: Java and Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) from Sun Microsystems is also a viable way to publish a
database on the Web. JDBC is a Java Application Program Interface (API) that enables Java programs to exe-
cute SQL statements, which, in turn, let Java programs interact with SQL-compliant databases (nearly all
RDBMSs support SQL). Java runs on most platforms, therefore JDBC makes it possible for a web operator to
write a single database application that can run on different platforms and interact with different RDBMSs.
At this time, the tools and drivers needed for Java database development are in their infancy. However, you do
need to know that JDBC is a lot like ODBC but is new enough that some databases don’t offer a direct inter-
face. If you plan to use Java now, one solution is to use a JDBC-ODBC bridge that allows a Java application
using JDBC to connect to an ODBC database. 
Tools for dynamic database publishing:
Baserunner (www.baserunner.com). This product creates data-driven, dynamic web
applications from any information stored in a dbf format database such as FoxPro
The Complete E-Commerce Book
136

Infrastructure Software
137
CGI
Common Gateway Interface 
A standard method of extending web server functionality. CGI works by executing
programs or scripts on the web server when a web browser request is received.
CGI lets you create web pages that can return information based upon a
customer’s input by calling a compiled C program or Perl script to access a
database or another data source. However, CGI is inefficient, since it causes the
server to launch a new process to run executable programs every time a new user
makes a request. If you have a lot of traffic, your website’s performance will suffer.
Still, CGI is a tried and true interface and is the most common way to connect
with web servers. Here’s an example of how CGI might work: A web browser sends
form data to a CGI script on the web server; the script integrates the data with a
database, and sends back a results page as HTML.
ISAPI
Internet Server Application Programming Interface 
A web server application development interface that can be used instead of CGI.
NSAPI
Netscape Server Application Programming Interface
A web server application development interface, developed by Netscape
Communications Corporations.
ASP
Active Server Page
This Microsoft technology dynamically creates web pages with an .ASP extension
using ActiveX scripting (usually VB Script or Jscript code). When a web browser
requests an ASP page, the web server generates a page with HTML code and sends
it back to the browser. Thus ASP pages are similar to CGI scripts, and are usually
used when it is desirable to enable Visual Basic programmers to work with familiar
tools.
JSP
Java Server Page
Sun’s Java Server Page (JSP) technology controls the content or appearance of web
pages through the use of servlets (small programs that are specified in the web
page and run on the web server to modify the web page before it is sent to the
requested user). JSP is comparable to Microsoft’s Active Server Page (ASP)
technology. 
PHP
Hypertext Preprocessor
PHP is a script language and interpreter that is freely available and used primarily
on Linux web servers. PHP (originally known as “Personal Home Page”) is an alter-
native to Microsoft’s Active Server Page (ASP) technology. As with ASP, the PHP
script is embedded within your web pages along with the HTML. Before the page
is sent to a requesting user, the web server calls PHP to interpret and perform the
operations called for in the PHP script. 
Table 5.  Detailed explanation of how a website using dynamic database publishing might commu-
nicate with the database to generate the necessary dynamic web pages.

and dBaseIV (a popular non-relational database program). As such, baserunner pro-
vides a fast, inexpensive, small-scale solution that permits simple template-based devel-
opment and avoids the overhead associated with such technologies as ODBC and the
complexity of SQL, PHP, or ASP. (It is noted, however, that Baserunner 4.6 introduced
support for relational databases and for using multiple tables within a template.) The
best thing about this template-based, stand-alone CGI executable is that it provides flex-
ible control of your online data. It works as an extension to HTML, providing new
tags and processing directives that enhance your web design by giving you easy access
to dynamic content. While this makes it a relatively easy-to-use tool, it also requires
that you possess more than a bit of technical knowledge to use it to its best advan-
tage. Cost — Free.
KazTrix DataBuilder 1.0 (www.instabase.com). This product allows you to publish
data from about any program (including personal information managers) or data-
base (including Microsoft’s Access). It is easy to use, and although it gives you many
of the advantages of dynamic database publishing, it only requires the user to pos-
sess minimal technical knowledge. KazTrixR DataBuilder requires no CGI scripting
or any other plug-ins on the server side. However, it is also not customizable and it
lacks some of the advanced features found in other dynamic database publishing
products. Cost — $149.
Dynamic Websites and the Search Engine Dilemma
A search engine has three parts. The first is a spider (also called a “bot”) that goes to
every page on every website that wants to be searchable and reads it. Every search
engine has its own criteria that its spiders use when crawling a website. The second
component is a program that creates a huge database of the keywords in the pages
that have been read by the spider. Finally, there’s an access program sitting on a por-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
138
THE ROLE OF APPLICATION SERVERS
IN DATABASE PUBLISHING
Some e-commerce website operators will opt for a different method to enable dynamic data-
base publishing; they will use application server softer to transform the database data into
dynamic web pages. To achieve this you must install software such as ColdFusion MX
(www.macromedia.com), Lasso (www.blueworld.com), or WBSP (www.whizbase.com) to pull
information out of the database to create HTML pages on demand. This, in turn, means that
you must run not only a web server and a database server, but also an applications server.

tal that can take millions of search requests from users, compare them to the entries
in the database, and return results.
Although dynamically generated web pages are easier for the web operator to man-
age, they are difficult for some search engines to index and incorporate into their data-
base. The simplest answer to this problem is to use static pages as often as possible.
Use the database to update the pages instead of generating them on the fly. Another
little bit of advice: Search engines hate the “?” symbol, so don’t use it in your URL.
✪
CONCLUSION
Before launching an e-commerce website, take the time to understand your website’s
infrastructure. This includes the operating system, the web server, the log analysis
program, and the database (an integral part of most e-commerce sites). And, of course,
the hardware on which these applications run. 
Overall, deciding which operating system and web server to use is just a matter of
personal choice, but the log analysis software and database choices can make or break
an e-commerce business. Log analysis software points out what works to your advan-
tage along with any trouble spots. And the database provides a simple, flexible, reli-
able, and affordable solution for supporting a large volume of data. This data can
include not only merchandise, but also such features as online membership roles with
login, logout, and expiry date control. If you already have an operational e-commerce
site and find that you are spending too much time managing its contents, a database
can help. 
In the end, most e-commerce operators will find that databases are what provide
their customers the accessibility they demand. When product catalogs, online serv-
ices, automated email responses, user feedback systems are managed via a database
everyone is happier. Thus plan your website from the get-go so that a database can be
an integral part of your operations — now and/or in the future. 
Infrastructure Software
139

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 9
E-Commerce Solutions
Conspicuous consumption of valuable goods is a means of reputability 
to the gentleman of leisure.
—Thorstein Veblen,
The Theory of the Leisure Class
While some e-commerce operators will choose to handle all the tasks needed to build
and design their website, others will choose to outsource some or all of those duties.
And, to be honest, if money is no object, you should hire a consultant or web-designer
to help in the building and design stages. However, most readers’ budgets can’t accom-
modate the costs of outsourcing such chores and thus they must take care of the web-
site design aspects themselves. This means that they are charged with the task of
finding the best service or e-commerce software package to meet their budget and
requirements. This chapter is written for that group, but even those with deep pock-
ets should read this chapter to understand what their outsourcer(s) offers.
In the previous chapters we discussed the necessities of a basic website infrastruc-
ture, now its time to determine how to incorporate that infrastructure into a work-
ing e-commerce site. This requires some sort of e-commerce software. The application
or program you chose must enable your website to provide your customers with the con-
venience of on-line shopping, i.e. provide your customers with the ability to view your
goods, to add or to delete items from their selection, and to review their final selec-
tion prior to purchase. 
141

Whether you are a novice or an expert, whether you are starting a new web-based
business or giving your brick-and-mortar business a web presence, there is an e-com-
merce software package that is right for you. It doesn’t matter if you have just a few
products or a whole catalog that gives your online customer thousands of choices,
determining the right e-commerce software package for your e-business can be a con-
fusing undertaking. For example, some e-commerce products are designed to grow
with your business, but other products work well only in low traffic environments.
Use your blueprint — it will make the task easier.
One of the first decisions to make is whether to enable online order processing or han-
dle your orders via an order form that is then emailed to you for processing. Next, you
must decide whether you would rather run your website from an e-commerce package,
an “out of the box” solution, or a “software toolkit,” which requires additional pro-
gramming to provide a complete, but flexible, customized solution. Here again, use
your blueprint — it concisely lays out your site’s exact needs and specifications.  
Note: Consider your own and your staff’s “expertise” with computers before making a final decision as to which
e-commerce solution is right for your e-business. 
While the author has categorized the various e-commerce packages, please note
that these categories often spill over into each other. However, there are a few items
that are consistent throughout the categories and as you examine the various e-com-
merce solutions, you should consider:
✸The product’s ease of set up.
✸Will the software integrate easily with your existing software?
✸Is scalability limited to what is offered by the hosting service or can you integrate
new software products?
✸How are orders processed?
✸Is the software difficult to administer?
✸Can it import product data from a database?
✸How thorough and responsive is the documentation and support?
✸Will your website operator have limited technical knowledge? If so, the software
should make extensive use of wizards and templates.
✸Or, if you have an experienced website operator, the software can be more flexible
and responsive to your needs such as software that can create CGI scripting and
HTML pages.
Note: It is of the utmost importance that you install your online e-commerce software on a Secure Sockets Layer
(SSL) server to facilitate safe (and private) online transactions.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
142

✪
HTML EDITORS
Know the difference between web design software and e-commerce software. Web
design software (commonly referred to as “HTML editors”) provides you with the
basic tools for designing a website. Only those readers developing a brochureware site
or going the email order processing route should consider using this type of product.
For those readers taking one of these paths to e-commerce, any of the following prod-
ucts should suffice:
CoffeeCup HTML Editor (www.coffeecup.com). This software makes it easy for
even a novice to create a website. It comes with more than 40 website templates, 125
JavaScripts, a DHTML menu builder, numerous graphics, wizards for frames, tables,
forms, fonts, and more. It also provides helpful and easy-to-follow documentation on
how to use the software. Cost — $70.
EZGenerator (www.ezgenerator.com). Working with this software is almost as easy as
working with a word processor. Just type, select, drag-and-drop your pages to build your
website. The product provides 2000 template variations so you can change the look and
feel in one simple click of the mouse. It also automatically (well almost) creates your
website navigation for you as you create new web pages and categories. Cost — $100.
HotDog Web Editor (www.sausagetools.com). This is one of the most popular
HTML editors. The HotDog Pro 7.3 provides a comprehensive set of web editing tools
including Linkbot, Interactor, and Paint Shop Pro. As such, the HotDog Pro provides
the web designer with the complete tools for the creation and management of a pro-
fessional website. But it still offers intuitive features and customizable tools so that
even the novice user can create great looking websites. Cost — $100.
Microsoft’s FrontPage 2002 (www.Microsoft.com). If you are a first time web
designer, this may be the product for you. Frontpage 2002 can help the novice to get
their website up and running easily and quickly, especially if the designer is familiar with
the Microsoft Office suite of products since it uses some of same buttons and com-
mands. The WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) interface is invaluable since
you don’t really need to understand HTML codes and scripts. This turnkey product also
makes its easy to add DHTML effects (changes on demand are also quite simple). The
product has an insert form function, too, which makes adding forms for emails and
guest books a breeze. The primary problem with Frontpage 2002 is that if you aren’t
hosting your website yourself, you may have to work a bit harder to find a web-host-
ing service that allows FrontPage extensions. Cost — $150.
SiteDesigner 2.0 (www.sitedesigner.com). SiteDesigner is a WYSIWYG website
authoring tool, that has a drag and drop editor. This makes SiteDesigner extremely
E-Commerce Solutions
143

easy to use. Once you set up a master page for your site (using the templates that are
included with SiteDesigner, or using your own images), every web page you create
thereafter can inherit that master page’s properties. The SiteDesigner generates
extremely clean HTML code (some WYSIWYG editors add a lot of unnecessary code
meaning pages are harder to troubleshoot and take longer to load). Cost — $100.
Stone’s WebWriter 3 (www.webwriter.dk/english/index.htm). This award winning
Danish no-nonsense HTML editor offers easy-to-use dialogues, right-click editing,
code completion, and syntax high-lighting so you can design your website without
knowing HTML. WebWriter is for the professional as well as the beginner. With Web-
Writer you can build JavaScript, Cascading Style Sheets, and image maps. Cost — Free
(private use) to $800 (for a large enterprise that needs unlimited licenses).
✪
SHRINK-WRAP E-COMMERCE SOFTWARE
Now let’s discuss software that will provide you with all the tools you need to build
a full-fledge e-commerce website, e.g., a product catalog, a shopping cart, and some
kind of order processing and transaction security solution. E-commerce packages of
this type enable you to get your website up and running quickly. However, be aware
that when a product touts “ease of use,” it is a subjective term — what one person con-
siders an easy-to-use product, could be viewed as difficult by another. But if you know
HTML and have CGI experience you may want to use a shrink-wrap product; they all
provide the web design with some degree of flexibility, such as designing your own
HTML pages. 
Any shrink-wrap e-commerce solution should allow freedom of choice to incor-
porate software from a variety of offerings. Furthermore, they should provide, at a
minimum:
✸Good documentation and support.
✸The ability to import data from a database file.
✸Order processing features such as the availability of a virtual shopping cart.
✸The ability to transfer data securely using SSL and not leave it in an unsecured area
of a server where unauthorized parties might find it. 
✸The ability to send customers’ details to you using encrypted email.
✸Simplified day-to-day operation of your website such as allowing changes to be
made offline and then to be uploaded to the server. (For security reasons, this fea-
ture usually requires that you only use one specific computer for the updates.)
✸The ability to add, to delete, and to amend product data as well as to run special
promotions.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
144

✸Good, detailed reports of the analysis of server logs, such as the number of hits
and referrer information which in turn can give, for example, a sales history analy-
sis and information about the most common entry and exit points your customers
use in your website. 
The majority of the shrink-wrapped e-commerce packages will have in addition to
the features set forth above:
✸The ability to accept orders and payments in as many ways as possible — credit
cards, debit cards, paper checks, electronic checks, digital cash, fax, telephone, or snail
mail.
✸Maintain pre-set tax tables that so the correct tax is collected on each order.
✸The ability to interface directly with carriers such as UPS, along with automati-
cally calculating shipping costs.
✸The ability to send an email order acknowledgement automatically to the customer
along with a unique number to facilitate order tracking.
You will also find some of the products offer services such as:
✸Domain name registration.
✸Automatic search engine submissions.
And more advanced features such as:
✸Autoresponders (mail utilities that automatically send a reply to an email mes-
sage).
✸Chat rooms.
✸The ability to handle online processing easily. (Although you might process your
orders offline, it is good to have this flexibility for future growth.)
✸Discount clubs that let you give discounts to repeat or high-volume customers.
✸Online order tracking that lets your customers check the status of their orders.
✸Inventory management facilities, which can remove a product, automatically, when
supply dips below a certain level.
✸Additional marketing tools such as the maintenance of customer-buying history
and preferences, targeted emailing capability, and affiliate program management.
Be aware, however, that many shrink-wrap e-commerce solutions lack support for
the fundamentals, such as back orders, and some lack the modularity needed to mix
and match applications from competing platforms. Now let’s examine a sampling of
just a few of the many products available. 
E-Commerce Solutions
145

AceFlex B2C (www.aceflex.com). Although pricey, this robust sales management
software gives you everything you need to establish an e-commerce site. For example,
the AceFlex B2C provides web-based sales tracking, order processing, customer rela-
tionship management, product/content merchandising, scheduling & analyzing pro-
motion/marketing campaigns, set price levels, easy customizable storefront with
advanced catalog, shopping cart, real-time shipping gateways, pre-integrated online
payment processors, and more. Thus this product enables an e-commerce business
visibility into its entire multi-channel sales strategy so your staff can discover and
respond quickly to any customer’s needs, thereby strengthening customer relation-
ships. Also, it is possible to organize efficient collaboration with suppliers online. This
translates into greater insight into efficient business practices, increased profitabil-
ity, and better customer satisfaction. To check out the variety of websites that have
been built with the AceFlex B2C solution visit: www.pdfstore.com (software down-
loads), www.adasa.com (apparel sales), www.karaokecdgmusic.com (offers streaming
audio), and www.reach4life.com (mixture of content and sales). Cost — $2000.
Adobe GoLive (www.adobe.com). This product is actually CyberStudio 3.0 with a
bit more window dressing, which isn’t a bad thing. Of all of the products listed in this
section, GoLive has the cleanest, most user-friendly interface. That’s because it enables
the designer to layout pages on either a grid (which is structurally dependent on com-
plex automatically nested HTML tables) or via a simpler method of user-defined tables
consisting of columns and rows. GoLive makes it easy to switch between the WYSI-
WYG layout mode and a syntax-checking source code view. Dynamic HTML (DHTML)
and the related cascading style sheets (CSS) are easy to create and GoLive offers some
unique timesaving design features such as automatically generating low resolution
black-and-white images that load before a high resolution color image and it enables
you to create JavaScript rollovers quickly. Cost — $400.
ecBuilder Pro 6.0 (www.ecbuilder.com). This award-winning website builder and e-
commerce software program is suitable for any type or size of e-business. For instance,
you can use ecBuilder Pro to construct a website and online store with real-time secure
credit transactions, or an online store that can integrate seamlessly into an existing web-
site. ecBuilder Pro 6.0 also enables you to build a brochureware website. Cost — $397.
Erol3 (www.erolonline.co.uk). This is a very flexible e-commerce software and shop-
ping cart builder with excellent documentation. For examples of some of the websites
built with the Erol product visit www.officewigwam.co.uk, www.kiddicare.com,
www.chaseav.co.uk/erol.html or any of the numerous other websites that Erolonline
features on its website. Cost — £99 and up.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
146

Macromedia Dreamweaver MX 2004 (www.macromedia.com). This popular prod-
uct is designed for the e-commerce business that needs the latest and greatest in web-
site development. However, it’s not for the novice — it has a steep learning curve and
tech-support is expensive once the 90-day free period runs out. Nonetheless, this
extremely powerful web development application offers many advanced development
tools for website design and maintenance. For example, it provides support for cas-
cading style sheets, provides a good interface for accessing HTML code directly, and
offers features for the newest Active Server components. Cost — $400.
Note: A word about DHTML and cascading style sheets — both are handled differently by current versions
of Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer and aren’t supported at all by most older web browsers,
whether Netscape, IE, or Opera. So when you use DHTML and cascading style sheets, you must use tags that
are browser-specific and create scripts that redirect older browsers to alternative versions of your website.
The author’s main gripe about many of the current crop of shrink-wrap e-com-
merce solutions (especially the less costly products) is that they can’t integrate with
database servers easily. Hopefully someday a budget-pleasing turnkey solution will be
made available that will tap into databases easily and credibly convert existing database
forms into web-ready HTML.
Since this book gives advice on what is needed to build a viable e-commerce busi-
ness, but doesn’t walk the reader through the actual website build, some readers will
need more help when they begin the actual design or build process. This is where web-
site design books, of which there are many, come into play. The author suggests: Learn-
ing Web Design: A Beginner’s Guide to HTML, Graphics and Beyond, Jennifer Niederst
(O’Reilly); HTML: A Beginner’s Guide, Wendy Willard (McGraw-Hill); and HTML: Your
Visual Blueprint for Designing Effective Web Sites, Ruth Maran (Wiley). In addition to these
books, there are numerous websites that you might find useful during the design
stage. They include: Weballey.net (numerous useful links), Activejump.com (good
HTML tutorial), and Accessv.com (a good HTML tutorial can be found at
http://www.accessv.com/~email/webpages/). 
✪
ALL-IN-ONE WEBSITE SERVICES
Today you can find numerous web-based all-in-one e-commerce solutions. These web-
based services provide server space and the ability to set up and run an online store
through the simple process of inserting the proper information into web-based forms
and using a point-and-click interface. These services are easy-to-use because every-
thing is templated. But templates mean that you forego the unlimited flexibility of a
customized program, such as personalizing your website to present a custom look to
E-Commerce Solutions
147

each visitor. Another thing about all-in-one services — few can handle large down-
loads. So if your business model dictates that you sell or offer downloadable prod-
ucts (software, music, video, etc.) there are a few items you should confirm before
signing on the dotted line. They include: Will the service let your website serve large
downloads? How much will it cost (e.g. will you be charged extra if your traffic exceeds
a certain milestone)? Can their facilities handle the downloads (do they have a big
enough pipe to handle your downloads and their other traffic)? 
Still, for many small e-commerce businesses, the all-in-one solution is a good fit.
Especially since these services allow you to take advantage of industry-leading e-com-
merce design power without the necessity of purchasing or maintaining sophisticated
e-commerce software. But if you envision your e-commerce site “standing out in a
crowd,” this is not the solution for you.
If you are interested in taking the all-in-one service route, go with a well established
service. The best known of the all-in-one website services is perhaps Yahoo! Store, fol-
lowed by (in no specific order) Terra Lycos’ Angelfire.com, eBizWebpages.com, Digi-
tal River’s FreeMerchant.com, Merchandizer.com, and Bigstep.com. While the fees for
such services range from $5 to $300 per month, it is possible to find services that offer
basic store building tools for free, e.g. Angelfire.com. However, there is a catch — you
must allow the service to place advertising on your site. 
All of the previously mentioned services offer nice, robust store building tools that
are easy to use, even for the novice. Yet, the actual services offered vary widely, even
among the established all-in-one services. For example, some offer features such as a
universal shopping cart with a single check-out no matter how many stores are vis-
ited, one-click buying, an easy-to-browse product catalog, and product recommen-
dation and comparison engines. Others may offer individual shopping carts, but help
with establishing a merchant’s account, and/or real-time credit card processing. You
also will find all-in-one services that offer few e-commerce specific tools except a shop-
ping cart (e.g. no shipping options, accounting export, comparison engine, etc.). 
These all-in-one services, however, also tend to offer “extras” that can help a fledg-
ing e-commerce website expand its business. But the services offered — surveys, FAQs,
press releases, maps, registration of your site with search engines, etc. — differ from
service to service. 
All-in-one web services may be just what you are looking for to ease your entry into
the world of e-commerce, if so check them out; one may fit your needs. Even larger busi-
nesses may find that one of these services can suit their needs — in the short term. For
example, to have a good, viable store that could meet the expectations of its 1999 Christ-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
148

mas shoppers, FAO Schwarz (a very large toy store) placed its catalog in Yahoo! Stores.
Be aware though, that many all-in-ones have very restricted space for catalog inventory. 
While all-in-one services offer many benefits, you should understand that these
services, out of necessity, limit the breadth and scope of a business’s growth. 
Whatever solution you are considering, be sure to get answers to the following
questions before making your final decision. 
✸Can I use my domain name?
✸What type of credit card processing is offered and is there an additional charge for
this service?
✸Am I required to host ads and/or other types of branding?
✸What is free and what do I have to pay for?  Read the fine print and get down to
specifics or you might find yourself with an unpleasant surprise at the end of the
month.
Figure 22. A simplistic
diagram of a website built
around a commerce
server.
E-Commerce Solutions
149

✸How will they help drive traffic to your site?
✸Does the service offer special promotional features?
Remember that each all-in-one service offers something unique — it’s up to you to
decide which solution best fits you and your e-commerce business. Do your research,
and then perform the necessary due diligence to ensure that whatever company you
choose is stable and has the financial wherewithal to provide you with the services it
promises year in and year out.
✪
COMMERCE SERVERS 
Commerce Servers are web servers enhanced with support for certain commerce activ-
ities. Commerce server platforms can be costly ($800 and up), and most are anything
but plug-and-play. However, they can be the best solution for any mid- to large-sized
e-commerce business because they offer the full e-commerce platform in one pack-
age. By placing a commerce server at the helm, a fast-growing web business can ame-
liorate or sidestep altogether some of the more common e-commerce problems such
as performance, scalability and integration difficulties. 
Commerce server platforms offer a diversity of services including:
✸Transaction, payment and personalization engines.
✸Tax and currency calculation capabilities.
✸Workflow automation.
✸Content management software.
✸Database and ERP (enterprise resource planning) integration modules.
✸Proprietary and open application servers.
✸Customer-service offerings with “800” number phone support integration.
✸Smart catalogs.
Although commerce servers have come a long way in the last few years, some still
lack support for necessities such as back orders or contracts that require purchases
at specific intervals. Also proprietary architectures often make it difficult to customize
some commerce offerings, and back-end integration issues may require writing your
own custom code for each legacy system that needs integration. 
Most of the products don’t have the modularity necessary to meet the perform-
ance, scalability, and integration needs of today’s web-based businesses. However, that
being said, unless you have the resources to write your own software, you will be forced
to buy into a commerce server solution, whether or not the technology is “up to snuff.” 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
150

That is the bad news, now for some good news. There are some good commerce
servers on the market. Here is a taste of what today’s marketplace has to offer in the way
of innovative commerce servers. 
Advansis E-Commerce Server (www.advansis.com). This turnkey solution features
all the components needed to launch a comprehensive online store, including a browser-
based product catalog manager, shopping cart, online ordering, and extensive pay-
ment, security, and order processing features. Furthermore, the product can be easily
scaled to support an unlimited number of products. It also provides an affiliate pro-
gram manager and customizable currency options. On top of all that, the Advansis
E-Commerce Server includes support for custom catalog design using templates, stock
monitoring capabilities, “quick search” capabilities, pre-configured payment provider
options, and support for an unlimited series of tax and shipping schedules.
BEA WebLogic Commerce Server (www.bea.com). Designed in Java and based on
open standards, the BEA WebLogic Commerce Server blends ready-to-run, out-of-the-
box commerce functionality with the scalability and flexibility needed for e-business
operations. It also simplifies development of portable and scalable applications, and
provides interoperability with other applications and systems. Moreover, the latest
version of the WebLogic Commerce Server includes the WebLogic Personalization
Server with Portal Framework, which enables a web business to create adaptable e-
commerce applications that personalize customer interactions. 
Chapter Eight’s Commerce Server 2003 (www.chaptereight.com). This product
enables an e-business to safely transact business in a secure, robust, and a cost effec-
tive manner. Its key features include the ability to conduct credit card transactions
safely, to track orders via an order management system (or link to an existing order
management system), to analysis orders so you can discern sale patterns, and the abil-
ity for customers to manage their orders online. 
IBM Corp.’s Websphere Commerce Suite (www.ibm.com). This product is based
on an open Java application technology, which the large enterprise may find very use-
ful. The Websphere Commerce Suite provides a viable infrastructure for building,
deploying, and administering e-commerce sites. IBM also has done a nice job in mak-
ing enterprise-level provisions and tools (e.g. support for auctions, business intelli-
gence, personalization, and marketing campaigns) sophisticated enough to address
the needs of a maturing e-commerce site. If you envision your business providing
global commerce, then the Websphere Commerce Suite might be a good fit. It is
designed to enable an e-business to craft its site so that it can be customized to meet
requirements in foreign markets. Parameters for language, currency, and taxes (includ-
E-Commerce Solutions
151

ing value-added taxes) are easy to select. Other “global” features include regional ship-
ping guidelines and carrier selection, and currency selection. You can even provide
context-rich page displays relevant to a specific shopper’s point of origin. 
Microsoft’s Commerce Server 2002 (www.Microsoft.com). This server is a viable
option for the small to mid-size website. In true Microsoft style, its Commerce Server
2002 doesn’t exactly mimic the model used by its competition. Where IBM, BEA, Netscape
and others tend to create an application server upon which e-commerce modules are
added, Microsoft’s approach is more monolithic. Commerce Server contains features
for personalization, business-decision support, content management, order processing,
and much more. Just about the only thing not included in the package is an XML engine
(that can be found in Microsoft’s BizTalk Server). If you would like to know more about
Microsoft’s approach to commerce servers go to www.microsoft.com/technet/default.asp,
the select “Products and Technologies” (menu — left side). 
SeeCommerce’s Dynamic Commerce Server (www.seecommerce.com). This Java-
based product manages and distributes information (structured and unstructured)
from a variety of sources, e.g. data marts, data warehouses, web servers, ERP systems,
operational databases and corporate legacy systems. As such, it enables an e-business
quickly and securely to design, to generate, to publish, and to distribute information
to its customers. 
Simple Logic’s SecureMerchant e-Commerce Server (www.simplelogic.com). This
dynamic application foundation is ideal for online retail catalogs. The SecureMer-
chant e-Commerce Server combines the latest technologies, features, and security
needed for today’s e-business environment. Its web-based merchant administration
features allow store management from any location and the vendor’s comprehensive
online help services can reduce ramp-up time. Most importantly, businesses enjoy
increased sales because customers can find what they want easily. 
When looking for commerce server software, look at products that provide:
✸A modular system (to enable you to choose the best fitting elements for your enter-
prise).
✸Rules-based workflow automation, especially for content management.
✸Support for monthly supply replenishment or back-order provisioning.
✸EJB/XML support.
✸Scalability when the shift from back-end systems to multi-company workflow inte-
gration (i.e., product descriptions that will be provided directly by the supplier)
becomes the norm.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
152

There is, in all probability, a commerce server platform out there suitable for any par-
ticular web-based business model. However, if you are considering building your site
upon a commerce server, choose carefully. Then be sure that your final choice can
integrate seamlessly into your legacy systems. Also, consider your budget, existing
architecture, and software development capabilities when making the decision to pur-
chase a commerce server platform. 
✪
CONCLUSION
This chapter educates the reader on the technology needed to turn a website into an
“e-commerce business.” But it is up to you and your e-commerce team to choose the
method by which you implement that technology. 
Use your blueprint as your guide when selecting any e-commerce solution. Don’t
rush your decision-making process —take the time to determine how you want to
implement the actual “e-commerce” features into your website. 
Finally, never lose sight of the fact that your chosen e-commerce solution(s) must
work seamlessly with not only your hardware and other software, but also with your
means of collecting payment. For instance, if you are to process credit card payments
online, the chosen e-commerce solution must offer total payment processing inte-
gration — payment, gateway, and the agencies involved (i.e. the banks making and
accepting fund transfers, and the relevant credit card processing companies). 
E-Commerce Solutions
153

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 10
Adjunct Software 
Build momentum by accumulating small successes.
—Anonymous
Up until this point we’ve discussed what is needed to build a basic online presence.
But many e-commerce businesses will want more than just the essentials. The three
most popular e-commerce add-ons are online auctions, file sharing (peer-to-peer net-
working), and weblogs. Here is how each of these models works. 
✪
ONLINE AUCTION
Online auctions are popular. People like the thrill of the chase, the satisfaction of cap-
turing their quarry, and the pleasure of achieving a bargain (or a profit). 
An online auction can be a dynamic and profitable business. And almost any type
of merchandise can be sold via an auction format, whether you’re liquidating inven-
tory, selling memorabilia, antiques, books, computers and their peripherals, or just
bringing buyers and sellers together. 
There are a couple of popular online auction models. The first is where the e-busi-
ness owner physically controls the product being sold. As such, the e-commerce site
accepts all payments for the goods. Successful bidders will usually use the same pay-
ment methods as used on the typical e-commerce site: credit card, debit card, personal
check, cashier’s check, money order, or escrow service. There are many good examples
of this type of auction site including CollectorAuctions.com, Biddingtons.com, and
Southebys.com.
The other model is a website that enables person-to-person auction activity. eBay
155

is the most popular of this type of online auction business model. Individual sellers
and/or small businesses auction their items directly to the consumer. With this model,
the seller — not the website owner — has responsibility for the merchandise, payment
for said merchandise, and shipment to the purchaser.
This type of auction site usually requires that sellers register, obtain a “user account
name” or “screen name”, and meet other criteria, before they can place items for bid.
Sellers also must agree to pay a fee every time they conduct an auction. Most sellers
set a time limit on bidding and, in some cases, a “reserve price” (the lowest price they
will accept for an item). When the bidding closes, the highest bidder “wins.” If no one
bids at or above the reserve price, the auction closes without a “winner.”
At the end of a successful person-to-person auction, the buyer and seller commu-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
156
AUCTION FORMATS
Some of the more popular online auction formats include the following. But note that although
these five formats operate as set out herein, they do not always carry the same moniker as used
in this list. 
English or Regular Auction — With this auction format, the seller can start the bidding at a cer-
tain price and have each bid be incremented at a set rate. For example, if the seller had a cam-
era that he or she wanted to sell for around $50, that seller would state a starting bid of $40,
and then have each additional bid go up by $5. So the first person to bid would have to bid
$40 and the second would bid $45 and the third would bid $50 and so on.
Reserve Price Auction — This auction format allows the seller to set a minimum price for which
he/she is willing to sell the item. This “lowest price” is called the “reserve price.” In a reserve
price auction the bidders know there’s a reserve price, but not the actual price reserved. In
order to win the auction, a bidder must 1) meet or exceed the reserve price, and 2) have the
highest bid. If no bidders meet the reserve price, the seller is under no obligation to sell the
item to the highest bidder. 
Private Auction — Strictly hush, hush, this auction format protects a buyer’s privacy. Unlike
other auction formats, bidders’ email addresses will not show up on the item or bidding history
screens. When the auction is over, only the seller and the highest bidder know who bought the
item. 
Dutch Auction — This auction format is often times used when the seller has many identical
items to sell. With the Dutch auction format, the seller 1) lists a minimum price (or starting
bid) for one item, and 2) the number of items for sale. Bidders specify both a bid price and
the quantity they want to buy. All winning bidders pay the same price per item — which is the
lowest successful bid (which might actually be less than what the bidder bid). If there are more
buyers than items, the earliest successful bids get the goods. Also, higher bidders are more
likely to get the quantities they’ve requested. However, bidders can refuse partial quantities.
For example, if you place a bid for ten items and only seven are available after the auction, you
don’t have to complete the purchase. Here are some examples of how Dutch Auctions work: 

nicate — usually by email — to arrange for payment and delivery. Yahoo! Auctions,
eBay, and Ubid are the most popular person-to-person auction sites. But also see the
“Auction” section of Chapter 1 for examples of smaller, niche websites that represent
this model.
Requirements
In order to set up an online auction site, whether as an adjunct to an existing e-com-
merce site or as a standalone business, you typically need:
✸A web server that supports Perl 5 or above and CGI scripts.
✸Auction software and specialized script.
✸Some hard disk space on the web server for the script to write auction data. Usually
Adjunct Software
157
A seller has ten new Seagate hard drives for auction at $10 each. Ten people bid $10 for
one hard drive each. In this case, all ten bidders will win a hard drive for $10. But, if five peo-
ple bid $12 for one hard driven each and seven others bid $10, the minimum bid for the hard
drives is still $12, but because the five $12 bidders bid higher than the $10 bidders, they are
guaranteed a hard drive. The other five hard drives will go to the earliest $10 bidders. Thus,
with Dutch auctions, the final price for each an item may be lower than the highest bid placed,
since all winning bidders pay the same price — which is the lowest successful bid. 
Dutch Auctions might sound complicated, but the majority are simple because most users
win the items they bid on at the minimum asking price. Still, there are some special instances
you might want to know about: 
If you are the lowest bidder in a Dutch Auction and you specify a multiple quantity, you
may not get to purchase all that you specify. Why? Because there may be little left over after
the high bidders get their share. 
In other words, if the lowest bidder requests a quantity of four hard drives, he or she may only
get one since the first nine drives have already been allotted to the higher bidders. The only
way to avoid this problem is to make sure you are not the lowest bidder. 
In Dutch Auctions (multiple item auctions), successful high bids are usually displayed via a
“High bidders” link. And the complete bidding history (including any unsuccessful bids) is typ-
ically displayed via a “Bid history” link. 
Restricted Access Auction — This auction category is normally used for “adult” material such
as erotica. By using the Restricted Access Auction, customers can easily find — or avoid —
“mature audience” merchandise. This allows customers to avoid inadvertently viewing explicit
materials.
Note, however, that sellers of mature-audience-items may be subject to various legal statutes
that regulate the sale and distribution of mature-audience-related materials. And if you plan
to allow your website to offer “adult” items for auction, you should place a notice to bidders
and buyers of adult items that informs then that there are various legal statutes that regulate
the sale and distribution of those materials. 

one MB of space will do when starting out, but more may be necessary if your auc-
tion becomes popular.
✸Time and patience. A typical installation of auction software only takes a few min-
utes. But those of you who want your auction site to look original or who are
attaching an auction module to an existing e-commerce site, you might want
more. For instance, you may need to tweak the script a bit to give your auction
pages an original look and feel, or in order to match the auction pages to rest of
your website. 
Software
Here is a list, not inclusive, of auction software to consider using to setup your auc-
tion site.
Auction Bid Software (www.biddotcom.com). This is one of the more popular auc-
tion software products, probably because no special skills are required to get it up and
running. And updating your site is as simple as typing an email message; putting those
changes online just requires a click of your mouse. Cost — $299.
Auction Software for Online Auction (www.mewsoft.com/Products/). This auc-
tion software is driven by a SQL database and provides a variety of features including
unlimited nested categories; multi-lingual capabilities; proxy bidding system; featured
category, home page and gallery auctions; and Dutch, reserve, and private auctions
auction types are supported. It also has a user accounts manager and advanced search
tools. Cost — Free.
AuctionWeaver Lite (www.siteinteractive.com). This is a CGI program written in
Perl that enables a website to create and host auctions. Its key features include unlim-
ited categories and items; item preview before posting; outbid emails automatically
sent (which means you also need access to an SMTP mail server); integrated search
engine; and one script file for easy configuration and use. Cost — Free.
BidFlux Auction Software (www.bidflux.com). This fully functional online auc-
tion software is 100% self-contained. It is designed to be user and customer friendly,
as such it has many similarities with the auction program used by eBay. BidFlux also
allows for flexibility and growth as your auction business expands. Cost — $300.
E-Z Auction 1.8 (www.e-zauctionsoftware.com). This affordable auction software
is very popular with the e-commerce crowd. That is because E-Z Auction 1.8 allows
you either to create a standalone auction website or add auctions and classified ads
to an existing e-commerce site. Some of its main features include: required registra-
tion, email verification, password protection, automated email notification, auto-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
158

mated closing, integrated search engine, bidding history, browse closed auctions,
change registration info, seller sets starting bid, seller sets reserve price, automated
user statistics, unlimited subcategories, customized email, buy-it button, shipping
and payment options, feedback, lost password, forgot alias, view sellers other auc-
tions, and much more (e.g. ability to view all new, hot, and closing auctions). The pro-
gram is also fully customizable and comes with complete resell rights. Cost — $10.
Emaze Auction (www.emaze.com/auction.cfm). Although a bit pricey, Emaze Auc-
tion 2.5, written in Allaire Cold Fusion, is easy to install, to manage, and to modify
for any website’s design needs. This auction software easily integrates into almost any
existing e-commerce site or it can be used as the starting point for a new auction site.
It is completely web-based, incredibly powerful, easily expandable, and fully cus-
tomizable. A few other salient features include simple and fast installation, pro-
cure/classified/seller add-ons, user friendly administrative screens, ability to uses MS
Access or MS SQL databases, CyberCash and AuthorizeNet ready, and its source code
is readily available. E-businesses worldwide use Emaze Auction 2.5 and it has been
translated into German, French, Swedish, and Spanish. The software is utilized to
auction anything from personal products to autographs to estate jewelry to optical
equipment to oil field pipe. Cost — $995.
Ultimate Auction (www.ultimate-auction.net). This auction software is written in
perl and it utilizes the mySQL database (a binary database that can hold virtually
unlimited amount of information without a change in speed). Ultimate Action is writ-
ten so the average e-commerce operator can handle extensive online traffic and busi-
ness needs easily. The product is also perfect for the small business that wants to start
a small Dutch auction on their website. A few of its many features include the ability
to create cookies, blacklists, and watchlists. It also offers good account management
features, web-based administration, proxy bidding, a nice clean layout that loads
quickly under most conditions, and encrypted passwords. Cost — $300 without instal-
lation ($400 with installation).
As some readers may have ascertained, much of the auction software discussed in
this section is little more than what an experienced programmer could create with a web
design package such as Macromedia’s Dreamweaver MX. Though, of course, it would
help if the programmer has experience in developing online auctions so that he or she
could understand how to design the workflow for any number of pages dealing with
the intricacies of buying and selling online. Nonetheless, using an auction package is
probably the better choice since most e-commerce start-ups are not programmers and
are on a tight budget. Even if you have an ample budget you may find one of the more
Adjunct Software
159

costly auction programs to be a better choice than letting an experienced program-
mer have a go at designing your auction pages — building a bespoke system can run into
a wad of money. Still, if you want an auction site that offers all the “bells and whis-
tles,” you may need a programmer. 
Tips
Know Your Legal Obligations. Under federal law, you’re required to advertise your prod-
uct or service and terms of sale honestly and accurately. You can’t place “shill” bids
on an item to boost the price or offer false testimonials about yourself in the com-
ment section of Internet auction sites. You’re also prohibited from auctioning illegal
goods. If running a person-to-person auction site, put in place a system whereby you
can monitor the merchandise offered for auction to ensure that illegal items are not
offered — the responsibility for ensuring that a sale is legal rests with the auction site
owner, the seller, and the buyer. Consider posting a list of prohibited items as a guide
for both buyers and sellers.
If operating an auction to market your own merchandise know that you must fol-
low the following rules:
Delivery of Purchased Goods. You are required to ship merchandise within the time
frame specified during the auction, or, if a time frame is not specified, within 30 days.
If you can’t meet the shipping commitment, you must give the buyer an opportunity
to cancel the order for a full refund or to agree to a new shipping date. To learn more
about your responsibilities when shipping products, see “A Business Guide to the Fed-
eral Trade Commission’s Mail or Telephone Order Merchandise Rule,” which can be
found at www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/mailorder.htm. 
Advertising Products. When describing an item and its condition, you must state
whether it’s new, used, or reconditioned. Specify the minimum bid at the lowest fair
price you’re willing to accept and who is to pay for shipping (also whether or not you
are willing to ship internationally). State your return policy, including who’s respon-
sible for paying for shipping costs or restocking fees if the item is returned. Try to antic-
ipate questions buyers might have and to address them in the description of your item
or service. If possible, include a photo of the item. Don’t forget to advise prospective
bidders whether you provide follow-up service — or tell them where they can get it. 
Dealing with Bidders. Respond as quickly as possible to bidders’ questions about your
item or your sales terms. When the auction closes, print all information about the
transaction, including the buyer’s identification; a description of the item; and the
date, time and price of the bid. Save a copy of every email you send and receive from the
The Complete E-Commerce Book
160

auction site and/or the successful bidder. Contact the “winning” bidder as soon after
the auction closes as possible; confirm the final cost, including shipping charges, and
tell the buyer where to send payment. 
Arranging for Payment. If you accept direct credit card payments from the buyer, bill
the credit card account as close to the ship date as possible. If a buyer insists on using
a particular escrow or online payment service that you’ve never heard of, check it out
— visit the service’s website, call the customer service line. If there isn’t one, or if you
call and can’t reach someone, don’t use the service. Also, before agreeing to use an
online payment or escrow service, read the terms of agreement: 
✸If it’s an online payment service, find out who pays for credit card charge backs or
transaction reversal requests if the buyer seeks them.
✸Examine the service’s privacy policy and security measures. Never disclose finan-
cial or personal information unless you know why it’s being collected, how it will
be used, and how it will be safeguarded. 
✸Be suspicious of an online escrow service that cannot process its own transactions
and requires you to set up accounts with online payment services. Legitimate escrow
services never do this.
✸Check with the Better Business Bureau, state attorney general and/or consumer
protection agency, both where you live and where the online payment or escrow
service is based, to see whether there are any unresolved complaints against the
service. Be mindful that a lack of complaints doesn’t necessarily mean that the
service has no problems.
✪
PEER-TO-PEER
A peer-to-peer (P2P) operation is where individuals within a niche market open their
computers and allow others to upload files directly from their hard drives. Sharing
music, video, and software are the most popular reasons for adopting a P2P business
model, but there are many ways a P2P model can be used to enable a niche market to
share information and files. For example, film students could share their creations,
bird lovers could share photos, migratory information, etc., and software program-
mers find P2P networks invaluable when writing code. 
There are a few different types of P2P networks. Let’s examine the most popular
models.
Napster model. This refers to a centralized version of peer-to-peer file sharing that
is designed around a central server that directs traffic between registered users. The
central server maintains a directory of all registered user’s shared files (which are stored
Adjunct Software
161

on each individual’s computer). To find a specific file, a registered user types in search
criteria (e.g. name of song, artist, book title, genre, etc.) and starts a search of the sys-
tem. The central server then retrieves a list of files matching the search request, which
it presents to the requesting user. The user then selects the desired file(s) from the list
and opens a direct link to the individual computer that contains the desired file(s)
and downloads the file(s) directly from the other user’s computer. Actual files are
never stored on the central server. The problem with this version of P2P networking is
that if the central server goes down the entire network is unavailable to end-users.
Gnutella model or decentralized network. This model originated from the Gnutella
protocol written by Justin Frankel, the 21-year old founder of Nullsoft. It can be
described as a type of call-and-response protocol, i.e. a more complicated email or
news protocol. 
Nullsoft posted Gnutella on the Web in March 1999. Then in June 1999 Nullsoft
was acquired by America Online (AOL), and a day later AOL yanked Gnutella, but sev-
eral thousand downloads had already occurred, allowing reverse engineering to take
its course. Thus Gnutella continues today, albeit under the auspices of independent pro-
grammers who offer popular P2P software packages such as LimeWire, Kazaa and
BearShare. These software packages and many more can access the same “Gnutella” P2P
network — a network that does not use a central server to keep track of users’ files.
Each instance of a Gnutella-type software acts as both a server and a client because the
software supports bidirectional information transfer. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
162
Figure 23. The difference between
a Napster-like network and a
Gnutella-based network.

All you need to operate a fully functional Gnutella network is to install any of sev-
eral available Gnutella software packages (Kazza, BearShare, etc.) and to find other
Gnutella clients that are willing to communicate with you. You will communicate
directly only with the handful of sites you’ve agreed to contact. Any material of inter-
est to other sites will pass along from one site to another in store-and-forward fashion.
Since Gnutella networks use the Internet, if your computer is running Gnutella-based
software, you can connect with someone who’s in another country just as easily as
within your own region. This means peer-to-peer networks are robust and virtually
failsafe.
Under the Gnutella model, the user starts with a networked computer equipped
with a desktop version of Gnutella (e.g. LimeWire, Kazaa, BearShare), which is then
used in conjunction with an ISP account to connect to the Gnutella network and to
announce to all other computers connected to the P2P network that it is alive. The
user’s computer can then search the contents of the shared directories of the P2P net-
work, and download the desired files directly from another user’s computer. 
The advantage of using this type of P2P network is that it does not rely upon a cen-
tral server, thus it would be virtually impossible to bring it down. Even if distribution
of P2P software were banned, the network itself could still continue with all the cur-
rent users that have already downloaded the client software onto their computers. 
There are different versions of the Gnutella model. Grokster and others have taken
the Gnutella model and modified it. For instance, rather than all networked com-
puters passing along each search query, the Grokster distributed self-organizing net-
work recognizes faster computers that utilize a powerful connection (e.g. T-1/E-1)
and selects those computers to be what is referred to as “SuperNodes,” which then
serve as local search hubs. When a non SuperNode computer connects to the network,
its “neighborhood SuperNode” uploads information about that computer’s shared
files along with performing searches. The selection of a SuperNode is automatic, there
is no manual intervention. 
Freenet model. This P2P model is a distributed anonymous information storage and
retrieval system. The best way to explain the Free Network Project (i.e. Freenet) is to
quote the website’s explanation:
✸Freenet is free software that lets you publish and obtain information on the Inter-
net without fear of censorship. To achieve this freedom, the network is entirely
decentralized and publishers and consumers of information are anonymous. With-
out anonymity there can never be true freedom of speech, and without decentral-
ization the network will be vulnerable to attack.
Adjunct Software
163

✸Communications by Freenet nodes are encrypted and are “routed-through” other
nodes to make it extremely difficult to determine who is requesting the information
and what its content is.
✸Users contribute to the network by giving bandwidth and a portion of their hard
drive (called the “data store”) for storing files. Unlike other peer-to-peer file shar-
ing networks, Freenet does not let the user control what is stored in the data store.
Instead, files are kept or deleted depending on how popular they are, with the least
popular being discarded to make way for newer or more popular content. Files in
the data store are encrypted to reduce the likelihood of prosecution by persons
wishing to censor Freenet content.
✸The network can be used in a number of different ways and isn’t restricted to just
sharing files like other peer-to-peer networks. It acts more like an Internet within
an Internet. For example Freenet can be used for:
– Publishing websites or ‘freesites’
– Communicating via message boards
– Content distribution 
Freenet is not just theoretical, it has been downloaded by over 1.2 million users
since the project started, and it is used for the distribution of censored informa-
tion all over the world, including countries such as China and the Middle East.
Ideas and concepts pioneered in Freenet have inspired hundreds of academic papers
in the fields of computer communication, security, and law. Freenet has also received
significant coverage in the mainstream press.
Note: If you would like a more detailed tutorial on how peer-to-peer networks work visit the howstuffworks
website (www.howstuffworks.com/ file-sharing3.htm.) If you would like more information on Gnutella and
Freenet’s inner workings there is a very good article by Andy Oram, which can be found at
www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/2000/05/12/magazine/gnutella.html. Also visit http://freenet.source-
forge.net/ for more information on Freenet. 
Yaga model. This is a relatively new P2P technology. Yaga.com has crafted technol-
ogy that provides built-in security (e.g. files are scanned for viruses before being made
available), support for digital rights management, reliable transfer of gigabyte-size
files (an increasingly important issue when distributing software and videos), and cen-
tralized management (files are given unique signatures based on their size). As soon as
a file is made available, it is included in the search index, supporting full-text search
(every word, not just the title and description). All the basic elements are there to
enable content producers to use the Yaga network as a mechanism for selling content. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
164

For example, with Yaga you can make your files available to a community of users,
and also download files made public by others. Budding programmers who have writ-
ten software that they would like to make available to the world would find Yaga use-
ful. An up and coming rock band that is having trouble getting their music played on
the radio can, with the help of Yaga software, make their product readily available to
a community of users worldwide. 
Yaga may be the best tool if you want to set up your own private branded P2P net-
work. You could then use that network to publish software, a musical library, your
latest video concept, photographs, books and manuals, or any other kinds of files — for
free or for a price, depending upon your business model. 
Content-Addressable Network (CAN) model. We can’t conclude this discussion with-
out addressing the experimental, but very scalable CAN model. Freenet’s aim is to pro-
vide anonymity during both file sharing and lookups, and is intended to provide
robustness in the face of hostile agents both (legally and technically); whereas, Gnutella
was designed to provide a complete solution to file sharing in the post-Napster era.
Both P2P systems are designed for immediate deployment. However, CAN is a building
block for not only file sharing but also for higher-level services, such as DNS, distrib-
uted file systems, etc. While at this writing CAN is still largely a research rather than a
production system, keep an eye on its progress. It offers some exciting possibilities. Go
to your favorite search engine and perform a search to track the latest developments.
Requirements
To establish a P2P e-commerce operation by becoming a partner or an affiliate of an
established P2P network, you need at minimum:
✸A niche market group who will open their computers and allow others to upload
files directly from their drives. 
✸A working e-commerce website, of course.
✸P2P client software, which you would provide to end-users so they can access the P2P
network. Then your targeted market will need to download that software and put
their shared files into a folder on their own hard disk. 
You can create your own members-only network or become a part of a larger P2P
network such as Grokster, Overnet, eDonkey2000 network, kaZaa, or Blubster. It is
expected that only a small minority of readers will want to operate their own P2P net-
work — most will want to piggyback onto an already existing network. Thus, the design
and maintenance of a P2P network will not be discussed at length in this book. But
to point any intrepid soon-to-be P2P operators in the right direction, Peeracy.com
Adjunct Software
165

(http://peeracy.com) provides source codes (most are free) for various P2P networks.
Once you call up the home page, just click on “P2P Software” link. The first down-
loads listed are for P2P clients. Scroll through those and you will find a number of
different source code downloads. And visit the Afternapster.com website. This web-
site not only keeps an up-to-date list of the latest P2P networks and client software,
it provides a good, but brief overall review of each product/website.
Read books on P2P networking. For instance, the author learned quite a bit about
P2P from reading the Peer to Peer: Harnessing the Power of Disruptive Technologies, Andy
Oram (O’Reilly). Other good books include Peer-to-Peer Computing: Technologies for
Sharing and Collaborating on the Net, David Barkai (Intel Press), and Peer-to-Peer: Building
Secure, Scalable, and Manageable Networks, Dana Moore, John Hebeler (McGraw-Hill
Osborne Media). 
Business Model
Wondering what P2P has to offer an e-commerce operation? There are ways to make
money with P2P, although it is doubtful that you will ever get rich from such an oper-
ation. For example, you could —
✸Enter into contracts with third party software providers (e.g. Gain, Mysearch,
Shopathome, New.net, etc.) who will pay you for distribution of digitally rights-
managed files.
✸Sell advertising space on the client software that is downloaded onto your cus-
tomer’s computers.
✸Sell a version of the client software that is ad-free.
✸Sell products and service that is of interest to your niche market.
✸Create content, post that content on your website to encourage people to come to
your site, and then sell banner and pop-up advertising space on your website. 
✸Create a newsletter and sell sponsorships and/or ads. 
Cable
T-1/E-1
Media 
56 Kbps Modem 
(average 512 Kbps) 
(1.54/ 2 Mbps)  
Photo, 200 KB 
40 seconds 
2 seconds 
2 seconds  
MP3 Music track 
13 min 30 seconds 
1 minutes 
15 seconds  
Full-length movie 
22 hours 
1 hour 45 minutes 
25 minutes  
Five-minute video clip 
1 hour 
6 minutes 
2 minutes  
Novel, 1 MB 
4 minutes 
15 seconds 
4 seconds  
Table 6.  The average download speed for some of the more common files shared 
over a P2P network. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
166

Tips
Your P2P network doesn’t necessarily need to serve music or video enthusiasts. You
could use your P2P e-commerce site to enable a community of content developers to
share files, or perhaps cooks to share recipes, travelers to share travel journals, cartoon-
ists could share their creations, and programmers also would find P2P a valuable tool.
Another idea for using the P2P model is to enable individual stock traders to share court
filings, SEC documents, news articles, etc. about various companies — worldwide. 
There are many ways a P2P model could be used to enable a niche community to
publish their endeavors and easily to share it with a global audience. 
✪
WEBLOGS
Weblogs are the newest Internet craze — there are an estimated 500,000 active weblogs
available to the surfing public. Commonly known as “blogs,” weblogs are so popular
that the May 2002 issue of Wired Magazine predicted that “Weblogs will outrank the New
York Times website by 2007 (based on a Google search of five keywords or phrases
reflecting the top five news stories).” 
A weblog is a web-based writing space or online journal. And, like a journal, a weblog
is a dynamic, continually updated website that grows over time with the accumula-
tion of writing and other content. Typically, weblogging (or blogging) takes place
within a community of other webloggers (bloggers) who share a common interest. 
One of the reasons weblogs have spread so rapidly is their ease of use — the writ-
ing, editing, look, and feel of the site can be managed through your web browser. A
good weblog is designed so that a new entry can be “turned” each day (just like a jour-
nal). In addition, a weblog site should be able to keep track of the date, and archive
all entries. 
Weblogs are ideally suited to interaction between people sharing special interests.
Thus, many e-commerce businesses may want to consider adding a weblog to their
website. The weblog’s capacity for information dissemination and feedback potential
can tap into the buying power of a blogging community.
Requirements
Your weblog requirements will vary depending on what type of weblog you want. Is
it to be added as an adjunct to an e-commerce website or to stand by itself? Is it to be
self-hosted or to be hosted by a weblog service? 
If self-hosted or part of an existing e-commerce site then the infrastructure require-
ments are the same as for any other type of e-commerce website, except for the addi-
Adjunct Software
167

tion of XML (actually RSS, a dialect of XML) and a database (if one is not already
being utilized). Weblogs also need a set navigation structure and a means to archive the
daily entries automatically. 
If you go the weblog service route, all you need is a computer with an Internet con-
nection, a viable email address, and possibly access to a web server with FTP (File
Transfer Protocol). 
Software
We will now discuss some of the software and tools you might want to consider using
to establish a weblog.
RSS
Before you implement a weblog, you must understand its underlying technology —
the XML dialect referred to as “RSS.” RSS provides the means for organizing and pub-
lishing the content on your web pages. The acronym “RSS,” which can stand for either
“really simply syndication” or “RFD site summary” (the differences will be explained
later), refer to the code that underlies a weblog. Specifically, RSS (whatever version)
is a protocol that is an application of XML, which provides an open method of syn-
dicating and aggregating web content, including weblogs. 
Through the use of RSS, you can create a data feed that supplies headlines, links,
and article summaries from your weblog to your niche market (as long as they ask for
the feed). This allows interested parties (e.g. your niche market) to obtain constantly
updated content from your website through the help of a news aggregator. 
As mentioned previously, there are two types of RSS currently used as the underlying
code for weblogs. 
RSS 0.91 is referred to as “Rich Site Summary.” Netscape released the original pop-
ular version 0.91 in July 1999. That initial RSS code has since been upgraded by Dave
Winer of Userland — first to 0.92, then 0.94, and now 2.0.
RSS 1.0 is referred to as “RDF (Resource Description Framework) Site Summary.”
This version of RSS provides an XML structure for describing document metadata
content. The RSS-DEV Working Group created this RSS version to support the
Resource Description Framework. RSS 1.0 documents can draw upon any RDF-com-
patible extension syntaxes called modules. 
RSS Editors
Don’t want to worry about the RSS coding or adding the cost of an authoring/pub-
lishing application to your budget? If so, you have a number of options. While you
The Complete E-Commerce Book
168

can create a RSS file with any type of text editor, in doing so you run a real risk of syn-
tax errors. Thankfully, there are plenty of free RSS-specific web-base tools for your
use. Make use of one of the following free web-based RSS editors:
✸Ukoln’s RSS-Xpress editor forms RSS 1.0 XML. Go to the Ukoln’s website
(http://rssxpress.ukoln.ac.uk) for more information on this tool. 
✸WebReference’s RSS Channel Editor generates valid RSS 0.91 files. To access this
tool go to the WebReference website (www.webreference.com/cgi-bin/perl/rssedit.pl). 
✸WebDevTips, which also offers the RSS Headline Generator, constructs RSS 0.91
feeds. It can be found at www.webdevtips.com/webdevtips/codegen/rss.shtml. 
After a file is complete, save the files locally, and then load them to your server
when applicable.
For more detailed information on RSS and authoring/publishing a weblog: 
✸Visit these two websites — http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/tech/rss and http://web.
resource.org/rss/1.0/. Both sites discuss in detail the two incompatible versions of
RSS: RSS 1.0 and RSS 0.9x/2.0. 
✸Use the RSS Workshop which is available on the State of Utah’s website at
http://gils.utah.gov/rss/. 
✸Read Content Syndication with RSS, Bill Hammersley, (O’Reilly). O’Reilly has placed
on its website Chapter 4 of the book, which explains the Really Simple Versions of
RSS (www.oreilly.com/catalog/consynrss/chapter/ch04.pdf). Another good book is
The Weblog Handbook: Practical Advice on Creating and Maintaining Your Blog, Rebecca
Blood, (Perseus Publishing).
Note: All RSS files must conform to the XML 1.0 specification, as published on the World Wide Web Con-
sortium (W3C) website.
Authoring/Publishing Tools
To design your own full-blown weblog with capabilities similar to, for example, the
Steve Gillmor weblog on CMP Media’s CRN website (www.crn.com/weblogs/steveg-
illmor/), the Ken Layne and the Corvids weblog at www.kenlayne.com, the actor Wil
Wheaton’s weblog at www.wilwheaton.net, or the Nick Denton weblogs at both
www.gizmodo.com and www.gawker.com, you will need authoring/publishing tools. 
Weblogs are content-oriented with much more text than graphics, and most have
some degree of collaborative editing capability, thus you can use a regular content
management system both to create and to manage a weblog. (The only real distinc-
tion between a weblog and other types of web-based content is the RSS coding and
Adjunct Software
169

the chronological element of weblogs.) Examples of software systems that are suit-
able for weblogs include the following:
Manila (http://manila.userland.com). This robust Internet server groupware allows
a collection of writers, designers, and graphic designers to manage a website (includ-
ing weblogs) through an easy-to-use browser interface. (Blogue.com uses Manila.)
Cost — $900.
Movable Type (www.movabletype.org). After this powerful, customizable publish-
ing system is installed on your web server, an individual or a group of collaborators
can manage and update weblogs, journals, and site content. Costs — although Movable
Type is free for personal or non-profit use, commercial users must pay a licensing fee
of $150. 
pMachine (www.pmachine.com). This innovative software enables the publication
of virtually any kind of web content — from a basic weblog, to an advanced interac-
tive magazine. pMachine gives you complete control over the presentation and the
interactivity of your website. It is also simple to set up and use, allowing you to have
your first weblog entry up-and-running in record time. (The Blogalization commu-
nity used pMachine.) Cost — $125 for commercial license.
Scoop (http://scoop.kuro5hin.org). This collaborative media application falls some-
where between a content management system, a web bulletin board system, and a
weblog tool. That is because Scoop enables a website to become a community. It
empowers a site’s visitors to be the producers of the site — contributing both news
and participating in discussions. Cost — Free.
w.bloggar (http://wbloggar.com). Billed as “the best interface between you and
your blog,” this application is both a “post” and a “template” editor, and sports a num-
ber of features and resources that the average browser-based weblog editors (discussed
later) don’t offer. For instance, because w.bloggar runs over a Windows GUI it allows
the writer to edit his or her posts offline, and then save one or more text files locally
for posting on the weblog at a future time. The software stays minimized to the “tray
bar” as an icon until the writer wants to write and/or publish new text. All that is
needed is for the writer to click the icon and the editor is ready to go to work. Once
the text is finished, another click (if connected to the Internet) and the post is pub-
lished to the website. Out of all of the previously mentioned tools, w.bloggar is com-
patible with the most weblog systems (e.g. e.bloggar can post and publish to Blogger,
b2, MovableType, Nucleus, BigBlogTool, BlogWorks XML Blogalia, and Drupal blogs).
Cost — Free. 
Zope+Plone (www.zope.org or www.plone.org). Zope+Plone is not your average
The Complete E-Commerce Book
170

blogging software. This expensive, robust, multiplatform system requires the pro-
gramming language Python and you also need an experienced programmer on staff.
The Zope+Plone system includes the Plone Content Management Framework [CMF]
for portal construction and content syndication. Everything is stored in either Zope’s
built-in database or an external database application. Although its main use is as a
content management system, Zope+Plone currently is used to support a number of
heavy-duty weblogs including NATO, the Austrian Government, two U.S. governors,
CBS New York, and Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, part of the BC
Cancer Agency in Vancouver. Cost — varies according to website’s needs.
Weblog Services
If you don’t want to incur the expense or expend the time required to design your
weblog site from scratch, you can use a weblog service. Many good weblogs are oper-
ated using such services, e.g. Amy Wohl (http://amywohl.weblogger.com/), Bag and
Baggage (http://bgbg.blogspot.com/), Ernieattorney (http://ernieattorney.typepad.com/),
Isen.com’s blog (which is powered by Blogger). 
Some of the more popular weblog services include Blogger.com, Blogspot.com,
Typepad.com, and Weblogger.com.
Business Model
An e-commerce business can use blogging as a powerful, cost-effective tool for com-
municating with its customers. Some brochureware site owners are even considering
replacing their current static pages with a dynamic weblog. 
But, unless you are pairing a weblog with another e-commerce model, it may be
Adjunct Software
171
NEWS AGGREGATOR
Just as a web browser can “read” a page of HTML, a news aggregator (also known as news-
reader) can “read” RSS. You may notice when you visit a weblog that some have a small orange
XML or blue RSS pictograms displayed — both of these little icons indicate that the page is
available in RSS, i.e. news aggregators can automatically collect updates. News aggregators
read news, weblogs, and other types of “feeds” on the Web and aggregate them so the news feeds
are readable from a single place, regardless of their source.
To subscribe, however, the reader needs a news aggregator client — a piece of software that
decodes RSS feeds. There are a number of free news aggregator clients available including
NewsGator (www.newsgator.com), which runs within Microsoft Outlook; RSSReader (www.rss-
reader.com); NewzCrawler (www.newzcrawler.com), which gathers news content from a list
of source channels and displays them in a customizable view (e.g. scrolling list, news balloon
and news ticker); and Aggie (available on the SourceForge.net website). 

difficult to generate income by writing a weblog. That being said, here are few ways
to earn revenue from a weblog-based e-commerce site: 
✸Sell products and services that are of interest to your niche market.
✸Enter into affiliate agreements with other websites, e.g. Amazon.
✸Ask members of your blog community to make donations. If you craft your weblog
in such a manner that its contents are perceived as valuable to your niche com-
munity, and that community is involved in the blogger’s agenda, some will be happy
to give a donation every once in a while. (That’s why you see so many PayPal links
on weblogs.)
✸Syndication — but only if you already are well known in your niche marketplace
(such as the previously mentioned Nick Denton). 
Note: For more ideas of how to earn income from your weblog, you might want to purchase “Blog Profit Ideas
Exposed” by Mani Sivasubramanian. To order a copy, go to www.blogprofits.com. 
Tips
Until you are completely comfortable with posting your weblog’s content, make use
of one of the free weblog validation services. Despite its relatively simple nature, RSS
is poorly implemented by many of the tools used by the average blogger. 
Use a web-based validation service. These services can codify your text (i.e. translate it
into code) to ensure you are producing RSS correctly. Two of the best free weblog val-
idation services are: 
RDF Validation Service (www.w3.org/RDF/Validator/), a service of the World Wide
Web Consortium. All you need to do is enter a URI or paste an RDF/XML document
into the site’s text field box and a 3-tuple (triple) representation of the corresponding
data model as well as an optional graphical visualization of the data model will be
displayed. 
RSS Validator (http://feeds.archive.org/validator/). This service only requires that
you enter the address of your feed and click “Validate.” If this validator finds prob-
lems in your feed, it will present a message indicating the problems and highlight the
point where the problem first occurs in your feed. 
Measure your weblog’s popularity. Once your weblog is up and running you might
want to use tools like Blogrolling’s Top 100 and Technorati’s Link Cosmos to meas-
ure its popularity.
Weblogs make a good collaborative tool. Consider using a weblog as a content man-
agement tool for internal collaboration. A number of companies (including Microsoft
and Google) do exactly that. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
172

✪
CONCLUSION
The longer visitors stay within the pages of your e-commerce site, the more familiar they
become with it — familiarity breeds comfort. When a website visitor (your potential
customer) feels comfortable they are more likely to trust whatever your website has
to offer — products, services, opinions, etc. That trust will lead hopefully to a long-
term customer relationship. 
But to reach that point, it is essential that your website has a good deal of “sticki-
ness.” While good content and a pleasant design can help a website build a base of
repeat customers, the piece de resistance is to create a sense of community within your
e-commerce business. That is exactly what the software discussed in this chapter does
— any or all of these tools can be used to help an e-commerce business build a com-
munity within its niche market. A vibrant online community translates into a sticky
website; that, in turn, means more profit for the business owner. 
Adjunct Software
173

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 11
Quality Assurance
The first rule of intelligent tinkering is to save all the parts.
—Paul Ehrlich, in Saturday Review
A good Quality Assurance Plan (QA Plan) will determine how and in what order each
aspect of your website should be tested. A QA Plan’s first priority is to avoid a situation
that will force you to accelerate or to change the plan hurriedly because of some unan-
ticipated problem. For many websites, by the time a problem becomes too obvious to
ignore, considerable financial damage may have already occurred. If you do not test
often and thoroughly defects will accumulate or be missed. A good QA Plan will ori-
ent the project toward detecting defects early, close to the point of insertion, and not
allow defects to infect work later on.
This can’t be said enough — quality assurance testing is essential to developing a suc-
cessful website. The ever-growing list of operating systems, software choices, browsers
and user preferences, combined with the multitude of static web pages and dynamic
database-driven websites, result in everything from customers having a problem-free
experience while visiting your website to customers being driven crazy because their
browser crashed. Most of the problems could be easily solved with a slight change in
the HTML or other coding on the site. 
✪
THE QA PLAN
To assure that visitors to your website have a pleasant and problem-free experience,
develop and implement testing protocols to improve production specifications, visual
and HTML style guidelines, and process flow — this is your Quality Assurance Plan. 
175

A properly implemented QA Plan can:
✸Solve browser incompatibility problems.
✸Help you to stay current with HTML standards.
✸Help you with the use of browser-specific HTML.
✸Aid in the review of your site for bugs.
✸Set up usability testing to insure that website user interfaces meet user needs. 
Test every aspect — from Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and Netscape to Opera and
WebTV and other web appliances — for validation that your website provides a prob-
lem-free experience for your customers, no matter how they surf the Web. 
After following the design guidelines set out in Chapter 2, and before your new
website is ready for launch, “freeze” your prototype and intensively test it prior to giv-
ing the public access. Structure the tests per your QA Plan. Be prepared for fine-tun-
ing and testing to go on for a month. You must stop all development and changes of
the site during this testing period. 
Consider investing in software tools that specifically test content accessibility, basic
functionality, and behavior under controlled access loads. As your last test, perform
stress testing to see how the entire system reacts under really heavy or “bursty” traffic. 
Website testing tools can help illuminate what happens as traffic and load increase.
However, some of the software that can help you implement your QA Plan can be hard
to use. But persevere. Here are some products that might help you in your search for
a trouble-free website (note that the cost of these products will depend upon your spe-
cific needs).
Watchfire’s WebQA 2.0 Web Content Quality Testing tool (www.tetranetsoft-
ware.com/products) helps put you in control of your website by supplying intelligence
on simulated visitor interactions with site content and website transactions. Report-
ing, analysis, and measurement solutions provide you with a real-time view of your
website. This vendor also offers, WebXACT, a free online service that lets you test sin-
gle pages of web content for quality, accessibility, and privacy issues. You can access
WebXACT at http://webxact.watchfire.com.
Webtrend’s Enterprise Suite (www.webtrends.com) assists you in improving the
quality, performance, and integrity of your website. It can illustrate broken links, chart
biggest and slowest pages, document the loading time of connections, check the syn-
tax of various HTML components, find the availability of external servers linked to
your web server, and more, even crawling your website as a user would. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
176

Segue’s Silk Product family (www.segue.com) lets you test the performance of your
website rigorously using as many simulated concurrent users as your site and network
will support. Its ability to stress test web applications under heavy loads and simulate
bursts of activity make it ideal for use by virtually any web-based business. In addi-
tion, its reporting features enable you to chart and to correlate response time results
with server statistics to identify bottlenecks and problems quickly.
Site Mapper (http://trellian.com/mapper/) is perhaps the best of the lot. This prod-
uct will analyze the content of your website and create a detailed map of all resources
with an indexed listing by page and category. It also validates all links, so that visitors
need never come across a “File not found” error. Some of the quality assurance fea-
tures Site Mapper offers include: spellcheck of documents as they are mapped, built-
in document preview functionality, the ability to integrate with your favorite document
editor, it can map javascript files, stylesheets, and media files, and it can list and map
external links and broken links. 
Another quality service option is a full-service QA consulting firm like OTIVO
(www.otivo.com). Services include browser compatibility testing, functional testing,
and usability testing.
Testing the Prototype
The majority of your QA Plan should cover testing your website not only during devel-
opment but also during your prototype stage before “going live.” The optimal situa-
tion would be for your website to be developed on a development server and to be
launched to a staging server for QA. We realize the smaller web-based businesses will
not have the resources for these additional servers. Nonetheless, your QA Plan should
set out a full testing plan to ensure you tested as much of the expected customer inter-
action and site functionality as possible. 
Since your website’s design should already meet the “browser neutral” criteria we
specified in Chapter 2, you should test your design to see how it looks when viewed
with:
✸Different screen sizes. 
✸Different browser window settings. 
✸Different color resolutions.
✸High security settings.
✸Minimal feature settings.
✸Different browsers and versions.
✸Different client platforms.
Quality Assurance
177

When testing, manipulate the browser’s options settings. Change them so that the
page has a white background and the links are presented in the default color. Turn
on the “don’t load images” menu item, since some of your customers will have their
browsers set this way. Note the results to each of the following questions.
✸How does your website look with these settings?  
✸Can you still navigate your site with ease? 
✸Does your website use a text font that isn’t one of the defaults?  If so, does your
site look okay? 
✸If you used Java on your website, test it with a browser that doesn’t support Java
as well as with a Java-enabled browser with that feature turned off. 
✸If your website requires a special plug-in, a special helper application, or special
file type, test the website both with the special “whatever” installed and then with-
out the special “whatever” installed.   
If you can, test your site with WebTV and other web appliances. Some of these prod-
ucts are relatively primitive, generally having limited capabilities and lower resolutions.
You’ll find that web pages must be reformatted so they can be read on a TV screen.
Your QA Plan should take into account each static page and each of the unique
templates so they can be tested at least once in each browser configuration to ensure
cross-browser layout and functionality. All other non-browser-specific functionality
should be tested in at least one to three browser configurations.
Next, your QA Plan should have “no open bugs” defined as its “go live” criteria. In
other words, before your website is completely available to the public-at-large, fix all
problems and errors found on your site. The best way to accomplish this task is to
create and maintain a “bugbase” file (see Fig. 24).   
Place all reported bugs in the bugbase as they are found. As each bug is fixed on
the development server, launch the fixed elements and pages to the staging server as
a new version of your site. Once that is completed, change the bugs’ status in the bug-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
178
Bugbase File
Bug
Date
Pending
Date
Deferred
Description
Fixed
(y/n)
Closed
W/Explanation
Figure 24. Example of a bugbase file.

base file to “pending.” Finally, verify the “fixed” bugs and either re-open them (if they
weren’t fixed) or close them (if the fix was verified). The final step is to document your
testing procedure detailing the testing activity, remaining bugs, and their status
(deferred for later fix, feature requests, etc.).
✪
SERVER ERROR LOG
One of your main aids in tracking down bugs is your server’s error log — look for such
items as missing images, bad links, and errors from CGI scripts, just to name a few.
Use this excellent tool on a regular basis and after every update to your site. 
Website errors mean lost traffic. It is normal to have a few errors in your log files,
but if the error rate starts to rise precipitously, then look for what’s causing the prob-
lems and fix them. 
✪
OTHER ITEMS TO CHECK
Spell Check
Don’t forget to run your spell check or manually to copyedit your website’s text. Errors
in grammar or punctuation jeopardize your credibility as a reputable e-business.
Hang Time
Measure the various browsers’ “hang time.” Note how long each browser configuration
hangs with a blank screen before loading your web page. Is the hang time acceptable,
with all configurations? If not, correct the situation.
Printing
Test how your website prints using different browsers. This is particularly important
if your website is brochureware, subscription-based, or is a supplement to your tech-
nical help desk. 
Some browsers can start a new page if a table won’t fit on the current page; however,
tables can force page breaks when the document prints out. By using tables you can con-
trol how the pages will print.
Avoid browser-specific code since your website may not print out properly if the
customer uses a different browser.
Other printing problems can occur if you use images, or a black, or a colored back-
ground. Frames seem to constantly cause printing problems. If you think that your
website’s visitors will be printing your pages regularly, you might want to provide a
non-frame version. 
One common mistake is that contact information, support, and the Frequently
Quality Assurance
179

Asked Questions (FAQ) pages are not easy to find. Always keep those links clearly vis-
ible on every page.
Note: For those readers who are curious about the coding used to design a specific website you can do the fol-
lowing: If you have a Microsoft Internet Explorer or Netscape browser, just click on “View,” which is located
at the top of the browser, and then click “source” (page source for Netscape) in the drop-down menu.  
✪
TEST AND RETEST
Okay, you’ve tested the design/front-end of your site and now you are ready to put
the site on your staging server. Test it again. Make a hard and fast rule to always test
every time you make any change to your site just to be sure you haven’t accidentally
introduced an error. 
Other steps you should take during the testing stage include asking other people
to test your website and to proofread the text. You and your staff are just too close to
the project to notice what would otherwise be embarrassing errors. 
If you developed a site that exists simultaneously in different formatted versions
— flash/HTML, frame/non-frame — then, depending on the browser, you must test
every version with every browser and with all of the possible option settings. 
✪
CONTINUAL QUALITY ASSURANCE
Once your site is “live” and you have customers, don’t drop your QA Plan, it is just as
important now. With frenetic deadlines and constantly changing requirements, it is very
easy to ignore the basics of quality assurance. An active, dynamic site means your web
pages will be in a continual state of change. That means that, in all probability, the
pages will be revised by different people; those people will bring their own individual
coding quirks, which can and will introduce HTML and other coding errors (although
I am sure all will try to follow the HTML on the templates). 
If your website is currently operational but was brought to the Web without a QA
Plan, gather your entire staff together (including consultants) and discuss ad hoc
processes and standards that you currently have in use. In these discussions find out
what causes the most problems on the site. This will give you the basis upon which
to set up a QA Plan to address those issues as well as HTML and other coding guide-
lines. It generally is not practical to try to “update” your older content to adhere to
the new QA Plan, but do initiate the QA Plan for all new content.
Listen to Your Customers
Listen when you are told that a customer has problems with your website. When some-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
180

one takes the time to report a problem, pay attention. For every person who took the
time to inform you about the problem, there are probably about a thousand others
who didn’t — remember competition is just a click away. Be diligent, pay attention
and you will be one step ahead of most websites when it comes to neutralizing the lit-
tle annoyances. After all, are you building your website to drive customer traffic to
your competitors or to enhance your bottom line?
✪
QUALITY ASSURANCE PLAN GUIDELINES
Map your customers’ experience. How?  Fire up your browser and pretend you’re a
customer. Walk through the customer’s complete shopping experience — run numer-
ous tests from the moment your customer first enters your site through the last step
of entering payment information and shipping preferences. 
✸Test the website’s ordering process, from the user’s point of entry through to the
shipping preference.
✸Test the credit card verification system, as well as the billing system that comes
afterward. 
✸Stress test all of the servers with simulated loads. 
✸Check the website’s impact on any back-end systems. 
✸Test not only the servers, but also the personnel and processes that support the
systems.
✸Test email response times. 
✸Test customer usability through focus groups or random-sample surveys.
Test the offline side. How is the payment information received, verified and
processed, including the receipt of payment into your bank account?
Test your servers using simulated loads to see how they stand up under the stress
of heavy traffic. In addition to the products listed earlier, look into:
RSW e-Load (www.rswsoftware.com), a component of Empirix’s e-Test Suite, is the
easy way to test the scalability of a website running on Windows NT. RSW offers a 30-
day free trial. You can use e-Load early in your website’s development process to vali-
date the scalability of the overall architecture and to avoid costly rework later. It can
also be used to test and to tune your completed website under load prior to deploy-
ment. e-Load utilizes the Visual Scripts to emulate thousands of “Virtual Users.” You
can change the number and type of users on-the-fly to try “what-if” scenarios as you
vary the loading conditions or application settings. Also e-Load’s integrated real-time
graphics and reporting capabilities allow for easy interpretation of the testing results. 
Quality Assurance
181

Facilita Software Development’s Forecast (www.facilita.co.uk) is a non-intrusive
web server load testing tool that simulates users on a system. It allows you to perform
extensive and realistic load testing before a system goes live. It supports the UNIX
family — Solaris, AIX, SCO, Digital UNIX, and Linux, along with Windows NT.
Software Research, Inc’s Testworks/Web (www.testworks.com) allows you to ensure
the quality and reliability of your web pages prior to publication. Components included
in TestWorks/Web, such as the XVirtual tool, can simulate thousands of hits against
your website by fabricating hundreds of synthetic interacting users, thereby helping you
to assure 100% load accuracy. You can run the product on most UNIX and Windows
systems.
Now, test your website’s integration with your offline business systems such as
your in-house database, accounting, inventory management system, etc. by simulating
numerous transactions. In doing this you’re not only checking out the hardware and
software but you’re also testing your personnel and the entire process that supports your
website.
Last, but not least, check your customer service processes by testing your email
response time, your web-based call center, etc.
Never launch an e-commerce site, or make a site change or enhancement without
solid quality assurance. A month of intensive, structured testing is the minimum for
a large-scale e-commerce site. 
✪
FOCUS GROUPS AND SURVEYS
These are not in-house focus groups — don’t use employees and friends — you need
to find your intended audience and have that group participate in these tests. The
only way to do this correctly is to employ market researchers with Internet testing
experience or to use a service, like OTIVO (mentioned previously). Such services can be
expensive, but they are necessary because this is where you can discover, prior to open-
ing your site to the general public, if you have any features that your website’s typical
customers will find problematic or annoying. 
Focus group testing includes asking these potential users about their expectations
and usage, such as:
✸How often do you shop online?
✸What items do you most often buy online?
✸After viewing the first page of this website, do you know what’s in this site?
✸Do you feel that the information provided on the home page is informative and
useful?
The Complete E-Commerce Book
182

Give the testing company your customer experience map so the focus group can
set up various scenarios typifying an average customer. The tester then should give
you a report comparing the different approaches the individual members of the focus
group used to navigate your website. In this way you can determine what will work
best for your customers.
The company that you choose to conduct these tests should be prepared to pro-
vide you with a complete report at the end of the testing period. This report should
include:
✸A short executive summary.
✸Description of methodology.
✸Key findings.
✸Recommended actions.
✸Summary of user comments.
✸The full results (including any handwritten notes gathered during the testing,
should be made available upon request).
There are two advantages to taking this approach. One is that once you have the
results from the focus group testing you can intelligently change content organiza-
tion and navigation structure as needed. The other is that the results will help you to
understand your website from a customer’s perspective, allowing you to refocus your
site’s future development on your customer’s experience.
You could possibly cut the costs a bit by using a formal random-sample survey
which means the marketing firm would not need to have access to a computer for
each individual but would call individuals, ask them to use your site, and to then fill
out a questionnaire. 
✪
CONCLUSION
Only through a good QA Plan can you determine how and in what order each aspect
of a website should be tested. A good QA Plan injects testing into every aspect of an e-
commerce project. This allows you to detect defects early, close to the point of inser-
tion, thus defects won’t infect work later on. 
Don’t underestimate the value of a good quality assurance plan. And, don’t skip
this step. Not only must you execute a quality assurance test prior to launch, but also
after you make any type of enhancement to your site. 
Quality Assurance
183

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 12
Website Maintenance 
and Management
If you want a place in the sun, you’ve got to expect a few blisters.
—Anonymous
Everyone pines for those uncomplicated days when maintaining a website was sim-
ply a matter of updating HTML files. Alas, that is no longer the case; today’s e-commerce
businesses are more robust, complex and demanding than ever before. As a result,
more and more e-commerce operators are adopting an effective website maintenance
and management system that syncs with their overall business scheme.
Incorporate in your website’s blueprint a system to refine and to update not only
your web pages to keep them fresh and new, but also your entire infrastructure to take
advantage of new and evolving technology. In doing so, you ensure that your website
will provide the two most important features of a web-based business — a compelling
customer experience and minimal administration costs.
✪
ESTABLISHING A MAINTENANCE AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
How do you establish this type of system?  Use the Internet — take advantage of its
dynamic and interactive attributes. Your first step should be to put a customer feed-
back form in a prominent place on your website. Such forms are invaluable in getting
your online customers involved in the process of analyzing your site. Many of your
customers will be eager to participate. 
Take the proffered information and use it to ensure that your site always achieves
185

optimum performance from your customers’ point of view. Don’t be afraid to experi-
ment; but constantly monitor the results. In this way you can make your changes,
measure the results against other experiments, and settle on the best-performing
choice.
Another tried-and-true approach for maintaining and managing a website is to tie
it into your marketing strategies. This allows you to measure the results of your mar-
keting campaigns — whether a specific campaign is on-track — bringing in customers
and sales. 
If you are a click-and-mortar, your website strategy must be integrated into your
overall business strategy. This allows you to closely monitor whether your website is
meeting your stated business objectives. 
If shortfalls are found, bring out the blueprint and re-evaluate your web business
plan. You must not only define the process but also institute a methodology that pro-
vides the means for a continuous evolution of your website’s objectives. Remember,
as the new century progresses, and technology races ahead, you will continuously rede-
fine the role that your website plays in your overall business goals.
The establishment, management, and maintenance of a website requires a signif-
icant investment of time and resources on your part. But don’t let these tasks over-
whelm you. The best approach is to start with the basics:
✸Design your site for ease of modification.
✸Avoid sloppy formatting, numerous and gratuitous image maps, and superfluous
links on every page. 
✸Know who will maintain and update your website and have more than one person
that can easily step in and take control.
✪
AVOID SIMPLE ERRORS
When updating your website, check that errors aren’t incorporated into your updates.
If a mistake does get by you, fix it immediately upon discovery. As a website grows
and changes, your site’s fault-free design can become riddled with mistakes. For
instance, you may find that gradually:
✸The site’s navigation scheme begins to breakdown. 
✸Broken links become the norm.
✸Individual web pages have become too long. People don’t like scrolling, two screens
per page should be the maximum.
✸Too many graphics have been attached to one page.
✸You haven’t kept up with mundane updates, e.g. the site’s copyright information is
The Complete E-Commerce Book
186

out-of-date (2001 instead of 2004); contact information is inaccurate — you espe-
cially want to have accurate sales contact information at all times. (Consider using
general position email addresses names such as info@yourwebsite.com or
sales@yourwebsite.com, rather than individual names).
✪
SOFTWARE
There are tools to create and to implement a set of uniform formats and styles so that you
can instantly create a new web page by copying and modifying an existing page. For
example, the following tools can help in keeping all coding uniform, thus eliminating
problems caused by errant code. (The products price will depend upon your site’s needs.)
✸CyberTeams’ Website Director (www.cyberteams.com) is a highly scalable web con-
tent management and development system that is priced within reach of just about
any e-business’s budget. Its WYSIWYG editor and page layout templates optimize
website creation and maintenance by enabling content contributors and managers
to develop sophisticated web pages without knowledge of HTML.
✸Refresh Software SiteRefresh (www.refreshsoftware.com. If your website needs fre-
quent content change and/or is a dynamic database-driven site, this vendor’s rela-
tively inexpensive hosted content management system may meet your needs. 
✸Topfloortechnologies’ Insertrix content maintenance software (www.topfloor-
software.com) enables a website built upon dynamic content to cost effectively
change its content in minutes, without programming. 
✸Webceo (www.webceo.com) provides a unified workspace for nine programs that can
help a website operator to attain real results in search engine marketing, to per-
form intelligent web traffic analysis, and to maintain your website easily. Webceo
provides all the help you need to pinpoint broken links and other errors on your site;
to edit your web pages in the WYSIWYG mode; to upload HTML and other files
to your server, and to monitor your website. If you buy the entire nine-program
package, Webceo also can provide visitor analysis, live traffic analysis, handle your
search engine needs (optimize your site for high rankings in search engines, sub-
mit your URLs, and check your rankings with search engines). 
✪
LINKS MANAGEMENT
Another major part of a comprehensive website maintenance and management sys-
tem is to vigilantly identify and fix broken links. A broken link occurs when a page or
location (whether on your website or some far flung web page) pointed to by another
page has been moved, deleted, or renamed. Unfortunately, there are no automatic
Website Maintenance and Management
187

repair mechanisms standing by to sort the problem out. Most often the source page
is simply left with a broken, or dangling link that leads to nowhere. 
Any way you look at it, web-based businesses are heavily penalized for both bro-
ken outbound links (which are arguably under their direct control), and broken
inbound links (to which a number of unsatisfactory solutions apply). Some obvious
consequences of a failure to deal with broken links on your site and broken links that
once pointed to your site are: 
✸Loss of revenue as potential customers attempt, and fail, to follow a broken link
to your site. 
✸Brand damage since a broken link on a website is as bad, if not worse, than a mis-
spelled word in a brochure. It takes diligent oversight to guarantee that a web page
that revealed no flaws when placed on the Web, remains flaw free (including no
broken links) as time goes on. A business with a website with broken links and bro-
ken links pointing to that business’s website might lead a consumer to the con-
clusion that the error is caused in some way by poor standards or bad administration
within your business. 
✸Loss of productivity for the people who maintain your site. Broken links are a time-
consuming headache and large sites may find it costly to keep up-to-date with bro-
ken link repairs. 
The author notes that today the average website has one page in every four con-
taining a broken link. It has been written that more than 10% of the total links on the
Internet are broken. Just think, maybe one page in every four that points to your web-
site could be sending your customers on a one-way trip down the drain!
Do you have links to other sites? If so, you must check these links regularly and
update or delete them when the links are inaccurate. Be diligent about keeping your
links updated so you can identify broken links quickly and pinpoint the pages you
need to fix to keep your site at peak performance all the time. You don’t want your
customers to see a “File not found” message when they are looking to buy. There are
many applications and services available to help you with this, including:
ChangeAgent (www.xlanguage.com/products/cagent.htm). This link management
tool discovers broken links, investigates their cause, and repairs them in a single, inte-
grated environment. It also can remove orphan files and reorganize a site while main-
taining link integrity. ChangeAgent works well with other applications allowing it to
replace broken URLs while avoiding reformatting or restructuring your HTML code.
Cost — $200.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
188

CyberSpyder Link Test (http://www.cyberspyder.com/cslnkts1.html). This website
management program not only verifies whether a website’s links are broken, but also
provides content analysis services. CyberSpyder is designed to work with websites of
all sizes — from the very small e-commerce site, to the large corporate site with thousands
of links. Costs — CyberSpyder is distributed as shareware, as such it may be used free for
up to 60 days for evaluation purposes, after that there is a small registration fee of $35.
Link Checker Pro (www.linkcheckerpro.com). A nice, inexpensive, no frills tool to
check internal and external links. Link Checker Pro is easy to use and has many cus-
tomizable settings. It allows reports of link data to be saved in HTML format that
may be easily viewed in any Internet browser. Costs — Free for up to 30 days, there-
after there is a $40 registration fee.
Link Sleuth (http://home.snafu.de/tilman/xenulink.html). This free spidering soft-
ware checks websites for broken links. Link Sleuth’s link verification is carried out
not only on “normal” links, but also on images, frames, plug-ins, backgrounds, local
image maps, style sheets, scripts and java applets. It displays a continuously updated
list of URLs, which you can sort by different criteria. Costs — Free.
LinkScan (www.elsop.com/linkscan/). The LinkScan family of products provides a
host of industrial-strength link checking and website management tools. For instance
LinkScan offers flexible test automation capabilities for the entire spectrum of web-
based applications. Costs — $750 to $7500.
Linkscan also offers a free service, called LinkScan/QuickCheck (www.elsop.com/
linkscan/quickcheck.html), which provides online link checking and HTML valida-
tion service. This free service permits you to check up to 10 web pages per hour and up
to 50 per day (although there is a limit of 200 links per document). QuickCheck is
intended as a quick way to check the quality and identify problems on a web page.  
If you are diligent, and use one of the above-mentioned (or similar) software pack-
ages with intelligence, your customers, when trying to access your site through a link
or browsing your site, should seldom see some of the common error codes listed below: 
Error 401 - Access to this page is denied.
Error 402 - A payment is required.
Error 403 - The request you have asked for is forbidden.
Error 404 - File not found.
Error 408 - Server timed out waiting for request.
Error 500 - Internal server error.
Error 502 - Error response received from gateway.
Website Maintenance and Management
189

✪
CONTENT MANAGEMENT
Managing the content of a busy website is crucial. For example, size may be a prob-
lem — it is not unusual for a site to routinely publish hundreds of pages per week.
However, the people creating all of this content are usually writers and marketing
types who rarely consider the need to clean out dead files let alone understand the
problem of tracing a chain reaction of errors caused by a simple change in code. Then
you have those businesses whose entire website consists of constantly changing con-
tent — newspapers, ezines (an online magazine), B2B vendors, and catalog sites. These
sites require a tight control of style and format, and easy re-purposing. 
E-commerce businesses are encountering increasingly complex logistical problems
coordinating their site’s updates. Large and enterprise sites have web teams consist-
ing of software and content developers, webmasters, graphic designers, testers, and
approvers. Frequent changes by such a diverse team make it increasingly difficult for
an e-commerce business to ensure high quality, especially since most changes are made
at Web speed. 
✪
HARDWARE AND INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE
Time-to-market pressures have forced many web-based businesses to create web infra-
structures (everything that makes your pretty pages work) in a haphazard fashion.
These websites sometimes experience substantial downtime as a result of poor plan-
ning and/or maintenance — a flaw immediately apparent to customers and business
partners. Keeping your website up and available is the goal. Attaining 99.999% avail-
ability (“five nines”) is an exhausting, arduous, and never-ending pursuit. Your website’s
failure points can include: human error, hacker infiltration, faulty software in routers
and switches, increased bandwidth traffic that crashes servers, configuration prob-
lems, power failures, major carrier outages, not to mention any of the numerous appli-
cations that run your website. 
The total “end-to-end” performance of the website’s infrastructure must be under-
stood and analyzed in order to ensure that it delivers the performance demanded by
today’s web customers. However, this is not achievable by the simple addition of a
website management component to the mélange of existing systems, network, and
application management solutions already peppered throughout the average enter-
prise website.
But the case is not hopeless. Although a majority of all websites are now hosted
externally, it is still vital that a website operator understands the importance of real
time management and capacity planning. Many websites are sophisticated systems
The Complete E-Commerce Book
190

that incorporate transaction processing and any problematic component between the
customer and the website can effect performance and reliability. Help is on the way.
A formal management and maintenance system for a web-based business ran on
in-house equipment is crucial. This scenario requires that a robust management sys-
tem must be designed and implemented, i.e., the full “end-to-end” system — applica-
tion, network, connectivity and systems — if the site is to remain reliable and maintain
cutting edge technology. 
To accomplish this, all of your servers including your web server should be as self-
documenting as possible. All programs and other source code should be published,
and you should have a web policy document with goals, practice, management, etc.
that is frequently updated and in an easily accessible (but secure) location.
Here is the help (again, the cost depends upon your site’s needs):
NetMechanic (www.netmechanic.com). This all-in-one website maintenance serv-
ice performs whole site link checking, HTML validation, load time analysis, and server
reliability testing.
TIDF Maintenance Repair Shop (www.tidf.com/theIDF/wmrs/services.cfm). This
maintenance service focuses on website assurance (monitoring, diagnostics and test-
ing, browser compatibility checks), preventative maintenance and enhancement serv-
ices (recurring updates, database maintenance and upgrades, site efficiency
improvements including website infrastructure and general enhancements and tweaks),
and website repair and emergency services (emergency website re-deployment, emer-
gency assistance, hosting issues, database fixes and code repair).
Or use an outsourcing service like Elance Online (www.elance.com). Elance pro-
vides access to global expertise that is cost-effective and of high quality. There are a
number ways you can use Elance Online to gain the website maintenance you need:
Use Elance to search for the expertise you need; post your needs on the Elance web-
site and wait for proposals to come flowing in; or contact Elance’s Project Services for
project scoping, vendor selection, and/or project management assistance.
With the proper management and maintenance system in place, a web-based busi-
ness can monitor and manage applications, data, systems, and networks in an integrated,
pro-active manner using sophisticated software tools. In addition, the data gathered
and reported can be used for other functions, such as security, capacity planning, etc.
However, when it comes to five nines availability there’s no single answer, just as there is
no single point of failure. While a website should implement best practices to improve
its chances, there are just too many factors that can bring down your website. The only
sure way to minimize such incidents is strict attention to planning and preparation.
Website Maintenance and Management
191

Note: Maintaining a website can be time consuming, so you might want to outsource your website’s management
and maintenance chores. While there are many qualified experts that can help you manage, maintain and even
fix a problematic website, it’s up to you to be specific as to what you expect from the outsourcer and to under-
stand the outsourcer’s contractually obligated duties. Read Chapter 13 before going down this path.  
✪
CONCLUSION
A website must be kept updated or its moneymaking potential is wasted. In this chap-
ter, we’ve discussed various software and online solutions to aid in your quest for the
perfect, problem-free website. 
Most web operators will find that they need to rely on a blend of technologies to pro-
vide the proper website maintenance and management. Thankfully, the functions
offered by website management and maintenance tools often overlap. Thus, if you
look carefully before taking the leap, you may find it possible to save time and money
by purchasing a single suite of tools that can handle most, if not all, of the tasks nec-
essary for a properly managed site.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
192

Chapter 13
Consultants and Vendors
A consultant is someone who takes your watch away 
to tell you what time it is.
Every web-based business risks getting mired in an outsourcing dilemma as they seek
to obtain valuable expertise that is either not present internally or in short supply.
There are literally hundreds of capable consultants, vendors, and matchmaker com-
panies out there clamoring for your dollars. For the typical web-based business to
choose among the myriad of options available to it, requires that you be able to iden-
tify which consultants and vendors have the capability and commitment to help the
web-based business to reach its goals.
This chapter contains information about consultant contracts, costs, types of con-
sulting services available, when to outsource and when to do the work in-house, etc. Sur-
prisingly, nearly all entrepreneurs and most of the brick-and-mortar businesses do
not have a formal process for selecting consultants or vendors and most selections
seem as random as using the flip of a coin to make the ultimate decision. But with
an effective selection process in place your new website will meet the needs of everyone,
including your customers.
✪
SELECTING A CONSULTANT 
At some point, every web-based business will need to retain a consultant. Consultants
are the “hired guns” of the Web industry that eliminate an endless number of problems
in a timely and cost effective manner due to the wealth of related experience that they
bring to the table. 
193

Your specific talent needs may be for a website architect, a web designer, a web
developer, a marketing expert, a planning consultant, a security expert, or some other
form of technical assistance. Formalizing an effective selection process is key to obtain-
ing the best services for your needs.
As part of the process of sorting out your expectations and selecting your con-
sultant, write a summary of your project and objectives. Include a concise description
of your website (either as it exists, or as you anticipate it to be). This summary can be
a handy reference tool when contacting prospective consultants.
To begin, assess the project’s specific requirements, review your objectives to ensure
they are well-defined, then determine what your staff can handle and what you need
to outsource by asking yourself and your staff:
✸How much of the work can be done in-house? 
✸How much of the work is beyond your staff’s capacity and must be outsourced? 
✸What is the budget? 
✸Are there cost savings?  If so, what is the expected payback period (i.e., ROI of hir-
ing a consultant versus trying to do it in-house)?
✸What is your business’ commitment to the project? (In other words, after you spend
time in the selection process — which in and of itself can be costly — will the proj-
ect move forward to completion?) 
✸What is the timetable for completing the project? 
The Consultant’s Role
After the project’s objectives have been determined and prioritized you then need to
compare those objectives to the types of services consultants offer. Including:
✸A specialized expertise.
✸Ability to objectively assess a specific situation.
✸A temporary supplement to your staff and knowledge base.
✸Technical and economic analysis of alternatives.
✸Development of recommendations.
✸Design and programming support.
✸Assistance with hardware/software selection.
✸Assistance with implementing operational changes.
✸Completion of one-time projects. 
Consultants can help improve your website’s operations and productivity, but don’t
forget that you and your staff are the experts in the operation of your web-based busi-
ness; a consultant should enhance that expertise, not substitute for it. Do not depend
The Complete E-Commerce Book
194

on a consultant for decision-making — including purchasing decisions. Not uncom-
monly, consultants sometimes receive a commission when you (as their client) buy
one of their recommended products or hire someone the consultant recommended.
The Consultant’s Qualifications
After deciding to take advantage of a consultant’s service, begin the process of iden-
tifying the type of consultant that will best meet the needs of your project. To find
the right consultant:
✸Re-visit consultants you have used in the past, assess that consultant’s capabilities
and limitations before deciding if you need to find another consultant. 
✸Obtain referrals from other similar web-based businesses, trade associations, or
consultant referral services. 
✸Contact prospective consultants to identify their expertise, qualifications, and
interest in your project. Request their marketing materials, including relevant edu-
cational background, experience, and professional certifications. 
✸Obtain references and a list of previous clients. Checking past work performance
is one of the best ways to evaluate a consultant. 
When checking a consultant’s references and previous clients, find out whether
the consultant has worked on projects similar in size and nature to the proposed proj-
ect; has met the stated work and project deadlines; and he/she has been responsive,
available and trustworthy.
On a more personal level ask:
✸If there were any problems and, if so, were the issues satisfactorily resolved?
✸If it was easy to work with the consultant?
✸Whether the consultant was knowledgeable. What was the overall impression of
the consultant?
✸Find out if the final cost seemed in line with the original estimate. Ask if the final
cost was more than the consultant’s original quote. If so, how much and why? 
The Request for Proposal (RFP)
Once you have narrowed your selection down to three to five perspective consultants,
prepare a Request for Proposal (RFP). A RFP is a formal request to the consultant
describing everything you want the consultant to accomplish and requesting the con-
sultant to write a proposal outlining how he/she would go about meeting your demands
and the costs thereof. The RFP can be as informal as an email or a telephone call, but
it is best presented as a formal written document. The more information it conveys, and
Consultants and Vendors
195

the more specific your requests, the more the RFP enhances the consultant’s ability
to draft a relevant proposal. 
There are basically two types of RFPs. A defined, rigid proposal wherein is laid out,
step-by-step, your goals and requirements and a more informed, creative proposal, a
three to four page document simply setting out what the job will entail. The defined,
rigid-style RFP allows for an easy comparison of costs, approaches and other criteria
submitted by the consultant during the selection process. A creative proposal gives
the consultant less structure thereby allowing for a greater diversity in response, but
this approach can make the proposals more difficult to compare. Still, the creative
proposal allows you to observe how the experience and knowledge of the consultant
can be creatively applied to provide an exciting and unique approach to the project.
The Interview
After compiling a list of consultants whose skills fulfill your requirements, invite each
consultant in for an interview. Be sure to:
✸Explain your objectives and how you view the division of labor and responsibili-
ties between the consultant and your staff. Be specific. 
✸Solicit the consultant’s opinions — an outside perspective can be valuable. 
✸Set out your timeline. 
✸Ask the consultant to specify who would be working on the project.
If the meeting appears to be successful, take the next step — provide a Request for
Proposal (RFP) as discussed above and obtain the information necessary for you to
do your due diligence. Such as:   
✸Obtain a clients’ list from the perspective consultant, including names and phone
numbers.
✸Find out how long the consultant has been in business.
✸Ask what kind of projects the consultant has handled.
✸Obtain samples of the consultant’s work. 
✸Ascertain what resources the consultant has to complete the project, (i.e., staff,
sub-contracting, etc.).
✸Ask the consultant if there are any foreseeable problems in meeting your time
schedule.
✸Find out how the consultant charges — is it per hour, per day, or per project, and ask
if a deposit is required.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
196

In any communications thereafter, provide a written answer to additional infor-
mation requests by the consultant — clear communication is important, and it ensures
that you get the results you want.
Review the Proposals
Review the proposals received from each consultant and compare them to your estab-
lished selection criteria to determine whether: 
✸The consultant responded to the principle needs based on the RFP’s outlined
objectives.
✸The services set out are specific to your RFP and are clearly defined. 
✸The timetable covers both the consultant’s time and your staff’s time and that it is
reasonable.
✸All fees and costs are clearly defined, the billing procedures are specific, and the
consultant’s fees seem reasonable.
✸The consultant has clearly defined the division of responsibility between your staff
and the consultant’s staff. 
✸The consultant sets forth the consulting personnel assigned to the project, includ-
ing résumés, experience, and billing rates. 
✪
THE CONSULTANT CONTRACT 
To protect your investment, get a written contract. Some of the specific issues that
should be addressed in the consulting contract or letter of agreement are:
✸Does the consultant use subcontractors? If so, does the consultant receive a com-
mission for their services? 
✸Who provides the necessary insurance coverage? What type of coverage does the
consultant have? 
✸How will unforeseen costs be handled?  Is your approval required before such costs
are incurred? 
✸Where will the majority of the work be performed?  If at your place of business, is
there adequate space?  
✸If information accessible to the consultant is confidential, a nondisclosure clause
must be included. 
✸Include specific dates for the project’s milestones, for each report that may need
to be submitted, and for the project completion.
✸What is the procedure for handling problems as they arise?
✸How will revised work and costs be determined? 
Consultants and Vendors
197

Work Plan
Most consultants bill on a time and material basis. Therefore, to protect the interest
of both you and the consultant, set out a reasonable work plan with a not-to-exceed
(NTE) cost. A work plan is like your blueprint, it maps out exactly what the consult-
ant has contracted to perform, with timelines and estimated costs at defined stages. Use
the proposal received from the consultant as a guide when drawing up your work plan.
In some instances the work plan may vary due to the nature of the project, so a series
of possible scenarios and costs should be built around best case, worst case, and most
likely scenarios.
✪
WEBSITE DEVELOPERS 
Many new websites are contracted out for development to website developers, an inde-
pendent contractor performing a “work for hire” service. In this case you will look for
a person or entity with both the technical and conceptual ability to be responsive to your
requirements. A website developer will also need to produce a web design that is com-
patible with your business image. During the selection process, follow the procedure
set forth in the “Selecting a Consultant” section. 
You will also need to produce and sign a Development Agreement addressing issues
that cover the development of your website including payment and acceptance pro-
cedures. The bare bones of a development agreement should contain: 
✸Firm dates for specific design milestones and website completion.
✸A budget covering everything from the start through completion of the website
including specific payment milestones.
✸The developer’s use of subcontractors and any commission the developer might
receive for contracting with them for their services.
✸The procedure for handling any problems that might occur.
✸A mechanism allowing for revised work orders, change orders, and determination
of the ensuing costs. 
✸The maximum acceptable download time for any web page. 
✸The inclusion of a user option, if necessary, of a low-graphics version of the website
in order to minimize download times. 
✸A guarantee that the website is downwardly compatible with a specific version of
Internet browser software such as Microsoft’s Explorer, Netscape, and WebTV
browsers. 
✸A guarantee that a specific number of users are able to simultaneously access the
site, as well as setting forth a minimum response time. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
198

✸Assurance that the site will integrate properly with your business network, intranet,
or other data server infrastructure. 
✸Assurance that additions, corrections, or modifications to the website can be made
by you and your staff without interference with website operations. 
✸Specifications of the security safeguards, procedures, and firewalls that the site
must contain. 
✸Guarantees of the functionality of online credit verification and acceptance pro-
cedures.
✸Assurance of the scope and procedure for you easily to access, record, and compile
information about the site’s visitors and customers. 
✸A provision for timely documentation and source codes for all software associated
with development of the website. 
✸Training of your staff to use and maintain the website’s software including upgrades. 
✸Delineate the responsibility for transferring and installing the completed website
to the web servers that will run the new website. This should include all software —
either purchased or licensed by your business.   
✸Set out a provision for alternative interface designs that the website developer must
provide for your review.
✸A commitment by the developer to a set period for joint beta testing of the com-
pleted website and a subsequent specific number of days to be used for evaluation
of the new website by you and your staff to ensure your new website performs in
accordance with the agreement.
✸The developer will promptly correct any bugs and failed links, including setting
forth the maximum time for correction. 
✸The developer will promptly perform any revisions of the website that are neces-
sary to comply with the functionality specifications. 
✸A right of rejection of the website if it does not meet the written specifications, set-
ting forth certain options you may exercise regarding corrections at the time of a
rejection.
✸Any particular warranties or disclaimers by the developer. 
✸Assurances that any software for the site is free of any viruses or disabling devices. 
✸Conditions under which you have the right to terminate the developer’s agreement
and the liability of the developer upon such termination.
✸A nondisclosure clause must be included, if information accessible to the devel-
oper is confidential. 
✸A copyright notice to be displayed on each page of the website.
Consultants and Vendors
199

The Contract
Once you have successfully negotiated the Development Agreement, to legally bind
and protect all, a contract with the website developer should come next. It must address
several issues: 
✸Incorporated into the contract should be all of the provisions of the Development
Agreement by reference.
✸Ownership of intellectual property relating to the content, screens, software, and
information developed including who owns the rights to use any materials or soft-
ware the developer creates for the website. 
✸In development of your website, the developer must covenant that it will not infringe
or violate the copyright and other intellectual property rights of any third party. 
✸Normally you will receive a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide royalty-free trans-
ferable license to any intellectual property, but typically the developer owns, uses,
and retains ownership of the same. 
✸Set out who is responsible for securing necessary rights, licenses, clearances, and
other permissions related to any graphics or other copyrighted materials used or oth-
erwise incorporated in the website.
✸The developer covenants that it will not ever use any trademarks, service marks or
logos owned by you and/or your company, except with your express written approval. 
✸The developer will comply with all applicable laws. 
✸The developer will maintain satisfactory insurance and will provide proof of its
policies.
✸A copyright notice will be displayed on designated parts of the website.
Other issues you may want to incorporate into the developer’s contract or set forth
in a separate agreement: 
✸The developer will submit the appropriate information about your website to a
specified list of search engines and directories. 
✸The developer will not use its service affiliation with you for its own promotional
purposes without prior written consent. 
A website developer will be one of the first consultants you will need for your new
website. Go slowly, follow the steps outlined herein, choose carefully, and you will be
on the road to a great website.
✪
VENDOR SELECTION 
A vendor has a product for sale that may require customization for you to utilize it. Ven-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
200

dors sell you the product and their professional technical services, as a package. It is
imperative that the vendor selection process not be handicapped by internal political
agendas, “gut feelings,” or the toss of a coin decision. Once it is known that you are
“in the market” you will be deluged with specific vendor related solicitations. If not
managed correctly, the vendor selection process can eat up time and resources and it
can be quite costly, accounting for as much as 25-30% of the total vendor costs. 
Some of the worst-case scenarios can be:  
✸Choosing a vendor without proper due diligence. For instance, the vendor might
go out of business in the middle of your project resulting in you being forced to
make an ill-timed decision in order to complete the project. 
✸Service and support problems.
✸Differences in your visions that were not made clear.
Vendor Evaluation 
Establish a vendor evaluation methodology that does not focus most of the atten-
tion on the functionality and cost issues. A vendor’s ability to execute a specific plan
and its long-term vision is well worth the investment. The next step is to create a ven-
dor’s RFP.
Elements of a vendor RFP:
Functionality: This is usually the primary focus of any vendor evaluation, but in
actuality it should represent no more than 40% of the total decision-making process. 
Storyboard: To ensure that you cover all of the capabilities you want from a specific
vendor product, use a storyboard. Draw the storyboard using the same criteria as set
out in Chapter 2. In other words, include:
✸The design aspects. 
✸Ease of use features.
✸Ability to integrate with other tools, both hardware and software.
You must also determine if the product provides:
✸Tools that enable you to present content electronically.
✸Configurators to easily target various vertical, and geographic markets.
✸Scalability to incorporate new media formats.
✸Ability to easily interface with other e-commerce applications.
✸Ability to enhance rather than decrease the security risks.
Costs: Don’t put too much emphasis on the initial cost of the product in your deci-
sion-making process. Remember that the majority of the cost is hidden — such as prod-
Consultants and Vendors
201

uct training, customization, and integration. Therefore, cost calculations should always
include not only initial license costs for the product and any knowledge tools utilized,
but also costs of installation and maintenance, help-desk gateway, ongoing education
and training, and professional services such as customization and integration. 
The Vision: What is the vendor’s stated and realized development plans for its prod-
uct?  Ask how the vendor plans to incorporate and utilize new technologies into its
product’s architecture and how it plans to evolve its current product by adding to or
enhancing the current functionality. Let’s not forget about service and support — how
does the vendor plan to grow and change its general and professional services sup-
port. Remember to investigate (due diligence once again raises its ugly head) how the
vendor treats its customer once the vendor has been paid.  
A vendor’s vision is just as important as the vendor’s ability to produce a viable
product and execute its successful implementation. For most businesses, this can be
used as the key differentiator when making the final vendor selection. 
Service and Support: A product’s functionality and cost provides, in many instances,
the inducement for making a specific vendor selection. But it is just as important that
you also consider the availability of quality service and support, for without them, the
success of any product implementation is ultimately doomed. 
Service and support needs to be broken down into two areas. The first is general
support including installation of the product and continuing support. Also don’t for-
get to check out the quality of the vendor’s help desk services. The second area is pro-
fessional services. This can be the weakest link in many vendor organizations and
therefore due diligence must be stringent — i.e., evaluate the vendor’s strengths in
project management, systems integration, and business consulting skills. 
In spite of the critical service and support that vendor’s supply, most businesses
don’t take the time to create a vendor RFP  — let your business be the exception. 
Due Diligence
While we have harped on performing proper due diligence throughout this section,
it has proven to be the weakest area in most vendor selection processes. Given the
maturity of the e-commerce arena and the fierce competition that exists, the author pre-
dicts that, in a few years, at least half of the current vendors will no longer exist. Have
you taken this fact into consideration when making your vendor selection?  If not, do
so. What is the vendor’s financial viability?  Answer this question by analyzing the
vendor’s revenues, growth, margins, sales and marketing investment, quick ratio, etc.
The next step is to measure the quality of personnel within the Vendor’s sales and
The Complete E-Commerce Book
202

development departments. Ask questions, such as if these departments are able to
meet industry milestones; have historically been able to meet deadlines and delivered
what they promised; have R&D capabilities comparable with other vendors; and is the
vendor suffering a high turnover among its most talented people.
Finalizing the Selection Process 
Once you have put in place your selection criteria and structure, use your storyboard
to guide you through each step in the selection process. This will help to point out
your website’s needs. But you must also research, so as to pinpoint the exact require-
ments you expect a vendor’s products to provide. Then, write the RFP, and send it out
to a select group of vendors. That’s straight-forward, right?  
The next step is to whittle down your vendor selection list. This can get a bit hairy
— use RFP validation, comparisons, scripts (the storyboard) and vendor presentations
to help in this process. In the end, hold a no-holds barred in-house meeting and review
everything, you should wind up with a short list of no more than three vendors that
fits all the criteria. 
You can now take the final step — negotiation and selection. Here you develop and
sharpen your negotiating strategy. How? Decide what’s critical to the project and put
it all down in a contract (use your legal team for this part). Call in the short list ven-
dors and the race is on. Once you have selected a vendor willing to work within the
negotiated terms and conditions, you can begin the final documentation, presenta-
tion to management, and getting those signatures on the dotted line.  
Following the advice in this section should usher your web-based business into
many successful vendor partnerships.
✪
CONCLUSION
By following the procedures outlined in this chapter, any e-business should be able
to utilize the best evaluation criteria, gather the necessary and objective data, and
guarantee that its overall evaluation process proceeds in a structured format. You will
also end up with a great paper trail, which can be useful if there is a need to explain
how you arrived at a specific selection. 
Consultants and Vendors
203

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 14
Web-hosting Services
Technology. . .is a queer thing; it brings great gifts with one hand, 
and it stabs you in the back with the other.
—C.P.Snow
There are a multitude of web-hosting services (a third party that sells you space on its
web servers) available. A majority of small e-commerce businesses will contract with a
web-hosting service rather than use an in-house server. 
Your web-hosting decision is one of the most important decisions you make when
starting an e-commerce business. That is because a good web-hosting service provides
a place where your site can reside and operate quietly and efficiently in the background.
But, if you don’t do your research and perform proper due diligence, you might choose
the wrong hosting service. The trick is to find the right match between what your e-com-
merce site needs and what the web-hosting service offers. 
In your quest for the right hosting service, start with the basics — how good, how
reliable, and how industrial-strength is your potential host’s connection to the Inter-
net?  Then check out what other services are offered to enable your e-commerce busi-
ness to have more functionality.
As you shall learn, there are a multitude of web-hosting business models and options
available to an e-commerce business. Because there are so many hosting choices, you
must decide what your own web-hosting requirements are before venturing forth.
This allows you to narrow your shopping down to just a few hundred rather than
thousands of choices. Let’s first look at the various web-hosting models. Understanding
205

the different business models under which web-hosting services operate makes it eas-
ier to choose the best service for your e-commerce site. 
✪
THE WEB-HOSTING SERVICE MODELS
Web-hosting services are not equal. Although, at one level, all hosting services provide
hard disk space on powerful computers (the servers) that have 24-hour connections to
the Internet, there are many differences. By breaking this business group into differ-
ent business models, the differences become clear.
Internet Service Providers (ISPs)
Throughout the world, thousands of local and national ISPs provide dedicated per-
manent connections to the Internet backbone and allow individual users access to
the Internet (for a fee) via their connections. Some ISPs also provide some type of ad
hoc website hosting service. Many ISPs, however, don’t really understand the needs
of a small web-based business. Nor are they quick to offer improved service because
their bread-and-butter is dial-up access and that’s where they concentrate their focus
and investment. Furthermore, although a few large ISPs have a separate division that
specializes in website hosting, many ISPs just don’t have an adequate infrastructure for
web-hosting. If possible, pass on ISPs and look elsewhere for your web-hosting services.
Sub-domain or Non-virtual Account
What 99% of you don’t need or want is the 4 or 5 MB of web space that you can get
for a small monthly fee or even free from an ISP when you sign up for a regular Inter-
net dial-up account. This type of service is referred to as a “sub-domain” or “non-vir-
tual account.” It allows you to build a very small, simple website that can be accessed
by a URL that looks something like www.mystupidsite.ISP.com or www.ISP.com/~mys-
tupidsite/home page.html which means you have a directory on your ISP’s website in
which you can build your site. The profound drawback to the option is not only do
you have a hard-to-remember URL for your website, but if you ever move the site,
you’ll have to change the site’s address. This type of web space is not something to
use for a serious commercial website.
Dedicated Web-hosting Service
A dedicated web-hosting service provides you with server space (virtual, dedicated or
co-location) for your website, although usually without Internet access. Their prima-
rily business is offering server and rack space for businesses that do not want to man-
age their web-based servers in-house. While a few web-hosting services also might offer
The Complete E-Commerce Book
206

ISP service as a convenience to its core group of customers (e-commerce businesses);
they probably are not going after the “casual surfer’s” business. 
Thus, one advantage of a dedicated service is that your customers won’t be shar-
ing valuable bandwidth (a big concern when choosing any type of hosting service)
with the casual web surfer checking their email, downloading MP3 files, etc. What
this means is that your customers will experience speedy access times, fast loading
pages, and no shopping cart lag. 
All large or enterprise websites should consider this type of web-hosting service.
E-commerce sites that plan to incorporate streaming media or other types of services
that require specialized servers should also turn to dedicated web-hosting services. 
Since this market is over-supplied, to stand out in the crowd, some web-hosting
services offer very nice (but expensive) high-end features. You will find that a good
full-featured web-hosting service has a more “services” oriented approach — offering
expertise in networking, or offering and managing complex software — as opposed to
just selling space on its servers’ hard drives.
Local Web-hosting Services
Check out the web-hosting services in your local community. These services can offer
personalized attention and customized service, such as visiting your business in order
to evaluate your hardware, examine your network, etc., and then making specific rec-
ommendations. For a small web-based business, a local web-hosting service will, in
many instances, provide added services including, for example, helping you market
your business by providing a link to your website on its local business directory. There-
fore, many small- and mid-sized e-commerce operators may be willing to trade off cer-
tain features offered by a larger hosting service for the extendibility of a local service. Note
though that a local web-hosting service is less likely to provide 24x7 technical support. 
If you choose one of the small local hosting services, and your site becomes very
active, don’t be surprised if the host asks you to move your website to another serv-
ice. Why?  Because a good hosting service, even if small, will look out for the welfare of
its overall constituency and might be afraid that heavy traffic to a particularly popu-
lar website on its service will hurt the performance of the other websites that it hosts.
Web Developer Hosting
Using your website developer to host your e-commerce needs is another viable option
for the small- to mid-sized e-business. Quite a few web developers have added web-
hosting to their list of client services. 
Web-hosting Services
207

A web developer usually provides hosting services via a server with a small pipeline
to the Internet (either DSL or some type of partial T-1/E-1 service). Many times an e-
commerce business, especially one with a small niche market, will find that the great
service provided by such a hosting arrangement is more important than a large pipe
to the Internet. 
A web developer’s business is, by nature, customer-centric and thus it will usually
have the staff to help you with problems that might arise. However, there is a price to
be paid: a slightly higher contract price, total dependence upon one service, and lack
of 24x7 technical support. 
One piece of advice: If you decide to go this route, be careful to ensure that your
hosting contract does not lock you into using only the web developer’s services (host-
ing or otherwise) for an extended period of time. Also, take the appropriate steps to
ensure that the developer’s name isn’t listed as the “Administrative Contact” for your
domain name. This identity confusion can cause problems and delays if you (at any
time in the future) want to transfer your website and domain to another hosting serv-
ice. You can find out who is currently listed as Administrative Contact for your domain
name at www.accesswhois.com.
Free Web-hosting Services
Although free web-hosting services aren’t as prevalent as in the past, you still want to
avoid placing your web-based business in their hands. Here’s why:
✸You will be severely restricted in the things that you can do with your website.
✸You won’t be able to use your own domain name. You’ll have to settle for some-
thing like www.freewebhosting.com/yourcompany.
✸Although free web-hosting services normally give you between 2 and 10 megabytes
of server space, many require you to display their advertising banners (or put up
with annoying pop-up windows carrying their ads) and many won’t allow you to
display advertising from any other company. 
✸Most won’t give you the easy-to-use FTP services to upload your web pages. This
means you will have to find another way to put your changes on the web server.
✸Few, if any, of them provide database access.
✸Very few will give you CGI-bins.
✸Few, if any, provide secure servers for credit card purchases. 
✸Forget about data backups.
✸Search engines will normally take three to four times longer to list the submitted
pages. Also search engines give more “weightage” to sites that have their own domain
names.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
208

✸You won’t get unlimited autoresponders, nor the POP email accounts you need.
✸Most free web-hosting services will not give you access to your own server log files.
✸You and your customers will experience frequent downtimes because of the heavy
loads on the hosting company’s servers.
✸You will find that technical support is almost non-existent.
Get the message?  Don’t use a free web-hosting service for your web-based busi-
ness — EVER.
✪
TYPES OF HOSTING ACCOUNTS
As you have noticed as you’ve read through this chapter, when it comes to web-host-
ing services, one size does not fit all. The same goes for the type of account you opt
for with one of these services.
Virtual Hosting
Most small e-commerce websites should consider “virtual serving.” This type of host-
ing service lets you run your website as if you had your own in-house web server but with
the advantage of the web-hosting service’s pipeline to the Internet. Virtual serving just
divides a server’s capacity into several distinct “virtual” web servers. With this set up a
hosting service can host several sites on one computer. This type of service also allows
you to load your own software, set up your own cgi-bin directories, etc.  
Most Internet hosting companies offer several varieties of “virtual serving.” If you
require a more powerful server or a server with a limited number of sites sharing it or
a combination of both, you can get it (for an appropriate fee). You are only limited by
what hardware configuration and bandwidth you can afford. 
Your Own Dedicated Server 
Another option for a small e-commerce site that has heavy traffic, needs high avail-
ability, or serves dynamically generated pages is to contract for a dedicated server.
With a dedicated server contract, instead of sharing a server, you run your website on
one of the web-host’s servers, which is configured for, and dedicated to, your website’s
needs. This lets you take advantage of the web-hosting service’s high-speed connec-
tion to the Internet, technical support, and redundancy systems, but allows you to
have, at your command, the full capacity of an individual server. 
A dedicated server is the right option if a virtual hosting service plan doesn’t offer
enough data transfer, disk space, CPU power, and/or flexibility. With a dedicated
server your website has the whole server to itself. That means high data transfer lim-
Web-hosting Services
209

its, hard drives with gigabytes of free space, 100% of the CPU power, root access, and
the ability to run whatever programs you wish.
Dedicated servers usually come preloaded with an operating system, web server
software, control panel, and some basic services. Anything else to be loaded onto the
server is up to you. Most dedicated servers are rented by the month and pricing usu-
ally includes a monthly bandwidth limit and at least one IP static address. 
The downside of this choice is that the cost of running your website on a dedicated
hosted server can be significantly higher than using a virtual server. Also, you need to
know how to manage a server. That includes monitoring, installing and upgrading
programs, configuring programs, dealing with hack attempts, troubleshooting and
fixing problems, etc. Or you could hire an experienced system administrator to han-
dle such tasks. 
Another option is to let the web-hosting service provide your server management
needs. For an extra fee you can get a managed dedicated server — many Internet host-
ing companies offer leases for individual computers with the same management
options as a virtual hosting contract.  
Co-hosting or Co-locating
A large website might go with co-hosting (which is also referred to as co-locating)
since it provides the most freedom — but it is expensive. With co-hosting you rent
space in an Internet hosting service’s network server cabinet and pay to access the net-
work that’s connected to the Internet. In this situation you put your own computers
in the server cabinet and service them yourself by obtaining access to the hosting facil-
ities. This arrangement usually includes, for a fee, some kind of limited maintenance
and back-up service. 
Basic Server Farm
A basic server farm usually consists of several separate servers performing different
functions — all residing in one server cabinet. A large website running various appli-
cations should separate the various server applications over different computers, some
sharing tasks and others going it alone. It’s good practice, for example, to put a proces-
sor-intensive application on a single server and to isolate any risky tasks. See Chapter
4 for discussion of hardware configurations.
✪
DIFFERENT HOSTING NEEDS
There is a big difference between the web requirements of a small- to mid-sized web-
based business’ hosting needs (even if it is a full-scale e-commerce site) and an estab-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
210

lished large- or enterprise-sized business moving to the Web with a huge catalog of
products and heavy traffic.
Whichever category you fall into, shop around for your web-hosting service provider
and thoroughly check references. Learn to differentiate between a pitch and a prom-
ise. The first step in this process is to ask yourself what do you want from a web-host-
ing service. Then determine your website’s needs.
The Small- to Mid-size Website 
It is important that strict attention be paid to how your hosting service and your web-
based business will work together, including how your chosen hosting service can
compliment your web-based business. 
Shopping for the right web-hosting service for your web-based business is a diffi-
cult task at best. Look for a web-hosting service that offers a basic hosting package
that includes:
✸Unlimited data transfer.
✸At least 15 MB of space (if email, log files and system programs are included in the
amount of MB offered).
✸The option of FrontPage extensions, since so many websites are designed with
FrontPage.
Numerous hosting services offer small business-specific hosting services. To help
you in the task, make a list similar to the one depicted in Fig. 25. Use the list to start
your comparisons of web-hosts. 
Switching hosting services after your website is up and running is a headache. You
can often avoid this pain by selecting, from the get-go, a hosting service that provides
a full range of hosting packages — some of which you need now, and others that you
will need in the future. 
You will find in almost every hosting package a set number of email mailboxes, a
predefined amount of server space for your files, and a traffic allowance (the number
of megabytes downloaded when customers request one of your web pages). As with
everything else, the more email boxes, file space, etc. you want, the more you pay.
Unless your website is very well established and image-driven with, for example, a large
product catalog, you can start with the one of the less expensive plans offered by your
chosen web-hosting services. 
Many web-hosting services also offer web design packages; but be advised that most
of these packages leave a lot to be desired. If you do decide to use your hosting services’
web design services, subject their in-house design team to the same scrutiny as you
Web-hosting Services
211

would a web design firm or a consultant. If you design your website yourself using
your hosting service’s web design solutions, scrutinize the proffered web design tools
carefully before moving forward. Most of the time they are inadequate. Your best bet
is to buy and to use your own design software. 
For most small- to mid-size web-based businesses, contracting with a full-service
web-hosting service makes the best sense. Paying a relatively small monthly fee to a
service to host your website on its servers, which are maintained by its technical peo-
ple, and connected to the Internet via its pipe, allows you to ameliorate hardware costs
and avoid hiring expensive technical staff. 
Top web-hosting services that a small- to mid-sized e-commerce site might consider
include Globat.com, ICDSoft.com, iPowerWeb.com, Jumpline.com, Lunarpages.com,
SpeedFox.com, and WebsiteSource.com, 
The Large to Enterprise Websites
For some e-commerce businesses, a large, national web-hosting service is the only
The Complete E-Commerce Book
212
Your Website’s Hosting Needs
Projected Needs at End of the
Needs
Current
1st Year
2nd Year  
Reliability
90%
100%
100%
Services you want
- server space
5MB
20MB
25 MB
average small site needs 5MB)
- # of email boxes
5
15
20
- email forwarding
no
maybe
maybe
- traffic allowance
??
??
??
- ready-to-use
yes
maybe
maybe 
CGI scripts
- tracking tools
yes
no
no
- tools to register
yes
yes
yes
with search engines
- scheduled backups
yes
yes
yes
Cost you can bear
$3600
$5000
$7500
Figure 25. A list can help you to determine what you want from a web-hosting service. The reason
there are three columns is that what you want and need now won’t be what you need a year or two
down the road. 

choice. These e-commerce sites typically have very high traffic, provide server inten-
sive features such as chat rooms and large media content (e.g. graphic files in their
product catalog, streaming media, etc.). These websites not only has a need for, but
have the budget to pay for, a web-hosting service that offers, at a minimum:
✸OC3 or better connection to the Internet.
✸Mirror sites.
✸24-hour staffing.
✸Redundancy (including your connection to the Internet backbone).
✸Robust security.
Expect to pay a substantial sum for 24-hour full service technical support since
people cost more than computers. Yet, for most large websites, all high-traffic web-
sites, and all enterprise sites, this type of service is mandatory. However, before you
sign on the dotted line, be sure to checkout how much service you actually receive
from the service’s technical support. Determine:
✸How many hours a day is technical support staff on the premises (it should be
24x7).
✸How fast they respond to a request.
✸Is there a response time guarantee? 
✸How much help will the technical staff actually provide under various contract terms?
An enterprise-class hosting service should provide a project leader and an enter-
prise management team to run your website’s entire server infrastructure, including the
firewall, on a 24x7 basis. This team should manage, support, and upgrade web appli-
cations, whether standard or proprietary, and add networking options, including a
Virtual Private Network (VPN), Internet, frame relay, and dial services. 
Web-hosting Services
213
IN-HOUSE HOSTING
We have discussed the possibility of hosting your own small website in Chapter 4. Don’t try
this with a large website. It would be a nightmare unless your company already operates servers
on a 24x7 basis with a 24x7 technical staff on the premises. The cost of the large bandwidth con-
nection (pipeline) to the Internet is daunting. So, please find a place to put your web servers that
has engineers on site 24x7 to monitor them. This will provide a much less costly and less prob-
lematic website.
It is difficult for many of you to forego the opportunity for hands-on experience with your
servers, but once everything is correctly configured and running, there’s very little to do. What
you might need to do can be managed remotely whether you are running UNIX or NT systems. 

While the individual e-commerce client’s enterprise-class hosting services will dif-
fer depending on the scope of the e-business, there are some features all have in com-
mon (in addition to what has previously been discussed), including: 
✸Dedicated, point-to-point, unshared T-1/E-1 or T-3/E-1 access to the Internet.
✸Complete DNS services.
✸End-to-end implementation management.
✸Online network utilization statistics.
✸Choice of customer premise equipment (CPE) solutions.
✸A fully managed service.
✸Redundancy, e.g. a T-3 or better connection to diverse Internet backbones, UPS
and generator power backup, a redundant network operations center.
✸High availability cluster multiprocessing consisting of a primary machine and a
live standby. Data contained on the primary server is seamlessly mirrored on the
standby machine. If the primary should fail, the standby server will immediately
assume the role of the primary machine.
✸Dedicated e-commerce that offers customized systems for purchases, services, and
delivering order status and web application hosting.
✸Web applications such as email, human resources, finance, and other operations
to secure off-site servers with high-speed access and a single point of contact. 
✸Virtual Private Networking (VPN) and Virtual Private Dial-up Networking, enabling
your company to connect its LANs, hosting sites, business partners, branch offices,
telecommuters, and mobile employees in an integrated, secure, and simple manner.
✸Managed software services enabling the enterprise IT organization to provide asset
management, software distribution and management, network management, net-
work performance tuning, and desktop management.
✸Streaming media delivery through scalable, on-demand capability that distributes
images to single and multiple locations to support videoconferencing, PC-to-PC
conferencing, and video distribution services. 
But that’s just the beginning. The right enterprise-class hosting service will have
trained system administrators, along with other qualified personnel, on site 24x7,
monitoring your web servers along with the other web servers they host. The hosting
service’s technical personnel monitoring your site provide instant attention and fol-
low pre-arranged instructions for any situation that arises. These instructions can be
as varied as a call to a named technical person in your business, to handling the prob-
lem himself or herself, or anything in between. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
214

It is well known in the industry that security is an entity that has a life of its own;
therefore, leaving the matter to the security experts at a good hosting service is a wise
choice. A top-notch hosting service is positioned to provide first class security through
multi-staged access control and trained security personnel monitoring the equipment
and the system, 24x7. Such hosting services also will provide a configured router and
will offer front-line firewall solutions which you are advised to take advantage of since,
they are neither easy nor cheap to set up. 
Don’t forget the mundane. An enterprise level hosting service should provide auto-
matic backups of your data, and storage for the backups at an off-site storage loca-
tion. Visit the physical plant. Is there sufficient air conditioning to keep the equipment
cool? Is it clean and free of dust? Is it secure? 
An enterprise-class service contract costs a pretty penny, but for some e-commerce
sites, it is worth it. After all, what will it cost if your site goes down?  The odds are that
your website will suffer outages due to hardware failure, software glitches, outside
attacks, and more. If you are self-hosting your site, this can be a huge problem. Do
you know how you’ll handle such situations?  What will the cost be to your business
when your site is down? Can you afford it? 
The high-end web-hosting business is very competitive. These hosting companies
offer sophisticated, large-scale, end-to-end solutions tailored not only to the enter-
prise customer’s immediate needs, but engineered to respond to future demand, with
an emphasis on customer support and service. If your e-commerce business is in need
of this type of hosting service, check out companies such as Above.net, AppliedTheory,
Digex, WebIntellects, Rackspace, and Verio.com to name a few. 
✪
FINDING THE RIGHT WEB-HOSTING SERVICE
Whether you operate a small, large, or enterprise e-commerce business, shopping for
a perfect fit for your specific e-commerce needs can be complicated. Start by brows-
ing the web-hosting service’s website. 
✸Is there a phone number, a real mailing address (not a P.O. Box)? If the service does
not have a telephone number posted on their site as well as their hours of operation,
ask yourself “why”?  Maybe they do not want their customers to contact them. Rep-
utable hosts will have their telephone number and other contact information posted
on their site in a very visible location.
✸Is their FAQ (frequently asked questions) section comprehensive, i.e. does it answer
most of your questions? 
✸Does the site host an online users’ forum for discussing the host’s services? If so, read
Web-hosting Services
215

a sampling. This allows you to gauge what problems other websites are having and
how responsive the host was perceived to be to those problems. Then go to a search
engine and look for any other information (e.g. reviews) that might be available.
With a little more research you can whittle down your list of viable web-hosting
services even further. While costs are important, don’t let it be the only deciding fac-
tor — many low-cost web-hosting services are simply not worth the money. You get what
you pay for!   
Look for a hosting provider that has quality equipment and offers a variety of fea-
tures as well as the technical expertise to support their customer base. Consider choos-
ing a web-hosting provider that offers features that you plan to add to your e-commerce
site in the near future. Switching hosting providers takes a reasonable amount of
effort and is not something you want to do simply for the sake of saving a few hundred
dollars.
Find a company that has a few years of web-hosting experience. Ask when the busi-
ness began its web-hosting operations, not its web design business, nor its ISP services
Avoid web-hosting services that:
✸Have daily data transfer limits (transfer rate fees should be based on monthly usage
not daily).
✸Hide the fact that they charge a setup fee (virtually all hosting services charge a
fee).
✸Offer PayPal only accounts (some, but not many, accept payment by PayPal only;
credit cards are non gratis).
✸Limit file size (not the total disk space but maximum size of a single file) to dis-
courage downloads and large graphics.
✸Flat out don’t allow downloads.
✸Have an FTP transfer limit.
✸Don’t provide an emergency telephone number.
✸Place severe limits on resource use. While most hosts impose CPU limits on shared
plans, be sure the proposed host doesn’t forbid resource-intensive scripts such as
message boards.
✸Provide no technical support on weekends.
✸Offer no control panel (especially if you are new to the Web). 
✸Place a limit on monthly site hits (some hosting services do this in addition to data
transfer limits). 
✸Require that you sign a long-term commitment.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
216

✸Offer no money—back guarantee.
Now it is time to create a list of your website’s specific requirements. Be sure to con-
sider each of the following topics.
Windows or Unix?
Most, but not all, web-hosting services support only one operating system family either
Microsoft Windows or Unix (which includes Linux). If you use or are familiar with
Microsoft’s IIS web server, Active Server Page, VBScript, SQL server or Visual Inter-
Dev then you probably want to go with a Windows shop. If you lean toward Linux,
FreeBSD-based operating systems, Apache web servers, or already have a good under-
standing of Unix-based solutions, then find a web-hosting service that uses Unix.
Note: Your business’s internal operating systems don’t need to match your web host’s systems. If you run Win-
dows XP and want your website to run on Apache or if you find a good web-hosting service that operates Linux,
there will be no compatibility problems.
Size of Pipeline
The pipeline connects your server to the Internet — the bigger the better. But the more
bandwidth provided, the more it costs. It is the mind-boggling expense of installing an
adequate pipeline to the Internet that prohibits most web-based businesses from set-
ting up their web servers in-house. High-speed access is obviously the key to a respon-
sive website. If you expect your website to experience heavy traffic, find a provider that
offers a minimum of T-3/E-3 (45 Mbps) connectivity and verify that there is sufficient
bandwidth available for each client. This bandwidth should preferably be connected
directly to the Internet’s backbone (the worldwide structure of cables, routers and
gateways that form the Internet). The more direct access your web server has to the
backbone the less likely your website will suffer from a “data traffic jam.” 
The way these services charge for bandwidth varies. Most web-hosting services will
charge you a monthly fee based on the amount of traffic your site receives. But some
will connect you as directly to the backbone as possible and provide you with all the
bandwidth you can use for one set fee.
While some small local web-hosting services (including web developers that pro-
vide hosting services) might offer just a DSL or “fractional T-1/E-1 connection to the
Internet, most web-hosting services offer much more. The typical hosting service’s
computers are connected to the Internet backbone via a T-1/E-1 (at a minimum), T-3/E-
3 (the majority of local services), or some type of OC line (mainly those catering to
the enterprise crowd). For a complete discussion on connectivity, see Chapter 6. 
Web-hosting Services
217

All things being equal, your best bet is to look for a hosting service that offers at
least a T-3/E-3 connection (unless your website serves a small niche market with lim-
ited traffic). 
Note: One common problem is data traffic jams. Ask a potential web-hosting service what options are available
to you if you find your website’s bandwidth (speed of connection to the Internet) is compromised by another
website’s high volume of traffic.
Know Your Traffic Limits
Find out how many page hits (the number of times someone transfers one of your
web pages to his/her browser) are included in the basic price quoted. This will proba-
bly be stated in terms of megabytes of file transfer (amount of data transferred out
of your site); if so, ask the host to translate it into an average hit rate. Although some
web-hosting services have no limits, others will apply a surcharge if you go beyond a
pre-determined limit. Some hosting companies charge for the number of hits (the
number of times someone transfers one of your pages to his browser). Others charge
according to the amount of data transferred out of your website. Either way, the busier
your site, the more you’ll be charged under these kind of pricing schedules. 
Note: You can estimate your data transfer needs by looking at your average web page size (including graphics)
and multiplying that number by the number of page views you expect to have in a month. For example, if the aver-
age web page size is 50 KB, and you expect 2000 page views per day, your average data transfer rate will be about
3 GB per month. But in such a case, you should get a plan with a 4 to 5 GB of monthly data transfer limit to
avoid overstepping your account’s limit in case your calculations are wrong or your website’s traffic increases. More-
over, if your calculations indicate that your site’s average data transfer rate will be over 50 GB per month, look
into dedicated servers rather than virtual servers.
Unlimited use may not be the nirvana you think it is. Furthermore, unlimited or
unmetered accounts are usually just a gimmick — a web-hosting service would quickly
go out of business if they didn’t charge something for data transfer because they have
to pay from $1 to $5 per GB of data transfer. However, that’s not to say that a good
web-hosting service won’t provide a certain minimum data transfer for free. Most do and
for many smaller e-commerce businesses, that figure is more than adequate. As a rule
of thumb, a small e-commerce site will need, on average, less than 100 MBs per month.   
Compare traffic allowances. Hosting services that limit the amount of material
that can be downloaded from your site each month may hit you with a large sur-
charge when that limit is exceeded. If your site offers products/services that require
download (software, music, white papers, tech support information), you need to
find a service that doesn’t set limits. Some offer huge traffic allowances (several thou-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
218

sand MBs per month) for the same price as others that limit you to a few hundred
MBs per month. 
Finally, be advised that if you sign with a web-hosting service that offers an “unlim-
ited” plan, read their “acceptable use policy” very carefully. You will find that most
state that if you use too much disk space, bandwidth, or CPU time, you must upgrade
your service or leave. And remember to plan ahead — allow for future growth of your
site and its traffic.
Space
Web-hosting services usually assign a client a defined amount of disk space for “virtual”
service. In other words, when you’re using a web-hosting service, most of you are buy-
ing space on their server’s hard drives. You don’t want to handicap your site with too
little disk space, but at the same time you don’t want to pay for unused disk space. 
As little as 5 MBs may be plenty of space for the web pages and graphics of a
brochureware site, as long as email, log files, and system programs are not counted
in the 5 MBs. Otherwise, more disk space is needed because those items take up con-
siderable space (as much as 15 MBs more). 
As a rule of thumb, 10 MBs of disk space equals about 100 web pages, which is
more than enough for the average small business site. Of course, if your website offers
lots of images, sounds, animation, or applets, you’ll need more space. Again, plan
ahead — it can save you money later on. If you expect to grow, look for a place that
offers sites of 100 MBs or more. Ironically, some web-hosting services offer 300 MBs
sites for less money than others offering only 30 MBs.
Ask the hosting service how many websites are hosted on each of its computers.
Although most hosting services are not too forthcoming about this information, you
should be able to at least learn if the host has any policy limits. 
Uptime
Check the hosting service’s reliability or “uptime” — the percentage of time the web-
hosting service is up and running. Most claim 99.9 percent uptime, but ask around. XO
(previously known as Concentric), claims to have never been down. Digex also has a top-
notch uptime rating. 
Multimedia
If your website utilizes multimedia, look for a web-hosting service that supports the
technology used by your website. This is important. You want your customers to be able
to listen to audio or to watch video without the necessity of fully downloading the file. 
Web-hosting Services
219

CGI Scripts
Before signing with a web-hosting service you must know what server-side languages
(also known as CGI scripts) will be required for the optimum operation of your web-
site. Server-side languages enable dynamic websites. Perl is the most popular script-
ing language, but others such as PHP, JSP, Tcl, Python, Miva Empressa, server JavaScript,
and even compiled C/C++ are some of the other server-side languages utilized in the
operation of a dynamic website. Windows-based hosting services will usually offer
ASP, VBScript, Jscript, PerlScript and ColdFusion.
Specific CGI (Common Gateway Interface) scripts (small but highly potent bits of
computer code) are important for an email response form, a site search engine, and
e-commerce support. It’s a way to provide interactivity to web pages, such as the han-
dling of the input from forms, like using specific code to enable information to be
taken from a web-based form and sent to your email account. CGI scripts enable your
website to accept credit card orders, and track everything a visitor does once he gets
on your site. It can also automate otherwise tedious processes such as signing cus-
tomers up if you have a “registered users only” section on your website.
You will find that all web-hosting services are not constant regarding CGI script
policy. Some services:
✸Offer libraries of CGI scripts (CGI-bin directory) for your use.
✸Offer libraries of CGI scripts (CGI-bin directory) for your use and let you install
your own CGI scripts (your own CGI-bin directory). 
✸Don’t have a library but allow you to install your own CGI. 
✸Don’t allow you to add any CGIs.
Find a web-hosting service that supports the server-side language you need to oper-
ate your website and, at a minimum, allows you to install them in your own CGI-bin
directory. 
Note: You will need to reference server-side scripting code that reside in a CGI-bin directory. This directory will
include code such as a program that enables an email message to be sent out by a web page form. Thus, for
most e-commerce sites, it is absolutely essential that you sign with a web-hosting service that allows you to have
full control over your own CGI-bin. 
Telnet Access
A shell account is a login account on a UNIX server and is based on a UNIX operating
system. A telnet shell account allows you to interact with your site in a multitude of
ways. Telnet is a common way to control web servers remotely. Think of it as if you
were sitting behind the keyboard of the server. It lets you change, remove, and make new
The Complete E-Commerce Book
220

files, you can check your disk usage, clean out your server logs, read files, test scripts,
and FTP files from other servers. With telnet you can change the permissions of a CGI
file, change your password, create new directories, or just use programming tools such
as C and Perl. That’s the capability a telnet shell account gives you.
Telnet is a powerful tool. It is a terminal emulation program (a program that makes
your computer respond like a keyboard) for TCP/IP networks such as the Internet.
The Telnet program runs on your computer and connects it to a remote computer
(your web server at your hosting service). You can then enter commands through the
Telnet program and they will be executed as if you were entering them directly on the
server console. This enables you to control the server and communicate with any other
servers you might have at the hosting service. 
The ability to modify files and directories is very useful for an active site. Win-
dows95/98/NT comes equipped with a built in Telnet program. To start a Telnet ses-
sion, you must log into a server by entering a valid username and password. Web-hosting
services are split down the middle as to whether they will provide their clients a shell
account or not (and with legitimate reasons — the most prominent being that Telnet
access give hackers another avenue for attack). Without Telnet access, however, you
can incur longer programming development time, which adds to your overall devel-
opment costs. Also, without Telnet access, you can’t compile programs written in C,
C++, Perl, etc. Instead you must rely on the hosting service’s technical support staff,
which usually results in irritating and expensive delays. 
So while it is relatively easy to find a web-hosting service that allows FTP access to
a CGI-bin directory, it is more difficult to find one that allows Telnet access. Telnet
access is not a do or die requirement. Still, if you find a web-hosting service that offers
it, and you are satisfied with the service’s security set-up, it is an added bonus. 
E-Commerce
When considering a web-hosting service’s e-commerce offerings, please follow the
advice set out in Chapter 9. As a “quickie update,” remember:
✸Before putting your e-commerce in the hands of a hosting service, look closely at
the critical components. The software should be intuitive with some kind of “wiz-
ard” to assist you with the set up, such as tools that provide category pages with
links to individual items along with “Buy” links that can take the customer straight
to the shopping cart. 
✸To look at the catalog builder. Can you create your product catalog offline and
then post it to your website and link it to the database you use to track inventory? 
Web-hosting Services
221

✸The web-hosting service that offers an e-commerce package also should be able to
help you with setting up a merchant account — the agreement between your web-
based business and your bank that allows you to take credit card orders. 
✸Do you need real-time credit card authorization (see Chapter 3)? If so, this will be
an extra cost. 
✸Look at how the web host handles security for its clients’ order processing. Are all
credit card transactions conducted over a Secure Socket Layer (SSL) server?  If not,
what security does your web-hosting service offer for order processing, especially
credit card data? (See Chapter 7 for a detail discussion of security considerations.)
Technical Support
First-rate technical support should be your primary consideration, especially if you’re
not a technical wizard. The Internet has no down time. Your server must be available
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. In the event of problems, immediate contact and assis-
tance from your web-hosting service’s technical staff is mandatory. Look for a hosting
service that provides automatic monitoring of your website. This way, if there is a
problem with the site they will be able to respond to it immediately. Ask if the web-
hosting service’s stated “24x7” service policy means that server support, server mon-
itoring, and server availability are all covered. 
But still, that doesn’t answer the question of just the quality of the hosting ser-
vice’s technical support. Customer support can make or break your hosting experi-
ence, so test their support before making a commitment. If the host has a 24/7 live
chat, check it out. The best and easiest way to check out a potential hosting service’s
technical support is to check out the service’s procedures for handling problems with
your server. Try to determine how much help they actually provide individual clients.
Ask:
✸What type of technical support is available?
✸Is 24-hour tech support available?  
✸Is there a separate tech support line for hosting customers?
✸What is the average hold time before a technician picks up the phone to serve you
and what is the average time for response to a client’s inquiry?
✸Are technical support calls toll-free or a local call? 
✸What is their time limit on response to customer inquiries?  
Make sure you get thorough answers to your questions. Then, actually check out
the potential hosting service’s technical support. Here’s how: 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
222

✸Place a few telephone calls to technical support. Place calls at all hours of the day
and night, and on different days of the week. 
✸With each call, ask the technical support personnel questions that would repre-
sent some problems you might incur while using the hosting service. 
✸Send them a question by email and see how long they take to respond.
✸Check out the quality of their online documentation.
If you get the right answers stated in language you understand (i.e., not technospeak),
and you didn’t have to let the phone ring a 100 times or hold for 15 or more minutes,
you’ve hit pay dirt.
Web-hosting services handle technical support in a variety of ways. Some hosting
services have a policy of handling all their support through email. The problem with
this is that it’s too easy for them to ignore email or to delay responses. You will find that
75% of the time you will need to talk to someone. 
A few low-cost web-hosting companies have telephone support, although many
will not offer toll-free numbers; but at least you get to talk to a “live person.” Other
hosting services, some with toll free numbers, charge for telephone-based technical
support. Just be sure you know where you stand before signing on that dotted line.
If you need 24-hour technical support — and larger companies and high-traffic
websites do — then expect to pay substantially more. People are much more expen-
sive than machines.
The best practice is to find others using the service and ask them about their expe-
riences.
Value-added Services
All quality web-hosting services have a library of scripts that you can use to add forms,
guestbooks, forms, statistics, and so forth to your site. Your web-hosting service also
should provide e-commerce capabilities, e.g. shopping cart software, merchant account
setup support, real-time processing availability, and more. Furthermore, some e-com-
merce operations may need support for Java, Shockwave, Cybercash, Real Audio, Real
Video, VRML, secure transactions, and other utilities. It is important that the tech-
nical staff of your chosen web-hosting service be familiar with the applications you
plan to use. For example, if you’re planning to use an application that requires spe-
cial setup parameters, make sure your potential host is familiar with the application.
If not, you just might end up spending an enormous amount of time trying to figure
out how to configure it, or perhaps never figuring it out!
Web-hosting Services
223

Site Administration
Quite a few quality web-hosting services offer web-based site administration. While
not an essential requirement, the proper web-based administration tools allow you
to do things such as easily set up POP accounts and configure autoresponders through
your web browser (i.e. the tools are basically all point and click). Even if the site admin-
istration tools are not web-based, you will still need to update your pages, manage
files, collect orders, retrieve data from forms, get statistics, make counters, and per-
form other housekeeping chores to your site. So find out how secure and user-friendly
is the software that you’ll be using to do these things.
Also ask the web-hosting service: 
✸Can you make changes anytime you want? 
✸Do these changes need to be audited? 
✸Can you place custom ASP scripts on the server? 
Remember that your website is a direct reflection of you and your web-based busi-
ness. As such, you want to have sufficient control of your website so as to portray your
business in the best “light” possible.
Flexibility
As with everything in life, flexibility is a nice perk. Ask if the web-hosting service will
accept special requests or instructions. 
Another concern is the ability to upgrade services. As your web-based business
grows so will your hosting needs. Ask if you can start out with an economy package and
then upgrade as your needs and budget increase. Also check out how much it will cost
for you to add more disk space, transfer more data, create more email accounts, and
so on.
Security
Security is of paramount importance. As such, find out what security features your
web-hosting service offers or supports. Although many web-hosting services claim to
be secure, when closely examined they fall far short of their claim. Find out if your
web-hosting service can actually protect your data from the growing menace of outside
threats and hackers. For example, the hosting service should have an expert security staff
on call to dispose of any potential threats.
Some key security and reliability issues you’ll want to cover with a web-hosting
service include:
The Complete E-Commerce Book
224

✸What kind of Internet firewall does the web-hosting service have in place to keep
uninvited visitors out of its servers?
✸How often does it conduct security audits and what other proactive steps does it take
to address potential security holes?
✸How are hackers kept out?
✸Are back-ups performed daily to ensure data is never lost?
✸Are all servers on an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) so data is always avail-
able even when there is a power outage? 
✸Since you will be taking orders on-line and perhaps transferring sensitive infor-
mation, you’ll need a secure server (often referred to as an SSL server — a Secure
Sockets Layer server). For instance, credit-card information typed into a form will
be encrypted before being sent to your web server. Some web-hosting services charge
an additional fee to use their secure server, so ask. Look for hosting services that
support transaction encryption standards like SSL and SET (See Chapter 7). You
don’t have to have a secure server to take orders on-line, but many people won’t
place orders unless you do.
✸How does the web-hosting service get sensitive information from your web server
to your back-office in a secure manner?
✸Does the hosting service use redundant connections so your customers can access
your website even if a line goes down or is cut. 
✸Is the site physically secured so that only authorized personnel have physical access
to servers?
Finding a web-hosting service that will maintain the integrity of your website is
nearly as important as maintaining its availability. Having your server “hacked” is not
something you want to experience so find out if the web-hosting service has taken the
necessary steps to secure your website. In addition, ask about partitioning of users on
shared servers, ability to encrypt user access, and how the software security of the
server is set up to prevent unauthorized access.
Email
Almost all web-hosting services provide their client websites with at least one email
account, although most will provide several accounts. However, some hosting serv-
ices charge extra for an email account, so ask. Also determine if there is POP access to
the emails since some web hosting services only offer web access to the email accounts. 
Ask the web-hosting service how many email addresses you are allowed since some
services allow you to set up multiple “aliases” such aswebmaster@yourcompany.com,
Web-hosting Services
225

sales@yourcompany.com or info@yourcompany.com. Another feature web-based busi-
nesses might find useful is the ability for different aliases to be forwarded to more
than one email address. For example, you might have stores in many different locales,
with email aliases for each of them. 
Another mail forwarding feature offered by some web-hosting companies is the
ability to automatically define certain types of incoming email messages that are to
be forwarded somewhere else. For instance, messages to marketing@yourcompany.com
could be forwarded to marketing@acmemarketing.com. Remember to ask if there is
a limit on how many accounts can be forwarded.
Another feature you might need is POP (Post Office Protocol) email boxes on your
web-hosting site, although for some smaller web-based businesses, the POP email box
you have with your local access ISP probably covers your needs. 
Larger web-based businesses will need a minimum of 10 POP mailboxes. In addi-
tion to unlimited email aliasing most will want the option of designating a catchall
POP account so that any mail sent to anaddresseeunknown@yourcompany.com will
be forwarded automatically to the catchall account when a customer incorrectly
addresses an email message. 
Autoresponders
You will also want unlimited autoresponders. They undoubtedly will be an important
part of your marketing strategy. 
A mail responder, or autoresponder, is a program that automatically responds to
incoming mail sent to certain addresses. Autoresponders let you to specify email
addresses that allow for automatic and immediate posting of a pre-determined reply.
For example, if someone sends email to sales@yourcompany.com, a brochure-type
email message can be sent back.  
Among the many useful attributes of a good autoresponder are that it allows you
to:
✸Save the incoming message.
✸Copy the email address from the incoming message and put it in a text file, which
is important since that allows you to easily collect email addresses.
✸Quote the incoming message in the autoresponse.
Mailing List Management
A mailing list is a discussion group based on the email system. You can also use a mail-
ing-list program to distribute a newsletter. A web-hosting service that offers the option
The Complete E-Commerce Book
226

of mailing list software such as Majordomo, is a bonus for all web-based business and
a must have for others. Ask your web-hosting service if a mailing list option is available
and if so, the cost, how many mailing lists are permitted per site, and if there is a limit
on the number of members per list.
Online Promotion
Some nice perks that numerous web-hosting services offer involve help in promoting
your website. For instance, some help with the registration of your website with the
leading search engines and directories. Others may offer to help promote your site.
And some web hosts will even assist your website with online advertising.
Access/Traffic Reports 
The reason you are putting up a website is to attract customers. Find out what
access/traffic reporting services your web-hosting service provides. For instance, do
they provide access to raw logs and statistical reports to help you determine who is
visiting your e-commerce site? It is vital that any web-based business knows:
✸How often its website is being accessed.
✸What web pages are most popular.
✸Where its customers are coming from (i.e., search engine referrals).
✸How the customers are viewing the website (i.e. browser type, connection speed).
If you have access to the raw server logs, you have the tools necessary to make sure
that the site is functioning properly. 
A good web hosting service also will provide software that tracks all the traffic to
and from your site with the necessary statistical data on that traffic (your customers).
Some hosting services will automatically email reports to you at pre-determined inter-
vals. There are hosting services that even provide nice graphics showing the break
down of a number of detailed categories with charts and numbers. 
Even if you are satisfied with the access/traffic reports provided by the web hosting
service, you still need to find out a bit more. For instance:
✸Ask the service to provide sample access/traffic reports so you can determine if the
information provided suits your needs. 
✸Ask if the reports are accessible online, at anytime.
✸Find out if the reports held in archive for later reference and for how long.
✸Ask how often the reports are compiled.
Web-hosting Services
227

Multiple Domain Names
Ask your web-hosting service if it charges a fee for extra domains. Extra domains are
very useful. Your primary domain is for your main web-based business but you could
use additional domain names to promote specific products. You can structure this in
various ways. For instance, all the domains can point to the same directory; you can have
separate directories for each domain; or a specific group of domains pointing to a sin-
gle directory. Web-hosting services have a variety of billing methods for this option.
Some charge an additional fee for each extra domain; others allow a set number of
domains and charging for any over that limit; still others charge nothing at all for
domains. You have to ask.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
You don’t want to be restricted in any way when it comes to updating your web pages.
Look for a web-hosting service that will provide unlimited FTP access since that is
how you upload your web pages to your web server. Most web-hosting companies pro-
vide this service. 
Another type of FTP service you will need, if your website offers software down-
loads, is anonymous FTP (sometimes referred to as ”public FTP”). This is different
from FTP access to your website. Although it is possible to transfer files directly from
your website, customers that don’t have decent web access will want to use the anony-
mous FTP option. Another feature of some anonymous FTPs is that an interrupted
download can be resumed, i.e., if a file transfer stops somewhere in the middle due to
an ISP or telephone line problem, the customer can continue the transfer where it
stopped when he/she is able to get back online. 
Server Performance
Another must is a high performance web server. Do not compromise on this issue.
Find a web-hosting service that offers high quality server hardware with fast CPUs,
a lot of memory (the more the better), high-speed disk drives, and redundant T3 con-
nections or better. Ask the brand names of the servers, the operating system loaded
thereon, and the web server software provided. Also determine how often the web-
hosting service updates and replaces their servers’ hardware and software. 
Test the servers. Measure the speed of access for all facets of access (network speed,
DNS lookup, connect time, download time, and absence of timeouts). Be sure you
run tests during both peak and non-peak times.
One of the easiest ways to test your web-hosting service’s servers is to use Net
Mechanic’s Server Start (wwww.netmechanic.com). This is a nice free tool to use to
The Complete E-Commerce Book
228

measure a server’s access speeds. This product allows you to watch server perform-
ance for 8 hours and will send you an email report. 
Password Protected Area
Portions of your website can be password protected so that access is limited authorized
personnel only. Password protected areas is one of the best ways to keep unwanted
cretins out of your website.
Unfortunately, these protected areas can be problematic to set-up. Most web-host-
ing services will either assist in the creation of these protected areas or take care of all
of the technical aspects of setting up your password protected area(s). 
Backups (Server and Power)
Information on your servers will be in a constant state of change. Making daily back-
ups is essential in case of a major server crash. Ask the web-hosting service if it pro-
vides off-site storage of the backup tapes. If you also have your database on the web
host’s servers, talk to them about their procedure for backup data or if they can help
you backup the data yourself. 
Another important issue is a power backup system. Most web-hosting services do
this as a matter of course, but it doesn’t hurt to check that your web host provides
UPS and generator power backup.
Redundancy
The ability to be up and running no matter what is of critical importance. There are
many elements to redundancy — see Chapter 5 for the full picture. However, a good
web-hosting service will have redundant Internet connections, which are essential for
providing uninterrupted service to your customers. With only one connection point,
if the service’s pipe to the Internet goes down, then your website is down.
Scalability
The best thing that can happen is that your web-based business experiences a giant
spurt of growth due to its popularity. However, can your web-hosting service handle
such growth?  If you feel that increased traffic on your website may become an issue,
find a hosting service that quickly can add bandwidth and processing power to meet
any level of demand. A good quality web-hosting service will automatically moni-
tor on a 24x7 basis, both the servers and the Internet connections so that it can
respond appropriately to any traffic or congestion problems, without any action on
your part.
Web-hosting Services
229

Databases
As discussed in Chapter 8, databases have their own issues. If you use a database to
store your data, or your website is database driven, you need a web hosting service
that offers database servers. Most Windows-based services will offer Microsoft Access
and/or Microsoft SQL Server. Most Unix-based services will offer some form of SQL
(MySQL, PostgreSQL MS SQL Server) and/or Oracle. Be very careful to place your
website on a web-hosting service that offers an operating system compatible with the
system you use to maintain your database.
Other Items
Other features to consider when looking for a web-hosting service include:
✸A static IP address. If not, go elsewhere.
✸Provide sub-domains for creating sub-sections to your website without the neces-
sity of using directories in URLs.
✸A control panel for graphical access to your account settings.
✸Guaranteed uptime that includes a refund for times when your host is down.
✸Find out if the hosting service has larger plans available so you won’t have to deal
with the task of changing hosts if your website requires more space, features, etc. in
the future.
✸Is the web hosting service offering any special deals, discounts, promotions?
✸If you want a specific version (or the latest version) of a web server, shopping cart
program, database, and/or server-side language, ask if that version is available,
don’t assume it will be the version provided. 
✪
SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENTS 
Before signing on the dotted line, carefully read the web hosting service’s “Terms of
Use” and “Acceptable Use Policies.” Many hosting services put important qualifying
statements in those documents. For example, this is where content limitations (if you
have a controversial site) are usually stated. That is also where you will find statements
qualifying the host’s uptime guarantee (are they responsible only when the server is
down, or also when their connecting network is down?), and limitations on the so-
called “unlimited” plans. Also look for “catches” such as daily bandwidth measuring,
sale of personal information, and limits on the size of your database.
Go with a hosting service that offers, at a minimum, a 30-day money-back guar-
antee, which should be posted in easy view on their website. However, even with a
money-back guarantee, the setup fee might not be refundable, so check. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
230

If everything is copasetic, the last item for discussion is the service level agreement.
While you might attempt negotiation of a service agreement, you probably won’t get
very far. So be realistic; a web hosting service will not guarantee to provide 100% uptime,
nor will it offer more than pro rata compensation for down time or reimbursement
of paid service fees. That being said, most of the down time your site experiences will
probably be a direct result of something that is done from your end and not from
service outages attributable to the hosting service. 
✪
CONCLUSION
Choosing a web-hosting service is not a task to be taken lightly. Finding a hosting
service that provides a plan with the features your website needs for optimal opera-
tion, at a price you can afford, could try Job’s patience. 
When selecting a web-hosting service, your first decision is whether you need Win-
dows or Unix-based hosting service, then how much disk space your website will need
and how much data transfer you expect. Most of you also will need a web host that
provides database access and SSL servers. Furthermore, some e-commerce operators
will need to consider whether the server-side languages that the web-hosting service pro-
vides meet their site’s needs. 
Finally, carefully read the hosting service’s “Terms of Use” and “Acceptable Use
Polices” prior to entering into a hosting agreement. Be sure you understand these doc-
uments because that is where, for example, many services place qualifying statements
concerning uptime guarantees and limitations on their “unlimited” plans. 
Web-hosting Services
231

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 15
Search Engines and Directories
Whenever you see a successful business, 
someone once made a courageous decision.
—Peter Drucker
You’ve designed a wonderful website, but you may be disappointed with the traffic
and sales your site is generating, so you look for a solution. As you research the prob-
lem, you’ll find the majority of a website’s traffic comes from search engine and direc-
tory referrals — your website may not be getting these referrals. The reason may be
that you have not designed your pages correctly for search engine placement or you
have not submitted your website correctly with the various search engines and direc-
tories (or a little of both). 
We all know that it’s sometimes difficult to find what you’re looking for on the
World Wide Web. Even when using a search engine or directory service you still need
a fairly specific search — if you don’t want a million returns. Your potential customers
are in the same predicament. Take the time and make the effort to guarantee that
your website is listed well for the keywords that are important to you. Most search
engines use spiders to crawl the Web in search for new pages to add to the services
database or index. You can wait for one of these spiders to locate your site, go to the
search engines’ websites and tell them about your new website, or use one of the many
site submission services. 
Let’s examine the three different methods used to search the Web: crawler-based
search engines (e.g. AlltheWeb), directories (e.g. the Open Directory Project), and a
hybrid service (e.g. Yahoo!).
233

✪
SEARCH ENGINES 
The vast majority of search engines use spiders. These ingenious software programs have
only one task — to crawl the Web 24 hours a day, finding and indexing web pages.
These spiders (also called “bots” or “crawlers”) visit a web page, read it, and then fol-
low links to other pages within the site. The spider revisits websites on a regular basis
(e.g. every month or two) to look for changes. 
Everything a spider finds is put in the search engine’s index. The index, sometimes
called the catalog, is a giant database that contains a copy of every web page that the
spiders find. When a web page changes, the index is updated with the new informa-
tion, but it doesn’t happen immediately — it can take a while (as much as six weeks) for
new pages or changes to be added to an index. So although a web page may have been
“spidered” it may not have been “indexed,” and until such indexing occurs, that new
page is not available to those searching with that search engine.
Search engines do not index the entire Web (although it may seem like they do).
Most also don’t include dynamically created web pages like library web catalogs or
other data behind CGI-walls. And none index the entirety of every website, nor do
they share a common search language (i.e. the algorithm used to determine what is
searched and ranking of the searched item varies depending on the search engine).
However, there are three important elements that are common to all search engines: 
1. The database operates on the same principles as your website’s database. The data-
base consists of indexed descriptions of web pages including a link list with a small
description for each link. When a search request is received from a surfer, these
databases utilize special search algorithms, using keywords, to find needed web
pages.
2. Search engines give each page they find a ranking as to the quality of the match to
the surfer’s search query. Relevant scores reflect the number of times a search term
appears, if it appears in the title, if it appears at the beginning of the page or HTML
tags, and if all the search terms are near each other. Some engines allow the user
to control the relevance score by giving a different weight to each search word. A
search term used too many times within a page can be considered web spamming
(for which search engines penalize) so don’t overdo the use of a keyword or phrase
on a page (don’t exceed the 15-25 count range).
3. Each search engine has its own peculiar ranking method. For example, if there are
no links to other sites or pages within a website (a single page website) some search
engines will not list that website. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
234

While all crawler-based search engines operate basically the same way, there are dif-
ferences, which is one of the reasons the same search on different search engines pro-
duce different results. For instance, when spiders submit their results for indexing,
either the data is placed directly into the search engine’s index, or it is vetted by humans
prior to indexing. Once your pages are added to the relevant indexes, your potential cus-
tomers can search using various keywords and phrases to find pages that best match
their search criteria. Search engines also use software programs to sift through the
millions of pages recorded in the index to find matches when a search term is entered.
These software programs rank the web pages contained in the index — how the pro-
grams perform the ranking task is kept a closely guarded secret. 
Appearing within the first 20 returns of any relevant search is critical to driving
customers to your website. But since each search engine uses its own special “magic”
Search Engines and Directories
235
SPIDERS
A spider is an automated software program designed by search engines to follow hyperlinks
throughout a website, retrieving and indexing pages in order to document the site for search-
ing purposes. But what should concern a website designer is a spider’s nuances — a spider
determines relevancy, i.e. if someone searches for “beeswax candles,” the search results will be
only those web pages that contain the words beeswax candles. That is simple enough, but sup-
pose there are more than one website with the term “beeswax candles”?  Search engine results
are presented in descending order of relevancy to the search term that was used. Relevancy
determines which results will be presented first, and which second, and on and on. The spi-
der’s job is to work out which page is most relevant to the term “beeswax candles” and which
is the least relevant. 
Spiders calculate relevancy based on four factors: repetition, prominence, emphasis, and
link popularity. Let’s examine each of these more closely.
Repetition. This is simply the number of times a word is repeated on the page. The more
often it is repeated the greater is its relevancy to the page. But resist the temptation to simply
repeat the “keyword” over and over again because spiders are programmed to de-list a web
page if there are too many repetitions.
Prominence. This is where keywords appear within the website. Originally all a spider looked
for was the “keyword” meta tag, but not any longer. Now they look in keyword meta tags,
description meta tags, alternative text tags (on images), page titles, body text, and link text.
Emphasis. The number of times a search term appears, and whether it appears in the title
and at the beginning of the page or HTML tags; and if all the search terms are near each other.
Note: some engines allow the user to control the relevance score by giving a different weight
to each search word, others won’t.
Link popularity. This is the number of third party sites that are linked to a website. Each link
is regarded as a “vote” for the site. But to complicate matters, the “votes” carry greater weight
if the linked website is one that the spider recognizes as having a similar theme as the web page
it is crawling.

to determine the rank or position of importance of each individual website, the exact
rules that the search engine uses to rank pages for relevance are generally tough to
ascertain (and they change often). 
✪
DIRECTORIES
For the most part, directories such as Yahoo!, the Open Directory Project (http://
dmoz.org/), IDB/Internet Directory for Botany (www.botany.net/IDB), Writers.net,
the Middleeastdirectory.com, Questia.com (an online library), etc., use real people to
compile their information and then supplement that information with a search engine.
A directory-based search returns matches only when one is found either in a descrip-
tion submitted by the website owner or contained in a review. 
Since directories are dependent upon humans for their listings, a website opera-
tor is required to submit a short description of his or her website. Then depending
on certain (unnamed) criteria, an editor may then visit the submitted website and
write a review. (A well designed website, with good content, is more likely to be chosen
for review than a badly designed website or one with poor content.)
Changing your web pages has no effect on a directory listing. What will improve
a listing with a search engine will not serve to improve a directory listing. 
Note: The average time between your original submission to a search engine or directory and getting it into
that service’s database is about five to eight weeks. 
✪
HYBRID SERVICES
These services present both directory-based and crawler-based results, although most
hybrid services favor one type of listing over another. MSN Search, for example, typ-
ically will present listings from the LookSmart directory before it presents crawler-
based results provided by Inktomi. Yahoo! uses its own directory service, which is
supplemented with crawler-based results provided by Google (that may have changed
by the time you read this book). 
Designing for Search Engines
But, you might ask, how do crawler-based search engines go about determining rele-
vancy, when confronted with hundreds of millions of web pages to sort through? They
use algorithms, i.e. a set of rules that govern their spiders’ crawling techniques, index-
ing techniques and ranking within the list of returns of a specific search term. Although
exactly how a search engine’s algorithm works is a closely kept secret, all major search
engines follow the same, general rules. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
236

The remainder of this chapter, hopefully, will help you to understand how to design
your web pages so that your website will get the proper search engine and directory
rankings that it needs to be successful. 
When someone queries a search engine for a keyword related to your site’s prod-
ucts/services, does your web page appear in the top 20 matches, or does your compe-
tition’s? If your web pages aren’t listed within the first two or three pages of results, you
lose. To avoid such a circumstance, when designing your new website, take into con-
sideration the inner workings of search engines. If you ignore the criteria necessary
for optimal placement by search engines, your website will miss out on traffic that it
would otherwise have received if your website had been designed with search engine
placement as one of its design criteria.
Note: The three most popular search portals are Google, AlltheWeb, and Yahoo!. Trailing behind these giants
are MSN Search, AOL Search, Askjeeves, and HotBot. All of these search portals in one way or another use spi-
ders to crawl or search the Internet. Humans then search through the results in an effort to optimize the search
engine’s database. 
Mergers and acquisitions are changing the search portal landscape. As of mid-October 2003, Yahoo! owns
AltaVista, AlltheWeb, Inktomi, and Overture. At this writing, AltaVista and AlltheWeb continue to be avail-
able at their historic locations; however, they may share the same underlying database very soon. It is noted
that Inktomi remains the back-end search engine at MSN Search and is still available at HotBot.
As discussed previously, a spider is a small program that gives weight to the place-
ment and frequency of words, and uses ranking algorithms during the search process.
And as explained in the “Spider” text box, while location and frequency of keywords on
a web page is generally given the most weight, related words and word relevance along
with other criteria, such as descriptive five word or so page titles, body copy, place-
ment of keywords, and meta tags within your HTML code, etc. all play a role in how
a search engine ranks your web pages. 
Here is an illustration of how your website’s design influences a web page’s ranking:
Say that a potential customer types in “antiquarian books.” That customer wants
to find websites that have content about and/or sell antiquarian books. Since the
search engine assumes the same thing, the results will be top heavy with web pages
having that search term appearing in their HTML title tag. It assumes those web pages
are more relevant than those without the term in their title tag. But search engines
don’t stop there. They also check to see if the words “antiquarian books” appear near
the top of a web page, such as in the headline or in the first few paragraphs of text
because it is assumed that any page relevant to the topic will mention those words
somewhere near the top of the page. 
Search Engines and Directories
237

Now let’s consider frequency using the same scenario. A search engine also ana-
lyzes how often the keywords “antiquarian” and “books” appear in relation to other
words in a web page. Those with a higher frequency are often deemed more relevant
than other web pages.
So even though search engines vary on how they rank websites, every web page
should include: 
✸Page <TITLE> tag.
✸Keyword meta tag which is more than one word.
✸Description meta tag.
✸<!— comments tags —>.
✸First 25 words (or 255 characters) of text.
✸NO FRAMES tag.
✸Hidden FORM tag.
✸HTML tags.
✸<ALT> tags.
Let’s look a bit closer at each of these elements:
Title: The title you choose will be the most important decision you make affecting
search engine ranking and listing. There is no specific science to it — just make it sim-
ple. Look at the web page and the first five or so descriptive words that come to mind
can be the title. Another way to look it — think of your title as a catchy headline for
an ad.
Text: When it comes to the text of a submitted web page the search engines vary
their indexing procedure. While some will index the text of a submitted page others will
only take into account the first 25 words (or 255 characters) of a submitted page
(25/255 rule). So, write the text of a submitted page using the important keywords
more than once in the first 25 words. 
Something else you can do is to create at the top of a submitted web page, a trans-
parent gif image that is one pixel in size and inside the ALT tag insert a description
of the page using the 25/255 rule. 
Meta Tags: They are indispensable tools in your battle for search engine ranking.
Put them, along with keywords relevant to each specific page, on each page of your
website. 
When we discuss meta tags in this chapter we are discussing only description and
keyword tags. A description meta tag is exactly what it sounds like — it gives a descrip-
tion of a web page for the search engine summary. A keyword meta tag is again exactly
The Complete E-Commerce Book
238

what it states — it gives keywords (which should never be fewer than two words) for
the search engine to associate with a specific web page. These meta tags, which go
inside the header tags, are crucial for optimal search engine indexing. Your meta tags
should reflect the content of the first couple of sentences of the main body. It is impor-
tant that you make certain that the words you use in your keyword tags are words
that someone would type in to find your website. 
Keyword hints:  
✸Keywords are target words that will drive people to your website.
✸When choosing your keywords, always use the plural of the word. Searching for
“car” with find sites with “cars” in their keywords but searching for “cars” will not
find sites with only the singular “car” in their keywords.
✸Almost any site on the Web could use “web,” “internet,” “net,” or “services,” as a
descriptive keyword. Don’t!  Using these and other like words to target potential
customers is fruitless and most of the spiders actively ignore common words such
as these.
✸Include incorrect spellings of keywords that are routinely misspelled. For exam-
ple, the word “accommodations” is commonly misspelled as “accomodations” so
include both in your keywords.
An example:
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Best Online Widget Store in the Universe</TITLE>
<META name=”description” content=”An online store with all the Widgets you
would ever want.”>
<META name=”keywords” content=”widgets, widget accessories, widget howto,
widget books, widget articles, widget technical papers, widget software, working with
widgets, designing with widgets,”>
</HEAD>
For guidelines on what you should do with meta tags, go to a search engine, say
AlltheWeb, search for a term or word that you hope someone would use to find your
website. Then go to the top ranked websites and use the “view source” feature of your
browser to see what kind of meta tags each of these sites use. Study them and under-
stand their relationship to the web page, then use this information when you are com-
posing your own meta tags. 
Keywords: There are two ways to approach keywords: A blanket strategy and a tar-
geted strategy. When you use a large list of keywords, your pages will be found by a
Search Engines and Directories
239

variety of surfers using a extensive range of search strings, but your web pages will
not, in all probability, be among the top ranking pages — this is the blanket strategy.
When you use a limited number of keywords, the density of these few keywords increase
and therefore put them higher up the list — the targeted strategy. 
If you have a website that offers either a limited number of products/services or
products/services that can be adequately covered with a short keyword list then the
target strategy is for you. In other words, you’re confident that potential customers
will search for those specific words above all others. However, if you have a wide vari-
ety of products/services on your website (such as Drugstore.com or Outpost.com),
then you might use the blanket method. Or consider the doorway page, mentioned
later in this section.
Keyword Mix: Pay attention to your keyword mix. Keyword density (the ratio of a
keyword or keyphrase to the total words [depth] on a page) is the factor that search
engines most consider when assigning relevancy ratings to web pages. Achieving the
right keyword or keyphrase mix has become almost a science. Some search engines
look for various combinations of keyword density, i.e., the number of keywords ver-
sus total word count must be within a certain range, and to complicate matters, they
assign different “weights” to components such as Title, Meta Tags, Links, Body Text,
Headline, etc.
Link popularity. This refers both to the number of similar websites you’ve placed
links to within your web pages and the number of websites that have links that point
back to your e-commerce site. Your links to other websites must be on relevant pages
— that is pages that have as much to do with the common theme of your website as
possible, and that are not just a page full of links. Pages that are full of links are com-
monly referred to as “link farms” and are ignored by spiders. 
Search engines view a website with a large number of incoming links (i.e. other
websites that have links to your website) as an important or popular website. Thus,
according to search engines, a website with lots of links leading to it generally implies
that the website is a valued one and the search engine’s database would not be complete
without it. Link popularity is vital if your site is to achieve a high search engine place-
ment ranking. 
Use Optimization Tools
If your keyword density is too low, your page will not be rated high enough in rele-
vancy and, conversely, if too high, then your site may be penalized for “keyword stuff-
ing.” I know this sounds very complicated but there is a way to get help — keyword
The Complete E-Commerce Book
240

optimizing tools such as the GRSoftware’s Keyword Density Analyzer (www.grsoft-
ware.net) and the Webpositioning Gold at (www.website-promoters.com). Or check
out Keyworddensity.com, which provides free online analysis of any web page. Another
option is to use a service like Abalone Designs (www.abalone.ca), Dragonfly Design
(http://dragonfly-design.com/special-offers.html.) or etrafficjams.com. All three pro-
vide free website analyses as a marketing tool. 
Many of you will decide to purchase search engine optimization tools because such
tools can help you to get the desired results from search engine submissions, by pro-
viding you with the means to tweak your website so that it works with visiting search
engine spiders and their complex, math-based formulas used to rank websites. Here is
what to look for when selecting a search engine optimization tool:
✸Good documentation. You want a product that provides a clear overview of the
different steps you need to take to prepare and then submit your website to the
various search engines and directories.
✸An intuitive interface that provides ease of use. When you buy a search engine opti-
mization tool, you don’t want to spend a lot of time learning how to use the pro-
gram.
✸Submission options. Look for a product that will let you choose the number of
pages that can be submitted to the search engines. With most search engines, it is
better to submit all of your web pages individually, but not all tools allow this type
of submission. 
✸A viable search engine list. Watch out for search submission products that say they
will submit your site to thousands of search engines. While this might help drive traf-
fic to your website (there are thousands of micro search engines), only a small por-
tion will help you increase the number of relevant visits to your website. Submitting
your site to Lawcrawler, or some other specialty search engine unrelated to your
website’s content, will not have much value. The best search engine tools focus on
the major search engines and directories. Then add regional and specialty engines. 
✸Keyword selection. Choose a tool that guarantees that its keyword selection tools are
based on an analysis of millions of words and phrases entered in search queries daily. 
✸Page analysis. Look for a product that offers page analysis, i.e. there are tools to
examine each web page from a search engine’s viewpoint. The tool should check
for standard techniques and elements that will improve your ranking for your
selected keyword phrases. A list of problem areas and how to correct them should
be presented after the analysis is complete. 
✸Select specific search engines and directories. Find an optimization tool that
Search Engines and Directories
241

doesn’t provide an “all-or-nothing” submission option. Instead, choose a search
engine optimization product that allows you to select the search engines and
directories to which you want to submit your website pages.
✸Tracking and ongoing analysis. Look for a product that enables you to assess
whether your web pages have been listed in the index of all submitted search engines
and directories and how they are ranked in the various indexes. Products that pro-
vide tracking and ongoing analysis tools will allow you to perform such analysis. 
✸Money-back guarantee. Don’t spend your money on a optimization tool that won’t
provide a money-back guarantee. Many search engines and directories are now very
selective about automated submission sources (this is what all search engine opti-
mization tools do). Find a product that guarantees listings in the search engines
and directories on its list. 
Most search engine optimization tools are relatively inexpensive. To give you a sam-
pling of what’s available, check out:
✸Axandra/Voget Selbach Enterprises GmbH’s Internet Business Promoter (IBP)
product (www.axandra). The cost ranges from free to $350.00.
✸Microsoft’s bCentral (www.bcentral.com). The cost for the annual plan is $79.
✸Netmechanic.com’s search engine optimization tools are available on an annual
plan basis. The cost per URL subscription is $49.
✸Websiteceo.com offers four editions with different pricing options. The cost ranges
from free to $495. 
Note: By submitting your website to a search engine you speed up the spidering process. For after you have
submitted your URL to a search engine, it sends a spider to “investigate” your new website. But you should
also be aware that the information the spider returns many times will be exactly what appears in the “results
page” of the search engine.
You Can Do More
Now let’s examine some other steps you can take that might improved your web page
ranking.
Cloaking, or “stealth scripts.” These pages make use of software to serve one page to
surfers and a different page to search engines. There are even sophisticated scripts
that can serve a different page to each search engine, allowing you to customize a page
for specific engines. A secondary reason for cloaking your pages is to protect your
highly optimized page from code thieves. All a thief can steal is your “surfer” page.
It is imperative that your search engine pages (i.e. cloaked pages) represent your
surfer pages fairly and accurately. Search engines once threatened to ban cloaked sites.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
242

However, most engines have admitted, reluctantly, that they will not take any action
unless the surfer page is on a different subject than the search engine page. But if you
use keywords and phrases that are not related to your actual content, you risk having
your entire website banned from most, if not all, search engine indexes. 
Doorway Pages: Search engines do a poor job of indexing and scoring web pages that
use dynamically generated pages, frames, or Java Script. This is where doorway pages,
entry or bridge pages (they all mean the same thing), come into play. 
Doorway pages also can be used to create alternate entrances to your website so as
to target a specific search engine with a page designed to deal with that search engine’s
criteria. Although doorway pages should be designed carefully to target specific key-
words for individual search engines, they should also provide customer-centric infor-
mation and point the customer to the “guts” of your website and have the same look
and feel as the rest of your website. 
Doorway pages can help you to obtain a high ranking using the unique ranking
algorithms of each search engine. A web page that will be highly ranked by one search
engine may not fare as well on another. You will want to cater to the top search engines,
which at this writing are: Google, AlltheWeb, Yahoo!-owned Inktomi, and Teoma (Ask
Jeeves). Ideally, you need one gateway page for each of these six search engines, and
for each keyword or keyword phrase that a potential customer might use to find your
site. For example, if you anticipate that normally customers will search for your web-
site using one of five different keywords/phrases, then you’ll need 30 doorway pages
— 6 search engines times 5 keywords/phrases. 
There are three types of doorway pages:
✸A page that invites the customer to continue on to your website’s home page (at
the same time it provides the specific search engine with a page that it will find
highly relevant).
✸A page that is semi-invisible to the customer through the use of a Java script redi-
rection technique. The page that is submitted to the search engines is stripped
down to the minimum so that the search engine finds it highly relevant but a cus-
tomer will only see the page as a “flash” before the real page is presented to the
browser. There are two problems with this method: If your customers’ browser is not
enabled for Java script, they will see the unattractive stripped down page, and some
search engines find the “redirection” code and then downgrade the relevancy of
the page.
✸A doorway page that is completely invisible to your customers. This is where soft-
ware like iPush.net — an IP based delivery and cloaking system designed to help
Search Engines and Directories
243

you get the best possible search engine results and keep them. An oversimplification
of this software is that it “cloaks” the doorway pages so that only the spiders from
a specific search engine sees a specific page. This allows you to:
– Never worry about your visitors seeing your doorway pages, since they won’t
see them, you can design them strictly based on a particular engine’s algorithm.
They may make no sense at all, but the engine they were designed for will love
them.
– Never worry about someone stealing your rankings because outsiders won’t be
able to see the HTML code that got the ranking. 
– Design your regular pages freely without fear of hurting your rankings. 
– Use multiple pages without worry of hitting any limit in any search engine’s
criteria (www.ipush.net for details). 
As a side note:  Yahoo! does not accept doorway pages.
To find all the nitty gritty details necessary to design effective doorway pages, search
the Web with one of the many search engines using the keywords “doorway pages.”
Or visit Spider-food.net for extensive information on doorway pages and other search
engine goodies. Another great site is Spiderhunter.com where you can find a tutorial
on cloaking techniques and free cloaking script for your use, plus many other interesting
details about spiders. 
Submitting Your Web Pages
The best practice (there are exceptions) is to submit each page of your website, indi-
vidually, to all of the search engines and directories. You may think that submitting each
and every page of your website is not necessary since some pages may have, for exam-
ple, investor information or contact information. But every page that is listed is like an
entry in a drawing — the more entries, the more chances you have. 
Use a search engine optimization tool (previously discussed) for the submission
process, you can submit some of your web pages by hand to specific search engines
and automate the rest using web-positioning software such as Submitta.com, the pre-
viously mentioned Webpositioning Gold(www.website-promoters.com), or check out
one of the many website promotion services available online. 
If you want to try submitting your web pages yourself here is a guide:
✸Submit your main URL (i.e. http://yourdomainname.com) after you have finished
designing your website.
✸Submit other important pages in weekly intervals and in very small batches (no more
The Complete E-Commerce Book
244

than 10 a day) since search engines are very sensitive to what they consider spamming. 
✸A large website should submit first its most important and customer-centric web
pages, keyword-wise that is, since it is easy for a website with 200 or so pages to hit
their page limit (usually 50 or so pages) with search engines.  
✸Once you have submitted all of your web pages, you need to not only re-submit
each time you make substantial changes to a page but also, once every three or so
months re-submit the pages following the procedure set out above.
✸Pages that are generated “on the fly” usually will not be indexed so don’t submit
them.
✸If you have pages with frames, don’t submit them since most spiders will not crawl
a page with frames (no matter what you might have read to the contrary). 
✸Test and check to see how your website rates with the search engines after your
submission procedure is completed. 
✸Monitor your website listings regularly. Sometimes your listing can just disappear
or some kind of error can cause the link to become bad, etc. When you find some-
thing wrong, re-submit that web page. 
Pay attention to how your website is listed on a search engine. Does it identify what
your website is and the products/services provided?  To assure that your search engine
listing provides the proper information needed by the surfing public, use your title
tag (e.g. <title>Best Online Widget Store in the Universe </title>). Search engines then
use as the descriptive paragraph one of the following, depending on the search engine:
either your description tag (<META name=”description” content=”An online store with
all the Widgets you would ever want.”>) or the first 250 words (or so) of visible text
on your site.
Although it will take a little effort, it is important that you balance these tags. In
other words, sometimes what you need to put in as a title or descriptive tag (to get a
high ranking with a particular search engine) will not help you in your quest to have
potential customers easily find your page through commonly used keyword searches. 
✪
DESIGNING FOR DIRECTORIES  
Directories are differentiated from search engines in that real people, instead spiders
and software, directories categorize the information contained in their indexes. Each
directory has an in-depth submission form which the website owner must fill out and
submit before the website can be listed in the directory. 
When filling out a submission form, keep in mind that directories have real humans
Search Engines and Directories
245

with inquiring minds working behind the scene. The better you present your infor-
mation the better chance you have of getting your website listed in the directory. 
Here are some tips to help you in the directory submission process:
✸It is vital that you carefully consider and choose your 25-word description and cat-
egory that you want your website to be listed under. Once it is submitted it’s very
difficult to change your mind later. 
✸You should endeavor to find the best category listing for your website. To do this,
go to that directory, search for a word or phrase you hope would be most used to
find your website. The resulting category is the category for which you should sub-
mit your website. 
✸Provide an accurate, concise description of your website — using 25 words or less is
the key to success. It is interesting though that if your website has graphics or pho-
tos and you indicate that fact in the submission form, your website will have a
slight edge over other similar sites without graphics or photos. 
Remember, directories are compiled by thinking humans, so a good site, with good
content, has a better chance of being listed than its lesser contemporaries. 
✪
YAHOO!
Yahoo! is a directory that also integrates search engine results into its returns. This
makes it a category all unto itself. Through an alliance with first Alta Vista and then
with Hotbot and now with Google, when a surfer makes a search request, if no list-
ing is found within Yahoo! then the search is automatically and transparently defaulted
to the larger, spider-generated database. So you may think your website has a Yahoo!
listing when you see your site in a Yahoo! results page, but that listing may have been
generated from the search engine’s larger database. This isn’t the same as a true Yahoo!
listing.
It is very difficult to get a good listing on Yahoo!, but it is well worth the effort
since the site, as a whole, is the most popular site on the Web. Yahoo can generate
much of your site’s traffic — if you can obtain a successful listing.
✪
SPONSORED LISTINGS
To ensure that potential customers see your website listing when searching of specific
terms, consider sponsored listings. If you can afford it, a sponsored listing will give
your website top billing without the worry about whether your web pages are opti-
mized for search engine spiders. Yahoo!, Google, and other search engines offer spon-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
246

sored listings which enable your URL to be displayed in a highly visible ad space when
the results of a specific search term is returned. 
These services all work basically the same way. They have a method of determin-
ing the “known” number of searches performed based upon a certain keyword, such
as “widget.” Then, if a potential customer goes to a search engine where you purchased
the keyword phrase “widget repair” (and maybe others, budget permitting) and types
“widget repair” that potential customer would see not only the normal search result,
but also your website’s sponsored listing on their computer screen. If all available
impressions were purchased, the potential customer would see your ad every time a
search for “widget repair” was performed. If only a portion of the total impressions
is purchased, the ad would rotate with other sponsored listings. 
There are also dedicated paid listing services that resemble your average search
engine or directory. You will find that potential customers use these services — just
check out the popularity of Overture.com (formerly GoTo.com), findwhat.com, one-
search.com, etc. If you are so inclined, a dedicated paid listing service may be just the
ticket to driving more traffic to your website.
✪
CONCLUSION
Understanding the peculiarities of search engines and directories is a complex sub-
ject. I have tried to cover what is necessary to give your website the best chance for
breaking into the coveted “top 20” inner sanctum. But for those willing to delve deeper,
essential websites to bookmark include Searchenginewatch.com (also subscribe to
their paid service), Positioned1.com, and Fantomaster.com. All are good quality web-
sites with wonderful information; use them often. 
Finally, don’t obsess over your search engine and directory listing and ranking, just
follow what is set out above, and then move on. If you don’t get traffic from one cer-
tain search engine, yes, check it out, but if you can’t figure out why, forget it and move
on. There are many ways to market your new website, search engines and directories,
although very important, are just one part of the package. 
Search Engines and Directories
247

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 16
Marketing Your Website
The market is a place set apart where men may deceive each other.
—Diogenes Laertius 
Your new website is up and running, it’s time to inform the purchasing public. Mar-
keting a web-based business is just as important as marketing a brick-and-mortar
business. Even though a marketing plan is probably one of the most important ele-
ments of a successful business, it is usually the least thought of aspect of any new
business. Formulate a strategic marketing plan. A properly instituted marketing plan
gives your website an acceptance level far above the average website by providing a
rational direction for your marketing activities. 
✪
THE MARKETING PLAN
Creating a good marketing plan is the best thing that you can do to help assure a new
web-based business’s growth. Your marketing plan should be your guide on which
you base your marketing decisions and it will help to ensure that everyone involved
in marketing your website works toward the same goals. A properly drawn up and
instituted marketing plan not only provides a guide for the growth of your web-based
business, but also how to spend your promotional dollars. Optimally a marketing
plan and its budget (which is an integral part of your business’s overall budget) should
cover promotion and advertising for 6 to 12 months. 
Don’t forget to include in your plan’s budget a sizable allotment for market
research. What you know about your target market and the information gleaned
from marketing research will give you the basis for your marketing strategy. Research
249

is the only way you will know what is necessary to design your marketing plan to
reach the 25-35% of your website’s customers that are not brought to your site by
search engines and directories. The plan should lay the groundwork for campaigns that
will encourage customers to place an order, or to take some kind of action, that will
allow you to respond — thereby establishing a relationship with another potential
customer. 
Preparation
Develop market objectives that are realistic and specific. If possible, hire consultants
to assist you in identifying the available market, to understand who will be competing
with you for that market share, and to formulate a realistic projection for your share
of that market. Most of this information can be gathered from:
✸Your internal records.
✸Published market information from government statistics, chambers of commerce,
newspapers, magazines, trade journals, banks, utility companies, city and county
planning organizations, colleges and universities.
✸Surveys, mail responses, telephone and personal interviews, opinion polls, market
testing, and customer feedback.
Analyze your site from a promotional point of view. Then, with your marketing
hat on, look at your site with a fresh eye and consider: 
✸What would a visitor consider as the main purpose of your website? 
✸Who would be interested in your website?
✸How does your website stand out from other websites? 
Now look at the competition: 
✸Are potential customers using the Web now? 
✸What are the strengths and weaknesses of the competition? 
✸What can be done to make the campaign’s overall message superior to your com-
petition’s message? 
✸What message would be most effective in drawing potential customers to your
website? 
✸What would cinch the conversion of potential customer into an actual customer? 
This research will give you a good idea as to how you should go about reaching
your current and potential customers — in other words, where you should spend your
advertising dollars: banner ads, targeted opt-in email, newsletters (online or email),
The Complete E-Commerce Book
250

surveys, traditional advertising methods (print, radio, television), and incentives such
as discounts, gift certificates and contests. 
Now you have a good starting point for your strategic marketing campaign. 
As you formulate your marketing plan consider: 
Competitive Forces: Who are your major competitors now and who is likely to be your
major competitors in the future?  What response can you expect from those com-
petitors to any change in your marketing strategy?  How does the structure of the
industry affect competitive forces in the industry?
Economic Forces: What is the general economic condition of the country or region
where the majority of your customers reside (demographic research)? Are your con-
sumers optimistic or pessimistic about the economy?  What is your target market’s
buying power (demographic research)? What are the current spending patterns of your
target market? Are your customers buying less or more from your website and why?
Socio-cultural Forces: How are society’s (and your targeted market’s) demographics
and values changing and how will these changes affect your web-based business? What
is the general attitude of society regarding the Internet, your business, and its prod-
ucts/services?  What ethical issues should you address?
Legal and Regulatory Forces: What changes in various government regulations (domes-
tic and foreign) are being proposed that would affect the way you operate?  What effect
will global agreements such as NAFTA and GATT have on your web-based business?
Technological Forces: What impact will changing technology have on your target mar-
ket, if any? What technological changes will affect the way you operate your website,
sell your products/services, and conduct marketing activities? 
Identify Target Market: What are the demographics of your target market, i.e., char-
acteristics such as, sex, age, income, occupation, education, ethnic background, fam-
ily life cycle, etc.?  What are the geographic characteristics of this market, i.e. its location,
accessibility, climate? What are the psychographics of your niche market, i.e., atti-
tudes, opinions, interests, motives, lifestyles? What are the product-usage characteristics
of this market?
Needs Analysis: What are the current needs of your target market? How well is your
website and its products/services meeting these needs? How are your competitors’
meeting these needs? How are the needs of your niche market expected to change in
the near and distant futures?
Market Positioning
Your website and its products/services cannot be all things to all people. Look at mar-
Marketing Your Website
251

garine or aspirin, for example, and the extremes that have been taken to create brand
awareness and product differentiation. Marketing requires continual vigilance. Your
marketing position must be able to change to keep up with the current conditions of
the market. Constantly monitor what is happening in your “space” so that you always
have up-to-date knowledge of your marketplace. After you accumulate accurate infor-
mation about your customers, the segments they fit into, and the buying motives of
those segments, you can select the marketing position that makes the most sense. 
Performance Analysis
At this moment, how is your website performing in terms of sales volume, market
share, and profitability? How does this compare to other websites in your “space”?
What is the overall performance of your entire competitive marketplace?  If your web-
site’s performance is improving, what actions can you take to ensure that it contin-
ues to improve? What are your web-based business’ strengths, weaknesses, opportunities,
threats? (In marketing circles these four terms are commonly lumped together into
the acronym — SWOT.)
Marketing Objectives
Once you have answered the above questions, you are ready to set out your market-
ing objectives. Define your current marketing objectives. Are your objectives consis-
tent with recent changes in the marketing environment and/or needs of your target
market?  What is the specific and measurable outcome and time frame for completing
each objective? How does each objective take advantage of a strength or opportunity
and/or convert a weakness or threat? How is each objective consistent with your web-
based business’ goals and mission?
Marketing Strategy
Next comes your marketing strategy. Once you have completed the research on your
target market with specifics such as demographics, geographics, psychographics, prod-
uct-usage characteristics, justifications for the selection of this target market, and
your competitors in this market. Next consider your marketing mix (pricing, distri-
bution and promotion strategies). How does this marketing mix give you a competi-
tive advantage in your niche market?  Is this competitive advantage sustainable? Why
or why not? 
Other Elements to Consider
Some other elements that fit within a good marketing plan are: 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
252

✸Distribution channels.
✸Pricing and terms of sale.
✸Promotion and advertising plan.
✸Marketing budget.
✸Inventory selection and management.
✸Visual merchandising.
✸Customer relations.
When drawing up your marketing plan, think about where you want your busi-
ness to be in three years and how you plan to get there — that’s your marketing plan
in a nutshell. Marketing your web-based business is a never-ending task. Once you
have your information and your marketing plan in place, you must continuously
revisit, revise, refine, and revamp it to accommodate changes in your marketplace.
With a marketing plan in place you have a considered strategy to outmaneuver
your competition by capitalizing on their weaknesses and emphasize your web-based
business’s strengths. By increasing market awareness of the offerings of your website,
you acquire new customers. 
✪
IMPLEMENTING YOUR MARKETING PLAN
Now it is time to implement your marketing plan. Identify a marketing team. This
team can be formed from your business’ internal personnel and consultants, and peo-
ple who have intimate knowledge of the Web, web marketing and (if you are a click-and-
mortar) how the Web can be integrated with current marketing plans. In addition,
find graphic designers, copywriters, and illustrators. Once the team is in place, it
should plan and focus on strategic revenue goals. Don’t let the team focus on the
number of hits your site receives due to an overall advertising, marketing and PR cam-
paign while ignoring whether the campaign achieved the expected revenue goals. Make
it clear as to who has the decision-making authority, who is responsible for what, and
set out a clear timetable for each campaign’s completion?
Don’t forget to coordinate your marketing activities. What does this mean?  Here
are a few example: If you plan to unveil a campaign during the Super Bowl you must
ensure your website and your web-hosting service and/or ISP have the facilities to han-
dle the added traffic. If you are a brick-and-mortar, how do you coordinate special
promotions? If you plan to offer a specific item as, let’s say, a two-for-one promotion,
take steps to assure that there is adequate inventory. Also additional contact center
help is mandatory when launching any kind of new campaign.
Marketing Your Website
253

Marketing Venues
Your marketing plan should include marketing through several venues, such as print
media, banner ads, affiliates, television ads, radio ads, newsletters, email, etc. How-
ever, with the Web’s extensive capabilities available for a reasonable cost, make it the
cornerstone.
Consistency
Create a consistent marketing message for your website that reflects its mission and
goals. This theme will provide consistency to your presentation and continuity over
time. The theme can remain constant, although the look and content will certainly
change. Always keep the look and content focused on your potential customers’ wants
and needs and take advantage of any of your competitions shortcomings.
Analyze
Your marketing plan should become the basis for analysis of whether customer needs
are being met through analyzing sales trends, customer’s comments, return numbers,
requests for out-of-stock merchandise, repeat customers, surveys, etc. At some point
consider offering new products — either related or unrelated to current ones — and
go after new target markets or penetrate current markets more deeply.
Brick-and-Mortar Advantage
If you have a brick-and-mortar business, make use of it. How? By making certain that
your website information is prominent in all of the advertisements for your tradi-
tional business and check that your website’s address is prominent on all your mar-
keting and advertising material, business cards, letterhead, envelopes, brochures,
shopping bags, giveaways such as hats and pens, etc. Also make your employees aware
of the importance of promoting the online business. 
If you are the owner of a successful brick-and-mortar brand, then you already pos-
sess a key advantage in you online venture — name-recognition. Just this fact alone will
help make your website more valuable and allow it to obtain profitability more quickly.
Finally, institute a procedure to monitor the success or failure of your marketing
activities. Will a formal marketing audit be performed? If so, what will be its scope?  Will
specialized audits be performed? If so, which marketing functions will be analyzed?
✪
ON-SITE MARKETING TECHNIQUES 
How do you keep your customers coming back for more?  On-site marketing of your
website involves search engine submissions, strategic links, optimizing your copy, ban-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
254

ner ads, opt-in email, client retention services, affiliate programs, press releases, and
much more. In other words, it’s whatever will work to draw potential customers to
your website then converting them into paying customers. You want to build brand
awareness, foster relationships with your customers, encourage repeat business and
return visits to your website. 
Established brick-and-mortars that have moved their business (or elements of their
business) online must take care to reflect the essence of the brick-and-mortar brand,
work with the brand, and make sure that you take the brand online appropriately. In
other words, don’t jeopardize your product by using marketing gimmicks online that
you would not do use for your traditional business.
To keep your customers coming back for more, include in your marketing plan
strategies for: 
✸Targeted opt-in email, which means that the recipients have specifically requested
email relating to a particular topic. 
✸Online newsletters.
✸Content Updates.
✸Incentives, contests, and surveys.
Some examples are a newsletter for registered visitors, a free gift for answering a
questionnaire or for a referral, or a monthly drawing for one of your products. All of
these suggestions (out of many that can be implemented) not only build traffic but
also start you well on the road toward collecting data on your customers’ demographics
and offer the opportunity to amass your customers’ email addresses for use in future
marketing campaigns. 
Solicit Customer Feedback
Aggressively solicit customer feedback. It’s a great marketing tactic. Here’s a suggestion
on how to create a good customer feedback campaign: 
Create a short, say 25-question, customer survey that has a prominent position on
your website. When customers take time to fill-out the survey, thank them by issuing
a $5 gift certificate or some other giveaway. Compile the information obtained from
the survey and then use the results to fuel growth and change so that your site is always
new and exciting. Surveys also can indicate what your customers like and dislike about
your site. 
Another benefit from using the survey method is acquiring your customer’s infor-
mation —name, email address and maybe even their snail mail address — all very use-
ful for sending out future promotions. But be careful not to annoy your customers. It
Marketing Your Website
255

is advisable to mitigate the possible irritation caused by direct-mail (either email or
snail mail) by including something your customers will appreciate such as a newslet-
ter or a certificate for redemption of a small gift or gift certificate; which can, in turn,
result in customer appreciation.
Another way to use your survey form is for testimonial feedback that you can then
use as content on your website. For example, if you offer a certain brand of shoes, in
one of your surveys you can ask for opinions or comments about that brand. Use those
comments on your website, such as, “I didn’t need these shoes but they reminded me
of when I was a child,” or “I just wanted them because they were different.” 
Links
As mentioned earlier, numerous search engines use link popularity when ranking web-
sites. Thus instituting a strategic linking program is a must for any new website. When
a search service sees a website that has a lot of other websites linking to it, it naturally
assumes this profusion of links means it is a site with compelling content and is well-
regarded in the Web neighborhood.
Begin by negotiating reciprocal links, especially with websites that appear consis-
tently in the “top twenty.” Having a good base of incoming links from other websites
is as important as providing links to the “top twenty” on your website. Remember this
can also include your competitors’ sites. Why?  If any of your competitors’ sites are
one the “top twenty” returns when a search is done for “shoes” leading customers to
that site and they don’t find what they are looking for on your competitor’s site, but
see your link, guess what — they will end up on your site. You will be surprised how
many of your so-called competitors will be very glad to link to your site in return for
a link back. Why?  Because the next time your website may show up in the “top twenty”
when a potential customer uses a different search criteria. 
Work hard to develop link partnerships with websites that are popular with your
customers. How can you know what’s popular?  Use those surveys! 
Quality links — links that provide a valuable resource your customers will appreci-
ate — are the only links you should consider when developing your links strategy. These
links give you the opportunity to provide a useful service for a potential customer even
if there is no sale made at that specific time. Customers remember the websites that
enables them to accomplish their goal — even though they may have made their purchase
on another website. But because you took the effort to provide your customers with a
valuable service — links to quality websites that target the same niche market — they
will come back. Eventually, they will make a purchase from your website. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
256

There are many ways you can exchange links. Links can be banners, links can be
placed in emails, links can be placed within informational text on yours and others web-
sites, links can be an award, links can be provided within a buyer’s guide or directory. 
Okay, now you get the idea, so go for it. Try any variety of these links or all of them
— just do them tastefully and don’t let the links distract from the presentation of your
products/services. Links not only help with search engine ranking, they feed traffic
to your site directly, and they help to create name recognition. All good things!
Now, how to go about generating links?  First decide:
✸Which websites do you want as link partners?
✸Which websites would be of value to your customers? For example ask your cus-
tomers, in a survey,
– Where do they go for information and resources? 
– Where do they shop in the traditional world?
– What other websites do they visit when seeking the same product/service?
– Which websites offer products/services that compliment your offerings? 
– Which websites do they consider to be your competitors? 
When vacillating on whether to establish a link relationship with a specific com-
petitor, remember that if you offer a quality product that is competitively priced, a
link to a competitor’s site won’t hurt you. It can actually help by providing your cus-
tomers the information necessary to make a purchasing decision. Your customers
aren’t stupid; the Internet is a great venue for comparison-shopping, so customers
will probably be visiting your competitors anyway. Make it easy for them; they’ll appre-
ciate it. Remember Miracle on 42nd Street — Gimbles referring customers to Macy’s and
vice versa — same theory here. 
Before searching for link partners, consider what kind of partner you want and
what you have to offer the potential partner. Be diligent, be open to opportunities,
and always be on the lookout for a potential quality link relationship. If you are on a
website that you think might have potential, act immediately, send an email, use their
feedback form.  
Banner Ads
Banner ads are just small digital billboards that one website pays (in one way or another)
to be placed on another website. When potential customers click on a banner placed
within another website, they are sent to your website. 
Various studies have shown that the most powerful word in a banner ad is “free,”
that simplicity sells, and graphics enhance a message. If a banner is designed correctly,
Marketing Your Website
257

it doesn’t distract from the message. Other elements you need for a good banner design
include:
✸An attention-getting element, but not one that is antagonistic.
✸A call to action.
✸A reason to click through.
✸Content that ignites clicks, i.e., it tells them to give the banner a click.
✸Placement of your website’s logo somewhere within the ad.
When a potential customer clicks on your banner ad to visit your website, it is called
a “click-through.” The ratio of impressions to click-throughs is called the CTR (click-
through ratio). An effective banner ad design and astute placement on a compatible
high traffic site contributes to the obtainment of a high CTR, which can double the
click-through rate of your ad, thereby doubling your return on investment (ROI). A
study by Doubleclick.com found that:
✸After the fourth impression, response rates dropped from 2.7% to under 1% (ban-
ner burnout).
✸You need to focus on four important issues (creativity, targeting, frequency, and
content).
✸The use of simple animation can increase response rates 25% — just be sure that
the animation doesn’t slow downloading of the ad. 
✸The use of cryptic messages can increase CRT by 18%, but probably do not attract
potential customers or reinforce branding.
✸The use of humor is very effective.
✸Using a question within the ad can raise CRT by 16%.
✸Using phrases such as “Click Here” tend to improve response by 15%.
✸Offering free goods or services generally improves CRT.
✸Using bright colors in the design is more effective.
✸The use of a message that gives a sense of urgency actually decreases the CRT.
If you aren’t careful, banner ads often fade into the digital woodwork — even if you
use animation and other special effects. If not managed right, banner advertising can
be expensive and ineffective. Be very careful with your ad placement and make certain
that you do not overpay for ad placement on websites that do not produce real cus-
tomers to your site. Place banner ads on websites that you know your target customers
visit. Targeting equates to better-qualified customers, or potential customers that are
more likely to complete the sale. How can you know — via your online surveys. 
Note that a study by ZDNet found that animated ads generated CTR at least 15%
The Complete E-Commerce Book
258

higher than static ads, and in some cases as much as 40% higher. However, animation
does not take the place of response-driven copy and a creative idea. Avoid animation
that takes a long time to download and offers poor copy. But with simple, creative
animation more potential customers notice and pay attention, even if they don’t click
on it. Also, potential customers are more likely to click for more information if the
animation effectively emphasizes what product is about. However, the animated ad
must have a strong, well-crafted message and a clear call to action.
Frequency (the number of times a viewer sees an ad) is an important factor when
planning a banner campaign to build your brand awareness. In addition to maxi-
mizing your ad dollar, controlling ad frequency can open up new creative doors by
allowing you to create a custom banner package for your branding campaign. The
correct delivery frequency is necessary for banner ad success and will help determine
how successful your branding campaign will be. The right frequency is usually crucial
for getting your message across since too few impressions and your message just isn’t
seen by enough potential customers, and with too many your banners begin to fade
into the woodwork. This is referred to as “banner burnout,” i.e., a banner no longer
offers a good ROI. Several companies offer help in managing your banner ad fre-
quency rate. One such company is the previously mentioned DoubleClick.com whose
services allow you to control a sequence of banners that can be served to viewers in a
specific order.
Banner ads on popular websites (especially those that service the same niche mar-
ket) can run as low as $249 for 250,000 impressions. An “impression” is the number of
times surfers see a page that your banner is situated on. Ad placement services such as
BannerCell.com, Insidewire.com, Internet Advertising Solution (IAS) (http://iaswww.com),
NarrowcastMedia.com, and ValueClick.com can assist you with specific, targeted place-
ment of your banner ads. 
The industry average of CTRs is between 1.5 and 2.5%. If you purchased 50,000
impressions and received a 2% CTR, your website would receive 1000 potential cus-
tomers. It is possible that with a well-designed and effectively targeted banner ad cam-
paign you could receive a higher CTR, which is why a good banner design is important.
When using services such as the ones listed in the previous paragraph, you can easily
rotate two or three banners during a campaign, which keeps a single banner from
going stale. However, to receive the 1000 potential customers requires a substantial
investment on your part. Therefore, for small websites, it would probably be more
cost effective to use alternative marketing methods and then supplement that with a
few well-placed banner ads. 
Marketing Your Website
259

In a study from another ad placement service, Webreference.com, concerning effec-
tive ad placement, it was discovered that the placement of the ad on the side of a web
page, next to the right scroll bar, increased click-through an average of 228% over
placement at the top of the web page. Of course, as viewers become accustomed to
the ad placement along the side of a page, it might lessen its effectiveness. Another
study indicates that an ad placed one-third of the way down on a page gets better
results than ads placed at the top of a web page.
Don’t forget to factor in the costs of an agency to create the banner ad and another
agency or consultant to place the banner ad and to plot your online strategy. 
An economical approach is to develop reciprocal relationships with other websites
that will cost you only your time (plus the cost of the banner itself). If you do pursue
this method, follow these three rules:  
1. Create a banner ad with the criteria set out above.
2. Partner with websites that complement your site.
3. Keep your expectations low.
Consider using banner exchange services that enable you easily to advertise your
website on a variety of other sites for free in exchange for hosting other member’s ban-
ners on your website. Most of these services operate by membership and then provide
the means for you to swap banner ads with other members. Some services to check
out are ClickEZ’s Banner exchange (www.clickez.com), LinkBuddies.com, TrainX-
change Network (www.ntwp.net/trainxchange), and WorldBE.com. 
Almost all e-commerce websites can benefit from an effective banner advertising
campaign. Here is how: 
Stretches your ad budget. Banner ads cost less to create and place than other forms of
advertising and they also often deliver a more targeted audience than more expensive
advertising venues such as television, print ads, radio spots, and direct mail. 
Gets your e-commerce’s brand where you want it to be seen. It is easier to build a higher traf-
fic volume by strategically placing banner ads on websites that relate to your prod-
uct/service offerings. For example, an e-commerce site that offers trendy sunglasses
can place ads on fashion sites, or a software vendor can advertise on tech sites such
as ZDNet.com and Cnet.com. Online ads give users immediate satisfaction by allow-
ing them to just “click” and they are at your website — instant gratification. 
Provides quality traffic. When a person clicks on a banner, they are interested in what
the banner has to say, and thus what your website offers. Since banners tend to deliver
highly targeted sales leads, even ads with low response rates can be very effective.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
260

Helps to establish your brand. If you use the same theme (look and feel) for your ban-
ners that you use for your website, the ad can serve to reinforce your brand. Even if a
potential customer doesn’t click on the banner, they have been exposed to your mes-
sage, logo, and image. By consistently applying your business’s colors, trademarks,
and products in your banner ads, you help your brand’s image stick in potential cus-
tomers’ minds.
You can easily monitor the results of a banner ad campaign. Most banner ad enablers have
the ability to monitor web user response to a specific ad campaign and most will pro-
vide their clients with the ability to check web-user response to a banner campaign.
By tracking ad performance, you can determine which ads and ad placements work
and which don’t. This allows you to quickly tweak your campaigns and media buys
to improve response rates. Also after you’ve instituted a banner ad campaign, you can
continually test and chart the performance of the banners from the very first day of
placement through use of your own log analysis software.
Affiliate Programs 
To help drive quality traffic to your new website, consider setting up an affiliate pro-
gram — sometimes called referral, associate, or partnership programs. No matter what
term is used, these programs are attractive to many small websites that want to off-
set their costs by leasing space for a percentage of the sales made by sending traffic to
other online businesses.
Affiliate programs are established by web-based businesses to drive quality traffic
to their website. In exchange for a host site sending a customer to your website, you pay
the host site a commission based on the sales you generate from the referred customer.
These commissions are all over the place and can range from 1 to 30 percent and
upwards.
If you decide to establish an affiliate program you should create a system that can
do online tracking, so your host sites can count the sales they have generated plus
their commissions. The higher you can make the commission, the more likely your
host site will actually promote your website in some way so it can send paying cus-
tomers your way and earn additional income.
It also can work in reverse. With an affiliate program you can make your website
more valuable to your customers by offering them goods and services that are likely to
interest them. You can earn additional revenue from your site through partnerships with
websites that will compensate you for the traffic, leads, and sales you send them. 
You can either develop your own affiliate program or contact a service that manages
Marketing Your Website
261

affiliate programs by giving websites access to their own network of affiliate sites and
measuring the sales each affiliate generates. 
For those that want to go the managed affiliate program path, here is a small sam-
pling of the services you might find when you use your favorite search engine and the
keywords “affiliate management”: Commission Junction (www.cj.com), Floppy-
Bank.com, MyReferrer.com, Performics.com, and AffiliateNetwork.com. 
Some readers will want to run their own affiliate program “in-house” so they can
have total control over the way the program is ran, and avoid escrow fees, per-trans-
action fees and the like. There are two ways to go about this. Both methods enable
you to avoid handing over your affiliate program to a third party. 
The first method requires that you have the necessary skills to create your own affil-
iate program, e.g. craft the CGI script, and then place everything on your web server. 
The second method to use a program such as the Ultimate Affiliate (www.ground-
break.com), which is a CGI script written in the Perl programming language that allows
you to set up a fully featured affiliate program on your own web server. Ultimate Affil-
iate’s CGI scripts are easy to install and intuitive to use for the average web developer.
The resulting program lets you run a “pay-per-sale” or “pay-per-lead” program where you
recruit affiliates to promote your website, then pay them a percentage (or a flat fee) for
every sale or lead generated by their referrals. The Ultimate Affiliate program tracks
referrals by both cookie and optional IP tracking - making it virtually foolproof for an
affiliate to lose a commission. And for the hard-core developers, the script will also cre-
ate replicated websites for your affiliates to ensure 100% guaranteed referral sales.
Newsletters
Newsletters (whether called eNewsletters, ezines, email newsletters or electronic newslet-
ters) are an effective way to build goodwill and keep in touch with potential customers.
Of course, you must provide a form for customers’ opt-in (ask for you to email them
the free newsletter on a regular basis). Through the combination of a little public rela-
tions, image-building and selling, you can provide your readers (customers and poten-
tial customers) with information they will appreciate and find useful. However,
information is the key word here.
Through a newsletter (which can also be sent via snail mail) you can inform cur-
rent and potential customers about different topics while subtly promoting your prod-
ucts/services. Your newsletter must contain a main story, which is informational, and
then the secondary stories can target your products and services.
Newsletters, when used as an opt-in/opt-out program, are a great tool for bring-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
262

ing customers to your website, cultivating repeat business and building customer loy-
alty. A good newsletter is entertaining, while providing valuable, worthwhile infor-
mation. It must be attractive, well written and relevant. Newsletters that are informative
and rich in content can be just the reminder needed to remind customers to revisit
your website. 
Before taking on the task of writing a newsletter you should ask yourself — do I
have the time, aptitude and resources or the staff necessary to write a regularly sched-
uled newsletter?  If the answer is yes, start your research. Find other newsletters that
have the style and content that you like; read and study them until you know why
each particular newsletter is effective. 
Write your newsletter to a target audience. If your website serves a specific niche
market, then you have no problems. However, if you have a more generalized website,
dig into your customer data to find a specific subject your customers will find of inter-
est, and which provides enough material for a regularly scheduled newsletter. Once
you have your target audience in mind and the niche subject matter, don’t waiver.
Stick to that particular subject matter; don’t ramble. If your subject matter is col-
lectible Barbie dolls, don’t try to work in collectible Hot Wheels. That is another sub-
ject. What you could do is a survey and ask how many readers are also interested in
other forms of collectibles, if you get a favorable response then start another newslet-
ter for that niche market.
To establish a readership comfort level, create a distinctive style (both writing and
layout) for the newsletter, which should be consistent in each issue. Establish a pub-
lication schedule (weekly, monthly, bi-monthly). Every issue should provide links to
other sites of interest and/or reviews of sites that might interest your niche market.
The text needs to be content rich. For example, you can review a new book and give
links to sites with other reviews on the book and sites where you can purchase the
book. Remember your readership wants a newsletter that informs, educates or helps
them in their daily lives, not an “in your face” product brochure.
Create an easy-to-locate newsletter archive on your website so that your customers
can find any back issue they might need. Have links to your archive pages through-
out your website. In each new issue of your newsletter refer in some way or the other
to a back issue; this will lead readers to your archive pages and conversely to your prod-
ucts/services. Additionally, these back issues can help build traffic to your site if you
are diligent in registering each issue with the search engines.
A newsletter is a good tool, especially for the small web-based businesses. Incor-
porate your newsletter into your overall marketing plan. If you produce a high qual-
Marketing Your Website
263

ity, informative newsletter, and let other websites know about it, they will happily pro-
vide a link to your newsletter pages. You can also trade your newsletter for links, espe-
cially to other websites serving the same niche market (this will help build readership
and, in turn, traffic to your site). 
Benefits of publishing a newsletter, other than the obvious ones set out above are:
✸Your newsletter is distributed via the one item everyone on the Web has in com-
mon - an email address. Email is easy, free, and works without a hitch. Readers can
look at it at their leisure, print it out, save it, file it, and refer to it when needed. 
✸You can send potential customers emails (the newsletter) chock-full of informa-
tive content about a subject the receiver has shown an interest in (along with a lit-
tle promo for your website and its products/services).
✸You promote not only your website but also its products/services. It is vital that
you subtly, but relentlessly, reinforce your website and its products/services brand(s).
✸You build trust since familiarity fuels the comfort index. Every time your readers
receive your newsletter wherein you have shared valuable information, you build
and reinforce their trust. 
✸A newsletter can become an additional source of revenue. You can sell ads in your
newsletter, but you first must build your readership to at least 5000 to make ads
attractive to other businesses.
You will find that your customers and readers change their email addresses more
often than their physical address. You have to find a way to keep track of everyone’s cur-
rent email address. One way is to use a listserv program like Majordomo. Also let your
customers and readers in on the action, give them a simple form to fill out that allows
them to subscribe, to unsubscribe, and to change their email address. 
Market your newsletter, not only should you place your newsletter section with
search engines but you also should list it in every applicable newsletter and/or ezine
database available. For example, Pertinent.com maintains an ezine (newsletter) direc-
tory that serves as a centralized source of information for ezines online. You can find
specific information within the directory or promote your newsletter by adding your
listing. You also can also use the directory to trade advertising with other ezine pub-
lishers in order to increase your subscription base. Another site you might want to
check out is ezinedatabase.com. Although the website is poorly designed, the data-
base might be better designed. Finally, look at A.U. Publishing’s website’s ezine data-
base (www.aupublishing.com/ezinedb.shtml). Registering your newsletters with such
websites may help to bring in more subscribers, i.e., more customers.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
264

If you continually publish a quality product, your readers will repay you through
purchases on your website. Finally, ask your customers for feedback and always include
an opt-out link in each newsletter.  
List Management Software
Sending out your newsletter can be a daunting task unless you take advantage of email
list manager software. Email lists disseminate a single message simultaneously to a
group of people. With email lists, you can quickly and cost-effectively deliver thou-
sands, even millions, of newsletter messages simultaneously over the Internet. Fur-
thermore, through database integration, messages can be personalized according to each
customer’s demographic information and preferences. Email list management soft-
ware automate tasks such as list creation, subscriptions, un-subscriptions, bounce
handling of email delivery errors, and the like. Look into email list management soft-
ware solutions such as:
LISTSERV (www.lsoft.com). The first email list manager, and remains one of the
dominant systems in use today. It lets you create, manage, and control your electronic
mailing lists; maintain interactive email discussion groups for customer service; pro-
vide technical assistance; forums about any topic of interest; and distribute person-
alized direct email campaigns with targeted information that the recipients have
specifically requested. 
Majordomo (www.greatcircle.com/majordomo/). This freeware is distributed by
great Circle Associates. However, Majordomo is not for the fainthearted. The website
does not provide technical support for the software, although it does provide links to
user support groups. For further help with Majordomo, check out “Majordomo
Newsletters for the Novice,” which can be found at www.wilsonweb.com/articles/major-
domo.htm. (Bookmark this website as it holds a wealth of information for the e-com-
merce novice.) 
Majordomo automates the management of electronic mailing lists through com-
mands sent to Majordomo via electronic mail to handle all aspects of list mainte-
nance. Once a list is set up, virtually all operations are performed remotely, requiring
no intervention upon the postmaster of the list site. Majordomo controls a list of
addresses for some mail transport system (like sendmail or smail) to handle. Majordomo
itself performs no mail delivery (though it has scripts to format and archive messages).
Petidomo (www.ira.uka.de/~patrick/petidomo/). This product offers one of the
fastest mailing list server solutions available along with extensive technical options.
Petidomo delivers all email simultaneously rather than one-by-one.
Marketing Your Website
265

Some of these products (e.g. LISTSERV) also allow you to set up a discussion board
or an email discussion group on your website. This enhances your newsletter offer-
ing by allowing your customers to communicate with one another.  
Email
Marketing, promotional materials, and methodology can be helpful in building a good
customer base for your website, but be careful to not burn up your communication
pathways. If used properly, email is one of the best ways for a web-based business to
acquire new customers and grow and build long-lasting relationships with current cus-
tomers. Start with monthly emails then slowly increase the frequency and specializa-
tion of these emails by responding to your customer’s requests — because you, as a
responsible website operator, remembered to ask for feedback. Although the spam cri-
sis continues to affect consumer behavior online, it does not necessarily cloud con-
sumer receptiveness to legitimate marketers: an overwhelming majority of online
consumers receive offers by email and have made a purchase online or offline as a result. 
It is possible to set up a list quickly, by hand, if it is small or you can use special-
ized software (as discussed later). Surprisingly good response rates to target email
campaigns are achieved because: 
✸Email hyperlinks allow recipients to go straight to your website.
✸The recipient has proactively requested the information and, therefore, is inter-
ested in topic.
✸The recipient can opt-out if no longer interested in receiving specific email.
With the right email tools, you can have a candid one-on-one audience to get cus-
tomers to respond to an offer targeted to them. Check out iMailer (www.emailtools.co.uk),
Mail Bomber (www.softheap.com) and, DoubleClick’s (www.doubleclick.com) Dart-
Mail. While on the DoubleClick website, check out the latest DoubleClick Consumer
Email Survey.
One of the great values of a simple email offer is that it has many of the advan-
tages of the over-hyped push technology minus all of its complications. To effectively
use an email campaign you must request an email address with each order, each new
account, and each inquiry your website receives. However, be sure to ask your customers
if they would like to receive email messages with special sales information and news
about any new offerings before bombarding them with email offers. If you forego this
step, customers may feel that you are “spamming” them, and opt to go elsewhere, e.g.
your competitors.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
266

Give your customers the option of receiving their messages from you in the form
of HTML-enhanced mail since this type of mail can deliver a more persuasive mes-
sage than a plain-text email. All of the newer email clients can accept HTML email,
complete with graphics and layout, so use this technology wherever possible.
✪
DATA MINING
If your budget is generous, you can leverage the information you already have to bet-
ter predict your customers’ behaviors and to track business trends. Data mining dis-
covers patterns and relationships hidden in your data that allows you to see emerging
trends and patterns and to help you to develop better relationships by leveraging this
knowledge. Your ability to discover and analyze your data will give you the knowledge
to grow your business with useful and meaningful information. It’s almost guaran-
teed that at least some of your competitors are using data mining techniques to locate
high-value customers in order to increase sales and minimize fraud.
Businesses sit with enormous databases holding various customer data (scattered
all over the enterprise). These databases contain, not only a customer’s name, address,
and email, but also data on their buying trends (what they’re currently buying), their surf-
ing habits, the technology they are using, etc. The key to success is unlocking and apply-
ing that valuable information. With the right tools you can send quick inquiries into the
vast array of information found in your traffic logs, advertising reports, shopping cart,
etc., and perform real-time analysis of that data, allowing you instantly to capture infor-
mation about a customer’s behavior. Using this technology, scouting through your
various data sources, amassing the data, and then turning it into actionable informa-
tion, allows you to use the data to deliver value-added marketing. However, mining the
data contained in your business’s databanks isn’t for the fainthearted. It is expensive to
implement and for staff to use the data mining tools requires extensive training.
Marketing Your Website
267
EMAIL “NETIQUETTE”
If you are going to use email campaigns in your marketing efforts, it is imperative that you pro-
vide the email recipient with a way to easily opt-out of the email listing. As an additional “trust”
incentive, state clearly that you not sell your customer list to anyone without specific permission
from the customer (although it is perfectly legal to sell your mailing list to others). However,
if you feel it is important for you to have the option of selling a customer list you can provide
a clickable button giving approval for the customer’s information to be sold by you, but don’t
expect that button ever to be used. Use an email campaign to increase your bottom line, not
to alienate potential customers.

However, when properly used, data mining helps you to gain insight into the (evolv-
ing) requirements and needs of your customers through analyses of customer data
throughout the entire customer life cycle: from identifying prospective customers to
extending and maintaining customer relationships. Then use it for developing and exe-
cuting personalized, customer-centric marketing programs — programs that truly opti-
mize customer relationships and deliver the highest possible return on investment.
For example, your marketing people might want to know the number of customers
who saw the new widget banner ad on your website’s FAQ page exactly three times
before they clicked on it. Maybe it would be useful to find out how many times a cus-
tomer will search for something before they decide that it can’t be found on your web-
site. If your website requires registration somewhere within the purchasing process
or uses technology to differentiate anonymous potential customers, the likelihood of
using mined data increases exponentially. 
Establishing a data mining program is time-consuming, expensive, and requires
the amassing of clean data (from log files, email and ad servers, and customer data-
bases) before any analysis can begin. This can be done in-house or outsourced depend-
ing on your needs and budget. Next, since data mining builds models to analyze and
predict behavior of customers by focusing on associations and patterns hidden in
data, you need a staff that is well trained in data mining techniques. 
BestProcesses.com provides an example of how data mining saved an e-commerce
company money and helped it to understand its customers. The e-commerce busi-
ness is a publisher of Internet reference books. It experienced a 30 percent loss in its cus-
tomer base, causing the company to contemplate several courses of action, including
converting its books into online databases at a cost of more than $30,000. After com-
pleting a data mining project, the company discovered the problem was not as dra-
matic as originally thought. The substantial decrease was actually an error in tracking
customers. Data mining saved the company from incurring a needless expense. 
By comprehensively analyzing data, e-commerce operators can see a bigger picture
of what their visitors do and where they go. You can use that information to direct
visitors to specific pages within your websites and to present them with personalized
content. This helps to increase page views, lengthen visits, and increase sales.
Personalization
Personalization (one-to-one marketing) has the potential to completely revolution-
ize how a web-based business markets its product to customers and maintains its cus-
tomer relationships. What exactly is personalization?  It is a compilation of detailed
The Complete E-Commerce Book
268

behavioral knowledge of individuals and/or groups of individuals with certain like-
behavioral characteristics and the use of that knowledge to personalize a customer’s
online experience. To put it another way, personalization is the management of the
customer relationship on an individual customer basis, but carried out in a mass pro-
duction sort of way. With the help of personalization tools, you can entice your cus-
tomers to stay on your website, make purchases, click on ads, etc. This, in turn, can
lead to more sales, larger sales, more frequently returning customers. Customer ben-
efits include easier access to products they care about — ease of shopping is some-
thing customers remember, so they will come back.  
For the most part, personalization is more than a MyWidgetPage offering. Instead,
when properly used the personalization program is tied into a data mining program,
which enables a website to serve individual customers personalized ads and perhaps a
re-ordering of a web page’s content (which is accomplished in real time) to match that
customer’s behavior and shopping patterns. 
To implement an effective personalization effort on your website you must establish
clear goals to point the way toward what to personalize. It takes careful planning. You
must be able to predict the wants and needs of the individual customer and target what
you want to accomplish with the implementation of personalization on your site. 
Do you want to increase customer loyalty?  If so, add personalization in such a way
as to influence repeat traffic. Are your website’s products/services something that cus-
tomers usually feel that they need to research and evaluate prior to purchase (a refrig-
erator, automobile, etc.)?  If so, personalize any portions of your site that can help in
the customer’s decision-making process. Of course, to do this properly you need to
determine how your customers gather information before making a purchase.
Know your customers: Some will know what they want when they first click on
your website. Others should be gently led into an information-gathering process that
can aid them in their comparison shopping. 
Customer Categories. Your personalization tools need to be able to trace the paths
and gather information regarding individual customers who visit your website. In
general, customer behavior breaks down into five categories:
1. The impulse buyer (no research).
2. The brand conscious customer (little research).
3. The customers wanting the best value for the money (extensive research).
4. The price conscious customer (extensive price comparison).
5. The window shoppers.
Marketing Your Website
269

Be prepared to engage the customers in each of these categories so that they will
stay on your website and eventually make a purchase. To do this, lay out a different
motif for each customer category. 
Privacy Issues. Personalization tools can be abused. For that reason, personaliza-
tion has a “bad rep.” These tools must be used with care, or you may find that you
have alienated a serious percentage of your market share. Do not secretly profile the
customer, do not send spam, and do not trade in personal information that you do
not have the right to collect. 
Personalization tools can provide much good — when used responsibly. For exam-
ple, they can be used to create a unique session focused entirely on an individual cus-
tomer’s needs, employing techniques to cross-sell, up-sell, and perform goal-driven
configuration on a one-to-one basis. Thus you can present your products/services to
individual customers in terms that are almost too good to refuse. 
Use personalization to understand your customers’ interests, and provide them
with solid unbiased information on those interests (without charge or obligation). If
your customers like what you are delivering, you have a valuable commodity — a repeat
customer. 
If you think data mining and personalization tools are in your e-commerce business’s
future check out:
✸Megaputer.com’s PolyAnalyst 4.6. This comprehensive and versatile suite of advanced
data mining tools incorporates the latest achievements in automated knowledge dis-
covery to analyze both structured and unstructured data. (The megaputer.com site
also has a good data mining 101 section.)
✸Insightful.com’s StatServer, a web-based decision support system based on S-PLUS,
one of the premier tools for data analysis, data mining, and statistical modeling.
✸DeepMetrix Mining Visitor Intelligence Service (www.deepmetric.com), this is a
hosted service. It might be just the ticket for the less technically inclined e-com-
merce operator.
✸MarketMiner.com offers an automated, informative data mining tool that auto-
matically produces a complete marketing analysis from, for example, customer
demographics, sales, or response data from a past direct marketing campaign. 
✸Unica Corporation’s Affinium Product Suite (www.unicacorp.com) is a fully inte-
grated marketing automation suite designed to allow businesses to leverage cus-
tomer information across multiple data sources and interactive touchpoints.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
270

✪
CONCLUSION
Creating a stunning website is not enough to guarantee e-commerce success. You need
to get the right visitors — potential customers —to come to your website. 
Many readers will find that running a business on the Web will seem daunting at
times because there are so many avenues a potential customer can take before they
find your website. But if you understand the basics of marketing, establish a sound
marketing plan, and put that plan into place, the Web will appear less daunting. 
So get to work, develop targeted marketing strategies, monitor the results, and
continuously strive to improve your efforts. 
Marketing Your Website
271

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 17
Customer Service
Technology: The knack of so arranging the world 
that we need not experience it.
—Max Frisch, Homo Faber
Good customer service equals good customer retention and good word of mouth.
The explosion of e-commerce transactions brings tremendous opportunity to all
kinds of businesses. The Web has attracted both entrepreneurs looking for a new busi-
ness model and established brick-and-mortars seeking an opportunity to grow their
revenues and to expand their customer base through this compelling online sales
channel.
Yet, all e-commerce businesses need to differentiate themselves from the compe-
tition. That presents a daunting challenge to most online enterprises; especially those
just entering the e-commerce arena. The smart businesses realize that at least part of
the differentiation will come from the quality of service they offer their customers. 
The successful e-commerce business will adopt good customer service strategies
that allow them to build customer loyalty, fulfill a broader range of customer needs,
and increase the effectiveness of their sales and services. 
Look at customer service like this: Every contact a customer has with an e-com-
merce business, its employees, website, help desk, call or contact center, or other busi-
ness-related services, influences that person’s perception of that business — online
and offline. 
The technologies that the Web brings to the forefront present a unique opportu-
nity to create and nurture a special one-on-one relationship with every customer. This
is why providing exceptional customer service is the best marketing tool a website has.
273

✪
THE PROBLEM IN A NUTSHELL
Online customers bring a whole new set of customer service expectations that never
existed with brick-and-mortar stores. When a customer goes online with the purpose
of making a purchase, he or she expects to find easily all of the information necessary
to make an informed purchasing decision. But that customer also expects to hit the
order button, provide the necessary information, and boom! The package magically
arrives at their door. This is because buying products online feels like magic to many
online customers. Trying to manage such unrealistic expectation can provide a cus-
tomer service challenge. 
Let’s say that your business is increasing by leaps and bounds. That’s good, but
the more customers your website attracts means more customer inquiries and more
online transactions. That, in turn, translates into a higher burden on your order ful-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
274
Figure 26. The perfect e-commerce trifecta — marketing, sales, and customer service. An e-com-
merce business can court customers through promotional material, which entices the customer to
visit the website to review online marketing material. Once comfortable with the products and/or
e-commerce business, a customer will place an order. If the website is built with the right backend
support, the customer can then follow the post-order process through receipt of the product.
Thereafter, the customer can re-visit the website anytime he or she has a question, or desires addi-
tional information/products/services.  

fillment systems and a greater load on your customer service department (which may
just be a lone clerk, who not only answers the phone, but also picks and packs the
orders).
But success can be your downfall. Despite the pressures put on an overburdened
staff of a suddenly successful e-commerce site, you must promptly handle all cus-
tomer inquires. 
Numerous e-commerce businesses are dilatory in their response to online infor-
mation requests. Once a customer has been disappointed by how slowly their query
has been answered, they are unlikely to try again. Almost one-half of the currently
operational e-commerce websites provide such poor customer service that they take
more than five days to respond to an inquiry or complaint — that is if they provide
any response at all!  When a website ignores their customers’ inquiries, they not only
discourage brand loyalty, but actually drive traffic to their online competitors. 
Who is your competition?  It is the e-commerce sites that respond to their cus-
tomers’ inquiries within 24 hours.
Some sites leave their customers stranded where they can’t find an easy way to ask
for more information and/or send an email request. Then there are the many sites
where the “Contact Us” link simply launches a generic email query screen — with no
information about how soon they can expect a reply and/or where else to look for
information. Other sites hide their contact information forcing the customer into a
“hide and seek game,” or give only a webmaster’s email address. Some websites don’t
even give a telephone number for customers to use if they really need to talk to a
human. This is not the way to provide quality customer service.
What an e-commerce operator should ever forget is that it takes only a few key-
strokes for an unhappy customer to tell the entire world of the problem encountered
while dealing with your website. If you have a bad customer service day, week or month
— your business is ruined because by the time you’ve solved the problem the entire
buying public has read about your failures via message boards, forums, chat rooms,
and even review sites like eopinion.com. 
✪
CREATE A CUSTOMER SERVICE STRATEGY
Good customer relations keep your customers coming back for more. Fostering good
customer relations requires a customer service strategy that puts in place policies,
services, software, and hardware that make it easy for customers to feel confident
when making a purchase online. If an e-commerce business doesn’t develop a good
customer service strategy it will lose customers — the same way a brick-and-mortar
Customer Service
275

would lose them — by not responding to their needs. Efficient customer service is cru-
cial for survival of any business.
Don’t be one of the e-commerce operators who put an email form or contact/email
link(s) on their website without any plan for handling the increasing volume of email.
Admittedly, a small e-commerce business serving a niche market might be able to get
away with having no customer service strategy since it probably depends only on email
and the telephone for receiving and logging its customer queries and orders. Most
websites, however, require an infrastructure that allows them to serve their customers
through a combination of email queries, online ordering, and telephone support. 
To provide customer-winning customer service and to reduce your customer serv-
ice burden, encourage your customers to be self-sufficient. The best way to do this is
to have a well thought out customer service strategy that provides your customers
with the detailed information they want and need. This include product/service descrip-
tions, frequently asked questions (FAQs), and knowledge bases consisting of, for exam-
ple, product specifications, articles, technical papers and manuals, white papers, and
case studies.
Let’s now look at how to build a good customer service strategy. 
The first step is to ensure that the customer service department and/or call center
knows how to handle every aspect of a customer’s transaction. Although email should
be used as the main means of communication, telephone support (especially a toll
free number) is also important. Your customer service representatives (CSR) should
be able to access and manipulate all the information involved in a customer’s order,
including tracking the status of an order through the fulfillment process until it
reaches the customer’s doorstep. If possible, the CSR should be able to communicate
with the customers via email, the telephone, or online direct-connection software
(chat) — all of which are within the budget of most web-based businesses.
The second step is to determine just what the web-based business’s continuing cus-
tomer service strategy should address. Start with the minimum strategy set out in the
previous paragraph, but also plan ahead. To do this, answer the following:
✸Can customers quickly find answers to their most frequently asked questions on the
website?
✸Can customers easily check the status of an outstanding customer service issue?
✸Does the customer service staff respond to all customer emails within one busi-
ness day?
✸Can the knowledge content on the website be continually updated in a dynamic
and automatic fashion based on customer input?
The Complete E-Commerce Book
276

✸Is the most useful and/or commonly requested information presented to customers
first?
✸Do customers have an easy way to get to the human-based customer service?
✸Do customers consistently return to the website to find information, and if so, is
there any way to determine whether or not they do, and how often?
✸Can the website generate reports detailing the support activities that have taken
place on the site on a week-by-week basis? Do those reports help you to determine
the ROI of your online business?
✸Does the website give customers the option to have updates sent to them auto-
matically by email?
✸Is your website constantly updating its knowledge base by publishing useful infor-
mation as it becomes available? 
✸Do customers ever praise your website because they found it especially helpful?
If the answer to any of these questions is a “no,” “I don’t know,” or “maybe,” it’s
time to get to work. Begin by monitoring your customers’ requests for information
as they come in — many tend to ask the same set of questions. Diligent monitoring
of customer service inquiries allows a website to determine where to direct its efforts
— enabling much more efficient use of human and infrastructure resources. You also
can use the information gathered to redesign web pages to make them more respon-
sive to your customers’ needs. 
Consider building an online knowledge base of product specifications, articles,
technical specifications, white papers, and case studies that can answer many of your
customers’ immediate inquiries. Supplement that knowledge base with a compre-
hensive FAQ section. This empowers your customers to answer their own questions
without human intervention, which translates into not only satisfied customers but
also an eventual increase in your business’s profit margin. An added benefit of an
online knowledge base is that customers develop the perception that the website has
a good grasp of what their questions and problems might be thereby strengthening
their overall confidence in the site and its offerings. 
Don’t go down the road that some websites have taken, e.g. www.microsoft.com
and www.netscape.com — too often leaving the customer in “self-help jail.” Let prod-
uct descriptions, FAQs and knowledge bases be the first line of service, but in addi-
tion offer easy-to-access email support, chat, toll-free number(s), and other forms of
direct communication.
You must constantly look for ways to make your website more responsive to the
Customer Service
277

constantly changing needs of your customer base. If you don’t develop a comprehen-
sive customer service strategy, you will lose your customers to the competition, reap
poorer returns on their investment, and even find yourself spending more money than
is necessary on expensive customer service solutions such as conventional call centers.
Two Different Approaches 
There are two basic approaches an e-commerce business can take to provide award-
winning customer service. The first approach is called the “separate technology
method,” i.e. the customer support is separate from the website. The second is a “multi-
threaded contract strategy approach.” The second method builds upon the first
approach by adding managed email, dynamic FAQ pages, web-based chat, and more. 
The Separate Technology Method
When an e-commerce business is in the start-up stage, separating the website from
the call center might very well be a good approach. The separate technology method
just requires that the web designer place the proper contact information in a promi-
nent place on the web pages. Then either in-house staff or a call center takes prod-
uct/service orders, handle technical support, customer service, etc.
As the business grows and prospers, however, there will be an ever-growing burden
on the business’s customer service resources. Automation solutions can help you to keep
The Complete E-Commerce Book
278
HOW TO EARN A REPUTATION FOR GOOD
CUSTOMER SERVICE 
Here are some tips to help your e-commerce site win customer service kudos:
■Try not to depend too heavily on outside suppliers to ship products to your customers. This
gives you better control of your order processing procedures.
■Consider providing a 30-day home trial policy for specific products. This is especially a good
policy for websites that sell high-end products.
■Extend your return policy during holiday seasons.
■Institute a 30-day price protection policy that guarantees if a customer finds the exact same
product for a lower price within 30 days after purchase, you will give them a refund equal-
ing the difference.
■Prominently display your shipping and return policies (use Amazon.com as an example).
■Display all customer testimonials and, if possible, give them a venue where they can post
their comments. 
■The needs of your customers should always be foremost in every decision you make con-
cerning your website. 

apace with growth and still provide quality customer service. Automation solutions
include direct web-based transactions such as online ordering, shopping carts, etc.,
followed with a FAQ section to answer the most common questions about the business’s
products and/or services, etc.
To keep customer service so that it continually compliments the growth of the
business (rather than hindering it), the first approach will only suffice in the short-
term. So while many new e-commerce websites begin in some phase of the “first
approach” mode, don’t let your site linger there too long. When laying out your cus-
tomer service blueprint, keep in mind that your business will need to include an infra-
structure that allows it to adopt a more sophisticated technology as the need arises.
The Multi-threaded Contact Strategy
Taking the second approach means that the website is no longer an island, but part of
a multi-threaded contact strategy. To provide good customer service on the Web, com-
panies must open new lines of communication. Email, while universal, must be well
managed. FAQ pages and a dynamic knowledge base are easy to set up; and when man-
aged properly and kept current (perhaps with the aid of specialized tools) they can be
an asset for a website. 
Web chat, whether text- or voice-based, can be especially effective for quick real-
time customer queries, since it can be faster than a phone call. Examples include real-
time query and response (some with co-browsing features) “Talk to Me” buttons. “Call
Me” buttons, which allow customers to schedule a call back by a CSR are also effec-
tive. While the real-time solution is best, the “call me” system is more affordable and
can be implemented by almost any size e-commerce business. 
Many small e-commerce sites and even some mid-sized businesses will find the
multi-threaded approach to be too much for their budget. But there are e-commerce
sites (large and small) that currently use various degrees of this type of advanced cus-
tomer service strategy. Here are a couple of examples:
Landsend.com though its trademarked “Lands’ End Live,” which according to the
website states: “As you shop at Landsend.com, you can be in direct contact with a cus-
tomer service representative by phone (if you have a second line or a direct connec-
tion to the Internet) or through an online “text chat.” Instant assistance!”
VenueSwimwear.com and REI.com both not only serve an international customer
base, but also provide their customers a cornucopia of customer service choices: FAQs,
toll-free telephone numbers, email and snail mail contact information and last, but
not least, online assistance via chat.
Customer Service
279

So while the full multi-threaded approach may not be within the budget of the
start-up e-commerce business, most can implement some of the features outlined in
this section (and gradually add other features as business dictates) to increase its cus-
tomer service functionality. 
Note: A number of the customer service solution companies and customer relationship management solution
companies are moving toward the Application Service Provider (ASP) model, which simplifies integration with
a website and thus lessens the initial cost for such solutions.
Live Interaction 
Let’s look at some of the more common multi-thread solutions. 
A “Call Me” button on a website means that call center agents need to be on hand
to call back a customer, either instantly or at a scheduled date/time/number. Cus-
tomers seem to love this feature and it is a really powerful technique especially for a web-
site that sells high value products.
A “Talk to Me” button on a website requires that a CSR be instantly available when
the customer clicks the button (the customer also must have a multi-media capable
computer — sound card, speakers, microphone and the right software). This option
uses voice-over-IP (VoIP) to establish an instant voice link between the customer and
the call center agent. However, Internet congestion, delays in the website’s servers, in
the customer’s ISP servers, in the call center’s servers, etc. can mean that this method
sometimes produces poor voice quality. However, vendors such as Aspect
(www.aspect.com), have products that can link VoIP with web chat so if the voice con-
nection goes bad then text chat can take over.
Co-browsing requires that, when requested, a call center agent instantly be avail-
able to take over a customer’s browser to help with a form or to manipulate text or
images on web pages as the customer is viewing the same page. Only businesses offer-
ing very high value products (e.g. stock market investments), or perhaps businesses
teaching customers to use complex products or who provide online schooling should
look into this type of technology. 
Web chat is a real time interaction between the customer and a CSR using text to
conduct chat sessions. And while this service also requires that a CSR be available basi-
cally 24x7, a single CSR can handle multiple chat sessions, perhaps as many as eight.
This is good. And since it is highly productive, text-based chat can be used cost-effec-
tively for low end products. 
There are many live web-chat solutions available to the average website operator.
For instance, Peoplesupport (www.peoplesupport.com), Facetime (www.facetime.net),
The Complete E-Commerce Book
280

InstantService (www.instantservice.com), Liveperson (www.liveperson.com), and oth-
ers provide live, human customer service agents that are available instantly when a
customer clicks on a “chat” button. Most of these services are relatively inexpensive,
mainly because most offer a hosted version of their product, i.e. the company hosts
the software and then rents it out to you on a monthly basis or other contractual
terms, rather than selling the entire package to you for your implementation and man-
agement. For example, LivePerson’s setup fee is around $1000 plus about $250/month
per CSR. 
For many e-commerce businesses, a hosted solution is the way to go. Just think, a
completely integrated front-end and back-end where the applications are implemented
and hosted by a single vendor — that’s a model that’s hard to ignore. For a small- to
medium-sized e-commerce site the ASP route, like that provided by LivePerson, is a
good option since all that is needed are a few simple lines of HTML code and the but-
ton icon for its web pages, and it’s ready to go.
One caveat, though; do not use (at least not at this time) automated online per-
sonalities (robots) that supposedly can respond to a customer’s live chat questions.
They can’t — they just cause your customers a lot of frustration. I would advise stay-
ing away from this type of solution, at least until the technology improves.
A website could offer its customers that have multi-media capability (sound card,
speakers, microphone and the right software) the ability to click on a website button
to call a CSR over the Internet (a “Talk to Me” button). Once connected, the CSR can-
not only talk to a customer, but if the CSR’s computer is equipped with the right soft-
ware, he/she can even access the same web page the customer is currently on. They
can then browse the site simultaneously, solving order problems and even filling out
forms together. Customers like the personalized experience (the human touch) this
type of technology offers. 
Another plus for the “Talk to Me” method is cost savings. The calls are routed
across the Internet (voice-over-IP) so they cost much less than a traditional telephone
call. So, using the “Talk to Me” option (which is Voice over IP) also will have a posi-
tive influence on a website’s monthly toll-free number costs.
Note: Numerous industry studies show that shopping cart abandonment rates dramatically drop when some
type of “live” interaction is offered. 
✪
AUTOMATION IS THE KEY
Everything needed to create a truly responsive site — monitoring and analyzing customer
queries, creating the right content and posting it in a well-organized manner, han-
Customer Service
281

dling email communications, etc. — can be extremely labor-intensive. A website can
be a victim of its own success if the volume of communications exceeds the resources
dedicated to supporting that communication. 
Effective, scalable automation tools can automate such time-consuming knowl-
edge collection, which, when neglected, can result in out-of-date content, and dissat-
isfied customers, and a lower profit margin. 
Automated customer service solutions can be software-driven, services-driven, or a
combination of both. They run the gamut from FAQ manager programs, to email
management systems that help you automate the process of sorting and responding
to incoming inquiries, to full-blown customer relationship management systems. The
incorporation of some or all of the systems discussed in this section will help to pre-
vent the disorganization that often arises in many web-based customer service oper-
ations — especially problems generated by the inability to handle the volume of traffic
that can be experienced if your website suddenly becomes popular.  
Most of the solutions discussed herein are expensive. Still you should give them
some thought before you decide whether or not to forego the golden opportunity
these solutions provide — an online, customer-initiated, one-on-one relationship. 
FAQs
Although FAQs are built simply by creating web pages with questions and answers, the
knowledge contained in an ever-growing FAQ section will, over time, become difficult
for the customer to search and for you to maintain. Therefore, as your website grows,
consider automating its FAQ section to ensure that the knowledge contained therein
can be searched rapidly by your customers. An added bonus of an automated system
is that it allows you to more easily maintain a large and/or dynamic FAQ section. 
Software, such as, FAQ Generator (www.cgi-world.com/faq_gen.html), FAQ Man-
ager (www.interlogy.com//products/content/faqman/), and MyCGIScripts’ FAQ Man-
ager (www.mycgiscripts.com/faq-manager.html) will provide the assistance you need.
For more FAQ management tools go to your favorite search engine and type in “FAQ
Manager.” The results should provide you with a selection of products that fit your
needs and budget.
Email
Customers not only want the ability to place orders for product and services, they also
want to obtain additional product/service information, to resolve billing issues, to
track down shipments, and to ask installation and product support questions. As
The Complete E-Commerce Book
282

stated previously, most of today’s websites give their customers information on how
to contact them by telephone, email, or by a form on their site. However, as customers
become more “Internet Savvy,” and as hold times at call centers increase (as they must
with the e-commerce explosion), customers will become more inclined to send emails
to the web-based business. After all, why should they wait “on hold” to get information
(or place an order) when they can just fill out a form or send an email and then read
the reply at leisure? Moreover, servicing customers through online methods is a proven
cost-effective solution that can give a boost to your business’s profit margin.
Most home-based or small web-based businesses can, initially, rely on their inter-
nal email system to process customer queries. But even when using this method, the
following is suggested as best practice when responding to customer’s email inquiries
(you should pick and choose what would be suitable for your particular e-commerce
business):
✸Issue a “thank you” auto-acknowledgement for each email as soon as it is received
with a time frame of when an answer can be expected (then respond within that
time frame), along with an 800 number that the customer can call if they need an
immediate solution.
✸Have “click and drag” paragraphs available for CSRs to paste into the email response.
✸In some circumstances suggest a phone call (if the customer is willing) rather than
being drawn into a long series of email exchanges.
✸Above all, be fast — make it your goal to satisfy 90% of your customers’ email
inquiries inside two working hours, and want to be faster.
Don’t make a customer wait days for a response to their email inquiry, or give an
automated response that doesn’t come close to addressing their needs. Don’t require your
customer to take an aggressive stance just to obtain proper customer service. While a
persistent customer might be able to obtain the answer they’re looking for, it will come
with a lot of frustration, which doesn’t foster long term customer relationships. 
Many websites handle their email traffic poorly. Should people who communicate
with a company via electronic means receive less prompt service than those that use tele-
phones?  Remember, demographic studies indicate that people who browse the Web
are usually more affluent than the general public, and are generally inclined to try
new things. These are the very customers a company wants to attract and keep! 
Note: Some web-based businesses believe (wrongly) that automatic email response can handle all of their cus-
tomer email inquiries. While automatic email response does have a role in many multi-threaded customer serv-
ice strategies — it can’t do it all — also use live CSR support.
Customer Service
283

Email Management Systems
Any business that has a large volume of email, or finds that its email volume is grow-
ing exponentially, should consider using an email management system. And for those
astute e-commerce operators that want to handle email inquiries with the same qual-
ity of service as telephone calls, an email management system (EMS) may be in their
future. Although costly, an EMS can provide the infrastructure, processes and method-
ologies to handle online customer service issues in a manner comparable to, and some-
times as good or better than, what is available through most call centers. 
As discussed previously, e-commerce is conducted in essentially one of two ways:
1. A customer obtains information on products and services through a website.
(How extensive the available online information is can vary from product description
to FAQ to an extensive, dynamic knowledge base.) The customer then uses the tele-
phone to call a CSR to place an order and/or to ask for additional information.
OR
2. A customer not only obtains detailed information on products and services
through an easy navigational path through a website, but also can obtain additional
information through various channels (chat, message boards, FAQs, knowledge bases,
VoIP, co-browsing) and, of course, place an order — all entirely through the e-com-
merce website.
Many customers (especially the Internet savvy ones) prefer to take the self-help
route (product/service descriptions, knowledge base, FAQs, message boards, etc.) then,
if that doesn’t work, they will contact the website via email. If the customer has cho-
sen to make contact via email, then a website must make it as easy as possible by pro-
viding (at the minimum) a form on the website for its customers to fill out. A “Contact
Us” web page devoted to email address links segregated by departments would be even
better. This desire by customers to use email (and online ordering) represents a great
opportunity for websites that have implemented a high-quality email management
system. However, if implementing an EMS, study the websites of Net2Phone, Microsoft,
HP, and AOL first. Learn from their mistakes.
The advantage of email (and online ordering) is that the transaction can be con-
ducted in an asynchronous manner. Unlike a telephone call, the parties involved in
the transaction do not have to be in the transaction at the same time. This is espe-
cially valuable to both parties when the interaction needed is minimal, and the need
to complete the transaction is not immediate. For example, customers may want to
get the tracking number of an order so that they can check the status of their order
at their convenience. An email management system can provide the infrastructure
The Complete E-Commerce Book
284

necessary to enable a busy e-commerce website to promptly and efficiently handle the
vast amounts of customer-based electronic communications. 
Clearly, one of the benefits of having an online presence is that customers can con-
duct their own research on products and services, at their own pace. As discussed
throughout this book, a well-designed e-commerce site makes it easy for customers
to find what they want, and helps them get answers to most of their questions. Moti-
vated customers will navigate their way through well-designed web pages, and will
make purchasing decisions or resolve a service issue on their own. This kind of self-
service system offers tremendous leverage to a web-based business that doesn’t have the
wherewithal to provide 24x7 call center capabilities. The value of a good EMS can be
significant, for both the customer and a busy e-commerce site. 
The requirements for a high-performing EMS are to get the right answer to the
customers, using the right kind and the right amount of resources. This means that
the EMS should recognize the kind of inquiry initiated by the customer, determine
what resource it will take to process that inquiry, and then apply those resources to
get the answer to the customer. Let us examine each of these requirements in turn.
An incoming message must first be recognized by the EMS for what it is — the sys-
tem must determine if it falls into a predetermined category of communications, such
as a product question, an information request, a billing query, a complaint, or a follow-
up to an earlier communication.
Email tends to be free form in nature, so the EMS must have the ability to parse
the communication, and determine the category from the message itself. The EMS
must then determine if the inquiry can be handled in an automated manner. A major-
ity of customer queries fall within a few categories. For example, a company that sells
headsets may receive a large number of installation questions, but the questions them-
selves may fall into just a few categories (e.g. sound card questions, volume require-
ments, operating system compatibility, etc.) — the company already knows the answers
to most of these questions. With access to a comprehensive knowledge base of answers
to these frequently asked questions, a good EMS can match a customer’s request to
the appropriate answer in the knowledge base. 
Not all email can be processed automatically. Some messages will require cus-
tomization and personalization. An EMS must have the ability to identify emails that
don’t fit into a known category and route them to a knowledgeable person. That per-
son (CSR) can then respond using the knowledge base, one or more phrase banks that
contain standard language that reflects the company’s style, and their personal knowl-
edge and experience. The EMS should also provide a spell check function to enhance
Customer Service
285

quality prior to forwarding the response back to the customer. Furthermore, the CSR
should be able to annotate notes to either the customer’s message, or to the customer’s
profile. Other CSRs can then use these notes to ensure superior customer service. For
example, a CSR may use the annotation capability to record why the customer was
not charged for shipping costs if the company policy is “no free shipping.”
A CSR may not be able to completely handle all customer communications allot-
ted to him or her. For example, the CSR may prepare a response but want to forward
it to a co-worker or supervisor for review before sending it. Another customer inquiry
may need a response from someone with more information. To facilitate this, the EMS
must provide a workflow capability that allows a CSR to hand off a message to another
CSR, or a supervisor. This is similar to what may happen in a call center.
An EMS must enable supervisors to monitor, in real-time, the state of all messages
currently open, just as a call center manager can look at the state of all telephone calls
being handled by the call management system. This allows supervisors to manage work-
loads, personnel needs, training needs, etc. Supervisors also can use this information to
identify any potential problem areas quickly. For example, a favorable product review
on CNET or the mention of a product by Oprah or Ellen Degeneres on one of their
daytime television shows may at first cause a trickle then a torrent of information
requests. Just like in a call center, an alert supervisor can observe the initial change in
the incoming workload, and make adjustments to assure the best quality service.
The EMS also should provide reporting capabilities so that supervisors can more
easily measure and manage the performance of their CSRs. Another feature to look
for in a good EMS is the ability to survey customers on the quality of service received,
and manage the results of the survey. Moreover, the database used by the EMS should
be easily accessible so that custom reports can be developed as necessary.
A big benefit of electronic communication is that each message is recorded on
media and therefore the details of every customer interaction are retrievable. (This is
not often the case with telephone calls). This means that a customer’s entire email
history can be presented to the CSR every time a customer sends in a new message.
This provides a complete context for the CSR. A good EMS should provide not only
the ability to preserve and present context, but also give the company a valuable data-
base of interactions that can be mined for marketing purposes in the future. For exam-
ple, the database of all customer interactions may reveal that customers who ask
questions about one particular product often start by asking about a certain feature.
This may indicate a need to change the product in some way, or it may even present a
revenue opportunity for a complementary product.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
286

Finally, a good EMS should be easy to use, to install, and to manage. It should not
require a significant training effort. It should be adaptable and flexible enough to fit
into the way you do business, i.e. not require you to change your business models or
processes. Lastly, the system should leverage the website’s existing technology infra-
structure by seamlessly integrating with your current email, e-commerce, and front-end
and back-office systems. 
While out of the reach for most small e-commerce operations, an investment in a
robust, scalable EMS provides returns in many ways for a large or enterprise e-com-
merce business. An EMS can reduce the costs associated with handling customer serv-
ice requests by up to a factor of five. An EMS might even allow a website to avoid
building or contracting with an expensive call center provider because the CSRs can eas-
ily telecommute. An EMS enables a website to assure a consistent quality of service
to its customers, by ensuring that all customer interactions use the same base of knowl-
edge and communications styles. It can increase revenues by including new product
information with outgoing messages (the Marketing Department will love that fea-
ture). Most importantly, it can improve customer satisfaction and loyalty by giving
your customers a reliable way of communicating with you.
Is an EMS in your future? You consider investing in an email management system
if your website:
✸Handles more than 1000 email requests and online orders each day.
✸Has more than five full-time employees handling online communications.
✸Has a customer-base that expects 24x7 service and the same (or better) level of serv-
ice as they get from a call center.
✸Receives many “routine” email requests.
✸Has found that its online communications are out of control. 
If you are considering an EMS, begin by looking into Edify (www.edify.com), eGain
Mail (www.egain.com), Notions Systems (www.notionssys.com), and Transform
Response (www.transres.com/response). There are many more, but this should give
you a starting point.
Automated Customer Service Systems
The unique combination of quality automated customer service systems (ACSS) and
human customer service teams can help an e-commerce business ensure profitabil-
ity. The typical ACSS is a web-enabled suite of software that integrates sales, market-
ing, call center, help desk, field service, inventory procurement, and quality assurance
Customer Service
287

operations. Although these systems are expensive to purchase, when you do the math
you may find that, over time, they actually save you money.
Post-sales follow-up technology makes it easy for online merchants to offer supe-
rior customer service. These include FAQs and their answers, knowledge databases,
and message boards. With the correct deployment, web-based businesses can streamline
their service offerings and costs, evaluate and target their key-customer; now a web-
based business is on the road to building lifetime value and retention for the long term.
When looking at the implementation of ACSS, take into account that many appli-
cations require specialized views of the customer data — predictive modeling tools,
campaign management applications, call center packages, and web applications — all
which require different views in order to fulfill their role. The customer information
architecture must support rapid delivery of customer data in a wide variety of forms
suitable for application-specific requirements.
A properly implemented ACSS can find and identify essential bits of customer data
that are located throughout a business’s data infrastructure. Once found, that data
is then imported into a common knowledge base that is shared by each arm of the
ACSS to improve every segment of a business’s customer service offerings. An ACSS also
must be scalable and flexible enough to operate effectively through any number of
customer preferred channels, i.e., web, chat, email, fax, telephone or VoIP. The typical
ACSS platform is a web-enabled suite that lets a web-based business integrate its cus-
tomer service and marketing efforts. Research the products offered. To give you a place
The Complete E-Commerce Book
288
OUTSOURCING
Most web-based businesses use some level of technology to increase their customer service
offerings. But, technology can’t do it all — timely responses are impossible if the human resources
are not available. Throughout this book the author has preached “scalability.” Well, scalabil-
ity not only applies to technology; it is also relevant to staffing needs. As online sales increase
it will become necessary to increase your human-based assets, especially in customer service. Not
only will these needs grow throughout a business’s life cycle, they will also ebb and flow with
the seasons (for example, holidays, back-to-school, snow season if a website sells snow blow-
ers or mild weather if it sells boating equipment).
As customer service resources become strained to the limit during peak periods, the ability
to quickly and cost-effectively scale to meet these demands is essential. One way to assure scal-
ability is to outsource. But be prepared — do your homework and find the call center or customer
service solution provider that will meet the needs of your web-based business. If any integration
is necessary, have it well in hand before the necessity arises. A web-based business will want a
standby customer service solution to have the same access and timely visibility into customer
orders as its ongoing customer service solution.

to start, visit Siebel.com), E-talk.com) and Firepond (formerly Brightware) (www.bright-
ware.com) and pick up a copy of the author’s book, The Complete Guide to CRM (CMP).
✪
CALL CENTERS
Significant portions of real world transactions are conducted over the telephone and
many of these customers are routed to call centers filled with CSRs who are equipped
to handle a variety of customer interactions. Using the telephone for commerce and
associated customer service functions is widely accepted by the public. The brick-and-
mortar businesses that have migrated to the Web probably have existing call center
relationships, but how will these call centers address the world of the Web? If your
current call center doesn’t meet the task, what steps should be taken to bring it up to
speed? Should you use a hybrid system with some matters handled by the call center
and some in-house? What if you are a new business, without a call center outlet? As
a start-up grows, most will find that they need the services of a call center.
A call center is a combination of employees (CSRs), hardware, and software — all
trained or designed to aid in the efficient processing of large volumes of telephone
calls. It is where a high volume of calls are placed or received for the purpose of sales,
marketing, customer service, telemarketing, technical support, or other specialized
business activity. To take it a step further, a call center is a place for doing business
by phone that combines a centralized database with an automatic call distribution
system. However, a call center can be even more than that, it is:
✸A fundraising and collections organization.
✸A help desk, both internal and external.
✸An outsourcer (better known as service bureau) that uses its resources to serve a
number of companies simultaneously.
✸A reservation centers for airlines and hotels.
✸A customer service department for catalog retailers and e-commerce sites.
✸An e-commerce transaction center that doesn’t handle calls so much as automates
customer interactions. 
A self-service website has its limits. No matter how well designed the website may
be, not all customers can or will navigate their way to the correct information. And
some will not have the time or inclination to sit through an extended browsing ses-
sion. A website should offer alternatives to these customers. Give them the option of
picking up their telephone and calling a CSR. Although this kind of immediate serv-
ice adds to your costs, it can be extremely valuable to an e-commerce website that
Customer Service
289

offers products and services that require a lot of research or that has complicated
installation requirements.
Call center technology and the solutions it provides is a dense subject and beyond
the scope of this book. For additional information on call centers go to Online Cus-
tomer Care (www.olccinc.com), The Resource Center for Customer Service Profes-
sionals (www.the-resource-center.com), and Call Center Magazine (www.callcenter.com).
All three are have a ton of information — bookmark them. Other websites that you
might find of interest include Callcenternews.com and Callcenterops.com. Also use
search engines — there is a lot of information on the Web about call centers and out-
sourcers. Or perhaps purchase one of the many books that are available on this sub-
ject. One of the author’s favorite is Designing the Best Call Center for your Business, Brendan
Read (CMP Books).
Multi-Media and Web-enabled Contact Centers
Some of the most exciting trends in call centers are the multi-media contact centers
and/or the web-enabled contact centers. E-commerce businesses increasingly will find
that their customers want to conduct business in a variety of ways: text chat, email,
VoIP conversation (“Talk to Me”), “Call Me”, and the toll free number. If a website
offers a variety of options to its customers it needs to be sure that the call center it
contracts with has the resources to follow through. 
Why would a website want or need a multi-media or web-enabled contact center?
The Web appears to be a self-contained entity where a customer can surf the web, get
information, and buy products and services — it is a great channel or conduit for all
kinds of things — but it is a passive channel. An e-commerce site needs a way to han-
dle customers and potential customers who want a dialog, whether through email,
chat, telephone, or VoIP.
A brick-and-mortar has a superlative, multi-functional sales tool — the human being.
For web-based business to emulate this same type of service, it needs a web-based call
center. You’re on the Web, let the Web do what it does best — automate. But at the same
time keep the human element — this is where call centers enter the picture.
The fact that call centers offer a personal and immediate response makes it an easy
choice for customers — it is also your most expensive one. So make it easy for your
customers to find quick access to other customer service channels — FAQs, email, a
knowledge base, message boards, chat, etc. before they place that expensive telephone
call. A well thought out and designed website can help build a contented customer
base and at the same time reduce your annual call center expenditure.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
290

Most of the multi-media center and/or web-based call center applications work on
the same principle — the website’s customers click on a “Call Me” or “Talk to Me” or
chat button placed on the website to communicate directly with a CSR. With any of
these three options, the CSR and the customer engage in a real-time two-way chat via
voice or text. Of course, as discussed previously, for it to be voice-based the customer
needs a multi-media enabled computer. Some of the applications even allow collab-
orative “whiteboarding” or “co-browsing,” i.e., the CSR can browse along with the cus-
tomer, each viewing the same web page at all times — the CSR, in effect, takes over the
customer’s browser for a short period of time. In addition, the applications usually
can automatically track, store, and intelligently queue emails to appropriate CSRs or
route electronic messages to the correct destination, so customers don’t have to wait
hours or days for a response.
PeopleSupport (www.peoplesupport.com) offers a solution that even the small e-
commerce business might want to consider (this company offers a wide selection of
options). This online customer service outsourcing company’s CSRs do everything
from managing email to offering real-time text-chat customer service. PeopleSupport
offers many flexible services. For example, a website can contract with PeopleSupport
for their CSRs (who answer questions as though they were the website’s employees)
to provide live chat support to help customers perusing your site, but opt to handle all
email inquiries in-house. Or a website might want to use PeopleSupport’s technology
(its software is transparently accessed from its application service provider) and pro-
vide its own in-house CSRs to interact with its customers. PeopleSupport provides
Customer Service
291
CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT
Some readers may be interested in customer relationship management suites — especially those
working with an enterprise-sized e-commerce business. If so, look into products offered by
Wintouch (www.wintouch.com), Right Now Technologies (www.rightnowtech.com), and Peo-
plesoft. Note that the solutions offered by these vendors (and others), while providing numer-
ous benefits, are very expensive. To integrate them into an e-commerce business’s systems will
dramatically increase the cost of operating the online business, sometimes ranging well over a
million dollars. 
When investigating the feasibility of one of these suites, remember that a web-based business
must not only survive the procurement, installation and testing of the system, but the costs
for integrating integrate the system with the web-based business’s operations. Once everything
is up and running you also have the additional cost of maintaining a customer service center and
its staff.
For more information on customer relationship management read another of the author's
books entitled A Practical Guide to CRM (also published by CMP Books). 

with many different scenarios within which it can provide an e-commerce business
customer service support.
Go to their website and click on their live demo where you can test their chat serv-
ices through a chat session with one of their CSRs. Also look into LivePerson
(www.liveperson.com) and HumanClick (www.humanclick.com). 
✪
CONCLUSION
It seems that while many are conquering the basics of the e-commerce business model,
they have not managed to come to grips with the practical procedures for handling
customer service issues. This is because many website operations don’t treat their cus-
tomers as the source of current and future profits; instead they look at customer serv-
ice as just a series of individual transactions. This is not the only way to develop and
nurture customer relationships. 
The Web’s key appeal to the general public is its perceived ability to provide imme-
diate gratification. When customers come to a website they expect to find information
or products immediately, and then to solve the problem or purchase the product fast!
Consequently, the web user is sensitive to any delay — it only takes about eight seconds
before a customer gives up a quest for a product and/or service. Of course, some will
continue their search — only on another website. Others will abandon the search entirely. 
E-commerce businesses, therefore, operate under tremendous pressure to antici-
pate their customers’ every possible need. This need is passed on to the web designer,
the people who contribute to the development of the website’s content, the marketing
department, and customer support staff. Since the customer is hypothetically every-
one in every geographic region, the range of information that potentially may be
requested is staggering. Solution?  Prioritize — don’t get stuck in limbo because of
the enormity of the task — get the most important information and services on your
website first, and then add to it over time, as your customers’ needs direct.
The same customers, who expect instant action and gratification, demand better cus-
tomer service from a web-based business than they expect from a brick-and-mortar
business. To maintain a high level of customer satisfaction the web-based business
must realize that “site experience” is actually more important to an online customer
than “product experience,” and build the website and customer service solutions
around that fact. 
Good marketing can be for naught if there is poor customer service.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
292

Chapter 18
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
Better later than never, but better never late.
—Anonymous
Sometimes e-commerce businesses forget that the Internet is just another channel
from which business can be conducted. Granted it is unique in some ways, but many
of the same rules apply, especially when it comes to logistics and order fulfillment.
One of the last functions in the chain of customer-centric processes is the fulfillment
of the customer’s order. Ensuring that the customer’s order is picked, packed, and
shipped accurately is the final step in the typical online shopping process. 
As online sales continue to explode three factors put new pressures on a website’s
order fulfillment systems:
✸The expansion of the product line offered to the online customer.
✸The necessity of moving a large volume of small packages at breakneck speed.
✸The task of meeting ever-growing customer expectations.
Websites that don’t address order fulfillment with the same energy as they jumped
into the role of online selling will find themselves fighting an uphill battle for cus-
tomer loyalty. E-commerce business can meet these demands by immediately taking
the necessary steps to develop a fail-safe fulfillment system that delivers end-to-end
logistics, i.e., package visibility and service continuity from the “buy” button to the
final destination. 
End-to-end logistics consist of three basic tenets:
✸Empower your customers by keeping them informed and by providing self-service
solutions that apply to common fulfillment issues.
293

✸Stay focused on the quality and availability of the product.
✸Speedy delivery of the product to the customer.
Running a sophisticated e-commerce site often means operating a warehouse (of
course the warehouse may be your garage), pulling inventory from shelves and pack-
ing it for shipment, retaining a delivery service, helping customers track an order until
it arrives, and dealing with returns. To do this successfully many e-commerce busi-
nesses will need to rely to some extent on automated solutions. 
Customers have been led to believe through marketing and media hype that the
Web is all about convenience. That is why so many come to the Web with the expec-
tation that their online shopping will be quick and easy. Sadly, that is not always the
reality.
Whether you are a small start-up business or operating an enterprise e-commerce
site, coordinating and delivering at web speed is a tremendous challenge. Trying to
meet your customers’ inflated expectations makes it even more difficult. But any e-
commerce business that succeeds in meeting the challenge gains a tremendous com-
petitive advantage. 
✪
IT’S STILL ALL ABOUT THE CUSTOMER
Hopefully, the reader remembers from the previous chapter that customer service is the
best marketing tool at your disposal. Logistics and fulfillment is an arm of customer
service. Thus to guarantee the best customer service, don’t separate your warehouse
operations from your order management or from your customer service. This is true
no matter what the size of the e-commerce operation. 
A small entrepreneurial startup may have little experience with shipping products.
A click-and-mortar has an infrastructure in place that is, in all probability, geared
toward shipping palettes or cases to distributors or stores — not quantities of ones
and twos. Websites have customers with high expectations, they want their products
fast, and they may expect shipment of different products to different addresses, and
ask for instant credit for returns.
Order Processing and Fulfillment
To be a successful e-commerce business you must be able to process customer orders
efficiently and correctly and to deliver the product as promised. This can get messy
unless you have the right tools to help you; but many times the e-commerce solution
you use to power your site won’t provide you with all of the tools needed. To help you
handle back-office order processing and fulfillment chores you need tools that can
The Complete E-Commerce Book
294

help you keep track of pricing (including special sales), sales tax, shipping costs, items
shipped, split orders, back orders, returned orders, drop-shipped orders, customer
inquiries, and more. 
There are a few shopping cart programs that provide most, if not all, of those func-
tions (as discussed later). But many of you will make do using separate applications —
tabulating data from not only your shopping cart, but also using your accounting
program paired with a spreadsheet and/or database program. Others will look for
some type of application that spans their shopping cart as well as accounting or ship-
ping applications. 
First, let’s look at two applications that are designed specifically for online order
management.
Dydacomp Mail Order Manager (www.dydacomp.com) is design to serve the needs
of a small business. It provides a complete suite of accounting modules for mail order
and/or e-commerce. As an added bonus, this program also can be used with Yahoo!
Store.
StoneEdge Order Manager (www.wilsonweb.com/afd/se_ordermgr.htm) is a full-
function order management program based on Microsoft’s Access database. If you
use the drop-ship fulfillment model, consider this product. The program can be used
with a variety of other software including Miva, ShopSite, Americart, Able Commerce,
eBay, Half.com, Yahoo! Store, SmartCart, and more. 
Now let’s consider other order management methods that are popular with the e-
commerce crowd.
The first is QuickBooks. Check to see if QuickBooks format order export is avail-
able with your shopping cart. Watch the wording carefully because the exact Quick-
Books format must be built into the shopping cart system, don’t try it if you are told
that it is “possible,” unless you are an experienced programmer (or you are willing to
hire one for the job).
The next option for online order management is the use of spreadsheets and data-
bases. Before deciding to use this method, you should be aware that it usually requires
re-entry of data, which not only uses up valuable time, but also introduces another
venue for order errors. 
Some of you will want more sophisticated order processing and fulfillment fea-
tures. That means a product that contains integrated shopping cart and order man-
agement features. If you decide to go this route, you should understand that the level
of sophistication is not the same from program to program. Look for a program that
allows you to, at minimum, mark orders as “shipped,” “back ordered,” “drop-shipped,”
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
295

“suspended,” “cancelled,” etc. The following products can handle some or all of your
order management duties. (Test this type of application to see if it meets your needs
before laying out your hard-earned money.) 
Open Source e-Commerce Solutions (www.oscommerce.com). This product com-
bines open source solutions to provide a free and open e-commerce platform that
includes the powerful PHP web scripting language, the stable Apache web server, and
the fast MySQL database server. This feature-packed out-of-the-box solution allows
you to setup, run, and maintain online stores with minimum effort and with absolutely
no costs or license fees involved.
Nexternal Solutions (www.nexternal.com) provides a hosted e-commerce solution.
Its shopping cart can be used to sell directly to consumers or to other businesses. The
product maximizes order conversion (orders / unique visitors) coupled with tools that
increase site traffic. Since it is a hosted solution, the vendor handles the technical
infrastructure and provides the back-end management tools. 
Flashecom software (www.flashecom.com) is another hosted product that pro-
The Complete E-Commerce Book
296
THE ORDER CAPTURE PIPELINE — A SCENARIO
Once the customer order has been received, it’s dropped into the “order capture pipeline.”
From there the e-commerce site must send each product order (there may be a number of
“product orders” within each customer order) to the correct fulfillment provider, i.e. a fulfill-
ment service provider (FSP), a drop-shipper, and or an in-house fulfillment center. That provider
then assumes responsibility for delivering the product(s) to the customer. Even if that sounds
simple, it’s not; the system must contain business rules to determine which fulfillment provider(s)
to send what portion of the customer’s order to. An example of rules:  
■Use the same fulfillment provider for all the products, if possible.
■Use the fulfillment provider that can give the customer the lowest per unit cost.
■Check in-house inventory before using an outsource solution. 
Remember, if more than one fulfillment provider is used, then the customer will receive sep-
arate shipments (more shipping expense). Then, sometime during this process (it varies with
systems and is dependent upon whether all the fulfillment providers support real-time inventory
queries), the website composes an XML message and transmits it via secure HTTP to the appro-
priate outsourcers. If the website has outsourcers that do not support real-time inventory
queries then the site will need to rely on daily supplied inventory profile data. 
Now this is where it gets sticky — and where sometimes there is a need for consultants and
programmers. Each interaction requires mapping data from the e-commerce operation’s order
management system (and pipeline) into messages that can understood by the fulfillment
providers’ systems (including in-house systems). First, the data has to be represented — the
way that is handled is dependent upon the provider’s systems. For example, a specific “flavor”
of XML needed to represent the transaction, or a EDI X12 format might be used, or even a pro-

vides customizable order invoices, checkout with or without registration, inventory
controls, banner manager, affiliate program, web storefront, shopping cart, catalog, inte-
grated shipping system, eCoupons, and much more.
MonsterCommerce Ecommerce Software Shopping Carts for Small Business
(www.monstercommerce.com) powers thousands of e-commerce sites. The product
comes equipped with hundreds of pre-programmed features to help you manage all
aspects of an online business with an easy-to-use, fully customizable web-based inter-
face, including real-time shipping, product editor, inventory editor, payment man-
ager, order status, and much more. 
✪
MIRED IN THE SMALL PARCEL DILEMMA 
Although online shopping has exploded (recent statistics shows that 2003 should see
over $3.2 trillion in Internet sales worldwide from the nearly 75% of Internet users
who have shopped on the Net), less than one-half of e-commerce operations make a
profit on a one-item product order. Profit comes when the customer purchases more
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
297
prietary batch-file data format or a “special” crafted transaction-related variety with its own
key-value-pair grammars may be used to represent the necessary transactional information.
The next step in the order process is collection of the customer’s shipping address and ship-
ping instructions. Depending on decisions made upstream in the pipeline, the available ship-
ment options are determined by the outsourcer(s). If multiple outsourcers are involved, then a
shared shipping carrier is usually used to ship the order. If a single outsourcer is involved, then
the website queries it for current delivery options. Other complications at this stage can include
support for multiple ship-to addresses for the same order (for example, Christmas, Mother’s Day,
Graduation season, etc.) as well as gift wrapping and messages (e.g. “Happy Birthday Grand-
mother, Love James”).
Now we are at the payment stage where credit card information is entered or retrieved from
the customer database, and the credit card is authorized for the order total. The e-commerce
site interacts with a credit-card clearinghouse to validate the credit card and to determine whether
there is sufficient credit available. Communicating with a clearinghouse normally requires a ded-
icated line and transmittal of the requests using the clearinghouse’s proprietary protocol.
Once the credit card has been approved and the customer (all of the above should have
occurred within seconds) has clicked on the confirmation button, the order is accepted by the
website’s order management system. At this point, a few options exist depending on the site’s
policy and outsourcer(s) capabilities. If the site offers the customer the opportunity to cancel
the order within a specified time frame, the order is not immediately transmitted to the out-
sourcer(s). If the outsourcer doesn’t support a real-time protocol, then the order will be trans-
mitted during the next batch-file generation cycle. If the outsourcer supports real-time order
processing, then the site can transmit over secure HTTP, containing all of the information nec-
essary for an outsourcer to process the order. 

than one item, but even then it is dependent upon efficiencies in the website’s logis-
tics and fulfillment processes. 
With the right processes in place, an e-commerce website can keep the cost of receiv-
ing, storage, and picking down to less than a dollar per product. But the packing cost
(labor, the carton, and packing material) and the delivery is another story. Those items
run approximately $5.00 to $7.00 per product. A website also has to overcome the cost
of continually shipping out small packages where the shipping sometimes is at least
one-half of the overall value of the product purchased.
This high distribution cost is one reason why the Web has not progressed past the
“rapidly emerging sales channel” stage, except in a few specific areas — books (where
20-50% discounts are given on newly published, popular books), high-ticket luxury
items, and virtual products (music, ezines and software). 
Unless the customer is shopping for a specific hard-to-find product or finds the
convenience of shopping online outweighs additional shipping costs — your e-commerce
business will have an uphill battle. For many products, it is much less expensive to go
to the local retail store, even when the cost of gas and the time to drive and shop is
factored into the equation. An e-commerce business also must overcome the imme-
diate gratification factor — shopping at a local retail store means the product is in-
hand — the customer is not forced to wait for its arrival.
✪
LOGISTICS
So while it is easy to build a website that can take secure online orders, getting the
product to the customer can be problematic. That last yard — completing the sale to
the satisfaction of the customers so they return and order again — takes planning and
organization. The key word is “completing” and the sale is not complete until the
product is in the customer’s hands and the customer is satisfied. It’s the least glamorous
part of operating a web-based business and it’s the hardest to get right. The complex
process of getting a product from the website’s virtual checkout counter to the cus-
tomer’s doorstep is what order fulfillment is all about.
Logistics moves the right product to the right place at the right time. For an e-com-
merce business to be profitable, it must reduce its order fulfillment/logistical costs.
Don’t think you are alone in your struggle; order fulfillment is a logistical challenge
for the whole e-commerce community. This is why many of the major brick-and-mor-
tar websites offer only a limited number of products. 
E-commerce logistics requires integration of systems that run from your shopping
cart clear through to the shipper’s tracking system so that you and the customer can
The Complete E-Commerce Book
298

keep apprised of a package’s whereabouts. But that’s just the beginning. E-commerce
logistics also requires managing the complexity of delivering daily thousands of mostly
small packages to their unique destinations. To do this cost-effectively you must inte-
grate your inventory and distribution systems. But, with few exceptions, e-commerce
operators have simply ignored this necessity. Before making the leap into e-commerce
you must consider how your business will:
✸Process orders.
✸Manage multiple suppliers seamlessly.
✸Provide a comprehensive exception-handling process.
✸Handle the issue of returned products.
Thankfully, an e-commerce operator needn’t become an immediate expert in
logistics and fulfillment; but someone in the value chain must be an expert and that
expert can come from outside your organization. In fact, it isn’t that difficult for a
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
299
Figure 27.  This diagram depicts a typical e-commerce system including order fulfillment
processes.

new e-commerce business to outsource virtually all of its back-end logistical functions
including:
✸Order management.
✸Warehousing and inventory management (including forecasting).
✸IT systems integration to connect the front and back systems.
✸Fulfillment.
✸Post-sales services like warranty repair, returns management, customer care cen-
ters, spare parts fulfillment.
Note however, that if you outsource your entire fulfillment needs, you risk isolat-
ing your business and its brand from your customers. Thus, although a number of e-
commerce startups initially choose to outsource their logistics and fulfillment chores,
many soon move these processes in-house. They quickly realize that to succeed they
must make logistics and fulfillment a key part of their internal business process. 
To determine whether you should outsource or keep everything in-house, ask your-
self: What makes the most business sense at the moment? Assess your order fulfill-
ment requirements and then balance them against the resources available in-house. 
✪
HAVE A PLAN
A logistics and fulfillment plan lays out the chain of events from receipt of the cus-
tomer’s order through delivery of the product to the post-sale processes. It should be
a guide upon which all fulfillment decisions are based. A formal logistics and fulfill-
ment plan will ensure that everyone considers, not only your e-commerce website’s
requirements, goals and objectives, but also what each player can bring to the table.
This will help to assure that everyone is on the “same page.” 
You must craft a logistics and fulfillment plan that fits your e-commerce business’s
specific needs. Thus there are questions that must be answered. 
Product and Packaging:
✸What are the physical characteristics of the website’s products and how do they
vary in size, weight, and packaging? 
✸Does the website offer products that will require special handling and/or packag-
ing (breakables that need repackaging, different size items in one box or a sepa-
rate box per item, signature on delivery requirement, etc.)? 
✸Will the website offer products that require a number of different components or
accessories to be in the same box (a printer, printer cable and spare ink cartridge
or a DSL Modem, a telephone cord, line filters, etc.)?
The Complete E-Commerce Book
300

✸Do any of the products require sub-assembly? 
✸Are any of the products “over sized” or “heavy weight” so that they may require a dif-
ferent carrier from the norm? 
✸Are any of the products perishable or fragile, requiring a specific transportation
mode?
✸Do any of the products require special licensing for transport (e.g. alcohol, phar-
maceuticals, etc.)?
Average Order:
✸What is the size and value of the minimum, maximum, and average order?
✸What is the website’s current volume of orders?
✸What volume of orders is expected 6 months, 1 year, 2 years and 5 years from now?
Shipping:
✸What carriers do the website and its suppliers use and what system is in place to
track shipments? Is the tracking system easily accessible to everyone, including the
customers?
✸Will the website offer its customers online tracking and tracing? 
✸Will the website offer its customers a choice of carriers? Online? 
✸How will shipping rates be determined? Can the website accommodate customers
who already have a specific carrier account number (e.g. UPS, FedEx, AirBorne)
and want to be billed directly? Is COD an option? 
✸Can customers ship to multiple addresses from a single order?
✸If the website does ship in branded packaging, will this external branding affect
security as far as delivery is concerned (i.e. will it encourage theft)? 
✸What is the back-up plan if notification is received that a shipment has been
delayed/lost/damaged?
✸Is the website willing to absorb any of the shipping and handling costs? If so, under
what conditions?
✸What is the acceptable level of shipping costs compared to the order value (from
both the customer’s perspective and the website’s)?
Delivery Quality Control:
✸What is an acceptable time period to get products to the customer?
✸What are the criteria for on-time delivery, damaged claims, order accuracy, supply
availability? 
✸How will quality checks be performed?
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
301

Inventory:
✸How are orders for out-of-stock products handled? If the product is expected to
be available shortly, does the website still take the order and risk having to upgrade
the shipping to meet the promised delivery date?
✸How much inventory is needed to ensure product availability? 
✸Can suppliers respond adequately to a sudden increase in orders? 
✸How will replenishment be triggered once an item is picked from storage?
Returns:
✸What is the percentage of anticipated product returns? 
✸How are returns to be handled (dispose of them, use a secondary market, refurbish
and put back into inventory, return to supplier. . .)? 
✸What are the arrangements with suppliers for returns? 
✸How will customers return the products? Do they require authorization or special
packaging/labels for return? Are there any return restrictions, and if so, does your
website have the documentation posted to support that policy? 
✸Who is responsible for inspection/valuation? 
✸What information systems determine when ownership shifts to the customer or
back to the supplier? 
✸What records are required to keep track of potential tax write-offs or supplier credit? 
✸How are tracking records integrated with inventory management and shipping
records in order to produce necessary documentation?
✸What financial arrangements are in place with suppliers for return credit?
✸What documentation is required from the receiving department?
International Orders:
✸Will your website sell products for international shipment?  If so, how will cur-
rency transactions be handled? 
✸Who will fill out international documentation? 
✸Who will be responsible for duties and taxes/customs clearance? 
✸Will these costs be included in the shipping cost quotes?
✸Have you planned for the additional costs elemental to international shipping/trans-
actions?
Seasonal Considerations:
If the website offers products that are seasonal, how will that affect the warehous-
ing/inventory requirements?
The Complete E-Commerce Book
302

Suppliers:
✸Are suppliers willing to ship directly to your customers upon request? 
✸Can they ship daily, if necessary? 
✸Are suppliers willing to change from a “pallet” or “bulk” shipment basis to a smaller
count shipment? In other words, will the suppliers accept small orders? 
✸Will the supplier be responsible for transportation costs to the fulfillment center?
✸If your website uses drop-shippers, are your suppliers willing to repackage their prod-
uct in your branded boxes and use your branded labels, promotional material, etc.?
✸If your website uses drop-shippers will they insist on using any of their branded
products?  If so, what and how will it affect the website’s brand? 
Infrastructure:
✸How will your website send order information to the fulfillment service provider,
how often (real-time, hourly or daily)? Separately or in batches? 
✸How will your website handle package tracking and provide the information to
your customers? 
✸How are your website’s order entry systems integrated with the fulfillment, inven-
tory management, returns management and shipping systems?  
✸Do some orders get priority over others, if so, what are the criteria? 
✸How are your website’s financial systems integrated with its inbound shipping,
inventory management, orders entry, delivery and returns information systems? 
✸Can suppliers, order entry folks, inventory management personnel, fulfillment
workers, accounting personnel, shipping department employees, and carriers all
“talk to each other” to trigger coordinated action?
✸What online “alert” systems exist for replenishment, delivery delays, order inaccu-
racies, erroneous shipping addresses, incoming returns, etc.? 
✸What system is in place to track all products as they move from supplier to cus-
tomer (item by item, not just by order)?  Options might include bar coding, infrared
tags, radio frequency tags. How does the shopping-cart technology link with the
warehousing/distribution operation?
Warehousing and Fulfillment Centers:
✸What are the warehousing requirements, i.e. the area needed for inventory, sup-
plies and shipping prep, docks, fork lifts, racking and sorting bins, conveyors, pick-
and-pack systems, radio transmitted bar coding, software, shipping and labeling
equipment, etc.? 
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
303

✸Is the inventory storage area designed for easy and efficient order picking? 
✸What are the preferred geographic locations of the fulfillment center(s)? 
✸Is a dedicated facility needed or are the products to be put into a warehouse/dis-
tribution operation used by other companies as well as yours? 
✸Are sophisticated services and space needed or would a direct mail company or
public warehousing space be satisfactory? 
✸How well does the distribution facility accommodate multiple carriers for
inbound/outbound shipments? Who will handle scheduling? 
✸What is the financial trade off between outsourcing your order processing and
logistics versus operating your own warehouse and distribution facility?
Insurance:
✸What is the website’s policy regarding insurance coverage for loss, damage, and
theft?  What is the carrier’s and what is the customer’s responsibility? 
✸Is insurance information clearly posted on your website?
Once the answers are in hand, use them as the starting point in the design of a
good logistics and fulfillment system that will efficiently serve you and your cus-
tomers’ needs. 
Exceptions
Just as in the traditional sales channel, there is the need for handling exceptions. If
your website uses the drop-ship model (explained later in this chapter under “Fulfill-
ment Models”), what do you do when an individual customer order includes prod-
ucts from multiple suppliers and one of the products ordered is out of stock or
backordered? Or perhaps you handle your own shipping and inventory and you are
out of stock and you don’t know when it will be replenished. 
How will your website handle a partial shipment? Hold the shipment for all the
items, ship all ordered items that are available and cancel the rest? Do you request a cus-
tomer’s input prior to making the decision? Do you hold the order until you receive
a reply from the customer?
One solution is to have the order fulfillment system include event-based triggers that
are modeled on specific business rules. To implement such a rules-based system requires
that you sit down with the appropriate personnel, suppliers and, if necessary, the ful-
fillment provider, and correlate the business rules.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
304

Management of Suppliers and Channels
Most websites will have multiple suppliers providing a wide array of products. Again,
the drop-ship model (although in some instances it is the most efficient) poses the most
problems to the web-based business. However, unexpected situations can arise with any
fulfillment model, and web-based businesses should have the ability to accommodate
customer orders that include products from a variety of suppliers. The website must be
able to apportion each order appropriately and to track it through each supplier, and
at the same time give each customer a seamless view of their order’s shipping data. If a
supplier messes up in product delivery, your customers will hold your website respon-
sible, not the suppliers. Thus you must keep on top of your entire supply chain.
Back-end Integration Issues
An e-commerce business must have a clearly defined process for moving an order from
its website to its fulfillment center, whether it is in-house or outsourced. This process
ties the order to its payment and fulfillment processes — this is where integration with
your back-end systems becomes critical. The large and enterprise websites will also
find it necessary to tie into back-end applications, such as enterprise resource plan-
ning (ERP), inventory management, and financial applications. 
A brick-and-mortar that is making its move to the Web may already have pieces of
the fulfillment process in place, but the in-house operations may not be familiar with
the one- and two-item shipments that will, in all likelihood, become the norm for its
web operation. This business group will be tempted to build out their existing “bulk”
distribution center to handle the new website’s fulfillment needs. While not always a
good idea, depending on the legacy infrastructure, this method could provide low on-
going costs with optimal operational control, easy stock status information, and
higher product availability. On the downside, there may be a risk of confusion to cur-
rent operations. Also, the ability for existing personnel to adapt to change should be
a consideration. Furthermore, the transition could generate a long period of ineffi-
ciencies due to the necessity of building a complex system of individual software com-
ponents that require integration, customization, and management in order to merge
the web-based business with the traditional business’s systems. 
An alternative solution is to find a fulfillment provider to handle the your website’s
logistical processes. The decision should be based upon scalability — does the brick-
and-mortar (and its website) have the budget and the time necessary to build and main-
tain its own customized solution? Or can a fulfillment provider more effectively furnish
a solution to fit either or both its e-commerce and traditional channel needs? 
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
305

All web-based businesses will find integration with their back-end systems (con-
tent management, customer management, customer service, order fulfillment, inven-
tory management, financial, etc.) to be a costly challenge. Still, such integration is
absolutely necessary if you are to avoid fulfillment chaos. 
✪
SHIPPING
For the web-based business, selecting the right carrier can be a difficult chore. There
are so many options offered that the best choice is not always clear. When looking for
a shipping partner ask the shipper if it:
✸Offers a full range of shipping services, i.e., same day, next day, ground, air, etc.? 
✸Has online real-time tracking and tracing that can integrate into your website’s
back-end and warehousing systems?
✸Has an automated and easy return service that is consumer friendly?
✸Offers complete transportation management services, including palletized inbound
shipments and small package services? 
✸Provides the same connectivity and tracking services when shipments move out-
side the shipper’s network (a commercial airline or a train or ocean container)? 
✸Handles orders 24x7?  If not, when is the latest the shipper will accept a package
or schedule a pick-up? 
✸How late can a package get into the shippers hands and still be delivered the next day?
It is essential that a website integrate tracking information into its systems and
that it makes that data available to its customers. For example, Federal Express has a
customized shipping system that allows qualified web-based businesses to track deliv-
eries once every hour. This allows a website not only to check when a package was
delivered and who signed for it, but also to track the orders that were returned because
of a problem with the delivery itself. This information can be sent to the website’s cus-
tomers via email. 
Shipping is one of the most costly factors of order fulfillment. Keep in mind that
shipping rates are determined by three major factors: travel mileage, package weight,
and delivery times. To better understand the influence of these factors consider this
scenario:
Let’s say you’re shipping a package from San Francisco to New York City and the
weight of the package is five pounds or less. Using FedEx Standard Overnight or UPS
Next Day Air Saver would cost approximately $30 (FedEx being a few pennies more),
Airborne Next Afternoon Service runs approximately $21, and the U.S. Postal Service
The Complete E-Commerce Book
306

Express Mail runs $24 dollars. Second day service is more reasonable, although still
expensive — FedEx and UPS both running around $16 (again FedEx is a few pennies
more), Airborne runs a little over $10 and the U.S. Postal Service charges $6.50 for its
Priority Mail service.
Now let’s look at how shippers earn the $6.50 to $30. They:
✸Transport the package whether it is 5 miles or 5000 miles.
✸Provide tracking information so that you and your customer can know exactly how
far the shipping cycle has progressed. 
✸Deliver the package to the customer’s front door.
✸Record when the package is delivered to the customer’s front door. 
Speed is an expensive commodity — but the Internet is all about speed causing
many web-based businesses to find themselves in a catch-22 situation — how to arrange
a speedy delivery of products, inexpensively!
If you offer your customers shipping options, post clear, concise, and fair shipping
choices and policies on your website. If overnight service is offered, clarify what time
orders must be received for same day shipping and that orders placed on weekends
and holidays are shipped the next business day (unless that is not the case). 
There is help available. Several online sites provide information on the best shipping
options based on origin and destination of the package as well as based on the weight
and dimensions. Check out iShip.com. This website offers templates that allow you
to find the best options for shipping a package based on delivery times, weight and
destination with a comparison of UPS, FedEx, Airborne, and the U.S. Postal Service.
Just fill out the online form with the appropriate information — shipment dimen-
sions, postal codes and loss-protection options. It even has a place for a website to
add its handling charges (if any). The iShip.com site also offers a tool for online auc-
tions and provides an integration tool that allows e-commerce sites to provide the
service directly on their web pages as a convenience for their customers. 
A more sophisticated alternative is InterShipper.net. This website helps e-com-
merce operators and their customers manage all their shipping activities whether
domestic or international. A single real-time shipping quote from multiple leading
carriers allows buyers to select the shipping cost and service that suits them the best
right from their desktops, and enables pre-bid or pre-purchase shipping estimates to
expedite purchasing decisions. InterShipper integrates into web malls and stores, auc-
tion sites, portals, e-marketplaces, and e-commerce procurement systems, thereby
optimizing shipping logistics and tracking processes. 
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
307

✪
INTERNATIONAL ORDERS
To service international customers, websites need significant expertise in customs
clearance, duties and taxes, currency conversion capabilities, and a good relationship
with an international shipping company. Thus web-based businesses don’t offer inter-
national shipping. 
For those web-based businesses that want to have a global customer base, the first
step is to ensure that their back-end systems are designed for international addresses,
international currencies, estimating delivery costs, and so forth. The next step is to
tackle shipping. Whatever company you decide to use for your international ship-
ments (and try to make it only one company), that company must provide global ship-
ping to virtually any address anywhere and to help with customs clearance, duties and
taxes payment, and with proof of delivery. 
Again, there is help available. The previously mentioned Intershipper.com offers
help with the choice of international shippers. 
If you operate within the U.S. borders, the United States Postal Service’s Express
Mail International service offers Global Package Link, which establishes a direct link
between your e-commerce business and the U.S. Postal Service, enabling the post
office to handle most of the documentation for international shipments. This is a
worthwhile feature for high-volume shippers. Part of the Global Package Link is the
Customs Pre-Advisory System (CPAS), which relieves the website of paperwork and
helps speed its packages through customs. CPAS enables customs agents to review
the contents of the shipment prior to its arrival and decide if the parcel requires
inspection.
For small international shipments, Global Priority Mail is a good choice. The time
in transit is anywhere from four to seven days. The U.S. Postal Service offers two sizes
of mailers, which are good for magazines, small books, CDs, and any other small, flat
item (as long as the package is less than 4 lbs.). Both mailers have a low flat rate from
$7.00 to $9.00, depending on the country to which you are shipping. 
✪
FULFILLMENT
Although most websites currently receive fewer than 400 orders per day, as the buy-
ing public gains trust and comfort with Internet purchases, web sales should increase
exponentially. Inventory and fulfillment issues resulting from increased orders will
continue to catch many an unwary e-commerce site unprepared. Now is the time to
perfect the fulfillment systems and services needed so that when your website’s busi-
ness takes off, everything is in place. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
308

When a customer orders a product from a website, that customer is trying to achieve
one or more objectives: 
✸Save money on product cost (which is partially offset by the addition of shipping
costs).
✸Avoid the additional expense of state sales tax.
✸Purchase specialty products that are not available locally.
✸Convenience by avoiding a time-consuming trip to a mall or specialty store.
What your customers fear most about buying from an e-commerce site is the uncer-
tainty of whether their purchase will be delivered when promised. Web newsgroups
are full of tales about products ordered and not received when promised (sometimes
never). 
There comes a time when every web-based business selling a physical product as
opposed to a virtual product (such as software or music that can be downloaded over
the Internet) must decide how to pick, pack, and ship the product to its customers in
a timely manner. As stated many times in this book, online customers have zero tol-
erance for delays and poor service. But there are steps an e-commerce business can
take to provide superlative fulfillment services. They include: 
✸Linking the website directly, in real-time, to the fulfillment center (in-house or oth-
erwise).
✸Building a real-time inventory management system so that the inventory is con-
stantly verified — if a customer sees it on the website, the product should be in
stock and instantly available. If it is out of stock, but on order, have a system on
the website that can advise the customer that the product is backordered and when
the customer can expect it to ship.
✸If the customer places the order by 5:00 p.m. (local time), the product should be
shipped to the customer that day. 
✸Orders should be bar coded and scanned during picking, and check weighed at the
manifesting scale to insure complete picking accuracy.
✸If an order will take more than 2 days to deliver, special low rates on 2nd day ship-
ping should be offered to the customer (i.e., fulfillment center is in Vermont and cus-
tomer is in Hawaii).
✸If an order placed prior to 5:00 p.m. (local time) cannot be shipped the same day,
it should be shipped the next day with free upgrade to “next day” delivery to insure
it is received within two days. 
✸As soon as the shipment is manifested, an email should be sent to the customer,
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
309

showing shipping date, expected arrival date, final costs and tracking number. If
the order is to be shipped from multiple sites, an email message should be sent for
each part of the shipment.
✸Another email should be sent the day after expected delivery for verification that
delivery was made and accurately fulfilled. 
✸A bar coded “return” label and document should accompany each part of the ship-
ment, just in case any part of the order must be returned. 
Outsource what can’t be done in-house. Re-visit the situation regularly and when
the return on investment (ROI) shows it is feasible, integrate the process in-house
with the necessary technology, personnel, and facilities in place.
Keep the Customer Informed
The e-commerce site that understands the importance of the logistics involved in
timely order processing, notifying customers of unavailable items, providing real-time
order tracking and status information, implementing billing procedures and inventory-
tracking procedures will soon become a favorite online shopping site. What customers
don’t see on their favorite e-commerce site is its behind-the-scenes rapid and efficient
ordering and fulfillment process. But although your customers could care less about
the underpinnings of your website and how it works, they do want it to work for them
easily and accurately, 24x7. 
Order processing and logistics is where an e-commerce business’s back-end trans-
action management takes center stage. Delivering order and shipping confirmations
to the customer’s email in-box at the time the order is processed should be common
practice. Customers should be kept informed as to where their order is in the pick,
pack, and ship process. 
Order confirmations should contain enough data to give your customers confi-
dence that their order will arrive on time. Once your website has confirmation that
the order is on the way to the customer (it is in the hands of the shipper), you may
wish to follow with an email to the customer. The email may say something like “Just
thought we would let you know your Order Number 12345 is on its way.” (Also pro-
vide the shipping and tracking information plus a link to use if they want to check
on the status of the shipment). When the website obtains confirmation that the pack-
age has been delivered, a rigorous customer service will follow-up with another email
to the customer confirming that delivery was received and verifying that the prod-
uct(s) met the customer’s expectations.  
The Complete E-Commerce Book
310

The confidence a website instills in its customers will be worth the struggle that it
went through to provide the information. And your web brand will be paid ten-fold in
ongoing consumer loyalty. A lack of shipping confirmations results in worried cus-
tomers interacting with customer service representatives to obtain assurance that the
order is on its way (an avoidable expense). 
The “Holy Grail” of customer confirmation is to keep the customer in the loop by
providing a confirmation that outlines the order’s details with everything from the
recipient’s name, to the cost and billing information. Include: 
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
311
THE DROP-SHIP MODEL CONUNDRUM
If you use the drop-ship model to provide all or part of your products, you may find it difficult
and time consuming to keep up with the “order-processing end.” The drop-ship model requires
100% diligence. Your customer does not care that your drop-shipper didn’t supply you with cur-
rent inventory data, or that a tracking email didn’t make it back to you. It’s up to you to main-
tain communications with your drop-shippers. Obtaining confirmation of shipments is vital, as
is getting your orders processed and sent to the drop-shipper on time. The easiest way to solve
shipment tracking is to have the drop-shipper use your shipping account (UPS, FedEx, AirBorne,
U.S. Postal Service). This will enable you to receive all shipping and tracking information directly,
rather than depending on the drop-shipper to supply you with the information.
Questions you should ask before delving into the world of drop-shipping include:
■How do you manage your drop-ship programs in order to ensure consistently superior cus-
tomer service?
■How do you receive a confirmation that your customer has received the order? 
■Are you alerted of potential problems (e.g. out-of-stock, shipment lost, etc.)? If so, how?  
■Does the drop-shipper(s) provide tracking numbers for the products shipped?  If so, how
will you track each shipment? 
■How are returns handled? 
Some drop-shippers are slow to adopt new technology, so even if you are using cutting edge
technology your drop-shipper may still use faxes and telephones as its main mode of commu-
nication, making it difficult to automate your logistics and fulfillment processes. If you find
this to be the case, establish internal monitoring processes, assign employees to monitor drop-
shipments, and leverage technologies that will help to integrate the website with the drop-ship-
per’s systems to aid you in keeping the customer informed. 
Another tack to take is rather than managing the drop-shipping process on your own, con-
sider hiring a third party order management company to handle the task. If you choose this
route, look for a company that will allow you to interface with their systems (e.g. a web-based
tool that provides you with up-to-date information on product availability, shipments and cus-
tomer deliveries). But know that while contracting with an order management company will
make your life easier, the costs may cut deeply into your profits. Those web operators that may
want to investigate the possibility of third-party help should check out CommercialWare.com,
Dotcomdist.com, Netship.com, and Vendornet.com.  

✸A personalized greeting.
✸The order number and summary with charges.
✸Estimated shipping and arrival date.
✸Bill-to and ship-to addresses.
✸Customer service contact information.
✸Special request information (gift wrap/gift messages, special delivery instructions).
✸Links to order status and order history.
✸Links to return information.
The shipping confirmation should include all of the above information plus track-
ing numbers (when relevant) and links to the website’s package tracking service. 
Again, a website’s customers expect a lot of information — ideally shipping costs,
delivery times, order status, product availability, real-time online customer service —
and they want easy access to it on the Web. Providing this information on your web-
site — versus the fulfillment provider or the shipper providing the information — is
preferable for branding purposes. All of this may require a large investment in what may
seem like an overly aggressive web-based supply chain management technology, but as
your web-based business prospers it will become a necessity.
✪
FULFILLMENT MODELS
The “back-office” subsystems of e-commerce sites — those that provide the link between
the customer experience and the actual physical delivery of goods to the customer —
are a challenge for web-based businesses. These parts, which include inventory man-
agement, order capture and management, and reconciliation, often prove to be more
difficult than the construction of the site itself.
Online stores generally fit into one of six order fulfillment models, each with dis-
tinct benefits and faults. Let’s take a closer look at each of these models.
The Single Website Order Model
The product is ordered off the website and shipped from an in-house fulfillment cen-
ter (a basement or a garage for a home-based business; a warehouse or distribution
center, possibly automated, for larger businesses) to the customer in one shipment.
This model has one great advantage over other models — easy returns — since it gives
the web-based business an increased level of control over every moment of the brand
experience. This is what the mail order catalog business has been doing for years. How-
ever, it requires know-how, labor, facilities and often, special equipment and software,
all of which may be outside the area of expertise and budget of the average web-based
The Complete E-Commerce Book
312

business. Also there is usually only the one shipping location, which means that same-
day delivery is impossible (except in a small geographical area) and next-day delivery
can be expensive.
Kiosk Order Model
Some brick-and-mortars use this model (and in the future you may even find pure-
play web-based businesses in this space). The customer orders products, using a kiosk
with a computer and high-speed connection located at a store or mall. With this model,
your customers don’t need a home computer and generally can even pay in person for
the products ordered. This model makes it possible to order products online and pay
in cash. Customers also have the choice of picking up the order on their next trip to
the kiosk location or having it shipped. The big advantage of this model is a possible
increase in customer loyalty — there is human interaction (the store clerk who takes the
payment and hands over the products). Also, with a kiosk model, an almost unlim-
ited range of products can be made available at a neighborhood store, provided the
customer can wait a couple of day (if they are not willing to pay for next day delivery).
Internet kiosks may become as prevalent as ATMs, so you can order your favorite
books, wine, clothing, and gourmet food at your corner coffee shop or dry cleaners
and pick up the order a few days later.
The Drop-Ship Model
This model is popular with some small e-commerce businesses, primarily because it
reduces initial capital expenditures. With this model, a customer clicks the “buy” but-
ton on a website, the website then forwards the order to it’s drop-shipper(s) (a whole-
saler or distributor that owns a variety of products). The drop-shipper then fills that
order by shipping the product directly to the website’s customers. 
The web-based business owns the customer database, while the drop-shipper owns
the products. The drop-shipper typically pays the web-based business a sales com-
mission on each product sold. 
Here’s how the drop-ship model works: You take orders on your website and you are
responsible for collecting payments for all charges. Then at the end of the day, you
put together a set of receipts and packing slips to forward to your drop-shipper(s).
This can be done either by fax, email, EDI, or via the drop-shipper(s) website. The
drop-shipper then takes the order information, packs a box, puts your receipt in the
box, and ships it out. If you’ve done your homework and negotiations correctly, the
customer won’t even know that the drop-shipper exists. 
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
313

However, before you take your first order, you must have a rock solid contract in
place with the your drop-shipper(s). Sharpen your negotiation skills because every lit-
tle detail must be put in writing or you may find yourself continually arguing over lit-
tle things such as tacked on stocking fees, extra shipping fees, etc. Spell out everything
in your contract including your payment terms. 
The drawbacks of this arrangement are that there is little or no control over how the
products are packed and shipped. Furthermore, unless you are diligent in your contract
negotiations, your products may be shipped with the drop-shipper’s name on the
packaging instead of your brand. This can cause confusion and difficulty in retain-
ing a customer base loyal to your website. 
There are two ways to drop-ship. One is actually to buy the inventory and the drop-
shipper charges you to store it and to ship it for you. The other is to work out a cost
per item (plus fees) and then whatever you sell over that cost will be your commission
or profit. 
Those e-commerce operators that adopt the drop-ship model essentially reduce
their capital risk in exchange for higher, overall operating costs. Here’s why. If you
offer products from more than one drop-shipper, the manhours it takes to manage
these vendor relationships, to get the proper orders timely delivered to the drop-ship-
per, to make sure the product and service is good, and to update a sales and tracking
system, can really eat into your profits. Also you must be careful not to let the drop-
ship model obscure your band name or jeopardize your customer relationships.
The best way to adopt a drop-ship model is to start small with one company that
has a good reputation and that offers a lot of products. Negotiate the best deal you
can, make sure your deal has some sort of “out” clause in it. Once you have increased
sales volume, you can come back and get a better deal. 
Another downside to the drop-ship model is that it requires the e-commerce busi-
ness give up much of its control of the fulfillment process. Although the e-commerce
operator may establish rigid guidelines for the drop-ship suppliers, the business is
still putting its brand into the hands of strangers. This includes everything from qual-
ity of product, delivery to the customers, and communication with customers con-
cerning tracking, shipping, delivery dates, returns, and so forth.
One more disadvantage of this model becomes apparent when you try to integrate
the front-end customer experience with the drop-ship fulfillment process. A good
example is the shopping cart software. It’s difficult to use most of the traditional
shopping carts to gather your orders. Many plug-in shipping calculators and carts
aren’t compatible with drop-shipping needs. They can’t deal with orders that contain
The Complete E-Commerce Book
314

products with varying point-of-origin zip codes. There are work-arounds, however.
For example, look for a shopping cart that can be modified and then find a shipper
that can provide a plug-in that can calculate live shipping rates based on different zip
code origins of different products within a single order. Finally, if you are using a web-
hosting service, the server needs a specific module installed on it to deal with the new
shipping calculation technology. 
If adopting this model, be sure to:   
✸Research shopping cart applications very carefully — the product you purchase must
be able to be modified to your specifications as a website that uses drop-shipping.
✸Determine whether you are limited as to what shipping companies you can use to
deliver products to your customers. 
✸Keep control over when an order will be shipped to the customer and in how many
packages.
✸Determine how to keep track of what your drop-shipper has in inventory. The best
way is to only deal with vendors that can provide you with a direct feed of current
inventory; this way you can keep the products on your website current, avoiding
backorders and out-of-stock problems. If that isn’t possible, be proactive —know
what products are in stock on any given day. 
✸Realize that it’s up to you, not the drop-shipper, to provide your customers with
up-to-date tracking or shipping status information. 
✸If using multiple drop-shippers, realize that they may want to receive orders in
multiple formats (EDI, XML, email, fax, etc.). It’s up to you to determine how this
will be accomplished.
✸Ensure that your brand is on the documents and packaging sent to the customer
(e.g. packing slip, shipping label, box) — not the drop-shipper’s information.
Keep in mind that during contract negotiations with a drop-shipper, your first pri-
ority is to protect your company, your brand, and your customers. However, if you are
diligent and put in place procedures to maintain a firm upper hand, you have a rea-
sonable chance of building and maintaining a satisfied and loyal customer base using
the drop-ship model.
Same-Day Home Delivery Model
The products are ordered online, picked, and packed at a local distribution center,
and delivered the same day to the customer. This approach offers the convenience of
local shopping with an added benefit of being a timesaver. However, to provide same
day delivery is always more expensive than other fulfillment models — both for the
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
315

web-based business and its customers. Still, most customers that frequent websites
that offer same day delivery feel it is a good tradeoff — personal time for money. 
This model requires a very complex distribution and delivery network. It also is
limited to specific geographic areas (how is a website located in Connecticut going to
give same day delivery to a farmer in the outreaches of Minnesota or a customer in
the mountains of New Mexico).
Fulfillment Service Provider Model (FSP)
With this model, the e-commerce business outsources its warehousing and distribu-
tion services to a third party. Companies that offer these type of services are called
“third party logistics providers,” “fulfillment service providers,” or “fulfillment houses”
(this book uses “fulfillment service provider” or “FSP”). This model gives the web-based
business a good deal of control over all aspects of product quality, distribution and
messaging. If you use this fulfillment model, you might want to consider contracting
for more than one distribution center — each strategically located nationwide or world-
wide, and each center carrying inventory levels relative to their regional market. 
The FSP receives merchandise from not only your e-commerce business, but also
numerous other clients and then stores the merchandise in its warehouse(s). It picks
and ships the orders received by its clients. Since the FSP provides this service to numer-
ous client businesses, it can spread the costs of the operation across a large base. How-
ever, web-based businesses may find that maintaining the optimum service levels
require adjustments — give everyone at least four or five months to work out all of
the bugs. In particular, many of these providers make it difficult for a web-based busi-
ness to obtain real-time information about inventory status and order status. Don’t sign
a contract with a new FSP just before the Christmas buying rush.
Many large websites use this model. They feel (and rightly so) that, in the short-
term, it’s good business practice to concentrate on their core strengths and contract
with experts for other areas, such as a FSP. The FSP will, for an up-front agreed price,
provide whatever services are needed, e.g. the FSP will receive a website’s products,
warehouse them, and when customers orders are received, it will pick and fill the
orders, and pack and ship each order by the method that the website and/or its cus-
tomers choose. The provider works for the web-based business and therefore the labels
and packing lists carry the website’s name and logo. 
The fulfillment service provider model is frequently identified as the future of e-com-
merce, but it’s not there yet. While many web-based businesses give this model a try,
many eventually find that the expense of fulfillment eventually outweighs its benefits. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
316

In-Store Fulfillment Model
This is strictly a click-and-mortar model. When an online order is received by the web-
site, that order is fulfilled by employees who pick stock from the traditional retail
store’s shelves. From there, the product delivery process is basically the same as any
other model. This model incurs lower startup costs in the short term, which is why
some brick-and-mortars use this model to “dip their toe” into the e-commerce arena.
In the end though, this model can be very expensive due to the overhead and the com-
plexity in tracking and pricing the same inventory for store and web sales. The tricky
part is identifying and separating costs to each entity. 
✪
IN-HOUSE SOLUTIONS
Controlling the entire customer buying experience, from beginning to end, gives an
e-commerce business a competitive advantage. However, this also means that you
must learn how to make a profit on each shipped package. Yet, the sad fact is that
most e-commerce operators cannot quote their business’s cost of fulfillment.
Demand for order fulfillment solutions is reshaping the existing e-commerce land-
scape. While most web-based businesses initially survived by offering a limited num-
ber of products, to compete most have been forced to expand their product range.
Any e-commerce business with more than 1000 orders per day should bring its e-
commerce fulfillment in-house for three reasons: 
1. It gives more control of the operations. 
2. It leverages economies between existing and online channels. 
3. It allows differentiation of customer service.
The Small- and Mid-sized Website
The author understands that the small- to mid-sized e-commerce business can’t afford
the infrastructure that the enterprise web-based business puts in place, and for these
smaller entities it’s not absolutely essential. That’s because they don’t have a large
inventory to deal with daily. Remember your logistics plan? Use it to give you a good
idea of what you need to do.
Order processing can be tamed if the volume is within a manageable range. As
orders come in, send email acknowledgements to the customers. Then, process the
orders through the payment authorization process, generate invoices, and log all infor-
mation into the accounting software and inventory software. With such a system a
website can know how much inventory has been sold, to whom, and at what price. 
Once the initial processes are completed, it is time to pick the orders (find the phys-
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
317

ical products in your inventory), package them along with packing lists, invoices,
return information and return labels, and any promotional materials. 
Now the pick-ups are ready to be delivered to the shipper. Once the packages are
in the hands of the shipper, send follow-up emails to the customers with the total
charges, shipping information including tracking information (if available), and esti-
mated delivery date. 
Once the package is delivered to the customer (and it is up to the web-based busi-
ness to keep on top of this), send a quick email to the customer to verify that the deliv-
ery was received and that the product(s) met the customer’s expectations.
Software, etc.
Inventory issues can lay waste to a website that is “starting to take off.” To alleviate
this problem, many e-commerce software packages provide a full-featured inventory
control system, including out-of-stock and low-stock notification by email. If the e-
commerce software your website uses doesn’t offer this feature, see if an upgrade is
available. Or your web-hosting service may offer an online inventory system that you
can use to synchronize your offline inventory system, which may be in the form of a
flat file database, Corel Paradox, Microsoft Access, Microsoft Works, etc. If using the
latter system, test your web-hosting service’s order-activity file formats to see which
has the least compatibility issues. 
Another suggestion is to use off-the-shelf software like Quicken QuickPOS, Intuit’s
QuickBooks, PeachTree Accounting, or Microsoft Excel since all have good inventory
management packages which can help small websites manage their inventory and
track their orders. Finally, a small but active website might want to take a look at Hal-
logram’s IntelliTrack Data Management Software (www.hallogram.com). 
Whatever inventory system you use, carefully monitor the sales activity of each
product in your inventory and set realistic reorder levels (so the website doesn’t run
out of its best sellers). If you do run out of a product make sure your system can place
a “temporarily out of stock” notice adjacent to that product with approximate replen-
ishment date. Also look for a system that allows you to insert additional information
(cross-selling) about another product that may “fill the bill.”  
If the website’s volume of orders is such that additional automation is advisable, help
might be available through products such as Bonafide Management Systems’ eRe-
sponse (www.bonafide.com) order fulfillment software. This product can be useful
in all type of e-commerce situations, from the small startup to the large, high-volume
e-commerce site. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
318

Another system worth a look, especially for small- to mid-sized website, is Order
Desk Pro (www.odpro.com). This order entry, order tracking, sales performance analy-
sis, and customer database management tool is specifically designed for companies
that receive orders via a website. 
A busy, mid-sized website might want to investigate Verian Technologies’s(www.pro-
cureit.com) ProcureIT order processing and inventory software that works with an
ODBC database. 
Shipping Procedures
We will first discuss the customer’s view. Will you offer shipping options to your cus-
tomers? Will the website offers multiple shipping methods? If so, give your customers
the tools to pick their shipper of choice and the method (i.e., overnight, 2nd day, stan-
dard) and calculate the cost of shipping. A good practice for small websites is to offer
links to each shipper’s site on the web page where the shipping information is pro-
vided. In this way the customers can calculate cost and track their package (assum-
ing it is sent with a tracking number). 
Your shipping page should include the website’s shipping policies set out in a clear,
concise manner, sample weight/price shipping charts, and perhaps a note about the
amount of time that the average package will spend in transit. Educate your customers.
Make them aware of all shipping options. Many will opt for second-day service when
they realize the difference in cost. 
Now we will look at getting the product to the customer. Check with the customer
service representatives at the larger courier services, including the U.S. Postal Service
(if your business is located in the U.S.). Ask about rates and services for new business
accounts. Compare times for last drop off and delivery times. Ask if they offer guar-
anteed delivery, refunds, insurance, and free supplies. 
The U.S. Postal Service provides Express Mail Corporate Accounts, which are a
big help since they let patrons avoid weighing packages, affixing stamps, and battling
with postage meters. To set up an account, complete the application on the Postal
Service’s website (http://new.usps.com) and either mail it in or take it to a local post
office with the initial deposit. 
Note that because of heightened security restrictions by the Federal Aviation Admin-
istration, any domestic mail other than Express Mail weighing 16 ounces or more and
bearing stamps must be given in person to a retail clerk at a post office or given directly
to a letter carrier. 
The U.S. Postal Service, either through its website or at the local post office, offers
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
319

many of the supplies needed by a fulfillment center. For example, Express, Priority,
and Global Envelopes, rolls of Priority Mail tape, sturdy boxes for shipping fragile
items, padded envelopes for small items, pre-printed Express forms and self adhesive
Priority Mail labels with the web-based business’ return address. It is also noted that
the U.S. Postal Service offers what it calls an “e-merchandise return” service — check
it out.
Courier services including Federal Express, Airborne, and UPS, make it easy to
set up an account online. Most courier services will schedule daily package pick-ups
although some may charge a small weekly fee for pick-up service, others will do it for
nothing (especially if you have an established business account with them). Still, if
your shipping facilities are located near any of the major couriers’ drop-off points, or
near one of their drop boxes, it might be easier to just drop off the packages. 
FedEx offers several software packages to ease your e-commerce business’s ship-
ping chores. Airborne offers a number of software packages to help you to better
manage shipping products through its service. UPS offers its Online Office software
to help web-based businesses process shipments, print address labels and pickup
records, and track packages. DHL has Easy Ship software that it provides to busi-
nesses that meet specific criteria. 
Negotiate with the shippers — it can’t do any harm and most of the time it is pos-
sible to obtain volume discounts, especially if the rates offered by their competitors
are brought into play. Then pass on any savings obtained to your customers. As orders
increase, re-open the negotiations. It is possible to optimize your website’s shipping solu-
tions by exploiting each shipper’s strengths while getting the lowest rates possible. 
Insure all packages that contain items with a retail value in excess of $100 should
be insured. The standard insurance provided by couriers usually cover the first $100.
Simply fill out the corresponding space on the air bill — there will be a small fee charged
for each additional $100 beyond the first $100. 
Stay on top of the delivery time of all shipments. If a certain courier offers a guar-
anteed time (or day) of arrival, and that guarantee is not met, ask for a refund. In all
probably the website will have a disgruntled customer when a package arrives a day
later than expected, and your business will be the whipping boy, not the shipper. Pass-
ing the refund on to the customer can assuage that anger, while building your repu-
tation as an e-commerce site that offers outstanding customer service. 
Large and Enterprise Websites
As stated previously, for a brick-and-mortar making its move to the Web one of the
The Complete E-Commerce Book
320

first steps is to integrate its back-end systems. Until now, website integration issues
were limited to the applications residing within the web-based business’s own domain.
However, logistics technology requires that integration now extend outward toward the
four corners of the world and application program interfaces (APIs) are the passports.
Most e-commerce systems have APIs but they vary widely in capability — legacy sys-
tems have APIs with varying capabilities and there are even custom-built legacy sys-
tems without APIs (but it still might be possible to modify these system to directly
use the website system’s APIs). 
If taking the API route is too pricey, risky, or inadequate, the next course to take
is Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) or Extensible Markup Language (XML). Both
provide integration between systems. EDI is a well-established standard — the EDI
messages are normally transmitted between businesses by Value-Added Networks
(VANs). XML is an emerging standard for describing information and can be trans-
mitted directly between businesses over the Internet, but translation will be required
between the legacy system and the e-commerce system. 
The Options
After evaluating its present back-end systems and their current needs, an e-commerce
site usually has the choice of three options for its e-commerce platform: 
A Custom Solution: This is a good choice, but only if you have the capital and the
time to design a comprehensive solution to give your website the integration it needs. 
A Packaged Solution: This can, at times, be less pricey than a custom solution. A pack-
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
321
EXPLANATION OF BACK-END INTEGRATION STANDARDS
Application Programming Interface (API): Software that an application uses to request and to
carry out lower-level services performed by a computer’s operation system. In short, an API is
a hook into software. As such, an API is a set of standard software interrupts, calls and data for-
mats that applications use to initiate contact with network services, mainframe communication
programs, etc. Applications use APIs to call services that transport data across a network.
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI): A series of standards that provide computer-to-computer
exchange of business documents between different companies’ computers over the Internet.
EDI allows for the transmission of purchase orders, shipping documents, invoices, invoice pay-
ments, etc. between a web-based business and its trading partners.
eXtensible Markup Language (XML): A standard system for organizing and tagging elements
of a document. XML has the ability to structure exchanges of data between computers attached
to the Web, thus allowing one web server to talk to another web server. This means manufac-
turers and merchants can quickly swap data, such as pricing, stock-keeping numbers, trans-
action terms, and product descriptions.

aged or product solution is not the typical “out of the box” product (this solution
can’t be bought in a retail store). While less costly and time-consuming than a cus-
tom solution, a packaged solution still requires specialized integration, i.e. there is an
additional expense for “professional services” and it will take time to get everything
working smoothly. If considering this type of solution, do your research to find the
right packaged solution that can integrate with your business’s existing systems since
not all APIs are equal. Also determine how the packaged solution’s APIs will operate
with remote systems and with the website’s specific fulfillment needs and existing sys-
tems. Finally, don’t forget to check out how the solution handles or affects your sys-
tems’ security features. 
Many high-end packaged solutions offer API, EDI, and XML capabilities. But it
pays to be careful, a product that states it offers EDI capabilities could only mean that
it simply sends an EDI850 purchase order message in response to an order. This falls
short of the kind of meaningful interchange needed to support a website’s fulfillment
needs.
Finally, if the existing e-commerce system is currently running on a packaged prod-
uct, it may be that the necessary usable hooks and tools to integrate the product will
cost many times more than the original cost. 
Application Service Provider (ASP): It seems every day a new ASP offering a special-
ized service opens its doors for business. There may be an ASP out there calling your
name. In fact, ASPs may be a good alternative solution for some websites since ASPs
maintain software and infrastructure for many clients, the cost can be spread across
the landscape, resulting in lower costs for its clients. 
The ASP model works because the costs — software and integration — are often
built into a long-term contract and amortized. A good ASP can provide an e-com-
merce solution that seems like it is customized but without incurring the huge devel-
opment, maintenance, and infrastructure costs.
You can find ASPs that offer third party software and/or proprietary software. If
the ASP offers third party software then there might be a few complications: The ASP
may have built-in cost factors that could limit the value proposition to a website. The
ASP is forced to rely on the third party vendor to fix bugs or to provide answers to
technical problems. 
An ASP that offers its own proprietary software usually provides a lower ongoing
cost factor and greater flexibility. These ASPs also seem to be more flexible in their
pricing policies. A website also might find this ASP model to be more responsive to
adding product features or fixing bugs. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
322

The shared infrastructure of the ASP model also provides architectural advantages,
which can reduce the cost and time required for setup and integration. Just be sure
that your IT people go over everything with a fine tooth comb to verify that the ASP
can meet the website’s specific needs.
Once everyone is satisfied with the decision — be it custom, packaged or ASP — get
those legal eagles involved and set it down in writing how integration is to be addressed,
what the costs will be, and how long it will take. Get warranties and guarantees with
penalties for overruns. 
Note: Another consideration for brick-and-mortars: From an economic standpoint, many traditional brick-and-
mortar businesses should keep their web-based business separate from their traditional business to enable them
to track actual costs — especially if the web-based business experiences early losses.
Upgrading Fulfillment Operations for E-Commerce Activity
Although customer-centricity is the key for the rush to upgrade fulfillment capabili-
ties, some websites are wondering whether they can simultaneously update their ful-
fillment process and avoid compromising the customer experience. The astute
e-commerce operator knows that to maximize efficiencies and benefits it cannot afford
to make fulfillment an either/or decision. What you could do when selecting the meth-
ods and tools to optimize the fulfillment process is to not integrate the entire cus-
tomer experience immediately. However, each component should be fully knowledgeable
of the other, otherwise response to the customer’s needs won’t be personalized, and
delivery won’t made to the customer’s satisfaction.
Even large e-commerce businesses find it difficult to master direct-to-consumer
fulfillment. It takes a lot of guts to set up your own fulfillment center, especially since
most e-commerce sites make the majority of their gross income during the Novem-
ber and December shopping season. If you haven’t done everything right, your ful-
fillment operations will fail under the holiday crunch. Nevertheless, a huge plurality
of the large and enterprise websites (mainly click-and-mortars) are adamant about
bringing fulfillment processes in-house. 
The deciding component of a website’s success when building an in-house fulfill-
ment system is its willingness to view the entire fulfillment process as a realm without
borders. When optimizing the fulfillment processes the web operator must examine
everything from the customer’s initial product order through to delivery to the cus-
tomer’s door. This means a website cannot restrict its view to internal operations alone. 
Another problem with building an in-house system is the lack of a “single” solu-
tion to integrate all of the back-end order processing operations — from finding prod-
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
323

ucts from alternative suppliers, to expediting orders, keeping customers informed,
through to the financial end. Even with a good logistics plan, all of this involves a
mess of prickly specifications: 
✸Taking care of credit-card authorizations.
✸Routing one order to multiple suppliers.
✸Routing status updates from suppliers to customers.
✸Handling order cancellations and product returns.
✸Keeping up with the availability of inventory and the forecasting thereof.
✸Shipping specifics.
And that’s just the beginning; the list goes on and on. 
The main dilemma is that all of these applications have no de facto communica-
tion standards. One solution might be to bring an extensive library of pre-built con-
nectors into play; the connectors could reside at the website’s hub, speaking the
language of and translating between the various applications that must communi-
cate with each other. Of course, this means that such a comprehensive integration
project may be a long, resource intensive process. Most websites will find that the com-
plication of building out customized solutions is their only alternative. 
Some website operators also may realize that developing the needed expertise inter-
nally is not cost-effective. That group may decide that the faster, more efficient option
is to contract with one of the new breed of consultants and software vendors who can
help a web-based business forge a trail through this technological briar patch. 
Before taking the upgrade route, you must first assess your business’s current ful-
fillment needs and capabilities and compare that with your long-term goals. Then,
determine what is missing in terms of operational and functional processes, strategic
direction, technology and organization. 
Once everyone has grasped what needs to be done and what can be done, the task
then is to set out the tactical steps to fill in the missing pieces. Then begin the move
toward complete implementation. 
It’s easy to agree upon a strategy and to identify what is missing but the sticky
wicket is defining the tactical operational requirements. If a web-based business can
set out a feasible plan that cuts to the nuts and bolts of the process, then it has a fight-
ing chance. E-commerce operators that are willing to do their homework will have a
better chance of success. 
Once work has begun, everyone on the team should be available for daily or thrice
weekly conference calls to avoid duplicated effort and to assure that everyone is in
The Complete E-Commerce Book
324

adherence to the logistics plan and timetable(s). Everyone must stay focused on the
unequivocal requirement for a system flexible enough to grow over time. 
Use an Existing Direct-to-Consumer Operation
When a brick-and-mortar is planning a move to the Web, it assumes the easiest and
most economical route is to keep order fulfillment in-house. But as its web-based
business grows, it must come to grips with the fact that its distribution system is based
on pallets or many-item orders, and 9 times out of 10 it finds that it is struggling to
handle the one- or two-product, small-package shipments that a web-based business
encounters.
One option for enterprise websites choosing to keep their fulfillment in-house is to
look for either a direct-to-consumer competency buried somewhere in-house (such
as a small catalog operation) or buy a logistics firm or a competitor with e-commerce
fulfillment capabilities already in place. Either alternative can make it easier to imple-
ment technologies to handle basic e-procurement or elementary e-commerce tasks. 
However, this course won’t give a web-based business complete integration of inter-
nal and external systems across the entire value chain. Click-and-mortars that want
to integrate their systems to support real-time two-way flow of information through-
out the value chain (the entire supply chain: customers, internal applications, and
financial) will need require additional custom solutions.
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
325
FULFILLMENT: IN-HOUSE OR OUTSOURCED 
A PriceWaterhouseCoopers and eRetailing World study looked at how e-commerce businesses
handle their logistics and fulfillment chores. Here is what they found: 
Inventory
Picking/
Replenish-
E-Commerce Startup
Warehousing
Packing
Shipping
Returns
ment
In-house 
47.2%
41.6%
36.1%
63.9%
52.8%
Outsourced 
41.7%
44.4%
47.2%
22.2%
25.0%
Combination 
8.4%
11.2%
13.9%
13.9%
16.7%
Other response
2.7%
2.8%
2.8%
0.0%
5.5%
Click-and-Mortar
Company handles 
71.8%
69.2%
66.7%
79.5%
76.9%
Outsourced 
20.5%
20.5%
23.1%
12.8%
12.8%
Combination
5.1%
7.7%
7.7%
5.2%
7.7%
Other response
2.6%
2.6%
2.5%
2.5%
2.6%
As the figures show, although there are benefits of keeping fulfillment activities in-house, out-
sourcing is still a popular option for many e-commerce sites. 

✪
OUTSOURCING
The goal of outsourcing fulfillment should not be one of short-term cost reduction,
but rather speed to market. That is because in the long run, outsourcing usually costs
more than an in-house system. The benefits of using a FSP is that it provides a reli-
able method of getting the product to the customer while keeping in-house control
of important data such as inventory, reorder levels, and delivery confirmations. The
other advantage of outsourcing fulfillment is that it allows a web-based business to
focus its energy and resources on marketing, product development, sales, and build-
ing its customer base. 
We’ve discussed outsourcing throughout this chapter; this section is where we
really dig into the subject. While outsourcing can make fulfillment and distribution
simpler and more efficient it does have limitations and drawbacks. 
✸Outsourcing is not cheap.
✸Many FSPs will not service a website unless it has reached a decent shipping volume. 
✸An inventory that consists of a large variety of products can affect service and price.
For example, it’s more costly and time-consuming to prepare packages that con-
tain different combinations of items than it is single-product packages.
✸Some FSPs will only respond to inquiries regarding the status of an order while
others will provide full product support. 
✸The level of services in warehousing and inventory management also may vary from
company to company. In some cases, the FSP will order stock directly from the
manufacturers while others will expect the website to ship the products to the FSP’s
main warehouse for packaging and delivery. 
✸The drop-shipment option may result in multiple shipping charges for some orders.
✸Websites using drop-shippers will have to deal with customer confusion due to
packages arriving at different times from different shipping locations sometimes
without the website’s brand anywhere in site on the packages.
✸The drop-shipment option requires complex tracking and returns procedures com-
pared to FSP shipments. 
When Should You Outsource? 
Outsourcing to a FSP offers quick access to proven state of the art technologies and
thus can be a good starting point for a new web-based business. Lower start-up costs
preserve scarce start-up capital. These initial savings however mean a higher per prod-
uct cost during the operation of the website. Then there is the concern that any out-
sourcing model presents: How to keep control of the management of quality, accuracy,
The Complete E-Commerce Book
326

accountability, and customer service priorities, as well as integrating it into your back-
end systems.
Outsourcing to a FSP only makes good financial sense for a startup website if, in its day-to-
day operations, it has more money than time. When every penny counts, keep fulfillment in-
house. If the web-based business’ competency lies elsewhere and it can earn more utilizing its staff
in their areas of competency, look outside. If an established website currently handles fulfillment
in-house, it should look at outsourcing only when it has reached the limits of its current facilities
and infrastructure and the incremental cost of expansion would be a prohibitive expense or it
can’t have the disruptions that a rebuild of its infrastructure would bear on business. 
A web-based business might consider contracting with a FSP for the same reason
it chose to outsource its website to a web-hosting services — because an FSP can afford
the very best software and hardware solutions, and because its costs are spread over
many customers. Thus, even though there is an additional cost involved with out-
sourcing, it can give a web-based business the additional benefit of having a cutting edge
fulfillment process at its fingertips. 
What an FSP Offers 
The average FSP offers everything a web-based business might need for its fulfillment
processes. These services will take the ordered products from the warehouse shelves,
pack them, and hand them to shippers. Then they will follow-up by sending an auto-
mated email response with the website’s branding to the customer to let them know
the package is in transit. Many also will handle your credit-card processing, supply
current inventory levels to the website, reorder products, offer call-center services,
send notices of shipping, and handle returns. There are literally thousands of these
companies to choose from, but the best way to find one that suits your specific e-busi-
ness’ needs is by referral. 
Some FSPs offer everything: web design and hosting, order capturing, shopping
cart tools, credit card processing, merchant accounts, picking and packing, shipping,
invoice generation, inventory management, return/exchange logistics, and customer
service. Plus some will provide, for an additional fee, extra services such as wrapping
gifts and packing catalogues or other promotional items with each shipped package. 
It sounds good, but remember some of these areas may not be among the FSP’s
core competencies and may not be the best solution for your web-based business. Care-
fully evaluate your needs, the FSP and what it offers, and then pick and choose. 
Most FSPs will let an e-commerce business mix and match the fulfillment services
it needs. For example, if a website already has a shopping cart and credit-card func-
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
327

tion, it can limit its selection to inventory warehousing, pick, pack and ship service,
returns processing and customer service support. An e-commerce operator may want
to use a combination of fulfillment options. For some websites, it may be more cost
effective to handle the processing of small items in-house and only outsource the
bulkier items. Other websites may have some of their products handled by drop-ship
methods and others by the FSP. 
Should an e-commerce business choose a small or larger FSP?  Each offers advan-
tages and disadvantages. A small local FSP may be best, especially if it makes it easier
for quick replenishment of inventory or because it offers more personalized service.
A larger national FSP, on the other hand, can give a nervous startup confidence that
its customers will be adequately served throughout the United States. 
Another, good reason for choosing the smaller FSP is that an e-commerce busi-
ness could have its fulfillment services in numerous regional locations allowing it to
emulate a just-in-time inventory model (discussed later in this chapter). Having more
than one FSP also can alleviate concerns about relying on a single fulfillment resource
(i.e., redundancy). There are many options. Discuss them all with each potential FSPs
until you find a provider and a solution that fits your business’s specific needs.
Where and how can you find fulfillment service providers?  Begin with Yahoo!’s
directory. To reach your goal click on the following: Business and Economy > Business to
Business > Marketing and Advertising > Fulfillment Services. The list should provide you
with at least four or five companies that suit your needs. 
Drop-shipping
In a perfect world the drop-ship model would be the way all e-commerce sites would
want to go. If everything worked flawlessly, the website would concentrate on sales
and therefore sell more products, which in turn benefits both the website and the
drop-shipper. The website does not have inventory cost and the drop-shipper does
not have the marketing costs; this enables both to make more money by reducing the
retail price. But it’s not a perfect world.
Although many small and home-based websites may go with the 100% drop-ship
model when first opening shop, most gradually move into a hybrid solution — they
still have relationships with drop-ship manufacturers and distributors but they also
have begun to amass an inventory and deal with in-house fulfillment processes. 
The drop-ship model has been discussed throughout this chapter, but as explained
earlier, a website that uses the drop-ship model takes orders and payment for prod-
uct and forwards its orders to the drop-shipper who will “drop-ship” products directly
The Complete E-Commerce Book
328

to the website’s customers. When using a 100% drop-ship model, the website realizes
some advantage from delegating the physical labor of the entire fulfillment process
— from the order and stocking of product through the picking and shipping of the
products to the customers — although as the reader should understand, the website does
not totally avoid fulfillment expenses. That’s because the e-commerce operator is com-
pelled to be particularly diligent to guarantee that the fulfillment process is completed
to the customer’s satisfaction. If you fail in this task, you will lose control over your ful-
fillment process — you won’t know when orders are shipped, or how they are shipped
(including the number of packages, shipper, and method). 
Note: Another challenge that the drop-ship model presents to e-commerce operators is managing, synchroniz-
ing, and consolidating customers orders so that all packages comprising any one order arrives at the customer’s
door on the same day by the same shipper. 
Regional Distribution Centers
Suppose a FSP ran a network of distribution centers, and each center could ship prod-
uct for dozens of large and small e-commerce sites. A web-based business could con-
tract with one of the FSPs with multiple distribution centers, giving it a presence in
many regional areas. 
Using the regional distribution center model allows a web-based business to use
just-in-time (JIT) inventory management, thus saving on inventory holding costs.
With the JIT inventory model, vendors agree to deliver products right at the time
needed — not so early that you wind up with unnecessary warehousing expenses, but
not so late that you miss out on customer sales. Since needed products arrive at the
warehouse just in time for shipment, you can keep your inventory at a level that is
just enough to cover ongoing orders but not tie up capital. 
Just-in-time inventory management and delivery works best with companies that
have projects that are carefully scheduled and effectively managed so that work is per-
formed according to a strict schedule. For example, construction companies may effec-
tively use just-in-time delivery so that goods and materials arrive at the construction
site just in time. Money is saved largely by not having to provide warehouse facilities
for these goods and materials. 
For websites that have substantial warehousing costs and large well-scheduled proj-
ects, just-in-time delivery may make sense. Those companies should ensure that there
is no premium in the price for such delivery — or, if there is, that the premium is more
than offset by the savings in warehousing costs.
When a business has only one distribution center its products are usually received
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
329

in large quantities and stored in pallet racks until needed. As items are picked, more
products have to be dropped from the pallet racks to replenish the picking area. This
receive-store-replenish-pick cycle is a repeated expense, and, if replenishment is too
slow, out-of-stock notices may occur even when product is in the building.
If a website uses the JIT model and outsources some or all of its fulfillment needs,
it should look for a FSP that has supply chain management software to accommo-
date just-in-time shipping; thus allowing products and orders to flow smoothly from
manufacturers and distributors to regional distribution centers and finally to your
customers. Adoption of a JIT model can result in increasing the frequency with which
inbound shipments of product are scheduled, but decreasing the lead times and size
of these shipments. Web-based businesses that adopt the JIT model often reduce the
number of suppliers and transport companies with which they must deal and select sup-
pliers that are close to their regional distribution centers, enabling delivery of ship-
ments with short lead times. In addition, each regional distribution center has only
a portion of the website’s total stock, so it is a simple task to shelve all received prod-
uct directly into the pick area. 
Another reason for choosing this distribution model is that many web-based busi-
nesses want to give their customers reasonably priced next day delivery or 2nd day
delivery. A website could place its inventory in numerous regional centers, thereby
increasing its inventory holding costs, decreasing its overall shipping costs, and increas-
ing its customer satisfaction ratio. 
Here’s how it works. A business has one distribution center in (let’s say) Nashville,
Tennessee and a customer in Oregon who places an order for 2nd day delivery. Nor-
mally that order could be shipped for delivery within the two-day time period. But,
what if there is a problem (which happens frequently). Now the business has to ship
“next day” at additional cost (which it has to “eat”) to meet the 2nd day delivery time
limitation. 
Now take that same scenario, but the business has its inventory in four regional
distribution centers. The Oregon customer’s order is sent to a regional distribution
center in Utah; and, even if there is a mix-up which causes a delay in shipping the
product, it can avoid the “extra cost” next-day shipping method due to the proxim-
ity of the distribution center to the customer. In other words, with strategically located
distribution centers throughout the country a website can promise 2nd day delivery
with more certainty due to the proximity of the product to the customer.  
It isn’t always necessary to increase inventory. With the right technology running
behind the scenes, a web-based business can maximize its normal inventory levels.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
330

Take the same scenario: the Oregon customer’s order is sent to the Utah distribution
center, but that center is out of stock and cannot fill the order. The fulfillment sys-
tem can transmit the order seamlessly to another distribution center and still meet
the 2nd day delivery deadline by using the more expensive “next day” shipping option.
The web-based business did not carry extra inventory, but because of its data network
it could still adopt the just-in-time model. Using this system, premium shipping
charges would still be incurred to meet the 2nd day delivery deadline, but not in every
instance, every day.
Your Outsourcing Plan
Nothing succeeds without a plan — this time it’s an outsourcing plan, written as an
addendum to the logistics plan. First, determine the services the website needs and
expects from a fulfillment provider and what they will need to know about the website
— for example, its expected order volume, its business’ terms, and whether it’ll pay
handling on a per-piece-picked basis or on a package-shipped basis. 
FSPs differ widely on the variety of options they provide and the type of client they
serve. Finding the right fit for a web-based business requires in-depth research, which
includes asking for referrals. Once the research is completed and the information com-
piled, it will be possible to price out the most cost effective and efficient method of
getting the products to the customer while maintaining an adequate profit margin.
But it’s not an easy decision. 
The first step is to look at your carefully drawn up outsourcing plan. If the solu-
tion is still unclear, consider the following while keeping in mind that fulfillment is the
last form of customer contact — if a website fails to embrace order fulfillment with
the same vigor as it embraced online selling, it will experience not only distribution
headaches, but also, customer defection. 
Look at the current volume of orders and project what the volume is expected to be
in six months, one year, three years and five years. With figures in hand, take a long
hard look at the website’s staff — can they handle the workload. If the website takes off
and workload exceeds the staff’s capacity, its customers won’t be happy with the poor
service that they may receive from a harassed and overworked staff. The web-based
business may have jeopardized its hard-earned success with the wrong fulfillment
decision.
Also, consider the web-based business’ core competency, fulfillment may not be
one of them. Stay on top of fulfillment issues, and as the business grows, re-evaluate.
Before making your decision, get a pencil and paper out and compare the costs of
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
331

adding more staff and facilities (including automation) with the cost of delegating
the fulfillment process to an outside company. 
If the website is still in the first growth period and has expectations of a huge
growth spurt within the next six months — outsource. However, if the grow is pro-
jected to increase steadily over time and the in-house staff can currently adequately
manage the fulfillment process, then there is time to build a proper in-house fulfill-
ment infrastructure that can scale as the order volume increase. 
A start-up website that expects to handle a substantial volume of orders from the
get-go and does not have a warehouse and staff in place might find that in the begin-
ning it could be more cost-effective to outsource its fulfillment processes to a FSP. In
that case, the web-based business should ensure that its back-end is built so that it is
scalable enough to accommodate a move to an in-house fulfillment processes when the
need arises
If a website’s order volume is low and inventory requirements are not onerous, then
it is probably better to handle fulfillment in-house until the volume justifies a more
formal order fulfillment procedure. 
Your Product. Look at the products offered for sale via your website. If the answer
is “yes” to either of the following two questions then the decision to outsource is a
no-brainer. 
1. Do your products require special handling, i.e., fragile, sensitive to temperature
changes, or require special licensing (alcohol, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, etc.)?  
2. Will the majority of the product orders include multiples of different products?
This makes the picking and packing more labor intensive.
With a yes answer, a FSP should be found that will accommodate the specific prod-
uct needs and still allow the e-business to earn a profit. 
However, if it isn’t possible to find an FSP to provide the special services required,
an e-business has two choices: to outsource all fulfillment except the products requir-
ing special handling, which will be handled in-house, or to keep all fulfillment processes
in-house.
Customer Service. FSPs are well aware of customer service issues and most offer serv-
ices that integrate well with the typical website infrastructure. Some of the customer
service issues to be considered when instituting a fulfillment process include:
✸Managing inventory (so the customer is confident the product is available and the
website can cross-sell, if necessary).
The Complete E-Commerce Book
332

✸Offering multiple shipping options.
✸Tracking orders (so the customer can stay informed).
✸Handling returns and disputes.
Control. If a website decides to outsource with an FSP, then the FSP must become
an integral part of the web-based business’s processes. As such, it is important that
everyone coordinate their business processes and infrastructure to maximize the ben-
efits of each business’ strengths.
Integration. A web-based business will need to send its customers’ orders via email
or FTP directly to the FSP’s warehouse facility. The optimal FSP is one that offers
software to enable a website to integrate its systems with the FSP’s back-end systems
so that there is real-time inventory information. The FSP should offer continuous
technical support to assure that the operation runs smoothly from both ends. Bear
in mind that the FSP selected will become a partner in the value chain, and as such,
an essential arm of your e-commerce operations. 
Issues Specific to a Small Website
It is possible to find FSPs that cater to the small business, allowing even the busy
home-based website to take advantage of the latest cost- and time-saving techniques,
such as supply chain software, and orders sent directly to the distribution center floor
for picking.
Hence, a small web-based business that chooses to outsource fulfillment, should
select a FSP that specializes in servicing small businesses, especially if it receives fewer
than 10 orders per day. Do the due diligence — if the FSP falls down on the job dur-
ing a peak selling season, a small website might not recover and could lose its entire
business.
For the majority of small website’s the cost per order is significantly increased when
an FSP is brought into the picture. Outsourcing makes good financial sense ONLY
when you have more money than time. If you need to make every cent count, handle
your fulfillment in-house. 
A series of coordinated steps is required to bridge the gap between (1) a customer
clicking the buy button, thus sending the order to the shopping cart software and
into the “pipeline” and (2) the customer receiving the products. Ad-hoc solutions to
handle the communication with a FSP and/or drop-shipper(s) can be put into place that
may be sufficient for a website with low sales volume and limited inventory. However,
if sales increase substantially, then even a small website must deal with the lack of
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
333

standards for data representation and transmission requirements. This means deal-
ing with the API issues or taking the EDI and XML approach (discussed earlier in this
chapter) for communication between systems so as to be able to interact with each
outsourcer (FSP and/or drop-shipper). Eventually, the “string and sticky tape” method
will fail and proper integration will become essential. 
How Much Does It Cost?
The cost is dependent upon which services the web-based business requires and the
volume of orders it forwards to the outsourcer since many of the fees or commissions
are set on a sliding scale based on volume. On the average, you will pay an FSP a
monthly fee for warehousing the products of around three cents per small item, or
$15 for each pallet of products. An inventory count is usually performed monthly and
the fees are assessed on the products your business has in the FSP’s warehouses at
The Complete E-Commerce Book
334
EVALUATING THE OUTSOURCER
Keep in mind that an when you partner with an outsourcer (FSP and/or drop-shipper), it must
become an integral part of your website’s operations. Therefore, find an outsourcer that not only
offers the services the website needs, but also is a comfortable fit in other ways — location(s),
technology, mission statement, financial wherewithal, etc. To determine whether a prospec-
tive outsourcer meets a web-based business’ needs, ask it how it approaches key fulfillment
issues, such as:
■What types of products does the outsourcer have in stock for other clients? 
■What is the minimum volume the outsourcer will handle?  Is that minimum per month or aver-
aged over a set period?
■How does it handle the packing?  What type of packaging materials will be used?  How will
the box be labeled?  In other words, is the website’s brand used or also the outsourcer’s
brand?  It’s important, that the website’s brand isn’t diluted.
■Determine that the outsourcer does not require an exclusive contract to fill all of the web-
site’s product orders. The web-based business may want the flexibility of processing some of
its orders in-house and also it may want to hedge its bets with a secondary FSP or addi-
tional drop-shippers. 
■Is there a setup fee?  If so, how much and is it a one-time fee?
■Does the outsourcer offer special services such as gift-wrapping or sub-assembly?  If so,
what are the fees? Will the outsourcer include the website’s catalogs or other branding mate-
rials or special offers in the shipments?  If so, is there an extra fees and what is the fee?
■How quickly will orders to be filled? Is there a guarantee?
■What volume of orders can the outsourcer reasonably handle and how scalable is its
capacity?

that time. The FSP may also charge a handling fee for each package and for inciden-
tals, such as mailing labels, boxes, packing material, and then, of course, shipping. 
There are no outright, up-front expenses involved with the drop-ship model. The
drop-shipper pays the website a commission, which can range anywhere from 10% to
30% or more of the product(s) sales price. 
The Contract
Once you have decided upon an outsourcer, the next step is to perform due diligence
concerning such issues as financial health, union related issues, stability of manage-
ment, the customer list, references, and the physical plant (lease, ownership, condi-
tion of building and equipment, etc.). 
If the due diligence turns up nothing untoward about the FSP, the next step is to
get your attorney involved. Have him or her draft the contract, which should clearly
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
335
■How will the website’s infrastructure be integrated with the outsourcer’s systems?  Will spe-
cial hardware and/or software be needed?  What support does the outsourcer offer for the
integration process?   
■What credit cards and alternative payment methods does the outsourcer accept? 
■How are sales taxes handled?
■How does the web-based business get paid and how quickly? (The drop-ship model.)
■How will the website and its customers track orders? 
■How will the web-based business monitor and replenish inventory? 
■What reports does the outsourcer provide? 
■How will returns and disputes be handled? 
■Does the outsourcer offer customer service support? 
■Does the outsourcer handle international orders?  If so, how?  Are there extra costs involved?
■What shipping arrangement does the outsourcer have, and is there flexibility in that arrange-
ment to allow for the use of other shippers if they have better rates? 
■What kind of account servicing does the outsourcer offer? 
Be sure to ask for references and a customer list of at least 10 customers. Call all the refer-
ences and customers. Ask the customers (if you can get away with it) all the questions set out
above, but at least ask what kind of products the outsourcer handles for them and how well the
outsourcer meet its obligations to them. Ask them if they have any complaints or reservations
about the outsourcer. Ask them if they plan to renew the contract when it comes due. 
Another reason for demanding a customer list is so you can look it over to determine that
there is any conflict between your business’ product line and others that the outsourcer han-
dles. The customer list will also alert you to any large clients that may compromise the out-
sourcer’s resources, especially during a busy holiday shopping season.

outline both your and the FSP’s expectations, services to be provided, fees to be paid,
and guarantees. Give your attorney the logistics plan and the outsourcing plan to
use as a guide. Keep in mind that both the website and the outsourcer want to max-
imize revenues, so it is important that everyone agrees on a compensation rate that
is fair to all. 
The contract that is signed should be for a limited term since outsourcing is a
choice that you will reassess throughout the business relationship. However, the con-
tract should be a concrete document that defines the services and responsibilities of
both the website and the outsourcer. 
After everything has been signed, the next task is integrating your website’s sys-
tems with the FSP’s back-end so that fulfillment processes are executed so seamlessly
that your customers won’t know the difference. 
The Results
Now it’s time for the outsourcer to go to work. If the FSP is handling credit-card set-
tlement for your website, then the charge to the customer’s credit card is authorized
and settled for the order amount. The products are then shipped to the shipping address
using the selected carrier. If a product requested by the customer is not available, the cus-
tomer’s order is placed on hold (backorder), until inventory is replenished. 
During all of this the customer must be kept informed as to the order status. In
addition, it is desirable that the customer be able to go to your website to bring up
the order history and to request a real-time order-status query. If it’s supported, the site
communicates with the outsourcer via secure HTTP and requests the status. The
response message should include details of all shipments, cancellations, backorders,
and other transactions that have taken place while processing the order. 
Most outsourcers send order status files that describe all of the day’s order activity
nightly, via FTP or encrypted email. By law, a business can’t charge (settle) a customer’s
credit card until the order has been shipped. So, the order information returned to
the website by the outsourcer(s) must be verified for accuracy before the credit-card
information is processed. 
Without valid information, the website can’t post a shipment invoice to the order
management system. Settlement tasks run periodically to process shipment invoices
that need collection. The settlement process communicates with the clearinghouse
to charge the buyer’s credit card (note that when the order was originally placed, funds
were only allocated [authorized] but not disbursed). If the site and the outsourcer(s)
don’t agree on order details, customers may be charged the wrong amount. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
336

Then the information is transferred from the order management system to the
website’s financial system for purchase order generation, accounts payable, and so on. 
Once the products are in the customer’s hands, the website and the outsourcer
jointly need to handle any post-purchase activity such as returns or exchanges, and
to perform transaction reconciliation. 
Caveats
Despite the many advantages of using a FSP and/or drop-shipper, there are a few
potential downsides. Putting someone else between a website and its customer can be
a risky proposition, and there are significant data integration issues. When sorting
through these issues, it pays to see what others have done — get out there and talk to
everyone you know who uses or has used an FSP and/or drop-shipper. 
No matter what outsourcer(s) become your e-commerce fulfillment partner(s),
issues will arise. What happens when the busy and ever important Christmas season
arrives and it comes time to decide between shipping an order for a smaller company
(maybe like your website) or shipping an order for Amazon?  Which one is the out-
sourcer going to choose? It’s a given, the big guy will get the most attention. 
A smaller web-based business can protect itself to some degree by establishing a
detailed service-level agreement to ensure performance (get the legal eagles involved).
The Internet is a great equalizer. With the right FSP and the right integration
between the FSP and the web-based business, all websites can do business on the same
playing field with the same type of equipment and the same type of personnel.
Want to know more? Check out Opsandfulfillment.com (subscribe to the maga-
zine) and read the author’s book Logistics and Fulfillment for e-business (CMP Books).
✪
CONCLUSION
Regardless whether the e-commerce business is a start-up, a brick-and-mortar, a home-
based business, small, medium, or large, all of the solutions discussed in this chapter
do not come without cost. There are capital expenditures and development costs asso-
ciated with integration, and channel conflict in regards to any type of consolidation. 
Order processing and fulfillment is a website’s last form of customer contact. Invest-
ing in a logistics strategy is critical to a website’s continued growth. Whatever the cost
and ultimate solution, it is clear that new methods and processes must be utilized for
a web-based business to expect long-term survival in the e-commerce arena.
Logistics and Order Fulfillment
337

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 19
Final Thoughts
You can only predict things after they’ve happened.
—Eugene Ionesco
Despite a few stumbles, the future is bright for e-commerce. The 20th Century, shaped
by the Industrial Revolution, became the age of the automobile and the television.
The 21st Century, shaped by the Technological Revolution, is the age of globaliza-
tion. The Internet massively impacts all aspects of business. In the 21st century, e-
business is no longer an option for businesses; it is a necessity. 
Today, e-commerce is an ever-expanding consumer industry. For an e-commerce
site to succeed it must understand its customers’ mindset. Although price is always
an issue, it is rarely the primary motivator for buying a product online. Customers
are looking for convenience, and/or products they can’t find elsewhere. 
Small websites that cater to niche markets have the best chance of prospering. That
is, as long as you take care to ensure that your customers’ shopping experiences aren’t
marked with too many potholes. 
✪
FACTORS THAT CAN SLOW GROWTH
The Internet, the Web, and e-commerce have their peccadilloes. External elements,
including the public at large, and governments, have not yet weighed in with a final
opinion regarding this new behemoth. The public’s concern about security and the
personal information that websites amass must be addressed before the public takes
action of its own. In the other arena, a crucial and as yet unresolved factor that could
impede the growth of e-commerce is the degree of governmental involvement includ-
ing regulation and taxes. 
339

Customers’ Security Concerns 
The general population believes the Web is an unsafe place to conduct transactions
— specifically credit card purchases. But this perception will change as the customer
gains more experience on the Web using sites that incorporate digital certificates, the
SET protocol, and SSL. The technology is here — many websites use secure servers for
online transactions. These servers encrypt data that is sent over the Internet so that
a third party cannot intercept the information. Thus, many consumers will purchase
products from a website when convinced that the technology is in place to safeguard
their transactions and that the website itself is built upon a promise of integrity and
trustworthiness. 
Trust and e-commerce are mutually dependent. Although technology, such as using
digital certificates, helps in the battle to instill trust, branding is the key. Your brand
is the gauge a customer uses to assess quality and reliability. Stand by it and make it
a symbol of your contract with the customer to provide not only a product but also serv-
ice and satisfaction. Would you trust something if American Express endorsed it?  Do
you trust Lands End?  Customers need the reassurance of familiar brands (new, old, tra-
ditional, and web-driven), and assurance that the technology is in place for a secure
credit card transaction to build the trust required to take the first steps toward an
online purchase. 
Privacy Issues 
The ability to guarantee the customers’ privacy is an important challenge. The extent
to which a website uses personal information concerns every Internet user. How much
does the surfing public want the web community to know about them? 
The growing trend toward personalization on the Web will have a considerable
impact on e-commerce. While personalization does not translate into direct sales, it
brings the customer one step closer to a purchase. If handled correctly, your customer
may appreciate a familiar relationship that could include the recommendation of
additional products or of timely notices of sales. But if you abuse it, you’ve lost a cus-
tomer.
Still, personalization tools are becoming more prevalent. That’s because, the better
you know your customers, the easier it is to know what the individual customer wants.
How you obtain the information necessary for this personalization is the issue. Some
websites ask for information outright, and then use rules-based filtering systems or
adaptive prediction technology that can provide real-time learning of customer likes
and dislikes based on mouse clicks. 
The Complete E-Commerce Book
340

An information exchange is fair game — I answer the questions and then the web-
site gives me a $5 coupon, a 20% discount, a t-shirt, etc. That website has literally
become a storehouse of my personal information. If my information is passed on to
another party without my permission, I take issue. This is where the e-commerce com-
munity must police themselves or the government will step in to regulate how web-
sites use and exchange a customer’s personal information. 
Bear in mind that websites that utilize personalization tools, if managed properly,
are rewarded as early innovators. The websites that have amassed personalized pro-
files can get to know their customers over time. The longer websites wait to adopt per-
sonalization, the greater head start their competitors will have in using personalization
tools to gain a foothold in the customer base, making it unnecessary for those cus-
tomers to seek out other sites. Personalization tools lend themselves well to the early
adopters who have established a brand on the Web and who have focused on creat-
ing a long-term relationship with their customers.
✪
GLOBALIZATION
The Web is the first wave of a pure global economy. That means opportunity — to
take advantage of a rapidly expanding global trade and the ensuing revenue stream. The
task is deciding how a specific business can fit into the new global economy. 
Many new websites receive at least one international order on the first day they are
up and running — amazing proof that e-commerce generates a global customer base.
Imagine from just one location, a business can reach a market anywhere in the world,
not just in a specific state or country.
One barrier in this rosy picture is the average website owner’s lack of understand-
ing of worldwide taxes and tariffs. Integrating enabling modules into a commerce
software package could be a first step in untangling this confusing issue. Also, websites
need to keep costs down and ensure fulfillment efficiencies in the areas of tariffs,
freight, and sales taxes. 
All international e-commerce customers have the same questions – “If I buy this
product from this site, will I pay a duty on it when it crosses the international bor-
der? What are the shipping costs? Can I avoid paying sales taxes?”  If you are serving
an international customer base, devote a web page to international customers with a
complete, easy to understand explanation. Be prepared! 
So, dear readers, go out there and fight the good battle. The Internet and the Web
have an investment community and others who realize their value, and governments
who right now are silently waiting in the wings to see how this new phenomenon
Final Thoughts
341

shakes out. However, time is running out. Everyone wants a piece of the pie. Make
your plan and carve out your piece of the Web — it’s the future.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
342

Appendix
Computer Basics
What is a Computer? A simple question with no easy answer — a conventional engi-
neering definition is that a computer is first and foremost a tool, not an object, i.e. a
computer is defined not by what it is but rather by what it does. But let’s take a dif-
ferent course.
In the early days, computers were behemoth machines that carried out elaborate
mathematical calculations. Programs were written to perform a desired calculation,
submitted to the room-sized computer, and then you waited while the machine
crunched your numbers and printed the results onto several reams of wide green-
striped paper. 
The next evolution raised the computer out of the big mainframe, batch-oriented,
number-cruncher category into what were called microcomputers because these new
machines were smaller versions of the older, bigger mainframes. 
That brings us to the modern computer — a device that can be as small as your
hand or as large as a small suitcase. It comes with a CPU, some RAM, an address bus,
data bus, and so forth. The central focus of today’s computers is interactivity. Their
very essence is to explore. The human uses his or her creativity and values to propose
a variation on an existing scheme. The computer uses its computational resources to
work out the ramifications of the variation and presents the resultant order of things
to the human. Today computers’ responses are so fast that humans are encouraged
to try again and again, with different variations, to explore all the possibilities, to play
with each situation.
Now, let’s examine the components that make up the average computer used to
run a website. Situated in a computer’s chassis are, at a minimum, the following:
343

The motherboard is a circuit board that everything plugs into and provides the
actual physical connection between the different components that make up the
computer.
A system bus connects the components on the motherboard and enables the CPU
to communicate with all of the components. The motherboard consists of:
✸Memory (RAM or Random Access Memory). These chips installed on single in-
line memory modules (SIMMs), are a temporary high speed holding area for data
and applications for fast access by the CPU.
✸CPU (Central Processing Unit). This is a programmable device that processes dig-
ital information. 
✸Chipset. A collection of semiconductor chips that are the interface between the
CPU and the rest of the computer, and instructs the computer how to organize
and transmit data. The chipset will typically include such features as the system
memory controller, the PCI controller, and the AGP controller.
✸A special graphics chip to speed processing due to the complexity of graphics files.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
344
Figure 28. A typical motherboard. 

Connected to the motherboard by cables are: 
✸The hard drive(s) offer large capacity and store most applications, including the
operating system. 
✸Floppy drive(s) that are primarily used to load applications, and to retain and to
transport small data files.
✸CD-ROM drive (Compact Disc/Read Only Memory) can store larger applications
and more data. The faster your CD-ROM the faster your software will load.
Plugged into the motherboard via the AGP (Accelerated Graphics Port), ISA (Indus-
try Standard Architecture) and PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect) expansion
slots are various adapter cards that allow you to customize the computer, such as:
✸Sound card (makes sound). 
✸Video card (shows graphics and pictures).
✸Modem (to connect to the Internet) is an acronym for modulator/demodulator.
It sends digital info through analog telephone lines.
✸Network card (to connect to other computers).
A special memory chip, the L2 cache, performs certain tasks more quickly than
SDRAM.
AGP Bus provides graphics processors with a dedicated pathway to the main mem-
ory of a computer.
PCI Bus is the data highway inside a computer that hard drives, graphics cards
and other internal devices send data to each other. 
ISA Bus is the data highway inside a computer by which modems, networking
cards and other devices send data to each other.
Parallel Port transmits and receives data eight bits at a time, over eight wires and
is faster than a serial port. It connects devices such as scanners, printers, external drives,
etc. to a computer.
Serial Port transmits and receives data one bit at a time through one wire in a
series and is slower than a parallel port. It connects printers, mouses and other devices
to a computer.
USB Port (Universal Serial Bus) connects devices such as scanners, printers, mice,
keyboards and speakers to a computer. 
Power Supply converts the AC voltage from the wall socket to DC voltage that
powers the computer circuits. 
CMOS battery is what provides the power to a special battery powered memory
Appendix
345

— CMOS (Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor technology) — that a com-
puter uses to keep track of its particular configuration along with the date and time. 
There are several competing “mass” storage technologies that allow users to record
as well as read data, including removable hard drives, high-capacity diskettes, car-
tridges, tape drives, writeable CD’s, rewriteable CD’s, DVD ROMS, and other numer-
ous devices, all designed to make your life easier.
✪
CPU
Understanding how computers actually work begins with an understanding how the
Central Processing Unit (CPU) affects the performance of a computer. The CPU
(also “microprocessor or “processor”) is a vital component that is:
Central — it is the center of computer’s data processing.
Processor — it processes (moves and calculates) data. 
Unit — it is a chip that contains millions of transistors. 
The CPU is the silicon chip (also “silicon wafer”), or processor that makes every-
thing work together. Without the CPU, there would be no Personal Computer (PC). The
CPU is the “chip” that performs data manipulation in your computer. A CPU is the
brain of the computer. It has millions of switches that control the flow of data; the
data is coded into bits by the switches — one bit corresponds to a switch inside the
computer that can be “on” or “off”. Computer programs called “software” control
the switches.
CPUs continually undergo development and for years have doubled their per-
formance about every 18 months. There is no indication that this trend will stop. 
CPUs came into being around 1971, when a then unknown company, Intel, com-
bined multiple transistors to form a central processing unit. It was not until years
later that the first personal computers came into being. Personal computers are now
built using different makes and models of CPUs and although Intel dominates the
market, it is certainly not the only company making them. The first CPUs could only
work with whole numbers, but once the CPUs reached the Pentium level a mathe-
matical co-processor, called the Floating-Point Unit (FPU), was added to the CPUs
architecture for better math processing. 
The CPU is situated on the computer’s motherboard and its work is primarily cal-
culations and data transport. Before it can be processed, the data you enter into the com-
puter is transmitted along a path to the CPU called the system bus. The system bus
feeds streams of data (consisting of the data itself and instructions on how to handle
The Complete E-Commerce Book
346

the data) to the CPU. You’ve probably heard of “program code.” That’s what the instruc-
tions are — program code! Data is what you input via a mouse or a keyboard, i.e., a
letter to the telephone company. When you print that letter you actually use “pro-
gram code” by sending a print instruction to the CPU. 
Your computer’s CPU is, in all probability, “8086 compatible” which means that
your computer’s various programs communicate with the CPU in a specific family of
instructions, which were written for the Intel 8086 processor. This is also known as
“the IBM compatible PC.” All IBM compatible processors, no matter how advanced
handle the “8086 instruction format.” 
Many of the older CPUs had a Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC), which
means the computer could understand many complex instructions. However, Reduced
Instruction Set Computer (RISC) is used in most newer CPUs. RISC is exactly what
it says - the instructions are brief and the same length (for example 32 bit long) pro-
cessing much faster than the CISC instructions. 
You now understand that a CPU is a data processing gadget that is mounted on a
printed circuit board called the motherboard. You know that most of the data pro-
cessing takes place inside the CPU and that the data is transported via the system bus.
However, we have not addressed what determines the speed of the CPU. For example,
in the Pentium III, “500 MHz” is the clock frequency. What this means is that a small
crystal located on the motherboard constantly ticks to the CPU at a steady number
of clock ticks per second and at a “tick” something happens in the CPU. Thus, the
more ticks per second (frequency) – the more data that is processed per second. 
One problem with high clock frequencies is that when the frequency gets too high
it becomes an expensive proposition to design the rest of the computer’s equipment
so it can keep pace. Our manufacturing geniuses came up the solution — split the
clock frequency in two, this is called clock doubling. Clock doubling uses a high
internal clock frequency for the CPU and a lower external clock frequency for the
system bus which is where the CPU exchanges data with the RAM and the Input/Out-
put (I/O) units.
✪
MEMORY
The next important component of a computer is to be found in the chips where data
is stored, i.e. memory. There are many kinds of memory necessary for the operation
of a computer, such as ROM (read only memory) PROM (programmable read only
memory), Flash Memory, which is a type of PROM and cache Memory. The only mem-
ory you will need to make any decision about is the RAM and cache. The CPU can
Appendix
347

access data in any of the RAM cell locations in any order and it writes to the memory
in any order. If you add additional RAM to a computer, you can increase its ability to
process programs and applications at a faster speed. There are several types of RAM,
you only need to remember one — SDRAM or whatever is the most recent incarna-
tion (forget the others when considering server configuration). 
Just remember, when dealing with memory — more is better. In discussing RAM
you need to know that the size of memory is measured in bytes and each byte has its
own address. For example, 1 byte is 8 bits (remember the switches in the CPU is a bit),
so a kilobyte (“KB”) is 1,024 bytes, megabyte (“MB”) is 1,048,576 bytes, gigabyte (“GB)
is about a billion bytes and there is even a terabyte which is about one trillion bytes.
✪
CACHE
CPUs run much faster than everything else in the computer, which means that a com-
puter is designed to ensure that the processor is not slowed down by the devices it
works with. Slowdowns mean wasted processor cycles, where the CPU can’t do any-
thing because it is sitting and waiting for data. There is a special kind of fast RAM,
like SRAM, that a CPU needs; it is usually referred to as the cache. The cache holds
the data that is likely to be needed next by the CPU. The cache operates as a buffer
between the CPU that is very fast and the system RAM (memory), which is slow – it’s
not really slow, the CPU is just very fast. 
There are different types of cache in a computer, all acting as a buffer for often-
used data to enhance the computer’s performance. Each layer is closer to the CPU and
faster than the layer below it and each layer caches the layers below it, due to its increased
speed relative to the lower levels. By utilizing this cache system, when the CPU needs
something from memory, it gets it as soon as possible. Here is how it works: The CPU
gets a data request and it goes to the L1 cache because it’s the fastest. If it finds the
data there it uses it and there is no performance delay. If not, the CPU goes to the L2
cache and if it finds it there the CPU goes on with little delay. If the CPU doesn’t find
the needed data, it sends a “read request” to the system RAM where the data may be
stored or the system RAM may have to go to a disk (Hard, floppy, CD-ROM) to retrieve
the data thereby slowing the CPU’s performance. 
Level 1 (L1) Cache (sometimes referred to as internal cache) consists of the high-
speed memory that is built into most CPUs. It is small, generally from 8 KB to 64 KB,
but fast, it runs at the same speed as the CPU. By using L1 cache, the CPU can access
often-used data more quickly. The amount of L1 varies but is not upgradeable.
Level 2 (L2) Cache, also called the “burst” or the “pipeline” cache; and when “cache”
The Complete E-Commerce Book
348

is referred to without qualifiers or as “system cache” or “external cache”, it means the
Level 2 cache that is placed between the processor and the system RAM. The L2 is usu-
ally separate from the CPU and situated on the Motherboard. It is larger and a little
slower than the L1 Cache, the size varies (usually between 512 KB to 2 MB) and, unlike
the L1, it is usually upgradeable. The L2 works in conjunction with the CPU’s internal
cache (L1) to provide maximum performance. This cache is where oft-used data is
retained in memory as a way to help the CPU so that it seems to run even faster when
this oft-used data is accessed. When considering the L2, remember that the rule of
thumb is “the bigger the better.” 
Disk cache is the part of the system RAM used to cache reads and writes to a drive
(hard or external). It is not the size of disk cache that is important, but the organiza-
tion of the cache itself (“write/read cache” or “look ahead cache”). Disk cache has the
slowest speed since system RAM is slightly slower than the L1 or L2 and the drives
themselves are much slower than the system RAM.
✪
HARD DRIVES
Your next major consideration is the hard drive. Your hard drive is the computer’s
storage area — the filing cabinet. All files (operating system, applications and data)
are stored on the hard drive. Hard drives are measured in “Gigabytes”. The bigger
your hard drive is, the more files you can load. The hard drive has a tremendous
impact on the computer’s overall performance causing delay while data is pulled
off the drive. For example, drive access time is measured in milliseconds and RAM
in nanoseconds. 
The EIDE Enhanced Integrated Drive Electronics) drives allows fast transfers and
large capacities. The computer’s system RAM is used for storing the drive’s firmware
(software or BIOS). When the drive powers up, it reads the firmware.
The SCSI (Small Computer Serial Interface) drive is the fastest with the largest
capacity and the highest transfer rate available on the market. This is not to say that
the EIDE drive isn’t capable of the same, it’s just that high-end drives with high capac-
ity and high performance are built for servers. The power of SCSI is that several devices
can use its interface simultaneously and the multitasking environment of servers is
ideal for SCSI since there is frequent simultaneous access. 
✪
THE INTERFACE 
One of the factors that affect the speed of a hard drive is the interface. Currently there
are two common interfaces: EIDE and SCSI. The EIDE controller is integrated with
Appendix
349

the motherboard. The SCSI requires an extra controller since most motherboards
don’t have integrated SCSI controllers. 
The EIDE interface can connect a total of four devices to a computer bus such as
2 hard drives, a CD-ROM and a DVD. 
The SCSI interface can connect up to 15 devices to a computer bus. There are sev-
eral types of SCSI interfaces — 8-bit, 16-bit and even 32-bit. The transfer rate started
The Complete E-Commerce Book
350
Figure 29. Schematic diagram of the infrastructure of the typical computer.

Appendix
351
at 5 Mbps for the old SCSI 1 evolving in increments up to the 16-bit, 40 Mbps Ultra2
SCSI, then the 16-bit, 80 Mbps Ultra2 Wide SCSI. The latest incarnation is the 32-bit,
160 Mbps Ultra3 SCSI or Ultra1 60. For normal computer operation, the perform-
ance of a drive receives only a small boost from the SCSI interface but for a website, you
should seriously consider the SCSI. 

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

A
ACLS (Access Control List Service) –
Restricts access to computer resources such
as files and directories. 
Active Server Page (ASP) – A dynamically
created web page that employs ActiveX script-
ing. When a surfer requests an ASP page
through their browser, the web server gen-
erates, in real-time, a page with HTML code,
which it then sends to the browser. 
Active X – An architecture that lets a pro-
gram (the Active X control) interact with
other programs over a network such as the
Internet.
Active X Controls – The interactive objects
in a web page that provides interactive and
user-controllable functions.
American Registry for Internet Numbers
(ARIN) – One of three Regional Internet
Registries (RIRs) worldwide that collectively
provide IP registration services to all regions
around the globe. The other two RIRs are
APNIC (Asia Pacific network Information
Center) and RIPE (Reseaux IP Europeens). 
API – See Application Programming Inter-
face.
Applet – Small software programs that can
be downloaded quickly and used by any com-
puter equipped with a Java-capable browser.
See also, Java.
Application – A software program that does
some type of task.  MSWord, Netscape,
Winzip, and anti-virus programs are a few
examples of an application.
Application Programming Interface (API)
– Software that an application uses to request
and carry out lower-level services performed
by a computer’s operation system.  In short,
an API is a hook into software.  An API is a
set of standard software interrupts, calls and
data formats that applications use to initi-
ate contact with network services, mainframe
communication programs, etc. Applications
use APIs to call services that transport data
across a network.
Application Service Provider (ASP) – A
third party that manages and distributes
software-based services and solutions to its
customers from a centralized server base. 
Architecture – Refers to the overall organi-
zational structure of a given system, i.e.
processor architecture or proprietary archi-
tecture. Central to the architecture is the deci-
sion about the selection of structural
elements and their behavior, as defined by
353
Glossary

The Complete E-Commerce Book
354
collaborations of larger subsystems, there-
fore the architectural style is the definitive
guide for the system. 
Autoresponders – A mail utility that auto-
matically sends a reply to an e-mail message.
They are used to send back boilerplate infor-
mation on a topic without having the
requester do anything more than e-mail a
particular address. They are also used to send
a confirmation that the message has been
received. 
ASP – See Active Server Page and Applica-
tion Service Provider.o
B
Backbone – See Internet Backbone.
Bandwidth – As used in this book, the term
“bandwidth” refers to how much informa-
tion can be carried in a given time period
(usually a second) over a communications
link.
Bit – The smallest unit of information a
computer can process and the basic unit in
data communications.  Bits compose a byte.
Blog – Also known as a “weblog, at its most
basic, a blog is a journal that is available on
the Web. The writer (commonly known as
a “blogger”) typically updates his or her
online journal using software that enables
even people with little or no technical back-
ground to update and maintain their blog.
Postings on a blog are usually arranged in
chronological order with the most recent
additions viewed first. 
Blogger – Someone who keeps a blog.
Blogging – The activity of updating a blog.
Bookmark - Saving a web location (typically
via a feature offered by a web browser) in
order to be able to go back to it at a later
point with a simple click. The term, “book-
mark,” is used because the action is similar to
sticking a paper bookmark in a book. Most
web browsers provide the user with the capa-
bility to “save” a web location (i.e. address)
so the user can quickly access the web address
when it is needed. 
Bot – See Spider.
Brick-and-mortar - A traditional business
(usually retail) with actual buildings, man-
ufacturing plants, customer service centers,
or distribution facilities.
Bus – All computers use buses — a collection
of wires through which data is transmitted
from one part of a computer to another.
There are two common buses inside a PC –
the older ISA bus, capable of transmitting
only five megabytes per second and the newer
PCI bus, capable of transmitting up to 132
megabytes per second.
Business Rules – A conceptual description
of an organization’s policies and practices
enabling them to automate their polices and
practices, and to increase consistency and
timeliness of their business processing.
Byte – A set of bits of a specific length that
represent a value, in a computer coding
scheme.  A byte is to a bit what a word is to a
character.
C
C – A very powerful programming language
that operates under Unix, MS-DOS, Win-
dows (all flavors) and other operating sys-
tems.
Cache – To store data on a disk for quick
and easy retrieval instead of retrieving it each
time it is requested.  In order to conserve
bandwidth, large ISPs and businesses will
cache popular web pages.

Glossary
355
Call center – A functional area that is oper-
ated by a company to service is cus-
tomers/clients, or it can be an outsourced,
separate facility. Either way, a call center
exists solely to answer inbound or place out-
bound telephone calls.
ccTLDs – Short for country-code top-level
domain, a domain name suffix that is linked
to a specific nation. It is comprised of two
letters such as .uk for the United Kingdom.
Cells – The smallest component of a table.
In a table, a row contains one or more cells.
CGI (Common Gateway Interface) – A pre-
defined way in which CGI programs or
scripts communicate with a web server. See
also Server-side language.
CGI bin – A directory on a web server in
which CGI programs (scripts) are stored.
CGI Script – A program consisting of small
but highly potent bits of computer code that
is usually executed on a web server so as to
provide interactivity to web pages. 
Chargen (CHARacter GENerator) – This
term refers to an utility that provides an
approximate speed for a computer’s Inter-
net connection in characters per second (with
compression taken into account).
Chat – A term that is used to describe a type
of computer-based communication. When
you “chat” with someone you usually type
your communications into a computer as
text, although voice and video images can
also be used. One person sends a message
and another person or a group of people
can read it and respond to it. This happens
in real-time so, unlike e-mail, there is little
time delay before receiving a response to a
message.
CISC (Complex Instruction Set Com-
puter) – A microprocessor architecture that
favors robustness of the instruction set over
the speed with which individual instructions
are executed.
Client/Server – The client is a PC or pro-
gram “served” by another networked com-
puting device in an integrated network,
which provides a single system image.  The
server can be one or more computers with
numerous storage devices.
Cluster – A group of computers and storage
devices that function as a single system shar-
ing one or more panel runs and working in
a fault-resilient manner, allowing increased
effectiveness and efficiency of security,
administration and performance.
Comment Tag – Used to insert comments
in an HTML document.  Comment tags are
ignored by browsers (example: <!— text —>
or <Comment>text</comment>).
Connectivity – The property of a network
that allows dissimilar devices to communi-
cate with each other.  It also refers to a pro-
gram’s or device’s ability to link with other
programs and devices.
Content – A website’s offerings — products,
graphics, marketing materials, banner adds
— anything that is contained within the
pages of a website.
Cookie – An HTTP header that contains a
string that a browser stores in a small text
file in the Windows/Cookies directory (for
Microsoft Internet Explorer) or in the Users
folder (for Netscape Navigator) on a com-
puter’s hard drive. Cookies store informa-
tion supplied by a user to be accessed at a
later period in time but it is important to
state that a cookie can’t interact with other
data on a computer’s hard drive.

The Complete E-Commerce Book
356
CPE (Customer Premises Equipment or
Customer Provided Equipment) – Refers
to equipment on the customer’s premises,
which had been bought from a vendor.
CPU (Central Processing Unit) – This term
refers to a programmable device that can
process digital information.
Crawler – See Spider.
Cross-selling – Offering a product similar
to the one the customer is interested in if the
chosen product is unavailable. 
CSU/DSU – See DSU/CSU.
CTR (Click-Through-Rate) – The ratio of
impressions to click-throughs.
D
Database – Software that enables the stor-
age of data, the retrieval of that data, and the
ability to add to and change the stored data
when necessary.
Database Publishing – Allows businesses
to leverage existing data and data manage-
ment assets. Many of today’s database appli-
cations can create files usable by electronic
publishing software. By establishing com-
munication the database can continue man-
aging data, and the publishing system can
be used as an information synthesis tool to
gather data from a variety of sources (data-
bases, graphics, and text) and present it in a
single, cohesive document.
DBMS (DataBase Management System)
– Software that controls the organization,
storage, retrieval, security and integrity of
data in a database. It accepts requests from
the application and instructs the operating
system to transfer the appropriate data.
Digital Certificate – A small piece of unique
data used by encryption and authentication
software.  A digital-based ID that contains a
user’s information.  It accomplishes this by
attaching a small file containing the certifi-
cate owner’s name, the name of its issuer and
a public encryption key to the information
that is transmitted over the Internet.
Directories – A directory is basically a man-
ual entry database system for which a URL
is submitted along with a descriptive title
and summary for the website. 
Disk Pack – An assembly of magnetic disks
that can be removed from a disk drive along
with the container from which the assembly
must be separated when operating.
Domain name – Unique address of a web-
site.  The address that gets you to a website,
and consists of a hierarchical sequence of
names separated by dots (periods).  Also
known as a web address. It can identify one
or more IP addresses. See URL.
Domain Name System (DNS) – People
use the domain name addressing system,
whereas computers use the Domain Name
System. A DNS takes a domain name
address and automatically translates that
address into a numerical IP address via DNS
servers (also called name servers), maintain
databases 
that 
contain 
the 
web
addresses/domain name. The IP address is
then used by services such as packet-rout-
ing software and computers to get data
packets to their destination. Note: DNS is
also the acronym for the “Domain Name
Service,” which is the Internet utility that
implements the Domain Name System. 
Doorway page – Also known as bridge page,
portal page, jump page, gateway page, entry
page, a doorway page is a web page that is
designed primarily for search engines, not
for human beings. The term can also refer

Glossary
357
to a web page that serves only as an entry
point through which users click to go to the
actual homepage. In the latter instance, a
doorway page is created for each of the lead-
ing search engines. The only time a user sees
one of these doorway pages is when they click
on a link from a search engine’s result page. 
Dot-com – A company with operations are
entirely or primarily internet-based. While a
dot-com may deliver all their services over
an Internet interface, the company’s prod-
ucts may be delivered through traditional
channels.
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) – A tech-
nology that delivers high-bandwidth over
ordinary copper telephone lines.
DSU/CSU (Digital or Data Service Unit/
Channel Service Unit) – Communication
devices that connect an in-house line to an
external digital circuit, such as a T1, DDS,
etc. A DSU/CSU is similar to a modem,
although it connects a digital circuit rather
than an analog one.
Dynamic Web page – The dynamic change
in the contents of a web page through the
use of a separate file wherein the current con-
tents of that file is displayed on all pages con-
nected to the underlying database whenever
a browser requests a web page.
E
E-1 – See T-1.
ECML (Electric Commerce Modeling
Language) – A universal format for online
checkout form data fields. ECML provides
a simple set of guidelines that automate the
exchange of information between consumers
and web-based merchants. 
Echo – A command in a software program
that sends data to another computer which
“echoes” it back to the user’s screen display,
allowing the user to visually check if the
other computer received the data accurately.
E-Business – The electronic exchange of
information including e-commerce.
E-Commerce – Buying and/or selling elec-
tronically over a telecommunications sys-
tem.  In doing so every facet of the business
process is transformed: Pre-sales, updating
the catalog and prices, billing and payment
processing, supplier and inventory manage-
ment, and shipment. By using e-commerce
a business is able to rapidly process orders,
produce and deliver a product/service at a
competitive price and at the same time min-
imize costs. 
EDI – See Electronic Data Interchange. 
EIDE (Enhanced Integrated Drive Elec-
tronics) – A hard drive that allows fast trans-
fers and large storage capacities. The
computer’s system RAM is used for storing
the drive’s firmware (software or BIOS).
When the drive powers up, it reads the
firmware.
EJB (Enterprise JavaBeans) – A Java API
developed by Sun Microsystems that defines
a component architecture for multi-tier
client/server systems. See also Java.
Electronic Commerce Modeling Language
(ECML) – Technology that provides a set of
hierarchical payment oriented data struc-
tures that enable automated software, includ-
ing electronic wallets (e-wallets) from
multiple vendors, to supply needed data in
a uniform manner.
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) – A
series of standards that provide computer-
to-computer exchange of business documents
between different companies’ computers over

The Complete E-Commerce Book
358
the Internet (and phone lines).  EDI allows
for the transmission of purchase orders, ship-
ping documents, invoices, invoice payments,
etc. between a web-based business and its
trading partners.  EDI standards are sup-
ported by virtually every computer and
packet-switched data communications com-
pany.
E-mail Management System (EMS) –
Intelligent automatic customer e-mail man-
agement software used to automate the man-
agement and dispatch of emails. An email
management system, for example, can send
an acknowledgement of a received email
automatically, automatically route an email
to a specific mailbox or mailboxes, provide
ways to improve email interactions with cus-
tomers, etc.
Encryption – A system of using encoding
algorithms to construct an overall mecha-
nism for sharing sensitive data. Encryption
is commonly used for the translation of data
into a secret code.
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) – A
business management system that integrates
all aspects of a business, such as, product
planning, manufacturing, purchasing, inven-
tory, sales, and marketing. ERP is generally
supported by multi-module application soft-
ware that helps to manage the system and
interact with suppliers, customer service, and
shippers, etc.
E-wallet – The electronic equivalent of a wal-
let for e-commerce transactions. A digital
wallet (e-wallet) can hold digital money that
is purchased similar to travelers’ checks or
to a prepaid account like an EZPass system,
or it can contain credit card information.
The wallet may reside in the user’s machine
or on the servers of a web payment service.
When stored in the client machine, the wal-
let may use a digital certificate that identi-
fies the authorized card holder. 
Extranet – A term that refers to a private,
TCP/IP-based network that allows qualified
users from the outside to access an internal
network.
F
FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) – A
term that refers to an online document that
poses a series of common questions and
answers on a specific topic. 
Ferroresonant transformer – A trans-
former that regulates the output voltage by
the principle of ferroresonance.  This occurs
when an iron-core inductor is part of an LC
circuit and it is driven into saturation, caus-
ing its inductive reactance to increase to
equal the capacitive reactance of the circuit.
Finger – A standard protocol. A program
implementing this protocol lists who is cur-
rently logged in on another host. It is a com-
puter command that displays information
about people using a particular computer,
such as their names and their identification
numbers. (Integrated finger is a common
Unix network function that reports infor-
mation relating to a user after entering his
or her e-mail address.)
Firewall – Hardware and/or software that
sit between two networks, such as an inter-
nal network and an Internet service provider.
It protects the network by refusing access by
unauthorized users. It can even block mes-
sages to specific recipients outside the net-
work.  
Firmware – Software which is constantly
called upon by a computer so it is stored in
semi-permanent memory called PROM (Pro-

Glossary
359
grammable Read Only Memory) or EPROM
(Electrical PROM) where it cannot be “for-
gotten” when the power is shut off.  It is used
in conjunction with hardware and software
and shares the characteristics of both. 
FPU (Floating Point Unit) – A formal term
for the math coprocessors found in many
computers.  The modern computer has the
FPU integrated with the CPU.
Frames – A programming device that divides
web pages into multiple, scrollable regions;
this is done by building each section of a web
page as a separate HTML file and having one
master HTML file identify all of the sections.
Frame Relay – A packet-switching protocol
for connecting devices on a Wide Area Net-
work (WAN). Frame Relay supports data
transfer rates at T-1 (1.544 Mbps) and T-3
(45 Mbps) speeds. 
Framesets – See Frames.
F-Secure SSH  – Provides for secure UNIX
shell logins.  SSH creates encrypted connec-
tions that protect confidential information,
such as passwords, from exposure to net-
work eavesdroppers.
FSP – See Fulfillment Service Provider.
FTP (File Transfer Protocol and File
Transfer Program) – Allows users to quickly
transfer files to and from a distant or local
computer, list directors, delete and rename
files on the distant computer.  FTP the pro-
gram is a MS-DOS program that enables
transfers over the Internet between two com-
puters.
Fulfillment Service Provider (FSP) – A
third-party business that outsources its ware-
housing and distribution services and expert-
ise to other companies such as e-commerce
websites. 
G
Gateway – An electronic repeater device that
intercepts and steers electrical signals from
one network to another.  In data networks,
gateways are typically a node that connects
two otherwise incompatible networks and
often perform code and protocol conversion
processes.
GIF (Graphics Interface Format) – A for-
mat for encoding images into bits so a com-
puter can read the file and display the image
on a computer screen.
gTLD (generic Top Level Domain) – A
small set of top-level domains that do not
carry a national identifier, but denote the
intended function of that portion of the
domain space. For example, .com was estab-
lished for commercial users and .org for not-
for-profit organizations.
GUI (Graphical User Interface) pro-
nounced “gooey” – A program with a
graphical interface that can take advantage
of a computer’s graphics capabilities thereby
making the program easier to use.
H
Hacker – An unauthorized person who
breaks into a computer system to steal or
corrupt data.
Hardware – Objects that go with the com-
puting environment that can be touched.
For example, modems, interface cards, floppy
disks, hard drives, monitors, keyboards,
printers, motherboards, memory chips, etc.
Home page – The main page of a website,
usually serving as an index or table of con-
tents to other documents stored on the web
server.
HTML (HyperText Markup Language) –

The Complete E-Commerce Book
360
Used to create documents on the World
Wide Web by defining the structure and lay-
out of a web document through the use of
tags and attributes thereby determining how
documents are formatted and displayed.
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) –
Defines how messages are formatted and
transmitted over the World Wide Web, and
what actions web servers and browsers should
take in response to various commands. 
Hypertext – A type of system in which
objects, whether they are text, graphic files,
sound files, programs, etc., can be creatively
linked to each other.
I
IDSN (Integrated Services Digital Net-
work) – A set of communications standards
that enable a single copper wire or optical
fibre to carry voice, digital network services
and video.
Image Map or Imagemap – Clickable
images. The image is a normal web image
(usually in GIF or JPEG format). The map
data set is a description of the mapped
regions within the image. The host entry is
HTML code that positions the image within
the web page and designates the image as
having map functionality.
Infrastructure – The interconnecting hard-
ware and software that supports the flow
and processing of information. 
Input/Output (I/O) Unit – Any operation,
program, or device that transfers data to or
from a computer, such as disks (floppy, hard,
or writable CD-ROMs, etc.).  I/O units can
also consist of single function operations
such as Input-only devices such as keyboards
and mouses and output-only devices such
as printers. 
Intranet – An internal TCP/IP-based net-
work behind a firewall that allows only users
within a specific enterprise to access it.
Internet – A public global network of com-
puters that exchange data.
Internet Backbone – The worldwide struc-
ture of cables, routers and gateways that
form a super-fast network.  It is provided by
number of ISPs that use high-speed con-
nections (T-3s, Ocs) linked at specific inter-
connection points (national access points).
Internet Address – A registered IP address
assigned by the InterNIC Registration Ser-
vice.
IP Address – A unique identification con-
sisting of a series of four numbers between
0 and 255, with each number separated by a
period, for a computer or network device on
a TCP/IP network. 
J
Java – A high-level object-oriented pro-
gramming language similar to C++ from Sun
Microsystems designed primarily for writ-
ing software to leave on websites which is
often downloadable over the Internet. Java
is basically a new virtual machine and inter-
pretive dynamic language and environment.
Java Applet – Small Java applications that
can be downloaded from a web server and
run on a user’s PC by a Java-compatible web
browser.  
Java Script – An open source scripting lan-
guage developed by Netscape (independent
of Sun’s Java) that enables interactive web-
sites by interacting with HTML source code.
JDBC (Java DataBase Connectivity) – A
Java API that enables Java programs to exe-
cute SQL statements similar to ODBC.

Glossary
361
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group)
also JPG – A compression technique used
in editing still images, color faxes, desktop
publishing, graphic arts and medical imag-
ing. Although it can reduce image files to
approximately 5% of their normal size, some
detail is lost in the compression.
Just-in-Time Inventory Management – An
inventory management system whereby
products arrive at the business’ warehouse
just in time to ship. 
K
Kerberos – A security system that authen-
ticates users but doesn’t provide authoriza-
tion to services or databases, although it does
establish identity at log-on.
Keyword – In database management, a key-
word is an index entry that identifies a spe-
cific record or document. In programming,
keywords (sometimes called reserved names)
can be commands or parameters, which are
reserved by a program because they have spe-
cial meaning. On the World Wide Web key-
words are the terms that you enter into the
search field of a search engine or directory.
Knowledge base – As used in this book, a
knowledge base is a database that contains
common questions and the answers to those
questions.  Although a knowledge base
sounds a lot like a FAQ section on a web-
site, its a bit more than that — a knowledge
base usually is searchable, and often offers
special options to make it more useful to
users, such as natural language searching,
options to add searchable keywords that
don’t appear in the question or answer (but
which apply), etc. The Microsoft website’s
technical section is built upon knowledge
base technology.
L
LAN (Local Area Network) – A short dis-
tance data communications network con-
sisting of both hardware and software and
typically residing inside one building or
between buildings adjacent each other — thus
allowing all networked devices to share each
other’s resources.
Link – On the World Wide Web, a link is a
reference to another website or web page or
document and it takes you to the other web-
site, web page or document when you click
on it.
M
Macros – Small simple programs written to
automate specific tasks are often referred to
as “macros.”
Mail List – A program that allows a discus-
sion group based on the e-mail system.
MAN (Metropolitan Area Network) – Two
or more LANs links together so resources
between the LANs can be shared.
Merchant Account – A business account at
a financial institution that functions as a
clearing account for credit card transactions.
Meta tags – HTML code between the
<HEAD> and </HEAD> section of a web
page.  Meta tags are accessed by a search
engine’s spider and used by search engines
to describe your entire website and individ-
ual web pages.  Meta tags are either in the
form of keywords or a descriptive phrase. 
Micropayments – A business transaction
type, which specializes in the sub-dollar
range. Although each transaction is a small
amount, it can add up to a sizable market
because of global access of the Internet.
Mirroring – As used in this book, the term

“mirroring” refers to the creation of multi-
ple websites that are exact duplicates of an
existing website.
Motherboard – A circuit board that every-
thing (adapter cards, CPU, RAM, etc.) plugs
into and therefore provides the actual phys-
ical connection between the different com-
ponents that make up the computer. 
N
Navigation – Traveling from place to place
on a web page, a website or the Web, from
information to information.  It can also
mean to search for information from a menu
hierarchy or hypertext. Navigation in a hyper-
text environment (the Web) is a physical
experience of scrolling, scanning and click-
ing, moving over the text with your mouse
pointer and actively clicking on hyperlinks.
Netstat – A utility that provides statistics on
the network components, i.e., it shows the
network status. It displays the contents of
various network-related data structures in
various formats.  For example, it displays: all
connections and listening ports (server con-
nections are normally not shown), ethernet
statistics, addresses and port numbers in
numerical form (rather than attempting
name look-ups), per-protocol statistics
(shows connections for the protocol speci-
fied by protocol), and the contents of the
routing table.
O
ODBC (Open DataBase Connectivity) – A
standard database access method developed
by Microsoft Corporation that allows data-
bases such as dBASE, Microsoft Access, Fox-
Pro and Oracle to be accessed by a common
interface independent of the database file
format.
ODBMS – Object-oriented Database Man-
agement System.
Object-oriented Database Management
System – A database management system
(a program that lets one or more users simul-
taneously create and access data in a data-
base) that supports the modeling and
creation of data as an object.
Operating system – The software that con-
trols all of a computer’s operations includ-
ing memory allocation, accessing disk drives
and calling applications is known as the
operating system.
P
Packet – A bundle that contains data and
certain control information including a des-
tination address which is transmitted on a
network.
PC (Personal Computer) – A computer
designed for use by a single person versus
simultaneous use by more than one person.
PDF (Portable Document Format) –
Adobe technology that provide a popular
method for formatting documents in such
a way that they can be viewed and printed
on multiple platforms using the freely avail-
able Adobe Acrobat reader.
PERL (Practical Extraction and Report
Language) – An interpreted scripting pro-
gramming language, commonly used in writ-
ing CGI scripts because it is a superb text
manipulator.
Ping (Packet InterNet Groper)– A pro-
gram used to test whether a particular net-
work destination on the Internet is online
by repeatedly bouncing a “signal” off a spec-
ified address and seeing how long that sig-
nal takes to complete the round trip.  A
common Unix network function that
The Complete E-Commerce Book
362

reports on whether another computer is cur-
rently up and running on the Internet as
well as how long the ping takes to reach the
computer.  
Plug-ins – Software modules that run on
the viewers’ local machine and add to the
functionality of an application, such as a
browser.
Point of Presence – An access point to the
Internet that includes includes routers, dig-
ital/analog call aggregators, servers, and
frame relays or ATM switches.
POP – See Point of Presence.
Pop-up Window – A second browser win-
dow that “pops up” when called by a link, a
button or an action.
Processor Architecture – A term used to
refer to the over all organizational structure
of a computer’s processor.  The main ele-
ments of any processor architecture are the
selection and behavior of the structural ele-
ments and the selected collaborations that
form larger subsystems that guide the work-
ings of the entire processor.
Protocol – A set of rules governing the for-
mat of messages that are exchanged between
computers and people.
Proxy Server – A server that rests between
the client and the server to monitor and fil-
ter the traffic traveling between them. It can
boost web browser response time by storing
copies of frequently accessed web pages.
Q
Query – A process by which a web client (e.g.
a web browser) requests specific information
(based on a character string) from a web
server. Usually a query is simply a database
search for a particular keyword or phrase. 
R
Rack Unit – A vertical shelving system to
mount servers.
RAID (Redundant Array of Independent
(or Inexpensive) Disks) – A system designed
to link the capacity of two or more hard
drives that are then viewed as a single large
virtual drive by the RAID management sys-
tem.  This allows for improved data storage
reliability and fault tolerance.
RAM (Random Access Memory) – Com-
puter data storage that comes in the form of
chips that can be accessed randomly, i.e., any
byte of a chip can be accessed without touch-
ing the preceding bytes. RAM is the most
common memory found in computers,
printers, etc.
RDBMS (Relational DataBase Manage-
ment System) – A program that enables one
or more people to simultaneously create,
update and administer a relational database.
Real-Time – Occurring immediately (as
opposed to simultaneously as in real time).
The data is processed the moment it enters
a computer, as opposed to BATCH process-
ing, where the information enters the sys-
tem, is stored and is operated on at a later
time.
Request for Proposal (RFP) – A formal
request to a third-party outsourcer describ-
ing everything you want the outsourcer to
accomplie and requesting the outsourcer to
write a proposal outlining how he or she
would go about meeting your demands and
the costs thereof.
RFP – See Request for Proposal.
RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computer)
– A microprocessor that is designed to favor
the speed at which individual instructions
Glossary
363

execute over the robustness of the instruc-
tions; i.e., it performs a smaller simpler set
of operating commands so that the com-
puter can operate at a higher speed.
Router – A high intelligent device that con-
nects like and unlike LANs (Local Area Net-
works), MANs (Metropolitan Area Networks)
and WANS (Wide Area Networks), which are
protocol sensitive and which can forward
packets between the connected networks. As
software, it is a system level function that
directs a call to an application.
RSS – An acronym that stands for either
“Really Simple Syndication” or “RFD
(Resource Description Framework) Site Sum-
mary.” RSS is a protocol that provides an
open method of syndicating and aggregat-
ing web content. It is the code that under-
lies a weblog. 
S
SCSI (Small Computer System Interface)
pronounced “scuzzy” – A standard for a
bus (with its own controller and micro-
processor) and interface that allows faster
communication between the input/output
devices and the computer’s main processor
and daisy chaining of up to 7 different
devices.
Script – A type of computer code that can
be directly executed by a program that under-
stands the language in which the script is
written.
Search engine – A database system designed
to index Internet addresses via a schema that
allows submission of a URL and through a
defined process the search engine includes
the submitted URL into its index.
Secure Electronic Transactions (SET) —
A technology that is used to encrypt credit
card numbers so that only designated banks
and credit card companies can read the infor-
mation. SET requires the website operator
to obtain a special certificate from his or her
bank, and then the customers must install
special software on their computer to take
advantage of SET protection.
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) Server – A
server that utilizes the SSL protocol in order
to encrypt transmission over TCP/IP net-
works such as the Internet. 
Server – A computer that manages network
resources.  For example, a web server has a
very fast permanent connection to the Inter-
net and subsystems to protect against power
outages, hackers and system crashes. A data-
base server manages and processes the data-
base and database queries.
Server cabinet – A metal cabinet designed
to house rack-mounted servers (some also
house tower configured systems).  The cab-
inet will usually have a slotted front door,
perforated steel rear door and top panel, with
room for fans or blowers, and lift off side
panels.
Server-side language – Also known as CGI
script, server-side languages are program-
ming languages (e.g. Perl, ColdFusion, ASP,
PHP, etc.) that are designed to run on a server
rather than a client such as a web browser. 
SET (Secured Electronic Transactions) –
A standard that enables secure credit card
transactions on the Internet thereby mak-
ing the theft of credit card numbers via the
Internet much more difficult.
Shell account – A login account on a UNIX
server.
Site description – A description of how a
website functions from web page to web page
The Complete E-Commerce Book
364

or section to section. A site description works
in conjunction with the storyboard to pro-
vide a detailed explanation of workflow, data
flow, and other items that may not be read-
ily apparent in the storyboard.
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) –
This refers to a TCP/IP protocol that is com-
monly used for sending e-mail between
servers.  The majority of the e-mail systems in
use today send mail use SMTP to send mail
via the Internet.
SNMP (Simple Network Management
Protocol) – This term refers to a specific net-
work monitoring and control protocol. Data
is passed from SNMP agents that are hard-
ware and/or software processes reporting
activity in a network device such as a hub,
router, bridge, etc. to the computer admin-
istering the network.  The SNMP agents
return information contained in a MIB
(Management Information Base), which is a
data structure that defines what is obtain-
able from the device and what can be con-
trolled, i.e., turned off, on, etc. 
Software – Computer instructions or data
– anything that can be stored electronically
is software.
SPARC – Sun Microsystems’ open RISC-
based architecture for microprocessors.
SPARC is the basis for Sun’s own computer
platforms and it’s licensed to third parties.
Spider – A special program (also referred to
as  “bot” or “crawler”) utilized by search
engines to index websites. There are two spi-
der classes — deep and shallow.  The deep spi-
der drills through the entire website and then
either finds the URL and copies the file or
finds a single directory within the URL and
copies the file. A shallow spider can do one
of two things, it can either spider the URL
given and stop, or only spider those URLs it
finds within a single level of directories. 
SQL (Structured Query Language) pro-
nounced “sequel” – A database language
used for creating, maintaining and viewing
database data.
SSL (Secure Socket Layer) – A transport
level technology developed by Netscape for
authentication and data encryption between
a web server and a web browser.
SSL Server Certificate – Also known as a
Digital Certificate, it is a small piece of
unique data used by encryption and authen-
tication software that enables SSL encryp-
tion on a web server.  This allows a website
to accept credit card orders securely.
Stickiness – Website elements that keep vis-
itors not only within a website’s pages, but
also keeps them coming back for more. Stick-
iness is the byproduct of a website that is
designed around both good content and
good design elements.
Storyboard – The pictorial representation
of the screen elements and their operations
for every web page, which taken as a whole,
constitutes a website.
Systat – A program owned by SPSS that pro-
vides powerful statistical techniques through
its convenience in handling data, selecting
and defining procedures to use, and for-
matting output.
T
T-1 – A high-speed digital connection capa-
ble of transmitting data at a rate of approx-
imately 1.5 million bps (bits per second). In
Europe the same basic technology is known
as “E-1.”
Tables – A collection of data arranged in
Glossary
365

rows and columns and in which each item
is arranged in relation to the other items.
Targeted text link – Text you can click on
that will transport you to a specific section of
a website.
Tcl Scripting Language (pronounced
“tickle”) – An open-source tool command
scripting language that can be embedded
within existing C++ code.  As such, Tcl is used
in the development of many websites.
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) –
A transport layer, connection-oriented, end-
to-end protocol that provides reliable,
sequenced and unduplicated delivery of
bytes to a remote or local user.
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol) – A networking proto-
col (the Internet’s protocol) that provides
communication across interconnected net-
works, between computers with diverse hard-
ware architectures and various operating
systems.
Telnet – A terminal-remote host protocol.
A program that lets one computer connect
to another computer on the Internet.
Text-only Browser – A browser that cannot
handle hypermedia files.  For example, Lynx
is a text-only browser that lets you travel from
one link on the Web to the next, in sequen-
tial order. Lynx gives access to all of the infor-
mation that the graphical browsers can, just
without the pictures or sounds. Netscape
and Internet Explorer are graphical browsers
that let you see pictures and hear sound.
TLD (Top Level Domain) – Domains of
which .com, .net and .org are the most com-
mon.
Traceroute – Software to help you analyze
what’s happening on an Internet connection
by showing the full connection path between
one website and another Internet address. A
common Unix network function that reports
the number of hops, or intermediate routers,
between a computer and a remote server.
Traffic Allowance – Refers to how many
bytes can be transferred from a website per
month, i.e., number of megabytes sent to a
website’s visitors’ browsers. 
U
UPS (Uninterruptable Power Supply) –
Generally a device that allows a system to
maintain operation when changes to the
power supply would otherwise interrupt the
function of that system. They can range from
a 9 Volt battery backup to a generator.   
Up-selling – Offering customers additional
recommendations when they are placing an
order.
Uptime – The percentage of time a service
(web-hosting service, operating system, etc.)
is up and running.
URL (Uniform Resource Locator) – The
global address of resources on the Internet.
The first part of the address indicates what
protocol to use, and the second part speci-
fies the IP address or the domain name where
the resource is located.
V
Voice-over-IP (VoIP) – A term that refers
to a system for transmitting telephone calls
over data networks, including the Internet.
VoIP technology provides the ability to carry
packetized voice over an IP-based network
(e.g. the Internet) with POTS-like (Plain Old
Telephone Service) functionality, reliability
and voice quality.
The Complete E-Commerce Book
366

VPN (Virtual Private Network) – A secure,
encrypted connection between two points
across the Internet. It can act as an intranet
or extranet, but uses the Internet as the net-
working connection.  Most VPNs are built
and run by Internet service providers.
W
WAN (Wide Area Network) – A network
that is geographically scattered with a
broader structure than a LAN.  It can be pri-
vately owned or leased, but the term usually
implies public networks. 
Web – A subset of the Internet that in today’s
world is accessed via a web browser. 
Web address – See Domain Name.
Web hosting service – A third party that
leases space on its web servers and use of its
other hardware such as UPS, backup, its tech-
nical staff, etc., so the lessee’s website can be
accessed over the Internet. 
Weblog – See Blog.
Web page – A document on the World Wide
Web that has its own unique URL (Uniform
Resource Locator). Websites consist of any
number of web pages.
Web page editor – A plain text editor, such
as Notepad for Windows offers a place to
type in your HTML code so that you can
post the file on your website. A more com-
plicated editor can do just about everything
for you (so there is no need to know HTML)
just drag and drop text, images, etc. onto
your page, and the editor writes the code. 
Web Server – A computer with data and spe-
cific software to operate a website.  
Website – Data residing on a computer,
which has software running on it that allows
the download and presentation of the data to
another computer that is permanently con-
nected to the Internet.
Whois – A common Unix network function
that queries databases for information about
domain names, IP address assignments, and
individual names.
WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You
Get) pronounced wiz-e-wig – An applica-
tion that enables you to see on the computer
monitor exactly what will appear when the
document is printed.
XYZ
XML (eXtensible Markup Language) – A
system for organizing and tagging elements
of a document specifically designed for web
documents.  It enables designers to create
their own customized tags to provide func-
tionality not available with HTML.  XML
also has the ability to enable the structured
exchange of data between computers
attached to the Web, thus allowing one web
server to talk to another web server.  This
means manufacturers and merchants can
begin to quickly swap data, such as pricing,
stock-keeping numbers, transaction terms
and product descriptions.
Glossary
367

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Affiliate programs
Management 145, 151, 262
Marketing tool 261–262
American Registry for Internet
Numbers (ARIN) 45
Antivirus software 94
Apache 114–115
Asia Pacific Network
Information Center
(APNIC) 45
ASP (Active Server Page) 137
Auction, online
and CGI scripts 158–160 
Formats 156–157
Legal obligations 159
Models 155
and Payment services 160
Requirements 157–158
Software 158–159
Authentication certificate, see
Digital certificate
Autoresponders 145, 226
Backup
Differential Method 72
Incremental Method 72
Plan 71–72
Bandwidth
Defined 83
Banner ads 
Benefits of 260–261
Costs 259–260
Design 258–259
Exchange services 260
Frequency 259
Placement 260
Blog, see Weblogs
Blueprint 25–26, 142, 185–186
Essential elements 25, 41
Browser compatibility 
176–179
Bugbase 178–179
Cascading style sheets (CSS)
146–147
and Dynamic HTML
(DHTML) 147
Catalog manager 151
ccTLDs 45–48
Central server concept 19, 20
Certificate Authority (CA)
48–53
CGI (Common Gateway
Interface)
Defined 137
Security 101
and Web-hosting service 220
Chat
re Customer service
279–280, 291–292
Rooms 145
Solutions 280–281
Checks
Acceptance and processing
57–58
Co-browsing 280
Commerce Server 150–153
Compatibility issues 26
Content 25, 29, 31–32
Management 152, 187–188,
190
Security 102–03
Visibility 37–41
Credit Card 
Accepting 54–55
Real-time authorization
55–56
Security 103–04
CTR (Click-through ratio) 
Defined 258
Industry average 259
Customer feedback form 185,
255–256
Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM)
291
Customer service
Automation 
ACSS (automated
customer service
system) 287–289
Email 282–287
FAQs 282
369
Index

The Complete E-Commerce Book
370
Customer service (continued)
Award winning techniques
278
Call center
Defined 288
Multi-media/web-enabled
290–291
Methods
Separate technology
278–279
Multi-threaded 279–
Outsourcing 288, 291
Resources 290
Strategy
Email 276
FAQs (frequency asked
questions) 276–278
How to build 276–277
Online knowledge base
277
Customers’ buying history 145
Customers’ preferences 145
Database 13, 139
Analytical 126
Defined 124
Desktop software 131
Design strategy 124, 130,
136
and E-commerce 124–125
Management system 
DBMS 125, 131
ODBMS 128–130, 132
RDBMS 127–128, 130,
134, 136
Models
Object-oriented 128–130
Relational 127–128, 130
Text file 126–127
Operational 126
Publishing 133
Dynamic 133, 135–139
Static 133–135
Security 93, 99
Data confidentiality 99
Design, website
Guidelines 31–41
Resources 147
Web-hosting service
211–212
Debit Card 54
See also Credit Card,
Payments
Denial of service attack 95
Digital certificate 48–54,
102–03
Digital ID, see Digital
certificate and E-wallet
Directories
Defined 236
and Doorway pages 244
Hybrid service 233, 236
Popular 237
Sponsored listings 246–247
Submission details 245–246
See also Search Engines
Discounts, handling online
145
Domain name 44–46
Multiple names 228
Registration 46
Domain name system (DNS)
45–48
and Web-hosting services
208
Server 46
Download speed 33–34
DS3, see T-3/E-3
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line)
84–86
Due diligence 150, 196,
201–203, 205, 335–336
E-1, see T-1/E-1
E-3, see T-3/E-3
E-Commerce
Basics 43
Business model 11
Business plan 25 
See also Blueprint
Models 12–20, 24
Software 
Shrink-wrap packages
144–145
Features 145
and databases 147
Electronic Commerce
Modeling Language
(ECML) 104
Email payment services 60
Email management system
284–287
Encryption (check)13, 92, 94,
98, 99, 100, 102
Escrow services 58–60
E-wallet 103–04
Fiber optic networks 89
Firewall 92, 93, 94, 96–97, 99,
100
Frames 37–38
Fraud, see Internet Fraud
FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
and Security 95, 97
and Web-hosting service 208,
216, 221, 228
Fulfillment, see Order
processing and
fulfillment
GIF (Graphics Interchange or
Image Format) 33–34
Global features 151–152
Globalization 341
International orders 302,
308
gTLDs 46–47

Index
371
Hackers 91, 93–94, 96, 100
Home page
Design 24, 29, 31, 36
HTML editor 143–144
Image maps 36
In-house web-hosting 212
Internet fraud 104–05
Exposure reduction 105–06
High risk websites 105
Internet service provider (ISP)
206–207
Internet connectivity 68, 69,
84, 88–89
Web-hosting service model
206
Internet trust services 102
Inventory management 145
IP address 45–46
ISAPI (Internet Server Applica-
tion Programming
Interface) 137
ISDN (Integrated Services Dig-
ital Network) 86–87
Java and Java applets 38–40
Security 101
JDBC (Java Database
Connectivity) 136
JPEG (Joint Photographic
Experts Group) 34
JSP (Java Server Page) 137
Links
Management 187–188
Tools 188–189
Marketing tool 256–257
Linux 111
Security 113
List management
Software 265
Local loop 84
Log analysis software 94,
119–124, 139
Maintenance and management 
Systems 185, 187–188, 191
Outsourcing 191–192
Marketing
Plan 249–267
Brick-and-mortar advantage
254
Objective 252
Strategy 252
Techniques 
Affiliate programs
261–262
Customer feedback forms
255–256
Data mining/personaliza-
tion tools 267–269
Email 266–267
Links 256–261
Newsletters 262–266
Merchant account 54–56
Microsoft Internet
Information Server II
(IIS) 115
Mirroring 80–81
Monitoring
Software 92
System 94
Navigability
Designing for 28–31, 36
.NET framework/platform 116
Netscape Enterprise Server
116–117
Newsletters 262–266
Niche market 7–8, 9, 14, 16, 18,
24–25
and Web-hosting service 208
NSAPI (Netscape Server Appli-
cation Programming
Interface) 137
Open Database Connectivity
(ODBC) 134, 136
Operating system
Defined 109
Security 113
Optical Carrier (OC) 88–89
Order processing and
fulfillment
Integration issues 305–306,
321–325
Logistics 298
Logistics and fulfillment
plan 300–304
Models
Drop ship 311, 313–315,
328–329
Fulfillment service
provider 316, 326–328
In-store 317
Kiosk 313
Same day delivery
315–316
Single website 312–313
Management of suppliers
and channels 305
Online, in general 8–9,
23,145, 151
Outsourcing, in general 316,
326–331, 336–337
Contract 335–336
Evaluation process
334–335
Plan 331–335
Order capture pipeline
296–297
Regional distribution
centers 329–331
Shipping techniques and
tools 306–308, 319–320
Small parcel dilemma
297–298
Techniques 309–312
Tools 294–297

The Complete E-Commerce Book
372
Orphan pages 36
Outsourcing 141, 191–203
Consultants 
Contract 197
Selection 193–197
Work plan 198
Customer service 288, 291
Order processing and fulfill-
ment 316, 326–337
Website developers
Contract 200
Development agreement
198–199
Selection 198
Packet sniffing technology 122
Password security 98–99, 100
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) 
and e-commerce 166–167
Models 161–165
Requirements 165–166
Resources 166
Source code 165–166
Tutorial 164
Performance
Impact upon 33–34, 70
and Web-hosting 206–207
See also Download speed
Personalization 152, 268–270
PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor)
137
Plug-ins 40–41
Point of Presence (POP) 84
Printing needs
Customer 179
Privacy issues 340
Processor Architecture 64–65
Quality assurance
Guidelines 181
Testing 
Browser compatibility
177–178
Customer service
processes 182
Focus groups 182–183
Integration with offline
resources 182
Prototype 175, 177
Tools 176–177, 181–182
Quality control 23
RAID (redundant array of
independent or
inexpensive disks) 
Configurations 77
Defined 77
Levels 77–80
Redundancy
Defined 71
Regional Internet Registries
(RIRs) 45
RFP (Request for Proposal) 
Defined 195
Consultant 195–196
Vendor 201–203
RIPE (Reseaux IP Europeens)
45
Router 95–96, 100
Search Engines
Common elements 234–235
Designing for 32–33,
236–240
Cloaking techniques
242–244
Doorway pages 243–244
and Dynamic websites
138–139
Hybrid service 233, 236
Indexing 234–235
Optimization tools 240–242
Popular 237
Ranking methods 234–236
Spiders (check) 234–235
Sponsored listings 246–247
Submission details 244–245
See also Directories
Secure Electronic Transactions
(SET) 13, 14, 103–04
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) 13,
43, 51–53, 101, 103
Servers and e-commerce 142
Security
Architecture 93, 100
Audit 102
Content 133
Customers’ concerns 340
Log files 119–120
Minimal strategy 100–01
Monitoring 102
Operating system 113
Plan 92–106
Resources 106–07
Software 99
Transaction 48–54, 91
and Web-hosting services
212, 215, 222, 224–225
Server
Analysis 102
Application 61, 138
Clusters 65–66
Commerce 150–151
Configuration 23, 67–70
Database 61, 69
Defined 61
DNS 46
Farms 66
Load balancing 66
Multiple CPUs 67
Rackmount 67
Requirements 62–64
Secure 43, 50–52, 62

Index
373
Staging 102
Web 19, 33, 61, 70
Shipping 306–308
See also Order processing and
fulfillment
Shopping cart 43, 144, 146,
148, 151
Abandonment rates 281
Order processing and 
fulfillment 295
Software
Defined 109
E-commerce 141–142
Web server 113–114
Stickiness 32–33
Storyboard 25, 26–30
SSL server certificate, see Digi-
tal certificate
Synchronous Optical Network
(SONET) 89
T-1/E-1 83, 87–88
T-3/E-3 88–89
Tab-delimited text files 13
Tables, HTML 34–36
Targeted email 145
TLDs (Top Level Domains),
45–48
UNIX 110–112
UPS (Uninterruptable Power
Supply)
Categories
Hybrid 73
Standby 73
True 73–74
Defined 72–73
Maintenance 76
Rating 74–76
Requirements 74–75
URL (Uniform Resource
Locator), see Domain
name
Vendor
Selection process 200–202
Voice-over-IP (VoIP) 280
Web address, see Domain
name
Web-hosting in-house 212
Web-hosting service (check)
61, 94
Autoresponders 226
Backup systems 72, 229
CGI scripts 220, 223
Contract/agreements 219,
230–231
and Databases 230
Data transfer costs 
218–219
Defined 205
Disk or server space 219
and E-commerce 221–222
Email 225–226
Flexibility 224
FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
access 228–229
Internet connection
(pipeline) 217–218
Mailing list management
226–227
Models
Dedicated service
206–207
Free 208–209
Internet Service Provider
(ISP) 206
Local service 207
Sub-domain or non-
virtual 206
Web developer hosting
207–208
and Multimedia needs 219
Needs defined
Small- to mid-sized
website 211–212
Large- to enterprise-sized
website 212–215
Online promotion 227
Reports provided 227–228
Requirements 215–230
Security 212, 215, 222,
224–225, 229
Servers 228–229
Technical support 206–208,
222–223
Telnet access 220–221
Traffic allowance 218–219
Types of hosting accounts
Co-hosting/co-locating
210
Dedicated server 209–210
Server farm 210
Virtual server 209
Uptime 219
Website administration 224
Weblogs 
and E-commerce 171
News aggregators 171
Requirements 167
Resources 169, 172
RSS 167
Editors 167–168
Readers 171
Tools 169–173
Validation services 172
Web server
Disk space 219
Log files 118–119, 227
Traffic analysis 120–121
Website 
Description, detailed 25,
30–31
Marketing tool 12
Models
Advertising 15
Auction 17–18 
Brochureware 12, 24

The Complete E-Commerce Book
374
Website, Models, (continued)
Business-to-Business 17
Cyber mall 15–16
Online store 13
Peer-to-peer 19–20
Subscription 14–15
Weblog 18–19
Windows servers 112–113,
115–116
Security 113
Xitami 117
XML
RSS 167–168
and Weblogs 167
Web services 116
Zeus 117–118

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

.This Page Intentionally Left Blank

