
The Cognitive Early
Warning Predictive System
Using the Smart Vaccine
The New Digital Immunity Paradigm for Smart
Cities and Critical Infrastructure

OTHER INFORMATION SECURITY BOOKS FROM AUERBACH
Android Malware and Analysis
Ken Dunham, Shane Hartman, Manu Quintans, 
Jose Andre Morales, and Tim Strazzere
ISBN 978-1-4822-5219-4
Anonymous Communication Networks: 
Protecting Privacy on the Web
Kun Peng
ISBN 978-1-4398-8157-6
Case Studies in Secure Computing: 
Achievements and Trends
Biju Issac and Nauman Israr
ISBN 978-1-4822-0706-4
Conducting Network Penetration and 
Espionage in a Global Environment
Bruce Middleton
ISBN 978-1-4822-0647-0
Cybersecurity: Protecting Critical 
Infrastructures from Cyber Attack  
and Cyber Warfare
Thomas A. Johnson
ISBN 978-1-4822-3922-5
Cybervetting: Internet Searches for Vetting, 
Investigations, and Open-Source Intelligence, 
Second Edition
Edward J. Appel
ISBN 978-1-4822-3885-3
Data Privacy for the Smart Grid
Rebecca Herold and Christine Hertzog
ISBN 978-1-4665-7337-6
Ethical Hacking and Penetration  
Testing Guide
Rafay Baloch
ISBN 978-1-4822-3161-8
Leading the Internal Audit Function
Lynn Fountain
ISBN 978-1-4987-3042-6
Multilevel Modeling of Secure Systems  
in QoP-ML
Bogdan Księżopolski
ISBN 978-1-4822-0255-7
Multilevel Security for Relational Databases
Osama S. Faragallah, El-Sayed M. El-Rabaie,  
Fathi E. Abd El-Samie, Ahmed I. Sallam,  
and Hala S. El-Sayed
ISBN 978-1-4822-0539-8
PCI Compliance: The Definitive Guide
Abhay Bhargav
ISBN 978-1-4398-8740-0
Secure Data Provenance and Inference 
Control with Semantic Web
Bhavani Thuraisingham, Tyrone Cadenhead,  
Murat Kantarcioglu, and Vaibhav Khadilkar
ISBN 978-1-4665-6943-0
Securing Cyber-Physical Systems
Al-Sakib Khan Pathan
ISBN 978-1-4987-0098-6
Securing Systems: Applied Security 
Architecture and Threat Models
Brook S. E. Schoenfield
ISBN 978-1-4822-3397-1
Security for Service Oriented Architectures
Walter Williams
ISBN 978-1-4665-8402-0
Security without Obscurity: A Guide to 
Confidentiality, Authentication, and Integrity
J.J. Stapleton
ISBN 978-1-4665-9214-8
The Frugal CISO: Using Innovation and 
Smart Approaches to Maximize Your Security 
Posture
Kerry Ann Anderson
ISBN 978-1-4822-2007-0
The Practical Guide to HIPAA Privacy and 
Security Compliance, Second Edition
Rebecca Herold and Kevin Beaver
ISBN 978-1-4398-5558-4
Web Security: A WhiteHat Perspective
Hanqing Wu, Liz Zhao
ISBN 978-1-4665-9261-2
AUERBACH PUBLICATIONS
www.auerbach-publications.com • To Order Call: 1-800-272-7737 •  E-mail: orders@crcpress.com

The Cognitive Early
Warning Predictive System
Using the Smart Vaccine
The New Digital Immunity Paradigm for Smart
Cities and Critical Infrastructure
Dr. Rocky Termanini

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2016 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20151228
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-2653-5 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been 
made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the valid-
ity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright 
holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may 
rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti-
lized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopy-
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For 
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Preface	
xiii
Acknowled g ments	
xix
Chap ter 1	
Big Inspir ation from the Human Immune System	
1
Immune Universe	
1
Holding Hands: The Nervous System and the Immune System	
1
Anatomy of the Human Immune System	
3
Pyramid of the Immune System	
4
Mounting an Immune Response	
5
How to Recognize the Enemy: Antigens	
5
Infection Symptoms	
6
Immunity: Natural and Acquired	
6
The Immune System and the Nervous System	
6
We Are Born with Immunity	
7
Acquired (Also Called Adaptive) Immunity	
7
Vaccinations	
8
Benefits of Vaccination	
9
Glossary: The Human Immune System	
9
Websites	
14
Part I
Chap ter 2	
The Story of the S mart Vaccine	
17
The World of Vaccine	
17
Then Comes Pasteur	
17
Made in China, Too!	
19
Why Was the Term Vaccine Selected?	
20
Why Was the Term Smart Selected?	
20
Magical Analogy between Human Immunity and Digital Immunity	
22

vi
Contents
Here Is Digital Immunity	
23
Microcosm of the Smart Vaccine	
25
Awesome Morphology of the Virus	
26
Smart Vaccine Transactional Messages and Services	
27
The Smart Vaccine Army	
27
Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS)/Smart Vaccine Speaks 
Web Service Language	
29
Web Services Will Have a Big Role	
30
Smart Vaccine Transactional Services (SVS)	
30
A Summary of the Smart Vaccine Transactional Services and Messages	
35
Websites	
36
Chap ter 3	
Critical Infr astructures of S mart Cities	
37
Why Did Cities Exist?	
37
What Is a Smart City?	
37
What Is a Critical Infrastructure?	
38
Critical Infrastructure Frameworks for Smart Cities	
38
Securing the Critical Infrastructures for Smart Cities: The Plan	
40
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT)	
44
Challenges of US-CERT for Smart Cities	
45
Challenges of Cybersecurity in Smart Cities	
45
The UAE Is Setting a Good Example	
45
The United Arab Emirates Power Grids: A Must See	
46
Smart Cities Cannot Live without Smart Grids	
47
A Smart City Runs on a Smart Grid	
48
How to Inject Resilience in the Smart Grid	
50
Smart Grid Success Formula	
50
Cyber-Cognitive Early Warning Model	
51
Holy Grail of the Smart Grid	
51
Two Technologies to Build the Smart Grid	
53
First Technology: Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI)	
54
Second Technology: Geographic Information Systems (GIS)	
54
GIS Benefits	
55
Third Technology: Digital Orthoimagery (DOI)	
56
Quantitative Assessment of Vulnerability of Critical Infrastructures	
56
Risk Computation	
58
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)	
59
Stuxnet as Enemy Number 1 for Smart Grids	
60
Response Planning and Preparedness	
60
Can Infrastructures Be Secured by Smart Cities?	
60
Response	
60
Infrastructure Disaster Preparedness	
60
Operations Research	
62
Modeling the Grid Using Queuing Theory	
62
Smart Grid Information Traffic Analysis	
63
Analytics of a Cyberattack on the Smart Grid	
64
Queuing Formulas	
65
Partial Universal Queuing Equations Used in CEWPS	
65
M/D/1 Case (Random Arrival, Deterministic Service, and 
One Service Channel)	
66
M/M/1 Case (Random Arrival, Random Service, and One Service Channel)	
66
M/M/C Case (Random Arrival, Random Service, and C Service Channel)	
66

vii
Contents
Glossary: Smart Grid	
67
Websites	
73
Chap ter 4	
S tat e o f t h e A r t o f A n t i v i r u s a n d 
CEWPS Te c h n o l o g i e s	
75
Historical Synopsis	
75
Virus Hall of Infamy	
75
Anatomy of a Biological (Human) Virus	
77
Anatomy of a Digital Virus	
80
Shopping for a Malice Act	
81
Type 1: The Virus	
81
Mainframe Legacy	
83
Introducing the Current Antivirus Vendors	
84
The Limping Antivirus Industry	
85
The Flat Tire of AVT, No Runflat	
87
Two-Generation Leap	
90
The CEWPS Cockpit Is Fully Autonomic	
93
Inoculation Missions of the Smart Vaccine	
95
Analytic Thinking Reduces Belief in Conspiracy Theories	
96
The Immune System and the Nervous System	
96
The Running Mind of the Hacker “Catch Me If You Can”	
97
Glossary: Technical Terms about Computer Viruses and Antiviruses	
98
Websites	
113
Chap ter 5	
Architecture of E arly Warning 
Predictive System for S mart Cities	
115
Digital Immunity: A New Dawn	
115
Smart Cities Are Like the Human Body	
115
CEWPS Is the Electronic Shield of Smart Cities	
117
What Is Causality?	
117
What Is Prediction?	
118
Anatomy of CEWPS and Its Main Components	
119
Component 1: The Central Coordination Command (CCC)	
119
CEWPS Component 2: The Knowledge Acquisition Component	
120
Where Wisdom, Experience, and Knowledge Are Distilled	
120
What Is Experience?	
120
What Is Knowledge?	
122
Six Stages of Cybercrime	
122
Cybercrime Raw Data Distillation Process	
124
Ontology and Semantic Technologies	
126
CEWPS Component 3: The Reasoning Engine	
127
We Can Forecast the Weather, Why Can’t We Predict Crime?	
127
Anatomy of the Reasoning Engine?	
128
CEWPS Component 4: Reverse Engineering Center (REC)	
129
CEWPS Component 5: Smart City Critical Infrastructure	
129
CEWPS Component 6: The Smart Vaccine Center	
130
CEWPS Component 7: The Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB)	
130
CEWPS Component 8: The Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB)	
130
CEWPS Component 9: CEWPS Smart Grid	
131
The New Jersey Grid	
133
Connectivity of Critical Systems to a City’s Smart Grid	
133
Critical Infrastructures in Smart Cities	
136

viii
Contents
A Smart City Is Idealistic Hype	
137
CEWPS Screen Layout	
139
Glossary with Bibliography	
141
Websites	
151
References	
152
Chap ter 6	
CEWPS Knowled g e and Intellig ence	
153
CEWPS Is the Beginning of Singularity	
153
Structure of the CEWPS Knowledge Center	
155
The Cybercrime Knowledge Model	
156
How Does CEWPS Predict Cyberattacks on the Smart City?	
158
How Does CEWPS Prevent Cyberattacks on Smart Cities?	
162
Causality Rules	
163
Cybercrime Predictive Analytics for Smart Cities	
164
Why Do We Need a Predictive Analytics Model for Smart Cities?	
167
Understanding Cybercrime Data in Smart Cities	
167
Collection of Cybercrime Data	
168
Building the Cybercrime Data Model	
169
Deployment of the Cybercrime Data Model	
169
Processes and Variables of the Data Model	
170
CEWPS Abbreviations	
172
References	
172
Websites	
173
Chap ter 7	
Big Data of C ybercrime and Terroris m: How to 
Cap ture and Manag e It	
175
What Is Big Data and What Does It Mean?	
175
Our Societal Waste Is Big Data	
176
In the Beginning, There Was a Crashed Message	
177
Attributes of Big Data	
179
The New Cybercrime Big Data	
179
Open Sesame Big Data	
180
CEWPS and Big Data Synergism	
182
CEWPS Cybercrime Analytics	
182
What Kind of Data Do Smart Cities Need?	
183
Data Extracted from Law Enforcement Crime Repositories	
185
Big Data Support for the Critical Infrastructures	
185
Interfacing CEWPS with Big Data	
186
Big Data Cybercrime Data	
187
Category 1: Structured Data	
188
Category 2: Unstructured Data	
189
Where to Get Cyberterrorism Data?	
189
Technology Standards Organizations	
190
Glossary: Big Data	
191
Websites	
201
Part II
Chap ter 8	
CEWPS Anatomy, the S mart Vaccine, 
and the Man-Made B Cell	
205
A Word on Virus Anatomy	
205
The Digital Immune System	
206

ix
Contents
Analogy between the Human Immune and the Digital Immune Systems	
208
Anatomy of the Present Computer Virus	
210
A Word about the Black Hat Community	
210
A Word on Hackers	
210
How Does the Classic Antivirus Work?	
212
Anatomy of the Smart Vaccine	
212
A Word on Artificial Intelligence	
212
The Smart Vaccine in the Battlefield	
214
The Digital Immuny Battlefield	
215
The Appeal of Cyberterrorism	
217
Terrorism Levels	
218
The Most Challenging Attacks for the Smart Vaccine	
219
Analysis of Cyberterrorism	
220
The Miraculous Fight of the Smart Vaccine	
221
The Attack on the Power Grid	
221
The Six Phases of the Attack	
223
The Purpose of the SCADA System	
223
The Terrorist Team	
224
The Smart City Attack	
224
Here Is What the Smart Vaccine Did	
225
The Making of an Antidote with Honeypots	
227
Additional Reading for Electrical Engineers	
227
Websites	
228
References	
228
Chap ter 9	
The S mart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a S ervice	
229
Introduction of Digital Immunity	
229
Cloud 101 Primer	
230
Three Technologies into One: Cloud Computing, Web Services, 
and Service-Oriented Architecture	
231
First Technology: Cloud Computing	
231
Essential Characteristics	
232
The Three Cloud Service Delivery Models, and the Fourth One Is Coming Soon	 233
The Five Types of Cloud Models	
234
How Does the Digital Vaccination Work as a Service?	
235
Cloud Standards and Practices for the Smart Cloud	
236
Connectivity Requirements for Cloud-Based Digital Immunity	
236
The Smart Vaccine Cloud-Based Reference Architecture	
237
Second Technology: Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)	
238
Third Technology: Web Services	
239
Cloud Vaccination Services	
241
Process Workflow of the Vaccination Service (VaaS)	
243
Three Scenarios of an SOA-Based Vaccination	
244
The Smart Vaccine in Motion	
245
Criticality of the Smart Vaccine Response Time	
246
Innate and Adaptive Digital Immunity	
248
The Smart Vaccine Is a Smart Sherlock Holmes	
251
Harnessing SOA Technology	
252
Glossary: Cloud Computing	
253
References	
259
Websites	
260

x
Contents
Chap ter 10	 The Interne t of Things, Converg ence 
of SCADA and CEWPS	
261
The Internet of Things (IoT) Is the Internet of Internet	
261
Kurzweil’s 5th Epoch	
262
Architecture of the Internet of Things	
263
Category 1	
264
Category 2	
266
The Magic of a VeriChip Implant	
267
Zombies Are Made in China	
269
Category 3	
270
The Anatomy of Machine to Machine	
270
Digital Convergence of the Internet of Things, SCADA, 
CEWPS, and Big Data	
272
What Is Digital Convergence?	
272
Emerging Technologies: The Big League Players	
273
Group 1: Information Technology (IT)	
274
Group 2: Consumer Technology (CT)	
274
Group 3: Operational Technology	
274
Group 4: Critical Infrastructure Technologies	
274
Cybercrime Hitting the Internet of Things with Virus Rain	
276
What Is Virus Rain?	
276
Design of the Intelligent Grid, the New Digital Immunity	
278
Panoramic View of How SVG Fights to Defeat Cyberattacks 	
279
Digital Immunity Is the Holy Grail of Smart Cities	
281
Glossary: SCADA System	
283
Websites	
289
Chap ter 11	 C onverg en ce of SCADA, CEWPS 
Dashboard, and Predictive Analy tics	
291
SCADA & CEWPS: The Best Techno-Solution for Smart Cities	
291
Merging SCADA and CEWPS	
293
Anatomy of the CEWPS Dashboard	
293
Mode 1: Real-Time Visualization Dashboard	
294
Mode 2: Smart City Predictive Analytics Dashboards	
302
CEWPS Performance	
302
Smart City Predictive Analytics	
303
Category 1: Systems	
304
Category 2: People	
305
Category 3: Predictive Analytics for Attacks	
306
Websites	
306
Chap ter 12	 CEWPS Knowled g e E ng ines	
307
Introduction to Causal Discovery and Bayesian Networks	
307
Short Course in Probability as Related to Predicting Incoming Cyberattacks	
307
Bayes’ Theorem	
308
CEWPS Works Like a Brain	
309
What Is an Expert System?	
310
Semantics and Ontology Relationship to CEWPS	
316
Glossary: Artificial Intelligence	
316
References	
322
Websites	
322

xi
Contents
Chap ter 13	 The Ne x t C yber War: The Evil Fig ht with the G ood!	
323
The Different Scenarios of Massive Cyberattacks	
323
The Pearl Harbor Attack	
323
Scenario-1 The Electronic Pearl Harbor Attack	
324
The Magic Smart Grids	
326
Scenario-2 The California Power Plant Attack	
326
Scenario-3 The Newark 4th of July Cyberattack	
328
How the Attack Was Planned	
328
Cyberterrorists	
328
The Traction Power System	
330
Train Movement Control	
330
How the Attack Was Planned	
331
The Terrorist Team	
332
Terrorist Communication Protocol	
332
Mobiles	
332
Designated Target	
332
The Stuxnet: The New Nightmare for Smart Cities	
333
Good and Evil at the Crossroads	
333
Stuxnet: The New Cyber War Missile	
333
Stuxnet Architecture	
335
Stuxnet Strategy of Attack	
335
Two Attack Strategies	
336
Increase the Rotor Speed	
336
Disturb the Gas Pressure	
336
The Crack in the Door	
338
Damages	
339
Historical Background	
339
The New Generation of Stuxnet	
340
Cloud-Based Stuxnet: The Virus Rain Attack	
343
Nanotechnology-Embedded Stuxnet (Epoch-5 Nanochip-Stuxnet)	
343
Digital Immunity Grid Layer	
345
The S-Curve Evolution of the Digital Immunity System CEWPS	
347
A Closing Word to Open Your Eyes	
348
Duqu 2: The Future Cyber-Espionage Tool	
348
References	
350
Websites	
350
E pilogue	
351
Appendix A: CEWPS D e velopment Te am	
367
Appendix B: The 10 Most Dang erous Botne ts	
369
No. 1: Zeus	
369
No. 2: Koobface	
370
No. 3: TidServ	
370
No. 4: Trojan.Fakeavalert	
370
No. 5: TR/Dldr.Agent.JKH	
370
No. 6: Monkif	
370
No. 7: Hamweq	
370
No. 8: Swizzor	
371
No. 9: Gammima	
371
No. 10: Conficker	
371
Inde x	
373

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

xiii
Preface
I saw the light of the future when I first read Ray Kurzweil’s best-seller book The 
Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. One cubic inch of nanotube cir-
cuitry, once fully developed, would be up to one hundred million times more powerful 
than the human brain.
Nanobots, nano programs, will be able to travel through the bloodstream, then 
go in and around our cells and perform various functions, such as removing tox-
ins, sweeping out debris, and correcting DNA errors, repairing and restoring cell 
membranes, reversing atherosclerosis, modifying the levels of hormones, neurotrans-
mitters, and other metabolic chemicals and a myriad of other tasks. For each aging 
process, down to the level of individual cells, cell components. Wow—This is heavy!
Then I started passionately reading chapter after chapter and got more adsorbed in 
knowing what he meant by the physics of the impossible. I started to wonder if we 
will ever get a chance, in our lifetimes, to understand the anatomy of our future and 
how we can go forward and backward in time and be older than our parents. I know 
it is going to happen, because it is based on real science. I was thunderstuck by his 
scientific prophecies and visionary futurism about our brains. Ray Kurzweil shook 
the tree of the scientific community when he revealed his law of accelerating returns, 
which crystal balls the reality of the exponential increase in technologies, like com-
puters, genetics, nanotechnology, robotics, and artificial intelligence. He says this will 
lead to a technological singularity in the year 2045, the time when progress will be 
so transformed that people will augment their minds and bodies with genetic altera-
tions, nanotechnology implants, and artificial intelligence. What amazes me about 
Kurzweil is his argumentation skills and the depth of his scientific knowledge: “If you 
have a different impression of the world today, I would want you to know that I am 
technically correct. If the rest of the world fails to think that’s enough, the rest of the 
world is wrong!”

xiv
Preface
I have always been fascinated by the magic of artificial intelligence (AI) and its 
rough edges. It is not stepping into science fiction as many believe. It is the science 
of reality and the mirror of human intelligence and will surpass humans’ ability to 
comprehend it. On the contrary, Ray Kurzweil gained the respect of the world not 
because of his visionary countdown to the “singularity,” but he became a magical 
storyteller with his scientific revelations. He is the inventor of the flatbed scanner, 
inventor of the first optical character recognition, the first inventor of the first com-
mercial text-to-speech synthesizer, the Kurzweil K250 music synthesizer, and in 2002 
he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame, established by the U.S. 
Patent Office. Kurzweil doesn’t believe in half measures, he takes 180 to 200 vitamin 
supplements a day.
He is a “restless genius” as described by the Wall Street Journal.
This brings me to the core of my own singularity concept which is replicating the 
Human Immune System in the Digital World; I call it “Digital Immunity (DI).” 
Cybertechnology is galloping forward in leaps and bounds—just imagine, the Internet 
is not even 30 years old (still in its infancy) and yet, its domination in the world is much 
more than all the inventions and discoveries for the last 1000 years. The Internet has 
brought us great things, but malware will always remain its evil shadow. Sudden assail-
ments have toppled societies and shaken civilizations. The element of surprise became 
a very potent change agent, and, perhaps, the most powerful weapon of all. And the 
mythic success of the Trojan Horse victory set a high bar for surprise and world-changing 
attacks that followed through the eons.
My interest in building Digital Immunity goes back to 2001, right after the 
attack on the World Trade Center in New York. I was wondering how the United 
States, with all its technological might, could not foresee or envision this provoca-
tive attack, while the terrorists were dancing and playing the war drums. As it was 
eloquently expressed by Senator Thomas Kean, head of the 9/11 Commission, “a 
failure of imagination.…” One interesting key the Commission unearthed was that 
“Terrorism wasn’t the chief security concern of the Bush or Clinton administra-
tions.” Amazing!
In 2002, I joined MERIT International Security Consultants with a focus on 
cybersecurity. Working with Joe Rodriguez, a veteran and former Newark officer, was 
a great inspiration and stimulus for my research. The idea of Digital Immunity started 
to gel in my mind, and I spent many hours studying the Human immune System 
with unceasing interest and jumped into the cold waters of immunology. On May 12, 
2004, I gave a presentation at the Society of American Military Engineers in New 
Jersey, which made me aware that the country was not ready for any cyber war. It was 
a 2-day conference where top presenters from the military talked about conventional 
arms with a sprinkle of low-tech creativity. I was the very last presenter and only given 
15 minutes. To my surprise, my concept of DI turned out to be the most interest-
ing and eye-popping presentation, with my scenario “The Electronic Pearl Harbor” 
Using Virus Rain™ and how the Smart Vaccine™ like the (B cells) is systematically 

xv
Preface
winning the battle. I knew then that the country was in need of new technology to 
protect its infrastructures and eradicate cybercrime and terrorism.
Every time I give a presentation on Digital Immunity and the Smart Vaccine, I 
surprise the audience. Everyone is pleasantly stupefied with this compelling ingenious 
concept. I have even presented the Smart Vaccine to New Jersey congressmen and State 
Police, and the Secret Service, but stunningly they could not assimilate the potenti-
ality of the idea. In December 2010, Joe Rodriguez and I applied for a federal grant 
issued by the Department of the Navy (BAA 11-007) and the reply came, “innovative 
idea but too far advanced to implement.” Ironically, Stuxnet sabotaged Iran’s nuclear 
program in June 2010. Whoever made this diabolical bomb had a long list of targets 
yet to come. We submitted a couple of ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency) 
proposals, but the response was “it is way ahead of its time. …” In 2009, we met with 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) representatives at the New Jersey Institute 
of Technology (NJIT). I remember I told the DHS representative (a retired brigadier 
general William Marshall): “What would happen to us if immunization never existed 
today? We would be walking zombies dead at 30.” It is heartbreaking to see DHS and 
DoD spending billions of dollars on throwaway grants and loose balloons and giving 
glamorous consulting companies so much money in return for well-bound 1000-page 
reports worth only their weight. I have yet to see a spark of innovation coming from 
these people. Unfortunately, projects are awarded to companies that spend a fortune 
promoting their services while entertaining chief information officers (CIOs) and 
chief security officers (CSOs) in return for winning a bid.
In 2012, I was invited to present the Smart Vaccine at the International Security 
National Resilience (ISNR) Conference in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (UAE). 
I got the chance to meet Dr. Bastaki, CEO of the ICTFund organization. He encour-
aged me to pursue this hi-tech project which is badly needed for a booming nation 
like the UAE.
In 2003, President Bush published a surprising document highlighting the impor-
tance of protecting the country’s critical infrastructures. The document was titled 
“The Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets” in which he 
said, “Much work remains, however, to insure that we sustain these initial efforts 
over the long term. This National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical 
Infrastructures and Key Assets represents the first milestone in the road ahead. 
Consistent with the National Strategy for Homeland Security, this document identi-
fies a clear set of goals and objectives and outlines the guiding principles that will 
underpin our efforts to secure the infrastructures and assets vital to our public health 
and safety, national security, governance, economy, and public confidence. It provides 
a unifying structure, defines roles and responsibilities, and identifies major initiatives 
that will drive our near-term protection priorities. Most importantly, it establishes a 
foundation for building and fostering a cooperative environment in which govern-
ment, industry, and private citizens can work together to protect our critical infra-
structures and key assets.”

xvi
Preface
In October 2014, President Obama’s proclamation over the security of critical 
infrastructures resonated how important the issue is: “The security of our Nation is 
my top priority, and my Administration is dedicated to preserving and fortifying the 
systems that support our daily lives. Guided by our Cybersecurity Framework, we 
are working to protect our critical infrastructure from cyber threats, while promoting 
an open and reliable cyberspace. In the face of a diverse set of physical risks to our 
infrastructure—from extreme weather and the impacts of climate change to health 
pandemics, accidents, and acts of terrorism—we are taking steps to reduce our vulner-
abilities. And because the majority of our critical infrastructure is owned and operated 
by private companies, we are encouraging the private sector to recognize their shared 
responsibility. As part of our National Infrastructure Protection Plan, we are finding 
new ways we can strengthen our public-private partnerships to bolster our systems 
and networks and to better manage risks.”
My aspiration for writing this book is to tell everyone that the present cyberse-
curity industry is not strong enough to win the battle against cybercrime much less 
for the escalating cyberterrorism. Antivirus Technology (AVT) has hit a plateau of 
stagnation and it is time to shift to a new paradigm. Looking at the horrific stag-
gering statistics of cyber malware (no one can really provide definitive statistics), we 
definitely need a cutting-edge holistic approach to “intelligently” secure the coun-
try’s critical infrastructure, and more importantly outsmart those cybercriminals 
every time.
Look, for example, at how Dubai City redefined the term “metropolis” by pushing 
the envelope of urban innovation ahead of every city in the world. Today, it is con-
sidered the magnet of technovation, and will certainly be one of the best models of 
smart cities with Digital Immunity as part of its success and glamour. It amazes me 
how a small country like the UAE has more appreciation for the prowess of the Smart 
Vaccine than Google, Amazon, and Microsoft.
Another influencing reason for writing this book is to bring into focus the impor-
tance of nanotechnology (NT) and artificial intelligence. These two emerging technol-
ogies have started to exhibit their potentialities to reinvent the cybersecurity domain. 
If we need to catch up with cybercrime, we need to harness these two pioneering 
domains and redraw our security blueprints. Digital Immunity is the convergence 
of these two emerging technologies and will usher the beginning of a cybersecurity 
renaissance.
The adversary countries have their own electronic armies, and other cybercrime 
communities will be turning to AI and NT for the next generation of cybernetic 
malware.
Horst Ludwig Störmer, the German physicist Nobel Laureate, described NT as 
follows: “Nanotechnology has given us the tools … to play with the ultimate toy box 
of nature—atoms and molecules. Everything is made from it…. The possibilities to 
create new things appear limitless.”

xvii
Preface
Robert A. Freitas, Jr., the pioneer of nanomedicine, described it as “The net effect of 
these nanomedical interventions will be the continuing arrest of all biological aging, 
along with the reduction of current biological age to whatever new biological age is 
deemed desirable by the patient, severing forever the link between calendar time and 
biological health. Such interventions may become commonplace several decades from 
today. Using annual checkups and cleanouts, and some occasional major repairs, your 
biological age could be restored once a year to the more or less constant physiological age 
that you select. You might still eventually die of accidental causes, but you’ll live at 
least ten times longer than you do now.”
It is amazing what we will be able to do with NT and AI in the domain of Smart 
Security. That is why we designed Digital Immunity as the cognitive shield for smart 
cities. Here is a glimpse of what nanobiology is doing to enhance the quality of our 
lives, as explained by Ray Kurzweil: “When nanotechnology is mature, it’s going to 
solve the problems of biology by overcoming biological pathogens, removing toxins, 
correcting DNA errors, and reversing other sources of aging. We will then have to 
contend with new dangers that it introduces, just as the Internet introduced the dan-
ger of software viruses. These new pitfalls will include the potential for self-replicating 
nanotechnology getting out of control and the integrity of the software controlling 
these powerful, distributed nanobots. We’ll actually accomplish most of that with 
biotechnology, methods such as RNA interference for turning off destructive genes, 
gene therapy for changing your genetic code, therapeutic cloning for regenerating 
your cells and tissues, smart drugs to reprogram your metabolic pathways, and many 
other emerging techniques. But whatever biotechnology doesn’t get around to accom-
plishing, we’ll have the means to do with nanotechnology.”
During the development of the Digital Immunity System, known as the CEWPS/
Smart Vaccine, I met very interesting scientists and researchers who are working 
diligently on great pioneering projects to enhance the quality of human life and, in 
particular, overcome the mysteries of diseases and how the brains of the criminals 
dynamically process relatively fine‐grained level plans for malware and vandalism. On 
Facebook I met Dr. Randal Koene, a neuroscientist who is pioneering, like myself, 
by uploading his brain knowledge data onto a “Virtual Brain” computer to repro-
gram data for mental diagnosis and intelligence enhancement. This Virtual Brain will 
provide neuroscientists and clinicians with an incredible opportunity to replicate the 
functions of the brain in the way they are encoded in neural ensembles.
The replication of human immunity is not science fiction. It is creativity in motion. 
I am writing this book for the younger generation, which has been nurtured on vid-
eogame milk and smartphone cookies. I am designing Digital Immunity for visionary 
whiz kids who are way ahead of their time, and can see the world as a brighter and 
smarter place. They will take this product and use their intelligence to make it of equal 
intelligence. I am writing this book for the young Kurzweils, the Hawkings, and the 
Einsteins, who will erect the new pillars of human intelligence.

xviii
Preface
I am providing the architecture and the foundation design for the Cognitive Early 
Warning Predictive System (CEWPS™) for the Smart City and Smart City Cloud. 
The next step will be putting together a tiger team to assemble all the smart compo-
nents into the new paradigm—Digital Immunity.
A smart city is a multiplexed metropolis where a smart grid will offer ubiquitous 
data services will make cities more livable, more efficient, more sustainable, and per-
haps, more democratic. But, more importantly, smart cities will use the smart grid to 
protect all the vital information hubs and home area networks from malicious exploits 
and “zero-day” black holes. Smart cities need two things: a Digital Nervous System 
and a Digital Immune System. The former will facilitate the dynamics of data, and the 
latter will protect the city’s data. As American author Jane Jacobs wrote in her influ-
ential 1961 book The Death and Life of Great American Cities, “Cities have the capa-
bility of providing something for everybody, only because, and only when, they are 
created by everybody.” To achieve this wonderful utopia, smart cities will be blessed 
with smart security that will protect all the information arteries just like in our body’s 
immune system. The Smart Vaccine is the holy grail of Digital Immunity. Often I was 
told this topic is ahead of its time, well I don’t think so. We are already immersed in 
the future right now.
Finally, I hope my points were well taken. I humbly express my gratitude and grate-
fulness to all the people who worked with me to make this happen.

xix
Acknowledgments
I humbly express my gratitude to all the people who have supported me in this new 
journey, to the ones who gave me a listening ear, to the ones who vehemently argued 
with me, to the ones who stood in awe listening to my science fiction, and to the ones 
who have fought with me tooth and nail:
My wife Lina
My daughter Nadia, Attorney at Law
Dr. Zafer Termanini, Orthopedic Surgeon
My sister Mia Termanini, Business Consultant
Irene Corpuz, Security Head, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Dr. Issa Bastaki, President of the University of Dubai, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Saeed Salem Al Hanki, Major General, Ministry of Interior, Abu Dhabi, United 
Arab Emirates
Meshaal Bin Hussain, Director EA/CERT, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Ahmad Hassan, Director of Risk Management and Compliance, DU, Dubai, 
United Arab Emirates
Ms. Amna Almadhoob, Senior Security and Researcher, AMX Middle East, Bahrain
Dr. Adel Al Alawi, Professor, University of Bahrain, Bahrain
John Casgrove, President of Cosgrove Computer Systems, El Segundo, California
Michael Krieger, Attorney, Los Angeles, California
Joe Rodriguez, President of M.E.R.I.T. Investigative Services
Stan Stahl, PhD, President of the Information Group, Los Angeles, California
And I thank the rest of my visionary friends for their gracious assistance.
Rocky Termanini

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

1
1
Big Inspiration from the 
Human Immune System
Immune Universe
Our body is a multicellular organism made up of perhaps 100 trillion cells. The cells in 
our body are fairly complicated smart machines. Each one has a nucleus, energy pro-
duction equipment, a data repository of information, DNA code, and protein builder. 
Our body has two complex systems that protect our existence. The first one is the 
nervous system followed by the immune system.
In order to understand the sophistication and complexity of the Human Immune 
System (HIS), we need to link 5 million data center in the world (like Amazon) into 
one cohesive grid, managed by 5 billion professionals working harmoniously together 
24/7 all year around the clock, without the slightest conflict or confusion. Of course 
it is an imaginary vision but it gives you an idea on the magnitude of the morphology 
of our immune system.
The Human Immune System is the Pentagon of the human body. Its main ­mission 
is to monitor and protect and keep people healthy. HIS is a layered defense system that 
quickly responds to any foreign invasion. HIS is run and managed by experienced gener-
als who guide millions of troops into a highly sophisticated and strategic war.
So what makes the Human Immune System so miraculous? Well, first, it self-
protects the body from invading germs, which are called antigens. It smartly knows 
the type of attack, time, and location. While the defending cells are hurrying to the 
attack location to set the right ambush and booby traps, the other cells are alerting 
some killer cells to devour the germs. Another group of cells carry supplies to the 
front. And then there are the memory cells that document the attack and the chemistry 
of the attacking virus. The immune system knows how to mobilize with amazing 
­scalability billions of ready-to-fight warrior cells. Like with any army, the immune 
system has a paramedic unit available to repair and heal wounded cells.
Holding Hands: The Nervous System and the Immune System
The Human Immune System can be systematically represented as shown in Figure 
1.1. It can be replicated into the Digital Immune System (DIS) to proactively and 
intelligently defend the Digital World (Figure 1.1). But let’s learn a little about our 
immune system first.

2
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The immune system and the nervous system are in fact interlinked in several ways. 
One well-known connection involves the adrenal glands. In response to stress messages 
from the brain, the adrenal glands release hormones into the blood. In addition to help-
ing a person respond to emergencies by mobilizing the body’s energy reserves, these 
stress hormones can stifle the protective effects of antibodies and lymphocytes (the white 
cells—B cells and T cells). Lymphocytes can travel throughout the body using the 
blood vessels. The cells can also travel through a system of lymphatic vessels that closely 
parallel the body’s veins and arteries. Cells and fluids are exchanged between blood 
and lymphatic vessels, enabling the lymphatic system to monitor the body for invading 
microbes. The lymphatic vessels carry lymph, a clear fluid that bathes the body’s tissues.
Biological links between the immune system and the central nervous system exist 
at several levels. Hormones and other chemicals such as neuropeptides, which convey 
messages among nerve cells, have also been found to speak to cells of the immune 
­system—and some immune cells even manufacture typical neuropeptides. In addition, 
networks of nerve fibers have been found to connect directly to the lymphoid organs.
Figure 1.2 shows how closely interlocked systems facilitate the duplex (two-way) 
flow of information. It has been suggested that immune cells may function in a sen-
sory capacity, detecting the arrival of foreign invaders and relaying chemical signals to 
alert the brain. The brain, for its part, may send signals that guide the traffic of cells 
through the lymphoid organs.
Another link between the immune system and the nervous system is that the 
hormones and other chemicals that transfer messages among nerve cells communi-
cate with the cells of the immune system. Indeed, some immune cells are able to 
Defense is 
mobilized
The immune
system
Start mobilizing
The brain
headquarters
Open communication 
channels
Asking for support
Regular army
The body
Motor data
Sensor data
The nervous
system
The 
microbe
world
The battlefield
Intelligence
Immune army
arsenal
Figure 1.1  The immune system and the nervous system are two federated (symbiotic) systems that bring together their 
recourses against any virus attack. The brain is the commander in chief and responds to the help request from the immune 
system. The nervous system offers the necessary services.

3
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
manufacture typical nerve cell products, and some lymphokines acting as “catalysts” 
can transmit information to the nervous system. Moreover, the brain may send mes-
sages directly down nerve cells to the immune system. Networks of nerve fibers have 
been found to connect to the lymphoid organs.
Anatomy of the Human Immune System
The organs of our immune system are positioned throughout our body.
They are called the lymphoid organs because they are home to lymphocytes—the 
white blood cells that are key operatives of the immune system. Within these organs, 
the lymphocytes grow, develop, and are deployed as shown in Figure 1.3a.
Bone marrow, the soft tissue in the hollow center of bones, is the ultimate source of 
all blood cells, including the immune cells.
The thymus is an organ that lies behind the breastbone; T cells mature in the thy-
mus; lymphocytes known as T lymphocytes, or just T cells, mature there.
The spleen is a flattened organ at the upper left of the abdomen. Like the lymph 
nodes, the spleen contains specialized compartments where immune cells gather and 
confront antigens.
In addition to these organs, clumps of lymphoid tissue are found in many parts of 
the body, especially in the linings of the digestive tract and the airways and lungs, 
gateways to the body. These tissues include the tonsils, adenoids, and appendix.
Builds more
B cells for the battle
Bone marrow
T cell
Thymosins
Brain
Thymus
Oversees the battle from the top
Sends alert messages
to the brain
Macrophage 
(dead cell eater)
B cells (the marines)
Lymphokines
(communication cells)
Figure 1.2   The interlocked organs facilitating a duplex (two-way) flow of information. Immune cells, it has been sug-
gested, may function in a sensory capacity, detecting the arrival of foreign invaders and relaying chemical signals to alert 
the brain. The brain, for its part, may send signals that guide the traffic of cells through the lymphoid organs.

4
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Pyramid of the Immune System
The immune system stockpiles a tremendous arsenal of cells. Some staff the general 
defenses, while others are trained on highly specific targets. To work effectively, how-
ever, most immune cells require the active cooperation of their fellows. Sometimes, 
they communicate through direct physical contact and sometimes by releasing versa-
tile chemical messengers.
The major responsibility for carrying out the activities of the immune system is 
done by small white blood cells called lymphocytes and count over 1 trillion. The two 
major classes of lymphocytes are B cells, which grow to maturity independent of the 
thymus, and T cells, which are processed in the thymus. Both B cells and T cells rec-
ognize specific antigen targets.
Each B cell is programmed to make one specific antibody. One B cell will make an 
antibody to block a common cold virus. Another B cell will produce an antibody that 
zeros in on pneumonia bacterium.
Antibodies are Y-shaped proteins, the body’s building blocks formed from amino 
acids. Proteins are made from amino acids using information encoded in genes in 
DNA as shown in Figure 1.3b.
The main responsibility of B cells is to produce antibodies. These antibodies will go 
after roaming antigens and handcuff them. T cells, in contrast, will penetrate living 
body cells (like a SWAT team) and go after the attacking virus that commandeered 
the cell. B cells mainly produce antibodies as defense by offense weapons. They roam 
Lymph
nodes
Lymphatic
vessels
Lymph
nodes
Lymph
nodes
Tonsils and
adenoids
Lamphatic
vessels
Bone
 marrow
Appendix
Thymus
Spleen
Peyer’s
patches
(a)
Antigen
Antigen-binding site
(b)
Figure 1.3  (a) Consider the lymphatic system as a network of factories to produce the B cells. The white cells are 
designed to protect the body from intruding microbes. (b) Antibodies are proteins that are produced by the body to fight 
the intrusion of foreign molecules such as toxins or other poisons. The antibodies are designed to bind very tightly to their 
adversaries (antigens).

5
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
around a lymph node, waiting for a macrophage (cells that carry antigens) to bring an 
antigen or for an invader such as bacteria to arrive. When an antigen-specific antibody 
on a B cell matches up with an antigen, a remarkable transformation occurs.
Once an antibody recognizes a particular antigen, it will attach itself to a specific 
marker on the cell surface of the antigen so that the latter can be targeted for destruc-
tion. In many ways, the binding of an antibody to an antigen can be likened to the 
insertion of a key in a lock.
The antigen binds to the antibody receptor, the B cell swallows it, and with the help 
of a helper T cell, the B cell starts to produce identical copies of the needed antibody 
at an astonishing pace—up to 10 million copies an hour.
A given antibody matches an antigen (antibody generate) much as a key matches a 
lock. The fit varies: sometimes it is very precise, while at other times, it is little better 
than that of a skeleton key. To some degree, however, the antibody interlocks with the 
antigen and thereby marks it for destruction.
Bacteria will divide every 20 minutes in a perfect growing environment. This kind 
of exponential growth has the potential to be very deadly, very quickly, as bacteria kill 
their host cell within the human body. Luckily, bacteria hit their carrying capacity in 
the human body at a relatively low manageable level for the immune system to fight 
off due to competition resulting from such limiting factors as space and food. In some 
people, bacteria in the intestines and colon can lay dormant for years until set off by 
antibiotics.
Mounting an Immune Response
Infections remain the most common cause of human disease. Produced by bacteria, 
viruses, parasites, and fungi, infections may range from relatively mild respiratory 
­illnesses such as the common cold, to debilitating conditions like chronic hepatitis, to 
life-threatening diseases such as AIDS and meningitis.
To fend off the threatening horde, the body, as devised, astonishingly intricates 
defenses. Microbes attempting to enter the body must first find a chink in the body’s 
external protection. The skin and the mucous membranes that line the body’s portals 
not only pose a physical barrier, they are also rich in scavenger cells and IgA antibodies.
Next, invaders must elude a series of nonspecific defenses—those cells and substances 
equipped to tackle infectious agents without regard for their antigenic peculiarities. 
Many potential infections are cut short when microbes are intercepted by patrolling 
scavenger cells or disabled by complement or other enzymes or chemicals. Virus-
infected cells, for instance, secrete interferon, a chemical that rouses natural killer cells.
How to Recognize the Enemy: Antigens
In order to recognize and respond to the antigens that are their specific targets, both 
B cells and T cells carry special receptor molecules on their surface. For the B cell, 

6
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
this receptor is a prototype of the antibody that the B cell is prepared to manufacture, 
anchored in its surface. When a B cell encounters a matching antigen in the blood 
or other bodily fluid, this antibody-like receptor allows the B cell to interact with it 
very efficiently.
Infection Symptoms
Clinically, infections manifest themselves through the five classic symptoms of the 
inflammatory response—redness, warmth, swelling, pain, and loss of function. 
Redness and warmth develop when, under the influence of a powerful chemical 
substance secreted by B cells and complement components, small blood vessels in 
the vicinity of the infection become dilated and carry more blood. Swelling results 
when the vessels, made leaky by yet other immune secretions, allow fluid and soluble 
immune substances to seep into the surrounding tissue and immune cells to converge 
on the site.
Immunity: Natural and Acquired
As long ago as the fifth century BC, Greek physicians noted that people who had 
recovered from the plague would never get it again—they had acquired immunity. 
This is because, whenever T cells and B cells are activated, some of the cells become 
memory cells. Then, the next time that an individual encounters that same antigen, the 
immune system is primed to destroy it quickly.
The degree and duration of immunity depend on the kind of antigen, its amount, 
and how it enters the body. An immune response is also dictated by heredity; some 
individuals respond strongly to a given antigen, others weakly, and some not at all.
Infants are born with relatively weak immune responses. They have, however, a 
natural passive immunity; they are protected during the first few months of life by 
antibodies they receive from their mothers. The antibody IgG, which travels across 
the placenta, makes them immune to the same microbes to which their mothers are 
immune. Children who are nursed also receive IgA from breast milk, which protects 
the digestive tract.
The Immune System and the Nervous System
Biological links between the immune system and the central nervous system exist 
at several levels. One well-known pathway involves the adrenal glands, which, in 
response to stress messages from the brain, release corticosteroid hormones into the 
blood. In addition to helping a person respond to emergencies by mobilizing the body’s 
energy reserves, these stress hormones decrease antibodies and reduce lymphocytes in 
both number and strength.

7
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
In addition, the brain may directly influence the immune system by sending mes-
sages down nerve cells. Networks of nerve fibers have been found to connect to the 
thymus gland, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow. Moreover, experiments show 
that immune function can be altered by actions that destroy specific brain areas.
The image that is emerging is of closely interlocked systems facilitating a two-way 
flow of information, primarily through the language of hormones. Immune cells, it 
has been suggested, may function in a sensory capacity, detecting the arrival of foreign 
invaders and relaying chemical signals to alert the brain. The brain, for its part, may 
send signals that guide the traffic of cells through the lymphoid organs.
We Are Born with Immunity
Innate natural immunity is the initial immunity that comes at birth. White blood 
cells do not have experience fighting all the foreign invaders. Innate immunity, 
unlike acquired immunity, has no memory of attack episodes and does not remem-
ber specific foreign antigens and does not provide any ongoing protection against 
future infection.
Innate immunity offers nonspecific defense mechanisms that come into play 
immediately or within hours of an antigen’s appearance in the body. These mechanisms 
include physical barriers such as skin, chemicals in the blood, and an army of defending 
cells that attack foreign cells in the body. The innate immune response is activated by 
chemical properties of the antigen (Figure 1.4).
Acquired (Also Called Adaptive) Immunity
Acquired (adaptive or specific) immunity is not present at birth. It is learned. As a 
person’s immune system encounters invading germs (antigens), the body’s immunity 
system learns the best way to attack each antigen and begins to develop a memory 
for that antigen. Acquired immunity is also called specific immunity because it plans 
its attack on a specific fight that took place earlier. Its hallmarks include its ability 
Immunity
Adaptive
immunity
Natural
immunity
Passive
(maternal)
Active
(infection)
Passive
antibody transfer
Active
vaccination
Artificial
immunity
Innate
immunity
Figure 1.4  The Human Immune System is created during birth (called innate immunity). During its lifetime, we realize 
that the body cannot defend itself. Active vaccination adds additional artificial immunity to the body through in order to 
defeat the attacking pathogen.

8
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
to learn, adapt, and remember. Acquired immunity takes time to develop after ini-
tial exposure to a new antigen. However, because a memory is formed, subsequent 
responses to a previously encountered antigen are more effective.
Adaptive immunity is carried out by B cells and T cells. The white blood cells are 
responsible for acquired immunity. Typically, an acquired immune response begins 
when antibodies, produced by B cells (lymphocytes), encounter an antigen. Dendritic 
cells, cytokines, and the complement system (which enhances the effectiveness of anti-
bodies) are also involved. Table 1.1 shows the fascinating similarity between Human 
and digital immunity.
Vaccinations
Simplistically speaking, vaccination is the process of artificial induction of immunity 
in an effort to protect against infectious disease that invaded the body. Vaccination is 
to prime the immune system with an antigen that causes the generation of antibody 
immune response. Stimulating immune responses (immunogen) with an infectious 
agent is known as immunization.
Vaccination is a very effective method to boost immunity among healthy people 
before they contract the disease.
Understanding the difference between vaccines, vaccinations, and immunizations 
can be tricky. Let’s explain further:
•	 A vaccine is a product that produces immunity from a disease and can be 
administered through needle injections, by mouth, or by aerosol.
•	 A vaccination is the process of injecting a killed or weakened organism that 
produces immunity in the body of the person against that organism.
Table 1.1  While We are Impressed with the Anatomy and Mechanics of the Immune System, Digital Immunity 
Is Pretty Much a Mirror Image of the Human Immune System (This table illustrates how both systems are run by 
autonomic control.)
FUNCTIONALITY 
HUMAN IMMUNITY 
DIGITAL IMMUNITY 
Early warning capability
Messages sent to B cells
Alerts sent to vaccine factory
Defense technology
Acquired immunity (two layers)
Autonomic on-demand Smart Vaccine inoculation
Defense sophistication
B cells, T cells, memory cells
Autonomic Smart Vaccine agents
Broadcast attack
Yes
Early warning alerts
Reaction under attack
Totally sympathetic
Total mobilization
Issue early warning
Yes
Radar grid
Capture viruses
Antibodies capture antigens
Viruses fall in the honeypots
Reverse engineer viruses
Yes, recognized and destroyed
Viruses undergo autopsy
Virus/attack analysis
B cells
Bayesian reasoning
Disposition of virus
T cells eat pathogens
Viruses are catalogs in KB
Disposition of attack
Memory cells are active
Attack episodes are catalogued
Vaccine emergency calls
Dispatched
Dispatched
Infested cell status
Isolated from healthy cells
Infested system is repaired back to normal

9
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
•	 An immunization is the step that follows vaccination, which protects (makes 
the person immune) against disease.
•	 Inoculation is the process of injecting a sample of the diluted disease into the 
arm of the patient.
All these procedures are done as part of the artificial induction of immunity. We can 
also call it acquired immunity.
Benefits of Vaccination
Vaccination is a national responsibility to keep citizens healthy and extend their lon-
gevity. In the United States, every president has been promoting different health pro-
grams. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is one of the major 
operating components of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. As the 
nation’s health protection agency, the CDC saves lives and protects people from health 
threats. Vaccination has become the most effective method to fight death-threatening 
and vaccine-preventing diseases.
Glossary: The Human Immune System
For ergonomic reasons, this immune system glossary has been placed in the same 
chapter to minimize flipping and wasting energy; it is a compliment of the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases glossary:
Adenoids: See Tonsils.
Adrenal gland: A gland located on each kidney that secretes hormones regulating 
metabolism, sexual function, water balance, and stress.
Allergen: Any substance that causes an allergy.
Antibody: A molecule (also called an immunoglobulin) produced by a mature B cell 
(plasma cell) in response to an antigen. When an antibody attaches to an anti-
gen, it helps the body destroy or inactivate the antigen.
Antigen: A substance or molecule that is recognized by the immune system. The 
antigen can be from foreign material such as bacteria or viruses.
Antiserum: A serum rich in antibodies against a particular microbe.
Appendix: Lymphoid organ in the intestine.
Artery: A blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to other parts of the body.
Autoantibody: An antibody that reacts against a person’s own tissue.
Autoimmune disease: Disease that results when the immune system mistakenly 
attacks the body’s own tissues. Examples include multiple sclerosis, type 1 
diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
B cell or B lymphocyte: A small white blood cell crucial to the immune defenses. 
B cells come from bone marrow and develop into blood cells called plasma 
cells, which are the source of antibodies.

10
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Bacteria: Microscopic organisms that are composed of a single cell. Some cause disease.
Basophil: A white blood cell that contributes to inflammatory reactions. Along with 
mast cells, basophils are responsible for the symptoms of allergy.
Blood vessel: An artery, vein, or capillary that carries blood to and from the heart 
and body tissues.
Cell: The smallest unit of life; the basic living unit that makes up tissues.
Chemokine: A small protein molecule that activates immune cells, stimulates their 
migration, and helps direct immune cell traffic throughout the body.
Clonal anergy: The process of switching off the ability of potentially harmful T or B 
cells to participate in immune responses. Clonal anergy is essential for gener-
ating the tolerance of T and B cells to the body’s self tissue antigens.
Clonal deletion: The genetically controlled process of eliminating immune cells 
that could destroy the body’s own cells and tissues. The elimination process 
removes immature T and B lymphocytes that have receptors for cells with self 
MHC or HLA antigens, and could therefore attack and destroy the body’s 
own cells.
Clone: A group of genetically identical cells or organisms descended from a single 
common ancestor, or, to reproduce identical copies.
Complement: A complex series of blood proteins whose action complements the work 
of antibodies. Complement destroys bacteria, produces inflammation, and 
regulates immune reactions.
Complement cascade: A precise sequence of events, usually triggered by antigen–
antibody complexes, in which each component of the complement system is 
activated in turn.
Cytokines: Powerful chemical substances secreted by cells that enable the body’s cells 
to communicate with one another. Cytokines include lymphokines produced 
by lymphocytes and monokines produced by monocytes and macrophages.
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL): A subtype of T cells that carries the CD8 marker 
and can destroy body cells infected by viruses or transformed by cancer.
Dendritic cell: An immune cell with highly branched extensions that occurs in lym-
phoid tissues, engulfs microbes, and stimulates T cells by displaying the for-
eign antigens of the microbes on their surfaces.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA): A long molecule found in the cell nucleus. Molecules 
of DNA carry the cell’s genetic information.
Enzyme: A protein produced by living cells that promotes the chemical processes of 
life without itself being altered.
Eosinophil: A white blood cell containing granules filled with chemicals damaging 
to parasites and enzymes that affect inflammatory reactions.
Epithelial cells: Cells that make up the epithelium, the covering for internal and 
external body surfaces.
Fungus: A member of a class of relatively primitive vegetable organisms. Fungi 
include mushrooms, yeasts, rusts, molds, and smuts.

11
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
Gene: A unit of genetic material (DNA) inherited from a parent that controls specific 
characteristics. Genes carry coded directions a cell uses to make specific pro-
teins that perform specific functions.
Genome: A full set of genes in a person or any other living thing.
Graft rejection: An immune response against transplanted tissue.
Graft-versus-host disease: A life-threatening reaction in which transplanted cells 
attack the tissues of the recipient.
Granule: A membrane-bound organelle (specialized part) within cells where proteins 
are stored before secretion.
Granulocyte: A phagocytic white blood cell filled with granules. Neutrophils, eosin-
ophils, basophils, and mast cells are examples of granulocytes.
Growth factors: Chemicals secreted by cells that stimulate the proliferation of or 
changes in the physical properties of other cells.
Helper T cells: A subset of T cells that carry the CD4 surface marker and are essen-
tial for turning on antibody production, activating cytotoxic T cells, and ini-
tiating many other immune functions.
Hepatitis: The name of several viruses that cause liver diseases. These viruses include 
hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C.
Histocompatibility testing: A test conducted before transplant operations to find a 
donor whose MHC molecules are similar to the recipient’s; helps reduce the 
strength of transplant rejection.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): The virus that causes AIDS.
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA): A protein on the surfaces of human cells that 
identifies the cells as self and, like MHC antigens, performs essential roles in 
immune responses. HLAs are used in laboratory tests to determine whether 
one person’s tissues are compatible with another person’s and could be used 
in a transplant. HLAs are the human equivalent of MHC antigens; they are 
coded for by MHC genes.
Immune response: Reaction of the immune system to foreign substances. Although 
normal immune responses are designed to protect the body from pathogens, 
immune dysregulation can damage normal cells and tissues, as in the case of 
autoimmune diseases.
Immunoglobulin: One of a family of large protein molecules, also known as antibod-
ies, produced by mature B cells (plasma cells).
Immunosuppressive: Capable of reducing immune responses.
Inflammation: An immune system reaction to foreign invaders such as microbes or 
allergens. Signs include redness, swelling, pain, or heat.
Inflammatory response: Redness, warmth, and swelling produced in response to 
infection; the result of increased blood flow and an influx of immune cells and 
their secretions.
Innate: An immune system function that is inborn and provides an all-purpose 
defense against invasion by microbes.

12
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Interferon: A protein produced by cells, which stimulates antivirus immune responses 
or alters the physical properties of immune cells.
Interleukins: A major group of lymphokines and monokines.
Lymph: A transparent, slightly yellow fluid that carries lymphocytes, bathes the body 
tissues, and drains into the lymphatic vessels.
Lymph node: A small bean-shaped organ of the immune system, which is distributed 
widely throughout the body and linked by lymphatic vessels. Lymph nodes 
are garrisons of B and T cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and other kinds 
of immune cells.
Lymphatic vessels: A body wide network of channels, similar to the blood vessels, 
which transports lymph to the immune organs and into the bloodstream.
Lymphocyte: A small white blood cell produced in the lymphoid organs and essential 
to immune defenses. B cells, T cells, and NK T cells are lymphocytes.
Lymphoid organ: An organ of the immune system where lymphocytes develop and 
congregate. These organs include the bone marrow, thymus, lymph nodes, 
spleen, and various other clusters of lymphoid tissue. Blood vessels and lym-
phatic vessels are also lymphoid organs.
Lymphokines: Powerful chemical substances secreted by lymphocytes. These mol-
ecules help direct and regulate the immune responses.
Macrophage: A large and versatile immune cell that devours invading pathogens 
and other intruders. Macrophages stimulate other immune cells by presenting 
them with small pieces of the invaders.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC): A group of genes that controls several 
aspects of the immune response. MHC genes code for self markers on all body 
cells.
Mast cell: A granulocyte found in tissue. The contents of mast cells, along with those 
of basophils, are responsible for the symptoms of allergy.
Memory cells: A subset of T cells and B cells that have been exposed to antigens and 
can then respond more readily when the immune system encounters those 
same antigens again.
Microbe or microorganism: A microscopic living organism. Examples include bacte-
ria, protozoa, and some fungi and parasites. Viruses are also called microbes.
Molecule: The smallest amount of a specific chemical substance. Large molecules 
such as proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids are the building blocks 
of a cell, and a gene determines how each molecule is produced.
Monoclonal antibody: An antibody produced by a single B cell or its identical prog-
eny that is specific for a given antigen. Monoclonal antibodies are used as 
research tools for binding to specific protein molecules and are invaluable in 
research, medicine, and industry.
Monocyte: A large phagocytic white blood cell which, when entering tissue, develops 
into a macrophage.

13
Big Inspiration from the Human Immune System
Monokines: Powerful chemical substances secreted by monocytes and macrophages. 
These molecules help direct and regulate the immune responses.
Natural killer (NK) cell: A large granule-containing lymphocyte that recognizes and 
kills cells lacking self-antigens. These cells target recognition molecules are 
different from T cells.
NK T cell: A T cell that has some characteristics of NK cells. It produces large 
amounts of cytokines when stimulated and is activated by fatty substances 
(lipids) bound to non-MHC molecules called CD1d.
Neutrophil: A white blood cell that is an abundant and important phagocyte.
Organ: A part of the body that has a specific function, such as the lungs.
Organism: An individual living thing composed of one or more cells.
Parasite: A plant or animal that lives, grows, and feeds on or within another living 
organism.
Passive immunity: Immunity resulting from the transfer of antibodies or antiserum 
produced by another person.
Pathogen: A disease-causing organism or virus.
Phagocyte: A large white blood cell that contributes to immune defenses by ingesting 
microbes or other cells and foreign particles.
Phagocytosis: Process by which one cell engulfs another cell or large particle.
Plasma cell: A large antibody-producing cell that develops from B cells.
Platelet: A cellular fragment critical for blood clotting and sealing off wounds.
Serum: The clear liquid that separates from the blood when it is allowed to clot. This 
fluid contains the antibodies that were present in the whole blood.
Spleen: A lymphoid organ in the abdominal cavity that is an important center for 
immune system activities.
Stem cell: An immature cell from which other cells derive. Bone marrow is rich in the 
kind of stem cells that become specialized blood cells.
T cell or T lymphocyte: A small white blood cell that recognizes antigen fragments 
bound to cell surfaces by specialized antibody-like receptors. “T” stands for 
the thymus gland, where T cells develop and acquire their receptors.
T cell receptor: Complex protein molecule on the surfaces of T cells, which recog-
nizes bits of foreign antigen bound to self-MHC molecules.
Tissue: A group of similar cells joined to perform the same function.
Tissue typing: See histocompatibility testing.
Tolerance: A state of immune nonresponsiveness to a particular antigen or group of 
antigens.
Toll-like receptor (TLR): A family of proteins important for first-line immune 
defenses against microbes.
Tonsils and adenoids: Prominent oval masses of lymphoid tissues on either side of 
the throat.
Toxin: An agent produced in plants and bacteria, normally very damaging to cells.

14
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Vaccine: A preparation that stimulates an immune response that can prevent an infec-
tion or create resistance to an infection. Vaccines do not cause disease.
Vein: A blood vessel that carries blood to the heart from the body tissues.
Virus: A particle composed of a piece of genetic material—RNA or DNA—surrounded 
by a protein coat. Viruses can reproduce only in living cells.
Websites
http://health.howstuffworks.com/human-body/systems/immune/immune-system7.htm.
http://techland.time.com/2013/07/17/your-future-brain-machine-implant-ultrasonic-neural-
dust/.
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/immunesystem/.
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/immunesystem/pages/glossary.aspx.
http://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/immunesystem/pages/nervoussystem.aspx.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090123214000290.

Part I

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

17
2
The Story of the 
Smart Vaccine
The World of Vaccine
In the beginning there was water, and then man discovered many wonderful deadly 
things.
On Sunday, February 15, 2015, CBS’s 60 Minutes discussed the challenges of find-
ing a vaccine for the deadly Ebola virus. Everyone should see how scary a loose virus 
wiped out complete villages and communities. The present drugs did not help. The 
vaccine is the only solution to this deadly disease (http://www.cbsnews.com/news/
zmapp-and-the-fight-against-ebola/). The show reverberates the problem that our dig-
ital world is suffering from. We need a new vaccine for our growing and ­unpredictable 
cyberattacks.
Around 250  years ago, scientists discovered, after the invention of microscope, 
that we live together with many tiny creatures, which we cannot see with the naked 
eye. These creatures are present everywhere—from the air we inhale, to the water we 
drink, to any object that comes in contact with the surface of our body. It was also 
discovered that these creatures penetrate the human body.
Of all the inventions and discoveries in the world, we should consider that the ­vaccine 
had the most influential bang on the human race. Not the exploration of space, not B1 
Stealth Bomber, not walking on the moon, not even the Internet comes close. Nothing 
comes close to the discovery of the vaccine. Simply because it is a life saver.
The word vaccine was devised by Edward Jenner to denote cowpox. He used it in 
1798 in the long title of his Inquiry into the…Variolae vaccinae…known as the Cow Pox, 
in which he described the protective effect of cowpox against smallpox. In 1881, to 
honor Jenner, Louis Pasteur proposed that the terms should be extended to cover the 
new protective inoculations than being developed.
Then Comes Pasteur
One day, a mother brought her son, Joseph, to Pasteur. Joseph had been bitten by a 
mad dog. He had 14 wounds all over his body. The dog had rabies. Everyone felt sorry 
for the boy. They said, “The child is sure to die.” Even Pasteur had no hope. But he 
had decided to save the boy.

18
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Pasteur had prepared a serum from a rabbit. The rabbit had died of rabies. He injected 
the serum into the boy’s body, at first in small quantities. Slowly, he increased the dos-
age. On the ninth day, Joseph showed improvement. He was out of danger. In 3 months’ 
time, Joseph walked out of the hospital. He then became a perfectly healthy child. The 
year was 1885. Many had been bitten by mad dogs. But no one had escaped death.
Since 1885, thousands of lives have been saved by antirabies treatment. The world 
has to thank Louis Pasteur. Louis Pasteur is considered to be the greatest scientist of 
France, by the people of France. The first vaccine was developed in the late eighteenth 
century, but people recognized the importance of immunity long before that.
Here is another revelation: During the plague of Athens in 430 BC, the Greeks real-
ized that people who had previously survived smallpox did not contract the disease a sec-
ond time. In fact, these survivors were often called upon to attend to those afflicted with 
smallpox, according to a 1998 article in the International Journal of Infectious Diseases.
In the tenth century, Chinese healers began blowing dried smallpox scabs into the 
noses of healthy patients, who then contracted a mild form of the disease—and the 
patients who recovered became immune to smallpox. This practice, which was called 
variolation or inoculation, spread to Europe and the New England in the 1700s.
The human body is home to trillions of bacteria, which outnumber our own cells 
10 to 1. In the gastrointestinal tract, these microbes are often beneficial, helping with 
digestion and synthesizing vitamins B and K. But research has also shown that our gut 
bacteria help our immune system and keep us healthy in various ways.
For example, the beneficial bacteria prevent pathogenic (disease-causing) bacteria 
from taking root in our epithelial and mucosal tissues. And these commensal bacteria 
also train the immune system to better distinguish between disease-causing patho-
gens and harmless antigens, which may help prevent the development of allergies.
Similarly, the good bacteria may influence the immune system’s sensitivity to anti-
gens, potentially helping to prevent autoimmune diseases, conditions in which the 
immune system attacks the body’s own tissues. The bacteria also produce useful anti-
bodies and trigger the expression of intestinal proteins, which cause the immune sys-
tem to repair internal injuries.
For decades, scientists have known that exposure to sunlight—specifically ultra-
violet radiation (UVR)—can suppress the immune system’s (IS) response to bacterial, 
viral, and fungal infections. To suppress the Human Immune System, it takes UVR 
doses that are only 30%–50% of what is required to cause barely detectable sunburn, 
according to a 2010 article in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.
At the same time, however, sunlight causes the body to produce vitamin D. A recent 
study in Nature Immunology suggested that T cells do not mobilize if they detect only 
small amounts of vitamin D in the bloodstream. Additionally, other research suggests 
that vitamin D might induce the production of antimicrobial peptides in the skin—
these compounds help defend the body against new infections.
The immune system is constantly at work to protect you from diseases and fight 
infections you already have, so you might expect that the system’s soldiers—the white 

19
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
blood cells—would make up a large portion of your blood. But this is not the case. 
White blood cells account for only 1% of the cells in the 5 L of blood in an adult’s body. 
But not to worry, there are more than enough white blood cells to get the job done: In 
each microliter of blood, there are between 5,000 and 10,000 white blood cells.
Made in China, Too!
The story of vaccines did not begin with the first vaccine—Edward Jenner’s use of 
material from cowpox pustules to provide protection against smallpox. Rather, it 
began with a long history of infectious disease in humans, and in particular, with 
early uses of smallpox material to provide immunity to that disease.
Evidence exists that the Chinese employed smallpox inoculation (or variolation, 
as such use of smallpox material was called) as early as 1000 CE. It was practiced in 
Africa and Turkey as well, before it spread to Europe and America.
Edward Jenner’s innovations, began with his successful 1796 use of cowpox mate-
rial to create immunity to smallpox, which quickly made the practice widespread. His 
method underwent medical and technological changes over the next 200 years, and 
eventually resulted in the eradication of smallpox.
Louis Pasteur’s 1885 rabies vaccine was the next to make an impact on human dis-
ease. And then, at the dawn of bacteriology, developments rapidly followed. Antitoxins 
and vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus, anthrax, cholera, the plague, typhoid, tuber-
culosis, and more were developed through the 1930s as shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1  Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur are greater than any emperor, king, or president. They made the water of life 
to give patients their life again. They are indeed an incredible tour de force. They fought the Reaper and they won! Pasteur 
created the rabies vaccine while Jenner gave us the smallpox vaccine. Ironically, though Pasteur and Jenner knew that the 
vaccines worked, no one in the world of science then knew how it worked!

20
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The middle of the twentieth  century was an active time for vaccine research and 
development. Methods for growing viruses in the laboratory led to rapid discoveries 
and innovations, including the creation of vaccines for polio. Researchers targeted 
other common childhood diseases such as measles, mumps, and rubella, and vaccines 
for these diseases reduced the disease burden greatly.
Innovative techniques now drive vaccine research, with recombinant DNA 
­technology and new delivery techniques leading scientists in new directions. Disease 
targets have expanded, and some vaccine research is beginning to focus on non­
infectious conditions such as addiction and allergies.
More than the science behind vaccines, these timelines cover the cultural aspects of 
vaccination as well, from the early harassment of smallpox variolators (the intimida-
tion of a prominent minister described in the 1721 Boston Smallpox Epidemic entry) 
to the establishment of vaccination mandates, to the effect of war and social unrest on 
vaccine-preventable diseases. Edward Jenner, Louis Pasteur, and Maurice Hilleman, 
pioneers in vaccine development, received particular attention as well.
Why Was the Term Vaccine Selected?
Selection of the term vaccine was not coincidence. When a dear parent or a close friend 
ends up with a “terminal” disease, we get intimidated to the core, and we look at all 
the technological advances in military and space in disdain and anger. Eventually, 
man with vaccine will conquer the most virulent enemy of human race.
Our cyber world has been bombarded with attacking vicious pathogens and 
­runaway malware. It is hit-and-run and no evidence and no witnesses. Our conven-
tional arms are good for jungles and deserts but not for cyberspace. We are getting 
crippled by successive invasions and we need to resort to the vaccination approach as 
our best proactive defense.
Why Was the Term Smart Selected?
I selected the term smart for its cognitive ability and residual intelligence to determine 
what the next move is. We used the term smart because immunity battles are some-
thing that fascinate and rivet the mind, but they are a slaughter house that requires 
smart commanders, smart vaccinators, and smart paramedics to overcome the assault. 
Next to the nervous system, the immune system is the most complex system in the 
human body. Here are some of the most fascinating maneuvers of immune cells when 
the early warning alarm sounds.
Regardless of the type of host cell, all viruses follow the same basic massacring steps 
in what is known as the lytic cycle, which has six stages. In the first stage, called pen-
etration, the virus attaches to a host cell. In the second stage, it injects its own nucleic 
acids and genetic instructions into a host cell. In the third stage, the viral acids form a 
circle in the center of the cell and its genetic material recruits the host cell’s enzymes. In 
the fourth stage, the host cell then mistakenly copies the viral acids instead of its own 

21
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
nucleic acids. In the fifth stage, the viral DNA organize themselves as viruses inside the 
host cell. In the sixth stage, when the number of viruses inside becomes too much for 
the cell to hold, the membrane splits, and the viruses are then free to infect other cells.
Cognition: The immune system (IS) is an incredible learning machine, capable 
of recognizing new patterns. It has been proven that the immune system is a 
cognitive system; IS has beliefs, knowledge, and view about concrete things 
in our bodies, which gives IS the ability to abstract, filter, and classify the 
information to take the proper decisions. The immune system has a cogni-
tive ability to differentiate between healthy and unhealthy cells. The immune 
system is by nature a highly distributed, adaptive, and self-organized system 
that maintains a memory of past encounters and has the ability to continu-
ously learn about new encounters; the immune system as a whole is being 
interpreted as an intelligent agent. The immune system, along with the central 
nervous ­system, represents the most complex biological system in nature.
Because a virus is merely a set of genetic instructions surrounded by a protein coat, and 
because it does not carry out any biochemical reactions of its own, viruses can live for 
years or longer outside a host cell. Some viruses can sleep inside the genetic instruc-
tions of the host cells for years before reproducing.
When something dies, its immune system (along with everything else) shuts down. 
In a matter of hours, the body is invaded by all sorts of bacteria, microbes, parasites, 
etc. None of these things is able to get in when your immune system is working, but 
the moment your immune system stops, the door is wide open. Once you die, it only 
takes a few weeks for these organisms to completely dismantle your body and carry it 
away, until all that is left is a skeleton. Obviously, your immune system is doing some-
thing amazing to keep all of that dismantling from happening when you are alive.
One anomaly that is not so obvious is that we sometimes see the immune sys-
tem because it ­prevents us from doing things that would be otherwise beneficial. For 
example, organ transplants are much harder than they should be because the immune 
system often rejects the transplanted organ.
Scalability: The immune system has a big arsenal of leukocytes (B cells) to take 
on any massive surprise attacks. The lymphoid organs (the spleen, bone mar-
row, and thymus) are always ready to generate new B cells and T cells.
Responsiveness: An infected person sneezes near you. You inhale the virus par-
ticle, and it attaches to cells lining the sinuses in your nose. The virus then 
attacks the cells lining the sinuses and rapidly reproduces new viruses. The 
host cells break, and new viruses spread into your bloodstream and also into 
your lungs. Because you have lost cell lining your sinuses, fluid flows into your 
nasal passages and give you a runny nose. Viruses in the fluid that drip down 
your throat attack the cells that line your throat and give you a sore throat. 
Viruses in your bloodstream can attack muscle cells, which cause muscle aches.

22
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Mobilization Trickery: The immune system responds to the infection, and in the 
process of fighting, it produces chemicals called pyrogens that cause the body’s 
temperature to increase. This fever actually helps you to fight the infection 
by slowing down the rate of viral reproduction, because most of the body’s 
chemical reactions have an optimal temperature of 98.6°F (37°C). If the 
temperature rises slightly above this, the reactions slow down. This immune 
response continues until the virus is eliminated from the body. However, if 
you sneeze, thousands of new viruses can spread into the environment to 
await another host.
Magical Analogy between Human Immunity and Digital Immunity
There is a fascinating analogy between Human Immunity and Digital Immunity. 
We both immunities have been tabulated by functionality as shown in Table 2.1. 
All the functionalities of Digital immunity are stored in Knowledge Bases of 
the system.
The immune system is made up of a network of cells, tissues, and organs that work 
together to protect the body. The cells involved are white blood cells, or leukocytes, 
which come in two basic types that combine to seek out and destroy disease-causing 
organisms or substances.
Leukocytes are produced or stored in many locations in the body, including the 
­thymus, spleen, and bone marrow. For this reason, they are called the lymphoid 
organs. There are also clumps of lymphoid tissue throughout the body, primarily as 
lymph nodes, that house the leukocytes.
Table 2.1  The Amazing Similarity between Human Immunity and Digital Immunity—All 
Information Is Catalogued and Stored in the Knowledge Base (KB)
FUNCTIONALITY 
HUMAN IMMUNITY 
DIGITAL IMMUNITY 
Early warning capability
Messages sent to B cells
Alerts sent to vaccine factory
Defense technology
Acquired immunity (two layers)
Autonomic on-demand Smart 
Vaccine inoculation
Defense sophistication
B cells, T cells, memory cells
Autonomic Smart Vaccine agents
Broadcast attack
Yes
Early warning alerts
Reaction under attack
Totally sympathetic
Total mobilization
Issue early warning
Yes
Radar grid
Capture viruses
Antibodies capture antigens
Viruses fall in the honeypots
Reverse-engineer viruses
Yes, recognized and destroyed
Viruses undergo autopsy
Virus/attack analysis
B cells
Bayesian reasoning
Disposition of virus
T cells eat pathogens
Viruses are catalogued in KB
Disposition of attack
Memory cells are active
Attack episodes are catalogued
Vaccine emergency calls
Dispatched
Dispatched
Infested cells status
Isolated from healthy cells
Infested system repaired back 
to normal

23
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
The leukocytes circulate through the body between the organs and nodes via 
­lymphatic vessels and blood vessels. In this way, the immune system works in a coordi-
nated manner to monitor the body for germs or substances that might cause problems.
The two basic types of leukocytes are as follows:
	
1.	Phagocytes: Cells that chew up invading organisms
	
2.	Lymphocytes: Cells that allow the body to remember and recognize previous 
invaders and help the body destroy them
The two kinds of lymphocytes are B lymphocytes (B cells) and T lymphocytes (T cells). 
Lymphocytes start out in the bone marrow and either stay there and mature into B cells 
or they leave for the thymus gland, where they mature into T cells. B cells and T cells 
have separate functions: B cells are like the body’s military intelligence system, seeking 
out their targets and sending defenses to lock onto them. T cells are like the soldiers, 
destroying the invaders that the intelligence system has identified. Here is how it works.
When antigens (attacking germs) are detected, several types of cells work together 
to recognize them and respond. These cells trigger the B cells to produce antibodies 
(specialized proteins that lock onto specific antigens).
Once produced, these antibodies continue to exist in a person’s body, so that if the 
same antigen is presented to the immune system again, the antibodies are already 
there to do their job. So if someone gets sick with a certain disease, like chickenpox, 
that person ­typically does not get sick from it again.
This is also how vaccination prevents certain diseases. A vaccination (as a mock 
attack) introduces a diluted antigen in the body, in a way that does not make the ­person 
sick, but does allow the body to produce antibodies that will then protect the person 
from future attack by the germ or substance that produces that particular disease.
Although antibodies can recognize an antigen and lock onto it, they are not ­capable 
of destroying it without help. That is the job of the T cells, which are called killer cells. 
Antibodies can also neutralize toxins (poisonous or damaging ­substances) produced 
by different organisms. Finally, antibodies can activate a group of proteins called com-
plement that assists in killing bacteria, viruses, or infected cells.
Here Is Digital Immunity
Digital Immunity has the pivotal responsibility of being available throughout a city’s 
smart grid. Digital Immunity is actually an autonomic operating environment built 
with federated subsystems that are constantly communicating with one another. We 
have deliberately included in the book different views of the CEWPS to give the 
reader a better understanding of the Digital Immune System. Some views are more 
complex than others. Some views emphasize information flow; while others focus 
on the architecture and structure of the system. Figure 2.2 shows an analogy with 
the Human Immune System.

24
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Lymphoid organs
Early warning alerts
Central
Coordination Center
Smart Vaccine
commander
Smart grid
commander
Smart Vaccine
armory
Killer vaccine
bots
Vaccine
paramedics
Smart city grid
VaaS
Dispatch
alerts
Dispatch
alerts
Spleen
Bone
marrow
Leukocytes
(white blood
cells)
Lymphocytes
(intelligence
cells)
Phagocytes
(killer cells)
Thymus
Figure 2.2  An amazing analogy between the Human Immune System and the Digital Immune System. Both systems are fully autonomic. Both systems are self-protecting and self-healing. 
Both are a marvel of engineering.

25
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
The Central Coordination Center (CCC) is where all the wires and information 
pipelines end up at the top. The CCC is like the brain of the CEWPS, overseeing all 
activities from its dynamic dashboard (DD). It is connected to the Smart City com-
mand control to early warning alerts and notifications. The CCC is also connected to 
smart grid central where all the critical systems are connected.
This is the advantage of having a superconductive smart grid. It acts like a super-
highway to transfer messages in real time and with precision. The smart grid always 
tries to be ahead of danger and massive attacks.
The CCC commander is also in constant communication with the Smart Vaccine 
Commander (SVC) who controls the Smart Vaccine Grid (tightly coupled with the 
city’s smart grid); the Smart Vaccine army; the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VKB) 
that has all the signatures and instructions of the vaccines; the Attack Knowledge 
Base (AKB); and the Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB). Again, like the battle in the 
human body, B cells and T cells combine their skills to circle and kill the attackers. 
The Virus Knowledge Base collects all the killer agents after they are quarantined 
and keeps parts of the agents for forensic analysis.
The vaccine paramedics (not shown in Figure 2.2 but will be described later) are 
also special vaccine agents that will remove the parts of the attacking viruses and 
repair the damage caused by the attack.
CEWPS Digital Immunity has several important security duties in The Smart 
City, which are as follows:
	
1.	It creates a smart (cognitive) barrier that prevents malicious viruses from entering 
the smart grid.
	
2.	If a virus does get into the grid, the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) will eventually 
detect and localize it before contamination spreads to the other systems.
	
3.	In the worst case, the attack will infect a honeypot trap on the grid, and the 
Smart Vaccine grid will capture it and will get reverse engineered at home.
Microcosm of the Smart Vaccine
One astonishing characteristic of the Human Immune System (HIS) that we did not 
know about is that the B cells in the HIS behave like the Marines at Camp Pendleton, 
where during peace, the B cells like first-class Marines train and retrain and learn 
from their mistakes and previous battles so they can fight better in the next battle.
We envision that in the near future, software technology will build smart city cen-
tric operating systems (OSs), which will be designed to manage smart grids and future 
versions of the Smart Vaccine. These OSs will be running in real-time mode perform-
ing transactional smart grid services (SGS) similar to cloud Amazon Web Services as 
shown in Figure 2.3.
At present, we do not have small city centric (SCC) operating systems. We do 
not have smart grid services either. We do expect in the near future to have working 
prototypes and platforms to usher the generation of the new computing environment.

26
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
But most importantly, CEWPS Digital Immunity will be an integral part of the 
Smart City centric operating system (as shown in the diagram). Like in the Human 
Immune System that is a part of the marvelous human engine, CEWPS Digital 
Immunity will be welded within the Smart City smart grid. Digital Immunity will 
be totally transparent to users, while their machines will be protected by the cognitive 
Smart Vaccine grid (SVG).
If one of the smart grid critical systems were to be hit by a preempted attack, the SCC 
operating system would instantiate an emergency response request to the Smart Vaccine 
Commander (SVC) who will mobilize the army of vaccinators, the vaccine paramedics, 
and the virus killers to defend the grid and later to remedy the attacked system.
Like their biological siblings, cybergerms (malware) are everywhere. They are in every 
machine, data center, cloud, network, city, and country, regardless whether we are con-
nected to the Web or not. We infect our machines through e-mails, chats, file swapping, 
and social media happy hours. Many of these cybergerms sneak into the machine and 
go into dormant mode waiting to be activated. But the majority of them are active at the 
entry time, and antivirus software will respond before the viruses dump their payloads.
Awesome Morphology of the Virus
Viruses are programmed to deceive users before attacking their systems. Cyberterrorists 
have a huge arsenal of trickery tools to bypass or fool intrusion checkpoints. They have 
a depot of cyber missiles and cyber grenades to use in vicious attacks. We have selected 
a few types of camouflaging-type viruses for illustration. We also rated the types by 
technological sophistication on a scale from 1 to 10.
Self-replicating (3 on the scale): Like in the Human Immune System, viruses are 
tricky and malevolent. They are designed to inflict damage in different ways. In fact, 
in 1949, the scientist John von Neumann theorized that a self-replicated program was 
User Communities
Critical Applications and Data
SC Operating System
Smart Vaccine Grid Services
Hardware/Smart Grid
Vaccination Services
SVG: Smart Vaccine Grid
CSG: City Smart Grid
VaaS: Vaccination as a Service
SC: Smart City
SV: Smart Vaccine
Smart City–SV Grid
Figure 2.3  Operating system software companies will soon develop a new OS designed specifically for The Smart City, 
and Digital Immunity (Smart Vaccine grid services) will be integrated into it. The new OS will include Grid Computing, Cloud 
Computing, and Autonomic Computing. The Vaccination Services (VaaS) will replace Antivirus Technology (AVT).

27
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
possible. Today, we have worms that replicate themselves while traveling from one 
machine to another. A doctoral student named Fred Cohen was the first to describe 
self-replicating programs designed to modify computers as viruses. The name has stuck 
ever since. In the spring of 1999, a man named David L. Smith created a computer 
virus based on a Microsoft Word macro. He built the virus so that it could spread 
through e-mail messages. Smith named the virus Melissa, saying that he named it 
after an exotic dancer from Florida.
Mass-mail destruction (2 on the scale): The ILOVEYOU virus initially traveled the 
Internet by e-mail, just like the Melissa virus. The subject of the e-mail said that the 
message was a love letter from a secret admirer. An attachment in the e-mail was what 
caused all the trouble. The original worm had the file name of LOVE-LETTER-FOR-
YOU.TXT.vbs given by Onel de Guzman. Microsoft’s visual basic script (VBS) exten-
sion pointed to the language that the hacker used to create the worm: Visual Basic 
Scripting. An antivirus software could trap this attack without difficulty.
Hardware activator (7 on the scale): The hackers who designed Stuxnet aimed it at the 
centrifugal pumps of a nuclear enrichment plant. This is the most dangerous type of 
attack because it is aimed at critical infrastructures and not mass mailing. This type of 
virus is highly educated and highly autonomous. No antivirus software could intercept 
this malicious attack. It does not have any history to learn from, even a SCADA com-
puter system that has a sophisticated security system could not recognize the danger 
before the attack.
Robobots (9 on the scale): These are the autonomic self-propelled, self-navigating 
viruses (similar to drones) that can ram into any system and destroy its content. Many 
of these attacking cybergerms are remotely activated from another machine.
Nanoattack vector (NAV) (over 10 on the scale): This is a futuristic type of an auto-
nomic attack component installed as the hardwired electronic chip of a USB. None of 
the present antivirus systems could detect it, stop it, or quarantine it. Once the USB 
is inserted, it will download and execute an attack vector in binary code, and it will be 
too late for the antivirus software to recognize and catch it.
Smart Vaccine Transactional Messages and Services
Digital Immunity has a very well-structured organizational chart showing the hier-
archy of the Smart Vaccine family. It is like the white blood cells (leukocytes); no one 
cell can do all the fighting. Each Smart Vaccine agent (SVA) has a specific responsi-
bility that supports and complements other responsibilities. All SVAs communicate 
with a repertoire of commands or messages while delivering their services. The subject 
of Smart Vaccine services (SVS) will be covered later in this chapter.
The Smart Vaccine Army
At the top of the organization, is the Smart Vaccine commander, followed by the 
Smart Vaccine intelligence officer, the Smart Vaccine vaccinator, the Smart Vaccine 

28
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
communicator, Smart Vaccine documenters, Smart Vaccine paramedics, Smart 
Vaccine Knowledge Base keeper, and Smart Vaccine killers. The Smart Vaccine 
Commander (SVC) oversees the whole battlefield to protect the critical systems from 
any improvised attack (Figure 2.4). The following is a description of each agent.
Smart Vaccine commander: It gets the directives from the Central Coordination 
Center commander. Its responsibilities cover total security monitoring and 
response for the entire smart grid.
Smart Vaccine vaccinator (SVV): It gets orders from the Smart Vaccine commander 
(SVC) to perform ­vaccination services for a particular critical system. There 
are thousands of SVVs that are dedicated to perform vaccination-as-a-service 
throughout the city’s smart grid.
Smart Vaccine intelligence officers: These agents have the responsibility to roam 
around the smart grid and collect intelligence information for the Smart 
Vaccine commander and the CCC. They also communicate with the ­early 
warning command for alerts.
Smart Vaccine communicator: This agent is responsible for signaling other Smart 
Vaccines during the attack. It is responsible for communicating with the other 
SVVs and the paramedics.
Smart Vaccine killers: These are the heavy-duty agents that are responsible for 
quarantining the attacking worm or virus and deleting it after getting a copy 
of its code and signature.
Central
Coordination
Center
The SV
Commander
The SV
Communicator
During the immune response against an attack, prompt communication
between the commander and the agents who are doing the fighting is required
Like before any attack, reliable information about the enemy is required: This
agent is responsible for providing the commander with reliable data on the 
movement of the enemy
They are the hardworking agents who will perform the vaccination in the battle
They are the marines who will do the fighting. Once the virus is spotted,
they will isolate it and quarantine and kill it after copying its signature and
instructions
They are responsible for repairing the damages during and after the battle with
the vaccine
The Vaccine Knowledge Base contains all the signatures and instructions of
the vaccines prepared after capturing and killing the viruses and reverses
engineering them
During and after the battle, this agent will document the episode of the
fighting and save it in the Knowledge Base
The SV
Intelligence
The SV
Vaccinators
The SV
Killers
The SV
Paramedics
The SV
Knowledge Base
The SV
Documenter
Early Warning
Center
Figure 2.4  The hierarchy of the Smart Vaccine team and responsibilities of its agents. The commander’s messages, 
attack alerts, vaccination requests, vaccination in progress status, vaccination outcome, and documentation are working 
concurrently over the Smart Vaccine Grid. It is a real war.

29
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
Smart Vaccine paramedics: As the name implies, these agents will repair the dam-
age after the attacking virus is destroyed. If the damage cannot be fixed, then 
the system administrator will be notified.
Smart Vaccine Knowledge Base keeper: These agents work as librarians and are 
responsible for the storage and retrieval of the proper vaccines, as instructed 
by the intelligence officers and the vaccinators.
Smart Vaccine documenters: These agents are responsible for collecting documenta-
tion on the attacking virus and how the attack was executed and how the battle 
was won. These agents act like the m cells, which is one of the ­highlights of the 
immune system.
Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS)/
Smart Vaccine Speaks Web Service Language
Web services are an intercommunication messaging technology. Life is very simple, 
but we made it complicated. Similarly, the concept of Web services (WS) is simple 
and common sense, but the IT folks made it complicated. CEWPS/SV will use Web 
services to store vaccination messages and critical system activities.
Figure 2.5 illustrates the basic mechanics of Web services:
	
1.	The SV commander invokes a request on the status of the battle and its 
outcome.
	
2.	The critical system requests some information from the Knowledge Engine.
Web
service
VaaS-1
VaaS-2
VaaS-3
Dispatch
Server
Vaccination
Server
Vaccination
strategy
engine
Vaccination Service Provider
The Smart Vaccine
Command and
Control
4. Critical System invokes a help
    request from the Smart Vaccine
   Command, and VaaS is on its way
Web
service
City Critical System
Virus
symptoms
Send it to
SV
2. Critical System is in trouble
Knowledge Engines
1. The SV commander
    asks KE to store status of
    battle, virus and vaccine
Historical Attacks
Vaccine
Virus
Attacks
3. KE sends the type of virus
    and reaching out to the SV
Service
descriptor
Service
description
Figure 2.5  The Smart Vaccine Command and Control runs the show. 1. The SVC asks the knowledge engine to store the 
results of the previous attack. 2. The Critical System indicates it has been compromised. 3. The Critical System reaches out 
to the SV. 4. The Critical System describes to SV the attack and how it happened.

30
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
3.	The Knowledge Engine sends the critical system information on the type of 
virus and its corresponding vaccine.
	
4.	The critical system invokes a vaccination service from the Smart Vaccine 
Commander.
Web Services Will Have a Big Role
SOAP provides the envelope for protection and integrity of the message. It uses http 
(Internet protocol) as a rail to transfer messages from one node to another node as 
shown in Figure 2.6.
Smart Vaccine Transactional Services (SVS)
Familiarity with Web services will definitely help the reader understand SVS. For 
those readers who are not familiar with WS, a simple overview on the subject is pro-
vided. Figure 2.7 speaks for itself.
The Smart Vaccine services are divided into three groups as follows:
Group-1: Smart Vaccine services to smart city grid services—The human body can-
not operate or even live with the connectivity of the nervous system. All its 
endpoints (trillions) are recognized, and their locations are stored in the 
brain (the human central knowledge engine). Critical systems are attached 
to the grid with an adapter. They are called nodes and are recognized (by 
location and ­characteristics) and monitored by the Smart City central grid 
command (Figure 2.8).
Envelope
Header
Body
Fault
Element that identifies the XML
document as a SOAP message
Element that contains header
information
Element that contains call and response
information
Element containing errors and status
information
SOAP Envelope
SOAP header
Header
Message body
Fault
Figure 2.6  SOAP document structure. In CEWPS/Smart Vaccine language, all message envelopes that travel on the 
SOAP highway will have the sender address, the receiver address, the information inside the envelope, and what to do in 
case the envelope is lost or it is the wrong address.

31
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
Knowledge Base
Knowledge Base
Knowledge Base
Smart Vaccine
Binding
Vaccination Service
Here is my request
Send confirmation
My system has been compromised
Describe the attack
Search for the service?
Dynamic publishing
Smart Vaccine
Smart Vaccine
Critical System
The Smart Vaccine Commander
Asks the Knowledge Base to store
all the types of Vaccination
Figure 2.7  Exchange of messages between the Critical System after it was hit by an attack, and the Smart Vaccine 
Commander. Web Services are used to give a ride to the vaccination services (VaaS).
Issue vaccination request
Smart city critical systems grid (CSG)
The Smart Vaccine grid (SVG)
4
5
1
2
3
Detect and set alert
SVG command
 server
CSG command 
server
Smart Vaccine
dashboard
Smart city
dashboard
Alert
Paramedic service 
and VaaS
Location (X, Y, Z)
System (A, B, C)
Figure 2.8  Grid-to-grid scenario. A simple scenario of how the Smart Vaccine grid communicates with the Smart City 
grid. In reality, the Smart Vaccine grid is a subset of the Smart City grid. By analogy, blood vessels and nerves run and 
work together.

32
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
By design, all critical systems in the city are connected to the city’s smart grid (CSG) 
and the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG). They are recognized and monitored by the CSG 
command server by location and platform characteristics. They are displayed on the dash-
board. The scenario described in Figure 2.8 is as follows:
	
1.	A preempted attack takes place on a critical system on the grid. This will 
­happen since malware is also getting more sophisticated and potent. So ­system 
(A, B, C) is crippled and calling for help.
	
2.	The City Smart Grid (CSG) command server receives a request for repair 
(RfR). The dashboard shows the location and characteristics of the critical 
system.
	
3.	The RfR is routed to the Smart Vaccine Grid command. The location and 
properties of the attacked system are displayed on the SVG dashboard.
	
4.	The SVG command sends a request for vaccination (RfV) to the grid Smart 
Vaccine (in the field) with the necessary data about the attacked system.
	
5.	Smart Vaccine paramedics and vaccination-as-a-service (VaaS) are rushed to 
the attacked system. Later in this chapter, we describe how the Smart Vaccine 
eradicates the virus.
Group-2: Preventive vaccination—Whenever the smart grid is attacked by an 
attacking virus, the Smart Vaccine rushes to vaccinate the remaining critical 
systems as shown in Figure 2.9. It is also like subscribing to a fitness program 
to keep all the critical systems in healthy operating mode; regular preventive 
vaccinations are necessary whenever a virus is caught on the grid and a vaccine 
agent is created to eradicate it. Then, vaccine agents rush to all the systems on 
the grid and vaccinate them as precaution.
Group-3: Defense by offense vaccination—This is the most noble duty of the Smart 
Vaccine. Like in the human body, whenever there is a virus attack on a critical 
system, the Smart City Grid (SCG) command will be aware of the attack, and 
its dashboard will display the attacked system location. Smart Vaccine Grid 
(SVG) command goes on alert, and the proper vaccine agent (vaccinator) will 
rush to the attacked system for help. Figure 2.10 shows in detail the magnifi-
cent fight between the Smart Vaccine and the attacking virus (Figure 2.10). 
Let’s go over each step.
	
1.	The attacking virus is activated after a backdoor Trojan sneaked in. Instantly, 
city grid instantiates an alert request. The honeypot had the virus trapped 
before. It was reverse engineered (autopsy) and stored in the Virus Knowledge 
Base (ViKB). The antidote was built and stored in the Vaccine Knowledge 
Base (VaKB). The early warning system sends a query request to both the 
ViKB and VaKB for a match and gets the matched antidote.
	
2.	The Smart Vaccine Commander is informed and is in charge.
	
3.	In the battlefield, the Smart Vaccine vaccinator gets the antidote and carries it 
to the crippled system for vaccination.

33
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
	
4.	Antidote was loaded in the crippled system and was back to normal. All other 
critical systems on the city grid got vaccinated with the antidote.
	
5.	The first line of defense (Smart Vaccine intelligence) was sent for more infor-
mation about the attack, in case there are other copies of the virus. Mutation 
could be possible.
	
6.	The Smart Vaccine is starting to appraise the level of the attack and the 
damage.
	
7.	The Smart Vaccine commander ordered the vaccinators to inoculate the criti-
cal systems with the created vaccine, just in case the worm might spread to the 
other systems.
	
8.	The inoculation process started for all the systems on the grid.
	
9.	Like in the human body, the B cells dismember the virus and retain the 
part as a memory token for the next similar attack. The attack vector and 
­payload will be documented and packaged, ready to send to the Virus 
Knowledge Base. CEWPS is an extremely intelligent and cognitive system 
with several autonomous subsystems as specific service providers. During 
the attack, the Smart Vaccine commander orders service instances and each 
service instance has a start and finish. Some instances are stateless, and 
others are stateful.
1. The attacking virus is activated after a backdoor Trojan sneaked in. Instantly, city grid instantiates an alert request.
    The honeypot had the virus trapped before. It was reveres engineered (autopsy), and stored in the Virus Knowledge
    Base (ViKB). The antidote was built and went to the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB). The early warning system
    send a query request to both (ViKB) and (ViKB) for a match, and gets the matched antidote.
2. The Smart Vaccine commander is informed and is in charge.
3. Right in the battlefield, the Smart Vaccine vaccinator gets the antidote and carries it to the crippled system for
    vaccination.
4. Antidote was loaded in the crippled system, and was back to normal. All other critical systems on the city grid got
    vaccinated with the antidote.
5. First line of defense (the Smart Vaccine intelligence) was sent for more information the origin of the attack, in case
    there are other copies of the virus. Mutation could be possible.
CSG command server
Vaccine agent
SVG command 
server
Request to vaccinate
system (A, B, CV)
1
3
2
4
Smart Vaccine vaccinator
Smart grid
critical system
Location (X, Y, Z)
System (A, B, C)
Figure 2.9  Preventive vaccination scenario: Whenever the smart grid gets attacked, the Smart Vaccine rushes to vac-
cinate the remaining critical systems.

34
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
1
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Virus pattern
recognition
receptors
Attack
predicted
by 1st line
defense
Pearl BN
reasoner
Attacking
virus activated
Trojan enters
system
Virus
recognized
Reverse
engineer virus
Dispatch code
to 1st line
defense
Early warning alerts
B and T modules
The Smart
Vaccine
Virus
pattern
recognized
Killer agents
kill virus
Quarantine
virus
Quarantine
infected code
Build memory
code
Store memory
code in KB
5
2
3
4
6
5
11
10
12
9
8
7
Make the right
vaccine
Memorize episode
Inoculate grid
systems
Antibody dispatched
vaccine dispatched
Issue alert to
grid systems
Semantic pattern lib
Memory
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
13
14
Figure 2.10  Defense by offense scenario: The vaccinator combats the virus and keeps its signature.

35
THE STORY OF THE SMART VACCINE
	 10.	The Smart Vaccine killer agents will finish the virus completely by deleting 
the attack vector and calling upon the Smart Vaccine paramedics to fix any 
damage caused by the attack.
	 11.	Once the anatomy of the virus is known and the attack vector code has been 
reverse engineered, it will be packaged and be ready to store in the memory 
Knowledge Base.
	 12.	The proper vaccine code has already been assembled and is ready to be exe-
cuted by the Smart Vaccine.
	 13.	The memory Knowledge Base is the repository that stores all the attack vec-
tors as documentation and reference for future attacks.
	 14.	The Vaccine Knowledge Base is the repository that stores all the prepared vac-
cines for the attack.
As can be seen, a viral attack is a complex operation and needs to be matched by a very 
intelligent commanding agent with lots of hands-on experience. This is why we call 
it the Smart Vaccine. The Antivirus Technology does not have the intelligence of the 
Smart Vaccine. While viral attacks are becoming intelligent and more potent, only 
the Smart Vaccine with his highly scalar intelligence will be to take down the virus 
and nullify the attack.
A Summary of the Smart Vaccine Transactional Services and Messages
Grid-to-Grid Messages
•	 SendCSGAlert city smart grid (CSG)
•	 SendSVGAlert smart vaccine grid (SVG)
Alert Messages
•	 ForecastAttack
•	 SendAlert
•	 ReceiveAlert
Vaccine Registry Messages
•	 PublishVaccine
•	 StoreVaccine
•	 AnalyzeVaccine
Vaccination Messages
•	 QueryVaccine
•	 GetVaccine
•	 StartVaccinate
•	 AbortVaccinate
•	 EndVaccinate

36
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Virus Registry Messages
•	 StoreVirus
•	 QueryVirus
•	 RetrieveVirus
Offense Messages
•	 RecognizeVirus
•	 QuarantineVirus
•	 DecomposeVirus
•	 DecompileVirus
•	 DisassenbleVirus
•	 TerminateVirus
Memory Messages
•	 BuildMemoryCode
•	 StoreMemoryCode
•	 QueryMemoryCode
Preventive Vaccination (Nonattack Situation)
•	 CheckSchedule
•	 UpdateSchedule
Websites
http://anatomylist.com/tag/immunity+system.
http://kidshealth.org/parent/general/body_basics/immune.html.
http://science.howstuffworks.com/life/cellular-microscopic/virus-human3.htm.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4070499/.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25003131.
http://www.thebody.com/content/art1788.html.

37
3
Critical Infrastructures of 
Smart Cities
Why Did Cities Exist?
Aleppo is considered by many historians to be the oldest city in the world. The city 
today rests on four previous cities and civilizations. Its unique charm is in its chronic 
age and resilience to atrocious wars and continuous onslaughts. Since inscription, 
the layout of the old city in relation to the dominant citadel has remained basically 
unchanged. Conservation efforts within the old city have largely preserved the attri-
butes of the Outstanding Universal Value. However, the setting is distinctly vulner-
able due to the lack of control mechanisms in the planning administration, including 
the absence of a buffer zone. The historical and traditional handicrafts and commercial 
activities continue as a vital component of the city sustaining its traditional urban life.
It is just as holy as the Jerusalem and the Vatican because the Prophet Zechariah’s 
shrine has been there for a modest 2300 years. If you want to learn about the history 
of civilization, you have to visit this invincible city.
Aleppo will never turn into a smart city simply because retrofitting and modern-
izing the city is an gargantuan effort. Converting the people of Aleppo into smart 
citizens is another monumental task, as the people will not trade their residual culture 
for a disruptive technology. Aleppo will remain thriving on orderly chaos. The corol-
lary of this phenomenon is that none of the old cities in the world will suffer from 
retrofitting to become a true smart city.
What Is a Smart City?
A smart city is a holistic environment where human infrastructures are gracefully 
­integrated with physical infrastructure. A smart city is run like a tight ship, where 
central command oversees all activates. The Internet has played a pivotal role in the 
making of smart cities. Using power sensors, wireless networks, and Web- and mobile-
based applications, smart cities are becoming a reality. The term smart city is in fact very 
ambiguous and confusing, simply because the concept is used all over the world with 
different nomenclatures, context, and meanings. As of 2014, there is not a complete 
smart city. There is not even a quarter smart city, simply because it is almost impossible 
to implement at one stage. It will take at least a decade to implement, provided that 
the government has allocated the money and the right people to manage the project.

38
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
In a sense, The Smart City is not an autonomous robot, but a mechanism that works 
with humans in order to create a healthier and more productive lifestyle for the people 
that live in it. On September 12, 2013 Time magazine had an issue titled “Number of 
City Dwellers to Double in 2050,” which was an eye-opener and shocker. It meant we 
are adding the equivalent of seven New York cities to the planet every single year. As 
our planet becomes more urban, our cities need to get smarter. To handle this large-
scale urbanization, we will need to find new ways to manage complexity, increase 
efficiency, reduce expenses, and improve the quality of life.
With this rapid growth ahead of us, imagine if our cities could talk—if they could 
give us live status updates on traffic patterns, pollution, parking spaces, water, power, 
and light. Imagine how that kind of information could improve the economic and envi-
ronmental health of a city for residents, merchants, and visitors. Imagine how it could 
improve working conditions and productivity for the people who maintain the city.
What Is a Critical Infrastructure?
First, the term critical is an interesting one. It means that there is a red line coming 
up, warning you not to step beyond it. The term has profound repercussions that need 
to be respected and observed. Adding this adjective to the word infrastructure makes 
it somewhat very important but fragile.
So, the critical infrastructures (CIs) are those vulnerably fragile items that consti-
tute the backbone of our nation’s economy, security, and health. We know it as the 
power we use in our homes, the water we drink, the transportation that moves us, and 
the communication systems we rely on to stay in touch with friends and family.
Ironically, the term critical infrastructure was born and became priority number one, 
right after the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center.
Critical infrastructures are the assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or 
virtual, which are so vital that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debili-
tating effect on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or 
any combination thereof.
Critical Infrastructure Frameworks for Smart Cities
To start with, no city is smart unless it has secured its critical infrastructures.
The main components of a smart city are smart infrastructures, smart governance, 
smart management, smart citizens, smart living, smart economy, smart environment, 
and smart connectivity. For example, A380 is the most complex avionic marvel that 
has ever been built. It is equipped with 100,000 different wires, totaling 330 miles 
in length, that perform 1,150 separate functions. The smart city is another engineer-
ing marvel. When a city has all its vital activities operating autonomously and being 
weaved into one cohesive framework, then we can have a smart city (Figure 3.1).
The key success factor in developing a smart city is connectivity where all of its 
components are pathologically and holistically connected in real time to the city’s 

39
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
centralized command center. Therefore, one of the most important prerequisites is to 
have a smart grid that ties all the pieces together. It is pretty much like the nervous 
system in the human body. A smart city is just as smart as its sensors. Data sensors 
collect live data and transmit the data to a processing center to become knowledge, 
saved semantically in a Knowledge Base. Then based on the Reasoning Engine, action 
sensors will respond back to the infrastructure. The environment of The Smart City is 
totally autonomic, self-correcting, and self-optimizing.
By definition, a critical infrastructure is a vital entity that supports the life of the 
city. Any damage or destruction to this entity will have a debilitating effect on the 
performance of the city.
There are two categories of infrastructures. The first category is the human infra-
structure, which includes health, food, banking, and education. The second category 
is the physical, which includes energy, telecom, transport, and water.
A smart city works on implementing a blueprint that guarantees the people smart 
mobility, smart governance, a smart environment, smart living, and a smart economy.
A smart city is a cohesive environment that monitors all of its critical infrastruc-
tures, including roads, bridges, tunnels, rails, subways, airports, seaports, communi-
cations, water, power, and even major buildings, through a cognitive early warning 
predictive security system.
A smart city connects its physical infrastructure, IT infrastructure, social infra-
structure, and the business infrastructure to leverage the collective intelligence of 
the city.
Smart people layer
Smart governance layer
Smart sensory layer
City Big Data
Cognitive and smart security layer
Knowledge and predictive analysis layer
Smart city central coordination command
Power
Water
Food
Transport Telecom Hospitals Govern’t
Schools
Ports
Defense
Banks
MFG
Figure 3.1  The monolithic structure of the happy smart city. Sensors collect information from smart people and all other 
smart establishments. CEWPS is one of the foundation layers that is incorporated in the structure.

40
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
A smart city strives to make itself more efficient, sustainable, equitable, and liv-
able. A smart city combines information and communication technology throughout 
all its organizations in order to speed up bureaucratic processes and help to identify 
new, innovative solutions to city management complexity, in order to improve sustain-
ability and livability.
Securing the Critical Infrastructures for Smart Cities: The Plan
The National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) (http://www.dhs.gov/
nationalinfrastructure-protection-plan) is the overall proactive ­security blueprint for 
the United States. The NIPP is the responsibility of the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS). It outlines how government and private sector participants in the 
critical infrastructures community work together to manage risks and achieve security 
and resilience outcomes. The NIIP establishes a vision, mission, and goals that are 
supported by a set of core tenets focused on risk management and partnership to influ-
ence future critical infrastructures security and resilience planning at the international; 
national; regional; state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT); and owner and operator 
levels.
The NIIP builds upon the critical infrastructures risk management framework 
introduced in the 2006 NIPP. Effective risk management requires an understanding 
of the criticality of assets, systems, and networks, as well as the associated dependen-
cies and interdependencies of critical infrastructures. To this end, the National Plan 
encourages partners to identify critical functions and resources that impact their busi-
nesses and communities to support preparedness planning and capability develop-
ment. In addition to cooperative public and private support, the National Plan receives 
supplemental help from the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration 
Center (NCCIC) and the National Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC).
The NIPP report offers the reader its own definition to some key concepts through-
out the plan, which are given in the following:
•	 Critical infrastructures: Defined as “all systems and assets, whether physical or 
virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of such 
systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national eco-
nomic security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those 
matters.”
•	 Security: Defined as “reducing the risk to critical infrastructure by physical 
means or defensive cyber measures to intrusions, attacks, or the effects of 
natural or man-made disasters.”
•	 Resilience: Defined as “the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing condi-
tions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions, it includes the abil-
ity to withstand and recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally 
occurring threats or incidents.”

41
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
•	 Risk: Defined as “the potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an 
incident, event, or occurrence, as determined by its likelihood (a function of 
threats and vulnerabilities) and the associated consequences.”
•	 Risk management: Defined as “the process of identifying, analyzing, and com-
municating risk and accepting, avoiding, transferring, or controlling it to an 
acceptable level at an acceptable cost.”
The NIPP has identified 16 critical infrastructure sectors, but there is more hard work 
ahead apart from listing them in the following:
	
1.	Chemical: The chemical sector is an integral component of the U.S. economy, 
relying on and supporting a wide range of other critical infrastructure sectors. 
The sectors can be divided into five main segments, based on the end product 
produced:
	
a.	 Basic chemicals
	
b.	 Specialty chemicals
	
c.	 Agricultural chemicals
	
d.	 Pharmaceuticals
	
e.	 Consumer products
	
2.	Energy: The U.S. energy infrastructure fuels the economy of the twenty-first 
century.
	
3.	Health care and public health: The health care and public health sector protects 
all sectors of the economy from hazards such as terrorism, infectious dis-
ease outbreaks, and natural disasters. Because the vast majority of the sector’s 
assets are privately owned and operated, collaboration and information shar-
ing between the public and private sectors is essential to increasing resilience 
of the nation’s health care and public health critical infrastructures. The sector 
plays a significant role in response and recovery across all other sectors in the 
event of a natural or man-made disaster.
	
4.	Dams: The dams sector is composed of assets that include dam projects, hydro-
power generation facilities, navigation locks, levees, dikes, hurricane barriers, 
mine tailings, other industrial waste impoundments, and other similar water 
retention and water control facilities. The dams sector is a vital part of the 
nation’s infrastructure and provides a wide range of economic, environmental, 
and social benefits, including hydroelectric power, river navigation, water sup-
ply, wildlife habitat, waste management, flood control, and recreation. There 
are over 87,000 dams in the United States; approximately 65% are privately 
owned, and safety offices regulate more than 77% of state dams.
	
5.	Commercial facilities: Facilities associated with the commercial facilities sector 
operate on the principle of open public access and masses of people, such as 
arenas, stadiums, aquariums, zoos, parks, museums, and convention centers. The 
majority of the facilities in this sector are privately owned and operated. We all 

42
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
watched horror movies where monsters cause massive people to be stamped 
out. Terrorists are using these facilities for political mass killing. Guarding 
these facilities with cameras and guards has become an operating necessity.
	
6.	Food and agriculture: The food and agriculture sector is almost entirely under 
private ownership and is composed of an estimated 2.2 million farms, 900,000 
restaurants, and more than 400,000 registered food manufacturing, process-
ing, and storage facilities. This sector accounts for roughly one-fifth of the 
nation’s economic activity.
	
7.	Government facilities: This sector includes a wide variety of buildings, located 
in the United States and overseas. These facilities include general-use office 
buildings and special-use military installations and armories, embassies, 
courthouses, central post office, and national laboratories, including restricted 
zones for nuclear testing.
	
8.	Information technology: Despite illicit but affluent technology espionage and 
smuggling, this sector is central to the nation’s security, economy, and public 
health and safety. Businesses, governments, academia, and private citizens are 
increasingly dependent upon information technology sector functions. These 
virtual and distributed functions produce and provide hardware, software, and 
information technology systems and services and—in collaboration with the 
communications sector—the Internet. The sector’s complex and dynamic envi-
ronment makes identifying threats and assessing vulnerabilities difficult and 
requires that these tasks be addressed in a collaborative and creative fashion.
	
9.	Nuclear reactors and waste: Nuclear power accounts for approximately 20% of 
our nation’s electrical generation, provided by 100 commercial nuclear reactors 
licensed to operate at 62 nuclear power plants. This sector includes the following:
	
a.	 Nuclear power plants
	
b.	 Nonpower nuclear reactors used for research, testing, and training
	
c.	 Manufacturers of nuclear reactors or components
	
d.	 Radioactive materials used primarily in medical, industrial, and academic 
settings
	
e.	 Nuclear fuel cycle facilities
	
f.	 Decommissioned nuclear power reactors
	
g.	 Transportation, storage, and disposal of nuclear and radioactive waste
	 10.	Transportation systems: The transportation systems sector consists of seven key 
categories:
	
a.	 Aviation: This includes 450 commercial airports and 19,000 civil and limi-
tary airports and heliports.
	
b.	 Highway infrastructure and motor carriers: This includes 4 million miles of 
roadway, almost 600,000 bridges, and some 400 tunnels in 35 states.
	
c.	 Maritime transportation system:   This consists of about 95,000 miles of 
coastline, 361 ports, 25,000 miles of waterways, and 3.4 million square 
miles of exclusive economic zone.

43
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
	
d.	 Mass transit and passenger rail: This includes service by buses, commuter 
rail transit trolleys and streetcars, and long-distance railroad trains such as 
Amtrak and Alaska.
	
e.	 Pipeline systems: These include approximately 2.2 million miles of natural gas 
distribution pipelines, about 168,900 miles of hazardous liquid pipelines, 
and more than 109 liquefied natural gas processing and storage facilities.
	
f.	 Freight rail: This consists of 7 major carriers, more than 100 smaller rail-
roads, over 140,000 miles of active railroad, over 1.3 million freight cars, 
and roughly 20,000 locomotives. Further, over 12,000 trains are operated 
daily. The Department of Defense has designated 30,000 miles of track 
and structure as critical to mobilization and resupply of U.S. forces.
	
g.	 Postal and shipping: 707,000 career employees work for this entity. The 
postal service delivers to nearly 153 million addresses in every state, city, 
and town in this country. It moves over 206 billion envelops/year. An 
incredible crawling slug!
	 11.	Water and wastewater systems: This sector is vulnerable to a variety of attacks, 
including contamination with deadly agents, physical attacks such as the 
release of toxic gaseous chemicals, and cyberattacks. If these attacks were real-
ized, the result could be large numbers of illnesses or casualties and/or denial 
of service that would also impact public health and economic vitality. Critical 
services such as firefighting and health care (hospitals), and other dependent 
and interdependent sectors, such as energy, food and agriculture, and trans-
portation systems, would suffer negative impacts from a denial of service in 
the water and wastewater systems sector. There are approximately 160,000 
public drinking water systems and more than 16,000 publicly owned waste-
water treatment systems in the United States. Approximately 84% of the U.S. 
population receives their potable water from these drinking water systems, and 
more than 75% of the U.S. population’s sanitary sewerage is treated by these 
wastewater systems.
	 12.	Financial services: The financial services sector represents a vital component of 
our nation’s critical infrastructure. Large-scale power outages, recent natural 
disasters, and an increase in the number and sophistication of cyberattacks 
demonstrate the wide range of potential risks facing the sector.
	 13.	Communications: This sector is an integral component of the U.S. economy, 
underlying the operations of all businesses, public safety organizations, and gov-
ernment. Over the last 25 years, the sector has evolved from predominantly a 
provider of voice services into a diverse, competitive, and interconnected indus-
try using terrestrial, satellite, and wireless transmission systems. Just imagine 
the Internet goes down in the country as a result of a major blackout of power.
	 14.	Critical manufacturing: This is crucial to the economic prosperity and continu-
ity of the United States. If you think Boeing is not important, then travel by 
mule-drawn wagon. Direct attack on or disruption of certain elements of the 

4 4
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
manufacturing industry could disrupt essential functions at the national level 
and across multiple critical infrastructures sectors.
	 15.	Defense industrial base: The defense industrial base sector is the worldwide 
industrial complex that enables research and development, as well as design, 
production, delivery, and maintenance of military weapons systems, subsys-
tems, and components or parts, to meet U.S. military requirements. Take for 
example, Area 51. The intense secrecy surrounding the base has made it the 
frequent subject of conspiracy theories and a central component to unidenti-
fied flying object (UFO) folklore.
	 16.	Emergency services sector (ESS): This is the Homeland Security initiative that 
covers prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery elements. ESS rep-
resents the nation’s first line of defense in the prevention and mitigation of 
risk from both intentional and unintentional man-made incidents as well as 
from natural disasters. ESS also serves as the primary protector for the other 
15 critical infrastructures sectors. The primary mission of ESS is to save lives, 
protect property and the environment, assist communities impacted by disas-
ters, and aid in the recovery from emergencies.
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT)
Originally, the grandfather, CERT started in academia as research in computer 
­science. Then DHS renamed it US-CERT. It was the first Internet security incident 
center, and it is still here 25 years later. Only now, the grandson CERT got bigger, 
smarter, and more arrogant with his expertise from incident response to a comprehen-
sive, proactive approach to securing networked systems. CERT is part of the Software 
Engineering Institute, which is based at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, and was founded by Andrew Carnegie and Andrew W. Mellon. It is 
considered the world’s leading trusted authority ­dedicated to improving the security 
and resilience of computer systems and ­networks and is a national asset in the field of 
cybersecurity.
As described on the US-CERT website (see the “Websites” listing in the back of 
the chapter), its full mission is, through its 24/7 ­operations center,
•	 To accept triages and collaboratively respond to incidents
•	 To provide technical assistance to information system operators
•	 To disseminate timely notifications regarding current and potential security 
threats and vulnerabilities
•	 To leverage the Protected Critical Infrastructure Information Program that 
provides advice to the private sector
•	 US-CERT is part of the DHS National Cybersecurity and Communications 
Integration Center (NCCIC)
US-CERT strives to be a trusted global leader in cybersecurity—collaborative, agile, 
and responsive in a dynamic and complex environment.

45
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Challenges of US-CERT for Smart Cities
It is clear that the US-CERT alone cannot handle a national response during 
a massive cyberattack on infrastructures, as indicated by the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office (GAO), which is an independent, nonpartisan agency that 
works for the congress. Often called the Congressional watchdog, the GAO investigates 
how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars (http://www.gao.gov/products/
GAO-08-588).
The US-CERT has been under the gun of GAO to report credible cyber threat 
predictive analyses. The US-CERT has a larege reservoir of talent and experienced 
domain experts, but it is unfortunately shackled by a heavy load of national responsivi-
ties and stringent performance acceptance criteria (PAC).
Challenges of Cybersecurity in Smart Cities
The management of smart city cybersecurity is a Himalayan challenge that all tech-
nology providers underestimate, which is smart city security. We have lots of running 
rabbits in this grueling race. It is estimated that $40 billion will be spent on smart 
city technologies by 2016. We examined one survey on the 10 best smart cities in 
the world. Interestingly enough, Vienna, Toronto, Paris, New York, London, Tokyo, 
Berlin, Copenhagen, Hong Kong, and finally Barcelona turned out to be the best 
smart cities in the world. The survey was based in the following criteria: “The sur-
vey selected cities that use information and communication technologies (ICT) to be 
more intelligent and efficient in the use of resources, resulting in cost and energy sav-
ings, improved service delivery and quality of life, and reduced environmental foot-
print—all supporting innovation and the low-carbon economy.” New York is the only 
city in the United States that has all the qualities to be called a smart city.
Unfortunately, the survey did not factor security into the criteria, which would have 
pushed Tokyo to the top as the best smart city. Tokyo is already bundled with inten-
sive electronic technologies that smart cities need.
Another remarkable country that is racing toward smart cities and setting a model 
to other developing countries is the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The country, born 
in 1971 (over 40 years old), with superb leadership and harmony among the seven 
emirates, it has managed to turn sand into gold. Today, Abu Dhabi (capital) and 
Dubai have become global attractions. You can see ultimate modernization and high-
tech urbanization to the highest level. Physical security and cybersecurities were first 
on the agenda.
The UAE Is Setting a Good Example
The United Arab Emirates first established the UAE National Electronic Security 
Authority (NESA) as the federal authority responsible for developing, supervising, 
and monitoring the implementation of UAE cybersecurity strategies, policies, and 

46
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
standards. NESA seeks to safeguard the UAE online environment and contribute to 
the collective achievement of national goals. NESA also published the first edition of 
the “National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS),” “Critical Information Infrastructure 
Policy (CIIP),” and the “UAE Information Assurance (IA) Standards” that collec-
tively work toward enhancing UAE national security by improving the protection of 
national information and communications infrastructure (ICT). Then, the UAE set 
up a computer emergency response center in Dubai.
The UAE Computer Emergency Response Center (aeCERT) is a miniature copy of 
US-CERT. It is recognized as a trusted, authoritative organization dedicated to 
improving the security and resilience of computer systems and networks. The aeCERT 
is managed by top-notch domain experts and is considered a national asset in the field 
of cybersecurity and regularly partners with government, industry, law enforcement, 
and academia to develop advanced methods and technologies to counter large-scale, 
sophisticated cyber threats. aeCERT is the cybersecurity coordination center for the 
UAE. It is established by the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA) 
as an initiative to facilitate the detection, prevention, and response of cybersecurity 
­incidents on the Internet. Its mission is to sustain a resilient and vigilant ICT infra-
structure against a broader set of cybersecurity threats and to build a secure and safe 
cyber culture in the United Arab Emirates.
The United Arab Emirates Power Grids: A Must See
The United Arab Emirates is progressing with gigantic leaps and bounds to become a 
model country with the most advanced infrastructures. Power generation is a ­federated 
infrastructure that every emirate controls rather than at the central federal level.
It is worth mentioning that the UAE’s appetite for power is three times the global 
average. The need for power in the emirates was growing at a rate of 9% each year, 
while the world energy demand was rising at around 3% on average. According to the 
statistical Annual Report for Electricity and Water, 2011–2013, the UAE’s present 
power consumption is about 85.17 billion KWh, which can increase to 40,000 MW 
by 2020. 
The rapid industrialization of the Arabian Gulf, in particular in the UAE, has led to 
a sharp rise in electricity demand, plus the growing urbanization and lifestyle improve-
ments that came with the growing economic prosperity, and was enhanced further by 
the resurgent construction boom that has now returned to the region.
Each emirate (state) is responsible for the power consumption. But all the emirates 
will be connected with one national grid, which will amalgamate the power gen-
eration, transmission, and distribution networks of the seven emirates into a single 
national grid.
The Emirates National Grid (ENG) is expected to be connected with the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) grid, linking the UAE with Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, and Oman (Figure 3.2).

47
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
One important note to mention is that the Arabian Gulf countries including Saudi 
Arabia have started to focus on solar energy (photovoltaic power)—as shown in the 
picture. Dubai has been built at the leading edge of technology in every domain and 
will be setting an example of a smart city to the rest of the world.
Statistics from the Dubai Electricity and Water Authority (DEWA) show the 
impressive demographic demand of power and water: 10,356 MW of power capacity 
and 470 million of water imperial barrels of drinking water.
The transition of Dubai to smart city requires a new security paradigm to pro-
tect an ultracomplex city with three downtowns. Several cities in the Gulf region 
are considering to use Digital Immunity (DI) with the implementation of Cognitive 
Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS™)–Smart Vaccine. The Gulf countries 
are spending their own oil money (at one time, used to invest the money outside the 
country) on accelerated urbanization to build smart cities, smart government, smart 
universities, and smart homes. The Gulf countries have emerged as the focal point for 
mega projects managed by global technology companies. They realized that a smart 
power grid is the backbone of The Smart City.
Smart Cities Cannot Live without Smart Grids
Paradoxically, as cyberspace provides a world without borders, Internet connectivity has 
made suburbia a part of the city. People who started to work in remote locations and virtu-
ally are connected to business. Telecommuting has provided people convenience, comfort, 
and safety. The information highway has become critical and vulnerable. The increasing 
production of information in cities raises issues of privacy, access, and inclusion. Who 
will own the brains of smart cities? Fast Company magazine (December 2010 issue) sees 
a battle for control between hacktivists pushing for self-serve governance and companies 
providing opaque systems based on proprietary technology. Achieving balance depends 
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2  Smart city builders have to consider the new technologies to generate power. Dubai— the largest city in the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE)—has leapfrogged the world with its innovative technologies. (a) It uses solar energy (photo-
voltaic power) and (b) desalinization to generate electricity (steam power) plus the water supply for the city.

48
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
on an agenda of openness, transparency, and inclusiveness led by a central trusted agency 
and driven by open standards. Smart grids are modernized electricity grids with smart 
sensory components connected to information highways and hierarchical control units 
monitoring signal and data traffic and relaying it to central command. In order to deliver 
sustainable and scalable energy to consumers, smart grids are in fact an open grid that can 
easily integrate all sorts of renewable energy supplies, like solar, wind, and cogeneration 
plants.
Smart grids are more reliable, with fewer and shorter blackouts. They allow electric 
vehicles to be charged when demand on the network is low, and their combined bat-
tery storage can be used to support the network when demand is high. Consumers 
need no longer be passive receivers of power, but instead can take charge of their 
energy use and make meaningful decisions that will benefit both the environment and 
their hip pockets. Household appliances can be programmed or directly controlled by 
the network to run when it is most cost-effective.
In a smart city, power is managed more efficiently and effectively, lowers the ratio 
of electricity consumption per economic output, reduces overall greenhouse gas emis-
sions with demand management, and encourages energy efficiency, improves reliabil-
ity, and reduces recurring costs while making prudent investments.
A smart grid performs three important functions. First, it modernizes power systems 
through self-healing designs, automation, remote monitoring and control, and estab-
lishment of microgrids. Second, it informs and educates consumers about their energy 
usage, costs, and alternative options, to enable them to make decisions autonomously 
about how and when to use electricity and fuels. Third, it provides safe, secure, and reli-
able integration of distributed and renewable energy resources. All these add up to an 
energy infrastructure that is more reliable, more sustainable, and more resilient. Thus, a 
smart grid sits at the heart of The Smart City, which cannot fully exist without it.
Smart cities depend on a smart grid to ensure resilient delivery of energy to supply 
their many functions, present opportunities for conservation, improve efficiencies, and, 
most importantly, enable coordination between urban officialdom, infrastructure opera-
tors, those responsible for public safety. The Smart City depends on how the city organism 
works together as an integrated whole and survives when placed under extreme condi-
tions. Energy, water, transportation, public health and safety, and other aspects of a smart 
city are managed in concert to support smooth operation of critical infrastructure while 
providing for a clean, economic, and safe environment to live, work, and play.
A Smart City Runs on a Smart Grid
Consider the human body as a smart city with four intrinsic attributes that add to 
the marvel of the human body. The first attribute we know is the connectivity of all 
the parts together, although each part works independently and autonomically man-
aging its own operating responsibility. The second attribute is that each part has its 
own sensors to prepare the part for defense, for attack, and for self-repair. The third 

49
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
attribute is that each part is able to communicate with the other parts for help, for 
food supplies, and for exchange of information due to injuries. The fourth attribute is 
that each part of the body is intelligent enough to respond to the outside world with 
the proper sensors. The nervous system is the smart grid of our body. It carries sensor 
signals to the brain for action. The brain will respond by sending motor signals to the 
parts. Let us not forget the fifth important attribute which is the Human Immune 
System (HIS) that detects attacks of intruders and mobilize armies to defeat these 
intruders. Now we understand the pivotal importance of the smart grid to The Smart 
City as shown in Figure 3.3.
Here is one example of how cost-effective efficiency can be achieved in a smart city: 
Water utilities are typically one of the largest consumers of energy in a city; savings can 
be achieved by lessening their consumption of electricity as the electric utility nears its 
peak condition when energy is most expensive. By coordinating with the electric utility 
and shifting water pumping to nonpeak hours, the water utility can reduce its energy 
consumption (and ultimately its bill), help the electric utility avoid problems, and allow 
other more critical and less flexible functions (such as hospitals) to maintain uninter-
rupted supply. In the same sense, electric trains can be accelerated more slowly to reduce 
power consumption while maintaining schedules. Building owners and the public can 
also participate in demand response programs to the same end. Building on all the com-
bined data points and analysis of the smart grid, the smart city represents the next step 
in the process.
Brain
Respiratory
Leg 2
Limb 2
Heart
Skin
The Immune
System
Leg 1
Limb 1
Digestive
Regulatory
Regulatory
Figure 3.3  A rough draft of the human body as a smart grid that connects all the parts of the body with nerves. There 
are three distinct characteristics: interconnected, instrumented, and intelligent.

50
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
How to Inject Resilience in the Smart Grid
Merriam–Webster defines resilience as the ability of a substance or object to spring 
back into shape or elasticity. Under extreme conditions, the most critical function of a 
smart city would be predictability. This is the most difficult attribute of the smart grid. 
The City Coordination Center (CCC) should be prepared to manage the grid before 
and during the incoming danger. The issue of cyberattacks and defense by offense 
will be discussed later in Chapter 13. The smart grid would maintain the load in a 
predictable and more manageable fashion so that critical city infrastructure and func-
tions are maintained (among them are police, fire, hospitals), supported by microgrids. 
Self-healing automation would restore power rapidly to areas where alternate routes 
are available. Local generation would be exploited to support immediate needs. The 
community (industry, commercial, residential) would respond automatically, to reduce 
their energy needs, to lessen the burden of restoration. Transportation and traffic 
systems would coordinate with the energy systems to support critical transportation 
arteries and modes. Through it all, timely logistics information would be gathered and 
supplied to the public by all means available, but particularly through social media 
networks. Conservation, efficiency, and safety will all be greatly enhanced through 
the availability of accurate logistical information.
Testing the smart grid for resilience is a big challenge. Three things have to be 
factored into resilience. First, a qualified staff is required to manage the SGC during 
extreme conditions. Second, the public should be aware and be given notice on how to 
handle the incoming problem. Third, the SGC should know the red zone of resilience 
prior to breakdown.
Complete smart cities do not exist yet in their entirety anywhere in the world, but 
some cities such as Dubai are heading toward a smart city. The secret sauce is the 
way the ruler of the city is managing the city with a very competent and loyal team. 
Technology is the means, but the human factor in crafting the right plan is the most 
important ingredient in developing a smart city.
Smart cities, like the smart grid, will evolve slowly, but surely, over the next 
two decades. They will more fully harness, integrate, and utilize information to 
be shared between departments, infrastructure operators, and citizens. Cities will 
partner with vendors to create integrated solutions, and the smart grid will become 
only a part of a greater, more responsive urban ecosystem. Ultimately, with The 
Smart City, we are all in it together.
Smart Grid Success Formula
The first step toward building a smart city is leadership, followed by a team of innova-
tors and risk-taking technology pioneers. This team will craft a blueprint for a holistic 
efficient, livable, and sustainable city and drive collaboration between best-in-class 

51
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
global and local players across the whole smart city value chain. The main focus will 
be on integration of operation and information, hardware and software to improve the 
overall efficiency of the city. Figure 3.4 shows the systematic planning effort required 
to build a city’s Smart Grid.
Cyber-Cognitive Early Warning Model
As the old saying goes, “History shows that those who do not learn from history are 
doomed to repeat.” Radar was secretly developed by several nations before and during 
World War II. The term RADAR was coined in 1940 by the U.S. Navy as an acro-
nym for RAdio Detection and Ranging. Radar becomes a crucial operating necessity in 
aviation. It is used to detect aircraft, ships, spacecraft, guided missiles, motor vehicles, 
weather formations, and terrain. Unfortunately, radar operators were sleeping on the 
job when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. It could have saved the Titanic. History 
does lie.
Radar, however, is an object-detection system that uses radio waves to determine 
the range, altitude, direction, or speed of objects. The radar dish or antenna trans-
mits pulses of radio waves or microwaves that bounce off any object in their path. 
The object returns a tiny part of the wave’s energy to a dish or antenna that is usually 
located at the same site as the transmitter.
Cyberattacks cannot be detected by radar. Cyber missiles are stealth. Conventional 
weapons cannot protect smart grids. You need new technology. We will show you how 
to defend the smart grids.
Holy Grail of the Smart Grid
To protect the smart grid, you need another smart grid to shield from malicious 
attacks. In other words, to protect the City Smart Grid (CSG), we need the Smart 
Vaccine Grid (SVG). If you have a city with 1000 critical systems, it will be impos-
sible to protect all of them at the same time unless they are pathologically (physically 
and logically) connected to a smart grid. Again, back to the human body, just imagine 
that each part has its own brain and nervous system. We would not be able to function 
normally. In any city, the water system is independent from the power network that is 
independent from the telephone network for a good reason.
In Figures 3.5 and 3.6, we show how Digital Immunity (DI) works by using the 
grid layering concept. Digital Immunity is the smart protection layer to the Smart 
Vaccine. The CEWPS is the powerhouse of Digital Immunity for the city’s smart 
grid. CEWPS has the main responsibilities to recognize all the incoming attacks 
ahead of time, to warn all the critical systems on the city’s smart grid (CSG), and 
to order the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) to manage the vaccination missions. 
Digital Immunity is constantly in a dynamic state of alert and is achieved with the 

52
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The Systematic and Holistic Planning of the Smart Grid
Board
and select
policy
Select
leader
Infrastructure
specifications
Project
specifications
Project
phasing
Estimate
level of 
effort
Project
performance
criteria
Public and
private
sectors
City
approval and
governance
Select
city
committee
Contract
approval
Planning,
strategy, and
policy
Build
team
Establish
PMO
Energy
infrastructure
first
Present
energy
situation
Commercial
metering
Residential
metering
Change
control
Finance
tracker
Risk
assessment
Semantic
management
Select
critical
infrastructures
Integration and
control and
coordination
Control
dashboards
SCADA and
data
collection
Telecom
connectivity
Hardware
connectivity
Grid
knowledge
storage
Grid
performance 
and metrics
Grid load
monitoring
Smart Vaccine
coordination
center
Attack
early warning
center
Attack,
quarantine, and
analysis
System
vaccination and
recovery
Attack,
knowledge,
storage
Configuration
management
Backup and
alternatives
Maintenance
planning
Emergency
response
planning
Smart
Vaccine
grid
Customer
service
center
Attack
reporting
center
Grid
user group
Collect
business
intelligence
Forecast and
modeling
Predictive
analyses
Ø1
Project
Approval
Governance
Project
Management
Infrastructure
Intergration
The Grid
The
Smart
Vaccine
Customer
Interface
Analytics
Ø2
Ø3
Ø4
Ø5
Ø6
Ø7
Ø8
Ø9
Figure 3.4  The systematic and holistic planning phases to deploy the city’s smart grid. There are nine contiguous phases that have to be successfully completed before we get the smart grid.

53
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) that sits at the top of the City Smart Grid (CSG) and is 
managed by the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) and its army of vaccinators that 
are ready to combat any foreign agents that hurt the critical systems.
Two Technologies to Build the Smart Grid
Like in any conventional war, there are a couple of crucial requirements that deter-
mine victory. The first is to know the landscape of the battlefield, and the second is to 
know the location of the enemy relative to the landscape. The army that has informa-
tion on these two requirements will be able to control the timing of the attack.
SystemJ (XJ, YJ, ZJ) 
Energy
Water
Agriculture and food
Information and telecom
Government
Public health
Emergency services
Transportation
Defense industries
Banking and finance
Chemical plants
Postal and shipping
Education
Figure 3.5  The first layer of the smart grid determines the perimeter (area covered under the grid) and then localizes 
the nominated critical infrastructures and their systems. Each system will be identified on the grid as a node. Then each 
node will be connected to the metering system and to the dashboard of the city’s smart grid coordination center (SGC).
The cognitive early warning 
predictive layer 
The autonomic Smart Vaccine layer
Systemj X,Y,Z
CEWPS DB
SV DB
SGC DB
The (IC) critical system layer
Figure 3.6  This is the high-rise architecture of Digital Immunity. CEWPS and its Smart Vaccine will be the technological 
solution to fully detect and eradicate all attacks. The critical systems will also be connected to the Smart Vaccine layer and 
will be under the real-time protection of the cognitive early warning layer. All the grids have their own dashboard and are 
interconnected.

54
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
First Technology: Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI)
Most human activity depends on location-based or geospatial information, that is, 
knowing where things are and how they relate to one another. These geospatial data 
are collected by The Smart City to locate the critical infrastructures and assign a set of 
coordinates to them on the smart grid.
A spatial data infrastructure (SDI) is an incredible network of data repositories 
(can be on the cloud) to promote data sharing and consumption. SDI implements a 
framework of geographic data, which is derived from geographic information system 
(GIS) that is another prominent technology designed to capture, store, manipulate, 
analyze, manage, and present all types of spatial or geographical data and metadata. 
Users can be registered online to have access to SDI storage. A GIS is often used to 
create an account for SDI. From the diverse literature on SDI, we found it useful to 
distinguish five major categories:
	
1.	Spatial data
	
2.	Technologies (hardware, software, and clouds)
	
3.	Laws and policies
	
4.	People (data providers, service providers, and user)
	
5.	Standards for data acquisition, representation, and transfer
Due to its nature (size, cost, number of interactors), an SDI is usually government 
related. The National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) is the (SDI) in the United 
States. On the European side, INSPIRE is the SDI, and ultimately the United Nations 
Spatial Data Infrastructure (UNSDI) will be ready for specialized agencies and mem-
ber countries. In the Middle East, there are two SDIs worth mentioning: Israel-SDI 
and Abu Dhabi Spatial Data Infrastructure (AD-SDI).
Second Technology: Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
Smart cities need smart grids which in turn need smart locations. To build smart 
locations by coordinates, geospatial technologies are used to calculate geospatial data 
about the most crucial infrastructures such as power plants, hospitals, government 
building, schools, and manufacturing plants. The GIS is the right technology to cap-
ture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present all types of spatial or geograph-
ical data. A little interesting blip of history about GIS is worthwhile: GIS was used as 
early as 1832 as one of the first applications of spatial analysis in epidemiology. French 
geographer Charles Picquet, in his research “Rapport sur la marche et les effets du choléra 
dans Paris et le département de la Seine,” represented the 48 districts of the city of Paris 
by a halftone color gradient according to the percentage of deaths by cholera per 1000 
inhabitants. In 1854, John Snow depicted a cholera outbreak in London using points 
to represent the locations of some individual cases, an early successful use of a geo-
graphic methodology in epidemiology.

55
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
There are a variety of methods that can be used to enter data into a GIS, where it is 
stored in a digital format. One way is positions from a global navigation satellite system 
(GNSS) like global positioning system (GPS) can also be collected and then imported 
into a GIS. Another method is satellite remote sensing that collects raster data that 
will be further processed using grid of tiny cells. A value is stored in each of these cells 
to represent the nature of the corresponding location on the ground (Figure 3.7).
After entering data into a GIS, the data usually require editing, streamlining, and 
homogenizing for consistency. For vector data, the data must be made topologically 
correct, which means the coordinates of the vector should be known, before it can be 
used for some advanced analysis. A line is drawn as a vector with a pair of coordinates. 
A building is equivalent to a square with four coordinates. For a road network, lines 
must connect with nodes at an intersection. Errors such as undershoots and over-
shoots must also be removed.
GIS Benefits  GIS is encroaching into new fields, and the core GIS software has 
become available on an open platform interfacing with other enterprise systems. 
The software that runs on network, cloud, or mobile devices includes analytical 
and sophisticated graphical tools and an ad hoc reporting system. The website 
“Geospatial Analysis” set up by Dr. Michael de Smith and Prof. Paul Longley, 
University College London, and Prof. Mike Goodchild, UC Santa Barbara 
Figure 3.7  A descriptive 3D picture of the multiple benefits of a spatial data infrastructure (SDI). All GIS data will be 
filtered and stored in an SDI database before all the critical infrastructures are identified for the smart grid.

56
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
(http://www.­spatialanalysisonline.com) provides a reasonably comprehensive 
guide to the subject. One thing worth mentioning is that geospatial intelligence, 
based on GIS spatial analysis, has also become a key element for security. GIS 
as a whole can be described as conversion to a vectorial representation or to any 
other digitization process. So, a GIS must be able to convert geographic data from 
one structure to another. In so doing, the implicit assumptions behind differ-
ent ontologies and classifications require analysis. Object ontologies have gained 
increasing prominence as a consequence of object-oriented programming and sus-
tained work by Barry Smith and his coworkers. GIS has also become the founda-
tion to a new technique called spatial intelligence which, when openly delivered via 
the intranet, democratizes access to geographic and social network data.
Third Technology: Digital Orthoimagery (DOI)
Digital orthoimagery will be one of the most important geospatial Knowledge Bases 
used during the development of smart cities. Orthoimagery is a set of pictures of the 
Earth captured by aircraft equipped with digital or film cameras and processed to 
fit the Earth with high precision. DOI was traditionally used to provide an accurate 
visual grid-based map for measuring distances and has enough clarity to represent 
roads, structures, vegetation, and other features on the ground. But more impor-
tantly, during the emergence of smart cities, DOI became an indispensable locality 
tool for the critical infrastructures. First, a virtual grid covers the whole city. Then, 
all critical infrastructures from power plants, hospitals, emergency facilities, schools, 
banks, water system, airports, and transportation systems are identified on the grid by 
relative coordinates. The grid of the city might have 10,000 tiles, and each tile would 
be equivalent to an area of 1 km × 1 km. Each critical item would have coordinates 
(X, Y, Z), a criticality index, and many indicators related to connectivity, backup, 
security, and other blocks of data. Figure 3.8 illustrates how orthoimagery can be 
used to identify the locality of critical systems in the New Jersey area. All items are 
semantically stored in a Knowledge Base that is in turn connected to a Reasoning 
Engine for predictive analyses (this topic will be discussed in detail later).
Quantitative Assessment of Vulnerability of Critical Infrastructures
The objective of these doctrinal guidelines is to enable the user to produce sound 
and commensurable quantitative estimates of the vulnerability of the nation’s ­critical 
infrastructure systems, assets, and resources. Adhering to these guidelines will allow 
the user to quantify risks so that they can be effectively compared across the critical 
infrastructure sectors.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has been diligently trying to evalu-
ate quantitatively the vulnerability of a cyberattack on the critical infrastructures and 
the consequence of miscellaneous attacks. In this section, we will look at the different 

57
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
approaches that have been developed by the DOD, and DHS, as well as many uni-
versities which have been funded by the U.S. federal government. The Department of 
Homeland Security asked the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) to provide doctrinal 
guidelines for operationalizing a framework for quantifying risk, with a specific focus on 
quantitatively estimating the vulnerability of assets and systems comprising the nation’s 
critical infrastructure.
In 2010, the Department of Homeland Security published an interesting docu-
ment on terms and definitions called the DHS Risk Lexicon (2010 edition). This is 
the second edition of the DHS Risk Lexicon and represents an update of the version 
published in September 2008. More than 70 terms and definitions were included in 
the first edition; the 2010 edition includes 50 new terms and definitions in addition to 
the revised definitions of 23 of the original terms.
It was produced by the DHS Risk Steering Committee (RSC). The RSC, chaired 
by the Undersecretary for the National Protection and Programs Directorate and 
administered by the Office of Risk Management and Analysis (RMA), has produced 
a DHS Risk Lexicon with definitions for terms that are fundamental to the practice of 
homeland security risk management and analysis. The RSC created the Risk Lexicon 
Working Group (RLWG) to represent the DHS risk community of interest (COI) in 
the development of this professional risk lexicon.
9200 tiles
One tile = 3 m × 3 m
Total storage = 500 TB
System (Xj,Yj,Zj)
NY Critical Systems
Coordination Center
Critical infrastructure
Digital picture
Location
Demographics
Technologies
Other key data
Figure 3.8  A descriptive 3D picture of the most critical infrastructures in the New York and New Jersey area. All 
data will be filtered and stored in a CEWPS (Smart Vaccine Knowledge Base). This is a great use of orthoimagery for 
the smart grid.

58
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The RSC is the risk governance structure for the DHS, with membership from 
across the department. All terms in the DHS Risk Lexicon were completed using 
this process and represent the collective work of the DHS risk COI. The DHS Risk 
Lexicon terms and definitions will be included as part of the DHS Lexicon, and 
future additions and revisions will be coordinated by the RSC and RLWG in col-
laboration with the DHS Lexicon Program.
The Lexicon is a 69-page document containing in detail all the security and vulnera-
bility terms with examples (https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/dhs-risk-lexicon-2010.
pdf). We reviewed it and extracted some of its content that applies to this book.
Vulnerability, when used in a critical infrastructure homeland security context, is 
difficult to define because (1) various homeland security decision makers define and 
use metrics for vulnerability in different ways to support their decisions, and (2) cas-
cading consequences, interdependencies, and systems issues can lead to computational 
complexities that make the idea and valuation of isolated vulnerabilities of little or no 
use to decision makers:
	
Risk
Threat
Vulnerability
Countermeasures
Impact
=
´
´
The risk equation that we use is quite simple: risk equals impact multiplied by prob-
ability weighed against the cost (risk = impact × probability/cost). Impact is the effect 
on the organization should a risk event occur. Probability is the likelihood (threat) the 
event could occur within a given time frame. Cost (countermeasures) is the amount it 
takes to mitigate or reduce the risk to an acceptable level.
Simplistically, we can say: risk is the probability that a threat will exploit a vulner-
ability to cause harm to an asset. This is represented by R = f(T, V, A) where T = threat, 
V = vulnerability, and A = asset.
Vulnerability can also be defined as the conditional probability of success given an 
attack for a given scenario:
	
Probability (Success|Attack) = P(S|A)
Risk Computation
Commonly defined, risk is the potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an 
incident, event, or occurrence, as determined by its likelihood and the associated con-
sequences. Quantitatively, risk is estimated as the expected value of loss from one 
or more scenarios times the likelihood or frequency of those scenarios. A scenario 
describes an incident (attack, accident, or natural disaster) and what specifically is 
being attacked or affected. The probability or frequency of a scenario and the associ-
ated consequences are calculated with respect to a domain, which defines the extent of 
the effects of calculations. The domain is defined either geographically, or functionally 
(e.g., cascading, interdependent effects), or both. The domain also includes the time 
horizon (for example, immediate, 1 week, and 5 years).

59
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
As an example, consider a set of attack scenarios comprising cyberterrorists, using 
Stuxnet-like worm, to attack a grid of power plants that supplies energy to 5 million 
people in the metropolitan city, and the consequence estimates that include astro-
nomical loss of the business, major logistic chaos, and a severe economic impact until 
conditions are normalized. Another example could be a set of scenarios involving 
hurricanes that strike the East Coast from June through November of a given year, 
and the domain could be the national electrical grid and the costs and economic con-
sequences due to the associated large-scale power outages.
To compute a probabilistic risk assessment, a set of attack scenarios is specified. 
For each attack scenario, a probability of occurrence is determined and the Expected 
Value of the Consequences (EVC) given the attack occurrence is calculated. The fol-
lowing relationship is a mathematical formula for a probabilistic risk assessment:
	
Risk (Scenario , Domain
) 
=
 Scenario , Domain
EVC (Sce
S
D
P
S
D
(
)*
nario , Domain
)
Scenarios 
S
D
S
å
In case a quantitative risk metric is given to restrict the condition of the attack, then 
the risk of the attack becomes conditional. This is called the conditional risk associated 
with that attack. The conditional risk, defined as the expected value of loss given that 
the scenario occurs, is calculated as follows:
Conditional Risk = Probability that an attack is successful given that it occurs
× Consequences of the attack given that it is successful
or symbolically
	
Risk = P (successful Attack) * Impact of successful attack
When dealing with layered defenses, for example, in the power grid, then the probability 
of an attack successfully penetrating the outer layer of defense is not a condition of suc-
cessfully penetrating any previous layer. For all layers of defense contained within this 
outer layer, the probabilities are a condition of the sequence of previously penetrated layers.
For example, in a two-layer defense—F1 (firewall-1) and F2 (firewall-2)—the joint 
probability of successfully penetrating both F1 and F2 is P(F1) × P(F2|F1). That is, the 
unconditional probability of successfully penetrating F1 is multiplied by the probabil-
ity of successfully penetrating F2, given that F1 has been successfully penetrated. This 
general formula can be extended to accommodate multiple layers.
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
The SCADA system represents a wide range of protocols and technologies for 
monitoring and managing equipment and machinery in various sectors of critical 
infrastructure and industry. This includes, but is not limited to, power generation, 

60
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
manufacturing, oil and gas, water treatment, and waste management. The SCADA 
technologies and protocols are a concern related to national security because 
the disruption of these critical services would result in the failure of the related 
infrastructure and loss of life. The SCADA system will be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 10.
Stuxnet as Enemy Number 1 for Smart Grids
Stuxnet is the work of the devil impersonated by a group trying to destroy the nuclear 
reactors of Iran.
Response Planning and Preparedness
Can Infrastructures Be Secured by Smart Cities?
This is how deep the risk ocean is. Smart city planners cannot build a smart grid 
with vulnerable infrastructures. The risk is high and the emergency response during 
a calamity becomes another disaster. It is important to note that every event related 
to critical ­infrastructure is unique, leaving planners to face more unknowns than 
knowns, when it comes to response.
Response  The capabilities necessary to save lives, protect property and the environ-
ment, and meet basic human needs after an incident has occurred. But each time an 
infrastructure element fails, “it causes the emergency managers to reconsider all of 
their emergency response plans.” Infrastructure failure is a moving target.
The situation is further compounded by the privatization of roughly 85% of the 
nation’s most critical infrastructure systems. Infrastructure may encompass varied 
forms. The U.S. government classified the national infrastructures into 16 categories. 
In contemplating this extremely wide range of possible sources of calamity, emergency 
managers must work through a delicate dance with private owners of infrastructure.
When the infrastructure is becoming fatigued, the private sector has a financial 
interest to ensure its critical components are sound. While the public sector is notori-
ously underfunded and behind on its upgrades in many jurisdictions, it is obvious from 
the risk assessment that the public side is more vulnerable and has higher risk.
Responding to a critical infrastructure disaster is not just a two-way street—pub-
lic to private. It is an every-way street. It is in the nature of critical systems to be 
enmeshed and intertwined with a whole host of other systems and processes. A burst 
dam causes a flood, which takes down power, which kills the phones. Meanwhile 
roads wash away. The ripple effect can be staggering to emergency responders.
Infrastructure Disaster Preparedness  The acid test of preparedness is painful. Learning 
from past experience will definitely help in disaster preparedness. But how do we test 
the preparedness for the smart grid for the first time?

61
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
The first thing we need to know is the sources of smart grid disaster risk. The second 
thing is to make the appropriate investments now to mitigate risk in the future. And 
the third thing is to establish a level of trust ahead of time between the public and 
private sectors. The deployment of the smart grid requires leadership and tremendous 
knowledge in disaster causality.
It is interesting that when we compare preparedness to human immunity we find 
the same pattern.
The National Response Framework (NRF) (http://www.fema.gov/media-library/
assets/documents/97352) is a guide on how the nation responds to all types of disas-
ters and emergencies. It is built on scalable, flexible, and adaptable concepts identi-
fied in the National Incident Management System (NIMS) to align key roles and 
responsibilities across the nation. This framework describes specific authorities and 
best practices for managing incidents that range from the serious but purely local to 
large-scale terrorist attacks or catastrophic natural disasters. The National Response 
Framework describes the principles, roles and responsibilities, and coordinating struc-
tures for delivering the core capabilities required to respond to an incident and further 
describes how response efforts integrate with those of the other mission areas.
NRF incident annexes describe coordinating structures, in addition to the Emer­
gency Support Functions (ESF), which may be used to deliver core capabilities and 
support response missions that are unique to a specific type of incident. Incident 
annexes also describe specialized response teams and resources, incident-specific roles 
and responsibilities, and other scenario-specific considerations. NRF incident annexes 
address the following contingencies or hazards:
•	 Biological incidents
•	 Catastrophic incidents
•	 Cyber incidents
•	 Food and agriculture incidents
•	 Mass evacuation incidents
•	 Nuclear/radiological incidents
•	 Terrorism incidents, law enforcement and investigations
National Operations Center (NOC): In the event of an act of terrorism, natural 
disaster, or other emergency, the National Operations Center is the principal 
operations center for the Department of Homeland Security.
National Response Coordination Center (NRCC): When activated, the NRCC is a 
multiagency coordination center located at FEMA headquarters.
National Military Command Center (NMCC): DOD’s NMCC is the nation’s 
focal point for continuous monitoring and coordination of worldwide military 
operations.
Strategic Information and Operations Center (SIOC): The SIOC acts as the FBI’s 
worldwide EOC.

62
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Operations Research
Operations research (OR), also known as the science of better, can be described as 
a scientific approach leading to effective solutions of problems in the management 
of complex systems including distributed and preemptive cyberattacks. OR is used 
to produce powerful results in business, industry, and government to decrease cost, 
increase revenue or return on investment, manage and reduce risk, improve qual-
ity, increase throughput while decreasing delays, and improve utilization of limited 
resources. In practice, operations research is a team effort, requiring close collabo-
ration between decision makers, OR analysts, and other stakeholders. Operations 
research comes with a rich portfolio of tools to solve practically any operational 
problem. Of course in our case, we will focus on the development of better predic-
tive models to combat complex cyberattacks.
•	 Optimization through linear and nonlinear programming and integer 
programming
•	 Network scheduling
•	 Dynamic programming
•	 Waiting line or queuing theory
•	 Game theory
•	 Inventory control models
•	 Simulation
•	 Sequencing theory
•	 Markov and stochastic processes
•	 Decision analysis and utility/value theory
•	 Definition of key performance and effectiveness measures
•	 Life cycle cost estimation and return on investment
•	 Development of asset maintenance and enhancement strategies
•	 Creation of resource allocation, operations plans, and budgets
Modeling the Grid Using Queuing Theory
In the mainframe era, computer performance management (CPM) and capacity 
­planning (CP) were a great challenge for the data processing department or data cen-
ters. The Internet was not born yet, and the phone companies were making fortunes 
by charging premium price for telecommunication networks and phone lines. Remote 
users had to use modem and slave terminals to connect to the central computer. 
There was no other choice. In fact, the Internet revolution started—like any other 
societal revolution, due to the abuse of the data processing department where users 
were at the mercy of the operation managers. Big corporations, airline companies, 
retailers and government, and health care institutions had centralized data centers and 
controlled the information world. Remote users had dumb terminals and they would 

63
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
connect to the data center through slow modem. The response time was not impres-
sive, and users were lucky to get their reports on time.
Today, with cyber freedom, users are in the driving seat, and the age of central 
data processing has become “dinosaurish.” Ironically speaking, Internet service pro-
viders (ISP) have the control of delivering Internet services, and instead of using 
large water-cooled mainframes, they use server blades by the millions. The Internet 
inventors (Vinton Cerf, Tim Berners-Lee, Robert Kahn, Leonard Kleinrock, Ray 
Tomlinson, Bob Metcalfe) could not believe the monster they created. Refer to the 
following site for a historical review of the Internet: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
History_of_the_Internet.
However, all scientific applications, mathematical formulas, and analytical meth-
ods remained the same, and the term operations research (OR) adopted a new term, 
­management science and analytics. Queuing theory (QT) remained the elegant science 
used to combat unpleasant waiting lines, traffic queues and gridlocks, and emergency 
response, and of course in Telecom. Now that the smart grid is the backbone of smart 
cities, and its performance has become pivotal.
Smart Grid Information Traffic Analysis
The smart grid is an incredible information highway that connects all the critical 
infrastructures and a big variety of commercial and residential applications that are all 
running simultaneously. Traffic needs to be constantly monitored and evaluated. As 
there are different traffic types with different quality of service requirements in the 
smart grid, we differentiated five classes of traffic:
Class 1: Level 1 Transactions—These are assigned to high-priority real-time traf-
fic such as security Smart Vaccine messages, alerts, warning messages, real-
time monitoring, and control with SCADA systems.
Class 2: Level 2 Transactions—These include systems that critically control pro-
cesses on the smart grid.
Class 3: Level 3 Transactions—Surveillance cameras and emergency connectivity 
through mobile base stations are some sample applications.
Class 4: Level 4 Transactions—These include metering data and event notification.
Class 5: Level 5 Transactions—These include broadband voice telephony, multi-
media transactions, and social media.
The smart grid is tied to 16 critical infrastructures, each critical infrastructure could 
have a dozen computer systems and each computer system may have several applica-
tions with several users per application. The smart grid is a nebulous service facility. 
As a result, modeling the smart grid for performance becomes necessary.
Using the smart metering system, customer will be able to be informed about the 
current price of electric energy. Whenever the energy is too expensive, they can turn 

64
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
off some electrical appliances to reduce their total energy consumption. So by using the 
smart grid, customers are able to manage their electrical use to minimize their costs.
The smart grid can be described as a multiservice facility serving transactions com-
ing from five different sources. The smart grid is represented in the simple diagram in 
Figure 3.9.
Analytics of a Cyberattack on the Smart Grid
Queuing theory (QT) is the favorite mathematical tool for the people who work in 
modeling the performance of cybersecurity. We will use it to model cyberattacks, 
predict insider threats, construct preemptive attack scenarios, and most impor-
tantly, formulate strategies on how to predictively respond to surprise attacks and 
eliminate them altogether. Unfortunately, we are not there yet. The diagram in 
Figure 3.10 demonstrates the difference between a reactive response and a predic-
tive response.
The top layer shows scenario-1, which is the conventional attack: the criminal plans 
the attack, rehearses it, and assesses the risk. Then he or she conducts the attack from his 
Internet Protocol (IP) stealth station. The victim organization, depending on the severity 
of the attack, will suffer physical damages and will endure agonizing morale problems on 
the top of confusion. In the case of an infrastructure, the damage will initially be in the 
Waiting lines
Smart grid customers
Smart grid perimeter
Information request
App-1
Cl-1
Cl-2
App-2
App-k
Cl-j
Cl-16
App-n
tresponse= twait+ service time
n = arriving messages/s
s = Message service time/s
App busy = Arrival × service
tresponse = twait+ service time
–
–
Figure 3.9   Simplistic view of the smart grid service model characterized as a multiserver with each application belongs 
to a unique Critical Infrastructure (CI) with its own waiting line.

65
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
computer which will lose control of the physical operation, and the damage will be trans-
ferred to the physical facility.
The lower layer shows scenario-2, which shows the predictive approach utilized in 
the Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS) that replicates the Human 
Immune System. The whole pivotal concept is that postmortem is not appealing anymore 
and premortem, by predictive analyses, is the only way to save the world from malware. 
The whole book will be explaining this concept and how it will work.
Queuing Formulas
Partial Universal Queuing Equations Used in CEWPS
These are universal formulas used by industrial engineers, system performance 
­analysts, transportation planners, intersection traffic light designers, and by emer-
gency departments and paramedics to optimize arrival time. Predictive analysts also 
resort to these formulas to study Big Data access time. We are using these formulas 
to determine the arrival time of the Smart Vaccine to the location of the attack. Then 
we will be able to calibrate the performance with many assumptions until we meet 
the optimum results.
λ is the arrival rate of the attack
μ is the service rate of the vaccinator
ρ is the λ/μ utilization of the Smart Vaccine commander
C is the number of vaccinators used
M is the random arrival/service rate (Poisson)
D is the deterministic service rate (constant rate)
Reactive response after the attack
Predictive response before the attack
Plan
attack
Predict
Recognize
Alarm and mobilize
Memorize and
 document
Send similar
matching
episode
Store attack episode
Knowledge
engine
Rehearse
attack
Attack
Impact
Response
Scenario-1
Scenario-2
Figure 3.10  Reactive response versus predictive response.

66
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
M/D/1 Case (Random Arrival, Deterministic Service, and One Service Channel)
	
Expectedaveragequeuelength:
 
E m
( )
(
)
(
)
=
-
-
2
2
2 1
r
r
r
	
Expectedaveragetotaltime:E v
( )
(
)
=
-
-
2
2
1
r m
r
	
Expectedaveragewaiting time:E w
( )
(
)
=
-
r m
r
2
1
M/M/1 Case (Random Arrival, Random Service, and One Service Channel)
	
The probability of having zero vehicles in the system: Po = 1 − ρ.
	
The probability of having n attacks on the smart grid: Pn = ρnPo.
	
( )
(
)
Expectedaveragequeuelength:E m =
-
r
r
1
	
Expectedaveragetotaltime:
 
E v
( )
(
)
=
-
r
l
r
1
	
Expected average waiting time: E w
E v
( ) =
( ) - 1
m
M/M/C Case (Random Arrival, Random Service, and C Service Channel)
Expected average queue length:
	
E m
P cc
c
o
c
( )
! (
)
=
-
+
r
r
1
2
1
1
/
	
Expectedaveragenumber inthesystems:E n
E m
( )
( )
=
+ r
	
Expectedaveragetotaltime:E v
E n
( )
( )
=
l
	
Expectedaveragewaiting time:E w
E v
( )
( )
=
- 1
m

67
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Glossary: Smart Grid
AMI: Advanced metering infrastructure is a term denoting electricity meters that 
measure and record usage data at a minimum, in hourly intervals, and provide 
usage data to both consumers and energy companies at least once daily.
AMR: Automated meter reading is a term denoting electricity meters that collect 
data for billing purposes only and transmit these data in one way, usually from 
the customer to the distribution utility.
Ancillary services: Services that ensure reliability and support the transmission of 
electricity from generation sites to customer loads. Such services may include 
load regulation, spinning reserve, nonspinning reserve, replacement reserve, 
and voltage support.
Appliance: A piece of equipment, commonly powered by electricity, used to per-
form a particular energy-driven function. Examples of common appliances 
are refrigerators, clothes washers and dishwashers, conventional ranges/ovens 
and microwave ovens, humidifiers and dehumidifiers, toasters, radios, and 
televisions. Note: Appliances are ordinarily self-contained with respect to 
their function. Thus, equipment such as central heating and air-conditioning 
systems and water heaters, which are connected to distribution systems inher-
ent to their purposes, are not considered appliances.
Capital cost: The cost of field development and plant construction and the equipment 
required for industry operations.
Carbon dioxide (CO2): A colorless, odorless, nonpoisonous gas that is a normal part 
of Earth’s atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is a product of fossil-fuel combus-
tion as well as other processes. It is considered a greenhouse gas as it traps 
heat (infrared energy) radiated by Earth into the atmosphere and thereby 
contributes to the potential for global warming. The global warming poten-
tial (GWP) of other greenhouse gases is measured in relation to that of 
carbon dioxide, which by international scientific convention is assigned a 
value of one (1).
Carbon footprint: A carbon footprint is the measure of the environmental impact of a 
particular organization’s operation, measured in units of carbon dioxide.
Carbon neutral: To be considered carbon neutral, an individual or organization must 
reduce its carbon footprint to zero.
Carbon offset: Credits achieved through financial support of projects that reduce the 
emission of greenhouse gases.
Carbon trading: Practice of purchasing carbon offsets in order to advertise a building, 
organization or event as being carbon neutral. Practice is regulated in countries 
that signed the Kyoto Protocol. Carbon trading in the United States is not 
overseen by industry-wide standards or certification.
Climate change: A term used to refer to all forms of climatic inconsistency, but espe-
cially to significant change from one prevailing climatic condition to another. 

68
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
In some cases, climate change has been used synonymously with the term global 
warming; scientists, however, tend to use the term in a wider sense inclusive 
of natural changes in climate, including climatic cooling.
Compressed air energy storage: A way to store massive amounts of renewable power 
by compressing air at very high pressures and storing it in large underground 
caverns, depleted wells, or aquifers.
Congestion: A condition that occurs when insufficient transfer capacity is avail-
able to implement all of the preferred schedules for electricity transmission 
simultaneously.
Demand-side management (DSM): This demand-side management category repre-
sents the amount of consumer load reduction at the time of system peak due 
to utility programs that reduce consumer load during many hours of the year. 
Examples include utility rebate and shared savings activities for the installation 
of energy-efficient appliances, lighting and electrical machinery, and weath-
erization materials. In addition, this category includes all other Demand-side 
management activities, such as thermal storage, time-of-use rates, fuel substitu-
tion, measurement and evaluation, and any other utility-administered Demand-
side management activity designed to reduce demand and/or electricity use.
Distributed generator: A generator that is located close to the particular load that 
it is intended to serve. General, but nonexclusive, characteristics of these 
­generators include an operating strategy that supports the served load and 
interconnection to a distribution or subtransmission system.
Distribution: The delivery of energy to retail customers.
Distribution system: The portion of the transmission and facilities of an electric 
­system that is dedicated to delivering electric energy to an end user.
Electric generation industry: Stationary and mobile generating units that are 
­connected to the electric power grid and can generate electricity. The ­electric 
generation industry includes the electric power sector (utility generators and 
independent power producers) and industrial and commercial power gener-
ators, including combined heat-and-power producers, but excludes units at 
single-family dwellings.
Electric generator: A facility that produces only electricity, commonly expressed in 
kilowatt-hours (kWh) or megawatt hours (MWh). Electric generators include 
electric utilities and independent power producers.
Electric grid: A network of synchronized power providers and consumers that are 
connected by transmission and distribution lines and operated by one or 
more control centers. When most people talk about the power grid, they are 
­referring to the transmission system for electricity.
Electric power: The rate at which electric energy is transferred. Electric power is 
measured by capacity and is commonly expressed in megawatts (MW). 
A megawatt (MW) is 1 million watts.

69
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Electric power grid: A system of synchronized power providers and consumers con-
nected by transmission and distribution lines and operated by one or more con-
trol centers. In the continental United States, the electric power grid consists 
of three systems: the Eastern Interconnection, the Western Interconnection, 
and the Texas Interconnection. In Alaska and Hawaii, several systems encom-
pass areas smaller than the state (e.g., the interconnect serving Anchorage, 
Fairbanks, and the Kenai Peninsula; individual islands).
Electric system reliability: The degree to which the performance of the elements of 
the electrical system results in power being delivered to consumers within 
accepted standards and in the amount desired. Reliability encompasses two 
concepts, adequacy and security Adequacy implies that there are sufficient 
generation and transmission resources installed and available to meet pro-
jected electrical demand plus reserves for contingencies. Security implies that 
the system will remain intact operationally (i.e., will have sufficient available 
operating capacity) even after outages or other equipment failure. The degree 
of reliability may be measured by the frequency, duration, and magnitude of 
adverse effects on consumer service.
Electric utility: Any entity that generates, transmits, or distributes electricity and 
recovers the cost of its generation, transmission, or distribution assets and 
operations, either directly or indirectly, through cost-based rates set by a sepa-
rate regulatory authority (e.g., State Public Service Commission), or is owned 
by a governmental unit or the consumers that the entity serves. Examples of 
these entities include investor-owned entities, public power districts, public 
utility districts, municipalities, rural electric cooperatives, and state and fed-
eral agencies.
Electricity congestion: A condition that occurs when insufficient transmis-
sion capacity is available to implement all of the desired transactions 
simultaneously.
Electricity demand: The rate at which energy is delivered to loads and scheduling 
points by generation, transmission, and distribution facilities.
Energy efficiency, electricity: Refers to programs that are aimed at reducing the 
energy used by specific end-use devices and systems, typically without affect-
ing the services provided. These programs reduce overall electricity consump-
tion (reported in megawatt hours), often without explicit consideration for the 
timing of program-induced savings. Such savings are generally achieved by 
substituting technologically more advanced equipment to produce the same 
level of end-use services (e.g., lighting, heating, motor drive) with less electric-
ity. Examples include high-efficiency appliances, efficient lighting programs, 
high-efficiency heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems 
or control modifications, efficient building design, advanced electric motor 
drives, and heat recovery systems.

70
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Energy savings: A reduction in the amount of electricity used by end users as a 
result of participation in energy-efficiency programs and load management 
programs.
Energy service provider: An energy entity that provides service to a retail or end-use 
customer.
FERC: The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is a federal agency with juris-
diction over interstate electricity sales, wholesale electric rates, hydroelectric 
licensing, natural gas pricing, oil pipeline rates, and gas pipeline certification. 
FERC is an independent regulatory agency within the Department of Energy 
and is the successor to the Federal Power Commission.
Fuel cell: A device capable of generating an electrical current by converting the chem-
ical energy of a fuel (e.g., hydrogen) directly into electrical energy. Fuel cells 
differ from conventional electrical cells in that the active materials such as fuel 
and oxygen are not contained within the cell but are supplied from outside. It 
does not contain an intermediate heat cycle, as do most other electrical gen-
eration techniques.
Generation: The process of producing electric energy by transforming other forms 
of energy; also, the amount of electric energy produced, expressed in 
kilowatt-hours.
Global warming: An increase in the near surface temperature of Earth. Global 
warming has occurred in the distant past as a result of natural influences, but 
the term is today most often used to refer to the warming some scientists pre-
dict will occur as a result of increased anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse 
gases.
Greenhouse gases: Those gases, such as water vapor, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, 
methane, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur 
hexafluoride, which are transparent to solar (short-wave) radiation but opaque 
to long-wave (infrared) radiation, thus preventing longwave radiant energy 
from leaving Earth’s atmosphere. The net effect is a trapping of absorbed 
radiation’s surface.
Intermittent electric generator or intermittent resource: An electric generating 
plant with output controlled by the natural variability of the energy resource 
rather than dispatched based on system requirements. Intermittent output 
usually results from the direct, nonstored conversion of naturally occurring 
energy fluxes such as solar energy, wind energy, or the energy of free-flowing 
rivers (that is, run of river).
Interruptible load: This demand-side management category represents the consumer 
load that, in accordance with contractual arrangements, can be interrupted 
at the time of annual peak load by the action of the consumer at the direct 
request of the system operator. This type of control usually involves large-
volume commercial and industrial consumers. Interruptible load does not 
include direct load control.

71
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Line loss: Electric energy lost because of the transmission of electricity. Much of the 
loss is thermal in nature.
Load (electric): The amount of electric power delivered or required at any specific point 
or points on a system. The requirement originates at the energy-consuming 
equipment of the consumers.
Load control program: A program in which the utility company offers a lower rate 
in return for having permission to turn off the air conditioner or water heater 
for short periods of time by remote control. This control allows the utility to 
reduce peak demand.
NERC: North American Electric Reliability Corporation, an institution that over-
sees and regulates the reliability of the North American electrical grids.
Off peak: Period of relatively low system demand. These periods often occur in daily, 
weekly, and seasonal patterns; these off-peak periods differ for each individual 
electric utility.
On peak: Periods of relatively high system demand. These periods often occur in 
daily, weekly, and seasonal patterns; these on-peak periods differ for each 
individual electric utility.
Outage: The period during which a generating unit, transmission line, or other facil-
ity is out of service.
Peak demand or peak load: The maximum load during a specified period of time.
Peaker plant or peak load plant: A plant usually housing old, low-efficiency steam 
units, gas turbines, diesels, or pumped-storage hydroelectric equipment nor-
mally used during the peak-load periods.
Peaking capacity: Capacity of generating equipment normally reserved for operation 
during the hours of highest daily, weekly, or seasonal loads. Some generating 
equipment may be operated at certain times as peaking capacity and at other 
times to serve loads on an around-the-clock basis.
Rate base: The value of property upon which a utility is permitted to earn a specified 
rate of return as established by a regulatory authority. The rate base generally 
represents the value of property used by the utility in providing service and may 
be calculated by any one or a combination of the following accounting methods: 
fair value, prudent investment, reproduction cost, or original cost. Depending 
on which method is used, the rate base includes cash, working capital, materials 
and supplies, deductions for accumulated provisions for depreciation, contribu-
tions in aid of construction, customer advances for construction, accumulated 
deferred income taxes, and accumulated deferred investment tax credits.
Rate case: A proceeding, usually before a regulatory commission, involving the rates 
to be charged for a public utility service.
Rate features: Special rate schedules or tariffs offered to customers by electric and/or 
natural gas utilities.
Rate of return: The ratio of net operating income earned by a utility is calculated as a 
percentage of its rate base.

72
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Rate of return on rate base: The ratio of net operating income earned by a utility, 
calculated as a percentage of its rate base.
Rate schedule (electric): A statement of the financial terms and conditions governing 
a class or classes of utility services provided to a customer. Approval of the 
schedule is given by the appropriate ratemaking authority.
Ratemaking authority: A utility commission’s legal authority to fix, modify, approve, 
or disapprove rates as determined by the powers given the commission by a 
state or federal legislature.
Rates: The authorized charges per unit or level of consumption for a specified time 
period for any of the classes of utility services provided to a customer.
Reliability (electric system): A measure of the ability of the system to continue oper-
ation while some lines or generators are out of service. Reliability deals with 
the performance of the system under stress.
Renewable energy resources: Energy resources that are naturally replenishing but 
flow limited. They are virtually inexhaustible in duration but limited in the 
amount of energy that is available per unit of time. Renewable energy resources 
include biomass; hydrothermal; geothermal; solar, wind, and ocean thermal; 
wave action; and tidal action.
Solar energy: The radiant energy of Sun, which can be converted into other forms of 
energy, such as heat or electricity.
Smart grid: A generic label for the application of computer intelligence and network-
ing abilities to a dumb electricity distribution system.
Tariff: A published volume of rate schedules and general terms and conditions under 
which a product or service will be supplied.
Thermal energy storage: The storage of heat energy during utility off-peak times at 
night, for use during the next day without incurring daytime peak electric 
rates.
Thermal limit: The maximum amount of power a transmission line can carry 
without suffering heat-related deterioration of line equipment, particularly 
conductors.
Time-of-day pricing: A special electric rate feature under which the price per 
kilowatt-hour depends on the time of day.
Time-of-day rate: The rate charged by an electric utility for service to various classes 
of customers. The rate reflects the different costs of providing the service at 
different times of the day.
Transmission and distribution loss: Electric energy lost due to the transmission and 
distribution of electricity. Much of the loss is thermal in nature.
Transmission (electric) (verb): The movement or transfer of electric energy over an 
interconnected group of lines and associated equipment between points of 
supply and points at which it is transformed for delivery to consumers or is 
delivered to other electric systems. Transmission is considered to end when 
the energy is transformed for distribution to the consumer.

73
Critical Infrastructures of Smart Cities
Utility generation: Generation by electric systems engaged in selling electric energy 
to the public.
Utility-sponsored conservation program: Any program sponsored by an electric 
and/or natural gas utility to review equipment and construction features in 
buildings and advise on ways to increase the energy efficiency of buildings. 
Also included are utility-sponsored programs to encourage the use of more 
energy-efficient equipment. Included are programs to improve the energy effi-
ciency in the lighting system or building equipment or the thermal efficiency 
of the building shell.
Wind energy: Kinetic energy present in wind motion that can be converted to 
mechanical energy for driving pumps, mills, and electric power generators.
Websites
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Area_51.
http://www.cert.org/.
http://www.dewa.gov.ae/default.aspx.
http://www.dhs.gov/protected-critical-infrastructure-information-pcii-program.
http://www.emergencymgmt.com/safety/Crumbling-Infrastructure-Challenge-Emergency-
Managers.html?page=2.
http://www.fastcoexist.com/1679127/the-top-10-smart-cities-on-the-planet.
http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/662901.pdf.
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-08-588.
http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/archive/2011/June/Pages/WhoisResponsiblefor​
Cybersecurity.aspx.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090123214000290.
http://www.sdimedia.com/location/israel/.
http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/b-istr_appendices_
v19_221284438.en-us.pdf.
https://www.smartgrid.gov/lexicon/6/letter_a
https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

75
4
State of the Art of Antivirus 
and CEWPS Technologies
Historical Synopsis
During the mainframe era, the antivirus never existed. At the very least, users were 
not involved in cleaning their terminals. The Central Data Processing Department 
had to take the system down and do the cleaning. Terms like corrupt files, tracking 
cookies, worms, and Trojans never existed. In fact the term virus was not born yet until 
the days of the first PCs in 1982. On MS-DOS, contamination took place through 
floppy disks only.
While there is some contention about who actually made the first overtly harmful 
computer virus, it is fairly well accepted (though sometimes challenged) that Bernd Fix 
developed the first antivirus software in 1987. Fix, a German astrophysicist and amateur 
computer programmer (at the time), developed software to combat the first computer 
virus in the wild, which means that the virus had escaped the confines of the lab or net-
work in which it was created (which was only done via floppy disk at that time).
Virus Hall of Infamy
The first PC virus, Brain, appeared in 1986. It was a boot sector virus that works by 
modifying the first sector on floppy disks. The infected floppy executes and loads its 
code into memory, as soon as it is loaded. It does not have to be a system disk: any disk 
will do. The software called BIOS detects the disk in drive A and automatically loads 
whatever infected code is in the boot sector. The user realizes they have tried to boot 
from a floppy disk by mistake when they see the message “Nonsystem disk or disk error, 
replace and press any key when ready.” They then remove the disk and continue working, 
suspecting nothing about what has just happened. The malicious code is already in the 
RAM waiting for the kill.
You may have heard of the newly discovered Flame virus in recent days. According 
to the Washington Post (June 19, 2012), “The United States and Israel jointly developed 
a sophisticated computer virus nicknamed Flame that collected intelligence in prepa-
ration for cyber sabotage aimed at slowing Iran’s ability to develop a nuclear weapon.”
Security experts think it is likely that a government created the Flame virus—not 
to ­target average citizens but to be utilized for cyber espionage. From the investi-
gation of Kaspersky Lab, it was discovered that the virus has an MD5 (message-
digest 5) encryptor function that generates a 128-bit (16-byte) hash to hide the virus 

76
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
that was built to disrupt Iran’s ability to develop a nuclear weapon. The sophisticated 
virus has been circulating almost exclusively in the Middle East and appears to be 
targeted at Iran.
In 2010, a computer virus called Stuxnet made headlines for making the centri-
fuges in Iran used to enrich uranium spin out of control. Now there is Flame and 
Roel Schouwenberg of Kaspersky Labs—the security firm that discovered the virus—
claims it makes Stuxnet look like child’s play. “Flame is 20 times the size of Stuxnet, 
which again shows the kind of manpower and man hours that has been put into this 
project,” Schouwenberg said.
Flame basically turns computers into spies—giving them the ability to log key-
strokes, take screenshots of a machine, and even enable the microphone to record 
conversations.
No one knows for sure who created the virus but if the United States was involved, 
Flame was likely the work of the National Security Agency (NSA), whose mission is 
to eavesdrop on communications.
The following is a list of notorious attacks that created major global disruption, 
which caused severe financial damages:
Melissa: Named after a stripper in Miami, this macro virus caused the most 
damage in 1999. In its wake, Melissa caused so much e-mail traffic that com-
panies such as Intel and Microsoft were forced to close down their e-mail 
services. At the heart of the virus was a Word document, called List.DOC, 
which was sent as an attachment and, once opened, provided access to porn 
sites. The virus is said to have infected up to 20% of computers worldwide.
SQL Slammer: Also known as Sapphire, in January 2003, this virus targeted 
Microsoft’s SQL Server and Desktop Engine database software, initiat-
ing distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks on various targets. Within 
minutes of infecting the first server, Slammer began doubling its number of 
infected machines every few seconds. The effects of this virus had an impact 
on real-world situations. The Bank of America suffered ATM outages, the 
city of Seattle was unable to take 911 calls for a period, and customers travel-
ing via Continental Airlines experienced ticketing and check-in issues. The 
virus is estimated to have caused around $1 billion of damages in total.
Sasser/Netsky, May 2004: Commonly known as one of the most famous out-
breaks ever to make the news, Sasser and Netsky are famous not only for 
their astonishing effectiveness but also for the fact that they have been traced 
back to a then 17-year-old German teenager named Sven Jaschan. Sasser and 
Netsky are separate viruses, and it was the similarities in the code that initially 
linked them both to the same individual.
Storm Worm, 2007: Originally distributed in e-mail messages containing the sub-
ject 230 dead as storm batters Europe, the Storm Worm (as it became known) is 
a nasty Trojan horse that would further infect a user’s machine with malware 

77
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
once active. While Storm Worm is the name that has stuck, the virus has 
been seen masquerading behind other news-inspired subject lines. E-mails 
infected with the worm contained an executable attachment. Once run, fur-
ther malware may be installed, and the infected computer will become part of 
a botnet—a network of remotely controllable PCs (Zombies). By September 
2007, it was believed that anywhere 1–10 million computers were infected and 
part of the Storm botnet, but due to the way that computers communicate, 
gauging the size is impossible without access to the control server.
CryptoLocker: In early September 2013, several antivirus and information secu-
rity companies began receiving reports of a new piece of malware that was 
spreading across the net quickly. The so-called CryptoLocker virus belonged 
to the group of malware called ransomware. It threatens to hijack your com-
puter or data and hold it for ransom unless a payment is made to the creators 
of the virus. While this type of malware has always been fairly common, 
with plenty of examples espousing fake messages from the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) or the CIA or the NSA, CryptoLocker stood apart 
because of its ability to follow through on the promise of making your files 
completely inaccessible unless the ransom was paid.
	
	
What makes CryptoLocker different from most older ransomware mal-
ware is its use of asymmetric key cryptography. This form of encryption, long 
the gold standard for most common encryption applications, uses a key pair 
composed of a public key and a private key. The public key is used to encrypt 
the data, while the private one decrypts it. CryptoLocker uses a public key 
generated from a unique ID to encrypt all files on your computer that end in 
popularly used extensions, including images, PDF files, and documents.
Anatomy of a Biological (Human) Virus
Not to be amused by it, the Curse of the Pharaohs until today is still being observed 
by some strong believers who trust that it brings a biological causality. The curse also 
referred to as the Egyptian Curse believed to be affecting any person with greedy 
curiosity. Ironically, this solemn invisible damn does not differentiate between thieves 
and archaeologists. A priori stories about the unfortunate fatalities described bad 
luck, followed by illness or death. Since the mid-twentieth century, many authors 
and documentaries have argued that the curse is real in the sense of being created by 
scientifically explicable causes such as dormant virus, bacteria, or radiation. However, 
the modern origins of Egyptian mummy curse tales shifted from magic to science to 
explain curses. Interestingly enough, the virus existed since the dawn of life, but it was 
considered a religious taboo caused by wrath of gods. So far, the people who died from 
the curse could not lie. The people who survive it did view it as unadulterated clap trap.
We will leave it to the discretion of the reader.

78
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Originally, the term virus came from Latin referring to poison and other noxious 
substances. In biology, a virus is an infective microorganism that typically consists 
of a nucleus that contains a DNA or RNA strand surrounded by protein shell to 
bond to host cell. A virus is too small to be seen by light microscopy and is able to 
multiply only within the living cells that will harbor them as host. Viruses are also 
referred to as pathogen (suffering generator) because they are infectious agents and 
produce diseases. We may consider a pathogen as a ticking bomb that will explode 
and empty its payload when the environment is suitable. Diseases are caused by 
opportunistic pathogens that penetrate the human body, as predators, and create 
havoc. They multiply and create clones and strategically proliferate and start attack-
ing healthy cells. History has recorded incredible pathogenic fights between small-
pox, influenza, mumps, measles, AIDS, and Ebola diseases. The human body has an 
incredible immune system that demonstrated superiority in defense by offense. This 
book is about how we can replicate the Human Immune System and apply it to the 
digital world. Learning about our virus world will give us great advantage to defeat 
the digital counterpart.
Figure 4.1 shows how a virus looks under the microscope. The autonomy of a virus 
consists of three parts: (1) the genetic material made from either DNA or RNA, (2) a 
protein coat that protects these genes, and (3) an envelope that surrounds the protein 
coat when they are outside a cell. The shapes of viruses can be helical and spherical. 
The average virus is about one-hundredth the size of the average bacterium. Most 
viruses are too small to be seen directly with an optical microscope.
It was noticed during the eighteenth century that people who had suffered from the 
less virulent cowpox were immune to smallpox. People did not have any idea about 
the vaccine. Incidentally, a farmer by the name of Benjamin Jesty at Yetminster had 
Protein shell
Healing cover
Spikes
Nucleic acid
Viral envelope
DNA or RNA (not both)
Virus nucleus
Figure 4.1  Viruses are not plants, animals, or bacteria, but they are the quintessential parasites of the living kingdom. 
Although they may seem like living organisms because of their prodigious reproductive abilities, viruses are not living 
organisms in the strict sense of the word.

79
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
suffered the disease and transmitted it to his own family in 1774. The mild version of 
smallpox acted as inoculation and saved the lives of his sons.
It was Edward Jenner, a doctor in Berkeley, who established the procedure by intro-
ducing a material from a cowpox vesicle on Sarah Nelmes, a milkmaid, into the arm 
of a boy named James Phipps. Two months later, he inoculated the boy with smallpox 
and the disease did not develop. Louis Pasteur is another vaccination pioneer who 
risked his life with rabies, but in the end he created the water of life with his vaccine.
Unlike human cells or bacteria, viruses do not contain the chemical machinery 
(enzymes) needed to carry out the chemical reactions for life. Instead, viruses carry 
only one or two enzymes that decode their genetic instructions. So, a virus must have 
a host cell (bacteria, plant, or animal) to live and make more viruses. Outside of a host 
cell, viruses cannot function. For this reason, viruses tread the fine line that sepa-
rates living things from nonliving things. Most scientists agree that viruses are alive 
because of what happens when they infect a host cell.
Figure 4.2 shows a sequence diagram of how a virus miraculously attacks the 
healthy body cells (host cells). It is an incredible holy war that goes on in our body. 
More advances in immu­nology and nanobiology have made us healthier. This is why 
1. The virus fixes to a cell
    and injects its genetic
    instructions into the host
    cell.
2. The injected virus
 genetic material
           becomes incorporated
 in the cell DNA.
3. The cell starts making
    more copies of the
    virus.
4. Eventually, the cell bursts,
    releasing all the new viruses
    it has manufactured. Then
    they infect other healthy
    cells.
Figure 4.2  Once inside the host cell, the viral enzymes begin making copies of the viral genetic instructions and 
new viral proteins using the virus’s genetic instructions and the cell’s enzyme machinery. The new copies of the viral 
genetic instructions are packaged inside the new protein coat to make new viruses. Once the new viruses are made, 
they leave the host cell in one of two ways: (1) They break the host cell open after they destroy the host cell. (2) They 
pinch out from the host cell membrane and break away with a piece of the cell membrane surrounding them. This is how 
enveloped viruses leave the cell. In this way, the host cell is not destroyed. Once free from the host cell, the new viruses 
can attack other cells. Because one virus can reproduce thousands of new viruses, viral infections can spread quickly 
throughout the body.

80
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
replicating the same concept in the digital world will make us catch up with cyber 
malware. We are on the right track.
Anatomy of a Digital Virus
A digital virus is the most important diabolical invention of the twenty-first century. 
It is the mastery of a new breed of creative nerds of the third kind, who can hatch an 
ingenious piece of code to create a technological holocaust for millions of people. These 
goons can do it for money or for political or religious reasons. They surpass the intel-
ligence of a rocket scientist and challenge the perseverance of a rock climber. Hackers 
and hacking syndrome will be discussed throughout the book. Figure 4.3 illustrates 
the temple of critical infrastructure terrorism showing an assortment of malware that 
would make any terrorist drool while selecting his next apocalyptic mayhem.
Hackers are truly nasty cyber snipers, who sit behind their magic tunes and with 
pleasure shoot at a company, or a complete city, or even the whole nation. An act of 
soft violence, hackers come in two categories: category-1—the smart hacker and cat-
egory-2—the smarter hacker. The business is immorally prosperous carrying a price 
tag of $100 billion a year. It is not an underground business anymore. Companies use 
it to spy on one’s competitors. Governments resort to it to bring down hostile regimes. 
Hacking ushers the dawn of the information war. The repertoire of malware is more 
impressive than the Louvre Museum!
Technology
espionage
Military
installations
Cloud data
theft
Banking
systems
Internet service
providers
Stock
exchanges
Postal
systems
Universities
Industrial
websites
Government
Power plants and
substations
Power lines
Telecom
Public 
registries
Hospital
records
Maritime
gateways
Air
gateways
Transportation
Figure 4.3  The temple of critical infrastructure terrorism.

81
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Simplistically, the sky is the limit when it comes to building a potent virus. Nobody 
knows how many types of viruses exist in the digital world. It is like the classic saying 
“if you can measure it, you can control it.”
Anyone can write an evil code and throw it onto the information highway. 
According to the Internet World Stats, at www.internetworldstats.com, the popula-
tion of Internet users in the world, as of September 2014 was 2,802,478,934! This 
roughly comes out as 2.4 of the world’s population of 7,181,858,619. The yearly pen-
etration rate into the Internet is truly impressive with 39%. With such an accelerated 
adoption rate, viral pollution is running almost at the same rate.
A virus is a software drone (often called a bot) masqueraded as an e-mail from a 
friend, a picture, a brochure, a video, or a message about winning a lottery. Once it is 
in the host computer, it will find a good place to incubate in hiding, and sneak into 
the target file before unleashing its malicious code as instructed by the hacker who is 
monitoring the attack from his or her remote dashboard. Often, the virus will go to 
the registry of the operating system and hide there with its encrypted name.
In order for the virus to replicate itself, it must be permitted to execute code and 
write to memory. For this reason, many viruses attach themselves to executable files 
that may be part of legitimate programs. If a user attempts to launch an infected pro-
gram, the virus code may be executed simultaneously.
Shopping for a Malice Act
Type 1: The Virus
Residential virus: A virus smart enough to bluff the operating system and execute 
its attack vector with a salute.
Nonresidential virus: It is just as smart as its sibling, but it looks for a specific 
file to install its attack vector that will detonate later and leave without 
notice.
Boot sector virus: This virus infects diskettes and hard drives. Boot sector viruses 
often spread to other computers by the use of shared infected disks and pirated 
software applications.
Program viruses: Active when the program file (usually with extensions .BIN, 
.COM, .EXE, .OVL, and .DRV) carrying the virus is opened. Once active, 
the virus will make copies of itself and will infect other programs on the 
computer.
Macro virus: Programmed as a macro embedded in a document, usually found 
in Microsoft Word or Excel. Once it gets in to your computer, every docu-
ment you produce will become infected. It is a relatively new type of virus and 
may slip by your antivirus software if you do not have the most recent version 
installed. Melissa is another example of this type of virus.

82
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Multipartite virus: A hybrid of a boot sector and program viruses. It infects pro-
gram files and when the infected program is active it will affect the boot 
record.
Polymorphic virus: A virus that can encrypt its code in different ways so that it 
appears differently in each infection. These viruses are more difficult to detect.
Bacteria virus: A virus known as Rabbit. It is a program that does not directly 
damage the system; instead, it replicates itself until it monopolizes the CPU, 
memory, or disk space. This constitutes a denial-of-service attack.
Bomb virus: A bomb is actually a type of Trojan horse that can be used to release 
a virus or bacteria. Bombs work by causing an unauthorized action at a speci-
fied date and time or when a particular condition occurs. There are two types 
of bombs: logic and time. Logic bombs are set to go off when a particular 
event occurs. Time bombs go off at a specified time or date or after a set 
amount of time elapses.
Industrial spy virus: Edward Snowden pioneered the leakage of classified infor-
mation from the National Security Agency (NSA) to the mainstream media. 
The U.S. government has set up an intricate secret network to spy on the U.S. 
citizens and abroad. Cyber spying has become a normal activity among the 
nations, although Snowden revealed that NSA documents were not related to 
industrial spying. Some of the Asian countries excelled not only in organized 
spying but also in stealing precious engineering and computer documents.
Russian security researchers from Kaspersky Lab claim the NSA has found a way to 
hide spying software deep inside hard drives, giving the agency free reign to eaves-
drop on your computer activity. U.S. citizens remain perplexed about the NSA spying 
rational (https://www.rt.com/news/312567-nsa-spy-un-internet/).
The autonomic (Intelligent)Virus: Figure 4.4 shows the main components of a typical 
intelligent and autonomic virus.
The kernel is the commander of the virus; it sets the execution rules and makes 
sure they are done completely and properly. Under its command, the replicator as first 
officer (copilot) will spread copies of the mutated virus throughout the network. The 
communicator relays to the headquarter’s dashboard, all the collected information, and 
how effective the virus performed. This information is very valuable in the design of 
more sophisticated version of the virus. The navigator is the component that commu-
nicated with TCP/IP and assigns itself a legitimate address to fool the scrutiny of the 
firewall and intrusion detection system (IDS).
Type 2: The Worm—A worm is a small piece of software that uses computer net-
works and security holes to replicate itself. A copy of the worm scans the network for 
another machine that has a specific security hole. It copies itself to the new machine 
using the security hole and then starts replicating from there as well. Stuxnet is the 
worm that attacked the nuclear plant in Iran.

83
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Type 3: The Trojans—Named after the wooden horse from Greek mythology, Trojan 
horses are nonreplicating programs that appear to be benign but actually have a hid-
den malicious purpose. Some Trojan horses are intended to replace existing files with 
malicious versions, whereas other Trojan horses add another application to a system 
without overwriting existing files. Trojan horses are often difficult to detect because they 
appear to be performing a useful function.
Type 4: The Zombies—A computer that has been implanted with a daemon (a pro-
gram that runs in the background and performs a specified operation at predefined 
times or in response to certain events that put it under the control of a malicious 
hacker without the knowledge of the computer owner. Zombies are used by malicious 
hackers to launch DoS attacks. The hacker sends commands to the zombie through an 
open port. On command, the zombie computer sends an enormous amount of pack-
ets of useless information to a targeted website in order to clog the site’s routers and 
keep legitimate users from gaining access to the site. The traffic sent to the website is 
confusing and the computer receiving the packets steals CPU cycles and other appli-
cations running on the computer will come to a screeching halt.
Mainframe Legacy
In the golden days of the mainframe, there were three reputable companies 
who were selling, specifically IBM-centric support and services in performance 
Payload
The payload is the malware
to be executed according
to the instructions of the
hacker.
The virus attack usually 
infects several computers,
not just one. Also the attack
 may require the virus to 
mutate and change identity.
The kernel is the pilot that guides 
the virus attack. It dials
back the hacker and confirms
the success of the attack.
The hacker issues the
virus as an e-mail or a
website. The virus is 
masqueraded as an
executable file.
A hacker-guided virus from a
remote dashboard.
The virus attack comes 
with navigational instructions 
on where to go and where 
to hide.
Instructions
Actuator
(kernel)
Communicator
Replicator
Navigator
Figure 4.4  A virus is a software robot (called a bot) that carries instructions (payload) to be executed once the target 
is reached. It travels in stealth mode on the Internet (TCP/IP) and navigates its way until it reaches its destination. Then, it 
starts executing the instructions without being discovered. It mutates into another virus and starts all over.

84
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
management (not necessarily antivirus scanners) and removers. The three com-
panies were Candle Corporation, Boole & Babbage, and BGS. BGS, which was 
located in Waltham, Massachusetts, wrote capacity-planning software for the IMB 
MVS systems. It was acquired by Houston-based BMC Software in March 1998. 
Boole  & Babbage, which was located in Sunnyvale, California, was also acquired by 
BMC in November 1998. Candle Corporation headquarters were in Santa Monica, 
California, and were famous for its elite product Omegamon, which was acquired by 
IBM in June 2004 and became an integral part of IBM Business Systems. In early 
2002, these three companies, among others, could not compete against the emerg-
ing Internet companies and became part of the group of defunct companies. New 
companies have started to focus on security as a first priority issue much more than 
performance. Scalability was not a critical factor; companies could hog thousands 
of blade serves into huge farms. With the change in the computing landscape post-
911, cybersecurity became the real national and business concern. The Internet has 
created the globalization effect and the United States could not maintain its lead in 
cybersecurity. New companies have emerged to offer a life jacket to the comput-
ing world. Today, there are a dozen of reputable AVT vendors that have stolen the 
thunder from Silicon Valley. In fact, we all rely on one of these antivirus products:
•	 McAfee from the United States
•	 Symantec from the United States
•	 Sophos from England
•	 F-Secure from Finland
•	 Kaspersky from Russia
•	 Imperva from Israel
•	 Bitdefender from Romania
•	 Trend Micro from Japan
•	 Avast from Czechoslovakia
Introducing the Current Antivirus Vendors
McAfee: Presently, it is part of Intel Security. In 1987, in the United States, John 
McAfee founded the McAfee company (now part of Intel Security), and at the 
end of that year, he released the first version of VirusScan. In the autumn of 
1988, in the United Kingdom, Alan Solomon founded S&S International 
and created his Dr. Solomon’s Antivirus Toolkit (although he launched it com-
mercially only in 1991—in 1998, Dr. Solomon’s company was acquired by 
McAfee).
Symantec: In May 1990, Symantec acquired Peter Norton Computing, a developer 
of various utilities for DOS. In 2009, Symantec’s Norton products included a 
slew of utility and file management products: Norton 360, Norton AntiVirus 
(for Windows and Mac), Norton Internet Security (for Windows and Mac), 

85
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Norton SystemWorks (which now contains Norton Utilities), Norton Save & 
Restore, Norton Ghost, Norton pcAnywhere, Norton Smartphone Security, 
Norton Partition Magic, Norton Online Backup, and Online Family. Most 
significantly, on May 19, 2010, Symantec acquired VeriSign’s authentication 
business unit, which included the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Certificate, 
public key infrastructure (PKI), VeriSign Trust, and VeriSign Identity 
Protection (VIP) authentication services.
Kaspersky: This is a Russian company, founded by Eugene Kaspersky, Vadim 
Bogdanov, and Alexey De Mont De Rique. The antivirus software was 
released by KAMI in Russia in 1991.
F-Secure: This is a Finnish company, which boasts one of the best antivirus pro-
grams. It is streamlined, fast, and effective. With advanced protection tech-
nology and additional integrated security features, F-Secure protects against 
viruses, spyware, worms, and Trojans. F-Secure can also locate and eliminate 
rootkits. This antivirus software also protects against viruses spread through 
e-mails, cookies, or malware that attempts to infiltrate the PC registry. 
F-Secure antivirus uses heuristics and proactive protection against zero-hour 
threats that go undetected by the current virus signatures.
Trend Micro: This is a Japanese company founded in 1988, originally in Los 
Angeles by Steve Chang. Trend Micro competes in the threat and breach 
detection industry. In the antivirus industry, Trend Micro competes against 
F-Secure, Kaspersky, McAfee, Sophos, and Symantec.
Sophos: This is a privately owned British–American computer antivirus software 
company and is coheadquartered in Abingdon, England, and Burlington, 
Massachusetts. Sophos competes in the antivirus industry against F-secure, 
Kaspersky, McAfee, and Symantec.
Bitdefender. This is a Romanian company with very high marks. Its elite AVT 
software Total Security 2015 boasts one of the top malware protection engines 
in the industry.
Imperva. This is an American company founded in November 2002 by Shlomo 
Kramer and headquartered in Redwood Shores, California. Imperva is one 
of the visionary ATV companies that markets Web security-as-a-service, 
as well as directly protects critical applications and data assets in physical 
and virtual data centers. Imperva has a client base of over 3000 custom-
ers in more than 75 countries. Imperva has a dedicated research team: the 
Application Defense (ADC) Center that actively researches current threats 
and hacker trends.
The Limping Antivirus Industry
The first canonical rule is that “Malware is running on Steroids, Security is run-
ning on Diesel.” In cyberspace crime pays, and it pays well. The criminal mind is 

86
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
phenomenally creative and visionary and often is hired by law enforcement. Crime 
will not be eliminated because it is part of the human psycho-infrastructure. There 
is a strong biological basis for criminality. CBS hit television show Criminal Minds 
talks about criminals. “Those who kill in the spur of the moment tend to have a poorly 
functioning prefrontal cortex, the area that regulates emotion and impulsive behavior. 
In contrast, serial killers and others who carefully plan their crimes exhibit good pre-
frontal functioning! Criminals carry criminal gene in their DNA!
We are not talking about newbies and first timers who were the pioneers of hack-
ing. We are talking about heavyweight professionals who turned into cyberterrorists, 
cyber Zodiacs, and cyber Mansons. We all remember the ingenious parachute escape 
from flight NW 305 in November 1971. Well, most bank robbers today can funnel 
millions of dollars into their private accounts from their remote PCs. But the focus 
here is on these ruthless Hellraisers who have a specific devilish plan in mind: going 
after critical and precious infrastructure. This is an honorable terrorism. A Stuxnet-like 
Trojan could trigger massive blackout, similar to the one that hit the northeast in 2003. 
Organized cybercrime is global and well funded. The Hall of Infamy is adorned with 
the Russian Business Network (RBN), the Chinese Mafia, the Romanian Mafia, and 
a bottomless list of syndicates specializing in cyberterrorism. Check the Epilogue at 
the end of the book. Figure 4.5 overwhemingly shows how cyberterrorism surpassed 
Antivirus Technology (AVT), even in probability of occurrence.
1990
2000
2010
2020
Probability of
occurrence
Antivirus technologies
Cybercrime
Cyberterrorism
Technological
sophistication
Historically, cyberterrorism started late, but it
surpassed AVT by an order of magnitude.
We are
here.
Figure 4.5  Cyberterrorism, although it started late, has surpassed Antivirus Technology in sophistication. The gap 
between AV Technologies and cyberterrorism is as high as the Golden Gate Bridge.

87
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
The Flat Tire of AVT, No Runflat
There are valid reasons for AVT limitations:
•	 The dynamic proliferation of malicious programs was written by cyber vandals. 
AVT providers could not keep up with this viral explosion. Many computer 
programmers are becoming professional hackers, hired by the underground or 
even competing companies for spying and stealing trade secrets.
•	 Antivirus users do not regularly implement the upgrades issued by the ven-
dors. Often the antivirus software vendors do not have the updates ready and 
users decide to change brands.
•	 Antivirus software are not compatible and do not follow any standards. Users 
have hard time replacing one AVT with another. AVT software cannot coex-
ist on the same PC.
•	 The zero-day malware is called such because the software vendor has just been 
aware of the flaw and had zero day to fix it. A zero-day attack is purposely 
planned to intimidate the software vendor. That is exactly what happened to 
Microsoft.
•	 These paparazzi hackers, serial cyber banditos, and “1%er” gang went after 
Microsoft Internet Explorer (IE) and defamed it with zero-day sharpshooting 
attacks. IE became very vulnerable and lost its shirt. Estimates for Internet 
Explorer’s overall market share range from 27.4% to 54.13%, as of October 
2012. The half-cooked IE limped through half a dozen of unfortunate stumbles 
and serious sinkholes. Zero-day hackers were claimed to be the real champi-
ons in the emergence of Firefox and later Google Chrome. The diagram below 
shows the timeline of this aggravating malware. The crucial time is T4−T3 that 
represents the recovery time from the zero-day virus. Many users ignore this 
period and have given up on updates. Many users found Firefox and Chrome 
faster and easier to install. However, Microsoft decided to integrate IE with 
Windows, which makes it extremely difficult to remove (Figure 4.5).
•	 Microsoft has not been able to come up, until today, with a robust browser to 
gain back its loyal users.
•	 AVT software generally has good intentions, but not all antivirus software 
are reliable. Immediately after scanning the drives, the software tries to delete 
the infected user and system files, and by removing them, Windows stops 
functioning properly.
•	 The new generation of viruses has the ability to mutate and take another iden-
tity with new signature. The virus signature is like a fingerprint in that it can 
be used to detect and identify specific viruses. The signature is a unique string 
of bits or the binary pattern with an encrypted hash. Antivirus software uses 
the virus signature to scan the presence of malicious code. Once the virus 
takes a new identity, its trail disappears and tracking the virus becomes a real 
challenge as shown in Figure 4.6.

88
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Since innovation is driven by technology, Microsoft has taken the lead and set the 
pace to establish its kingdom. The whole world at one time depended on Windows. 
The chart in Figure 4.7 shows that 90% of all desktops were under the gravitational 
force of Microsoft.
However, Microsoft did not pay attention to the Internet genie coming out of the 
bottle, until it was too late. Bill Gates was publicly denouncing the Web as just a 
fad. Microsoft penetrated the Internet with its half-cooked Internet Explorer in 1995, 
which underwent 11 major updates and was still very vulnerable and in fact has been 
an annoying speed bump to progress. Antivirus companies have been marching 
at Microsoft’s drumbeat and cautiously trying not to step on the turf of the soft-
ware giant. Hardware vendors also paid homage to Microsoft. Software companies 
that challenged Microsoft were either doomed or acquired. From July 1987 to late 
2014, Microsoft has bought or acquired 166 companies. For example, Skype was 
bought for 8.5 billion and later Nokia for 7.2 billion (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_mergers_and_acquisitions_by_Microsoft).
Microsoft has never been a security elite company and that is why Antivirus 
Technology (AVT) providers have been under the gravitation of Microsoft in order 
to survive. Most of them survived because they did not advance beyond Microsoft 
marching orders. Consumers were lured, we all remember that, to buying an antivirus 
software that came with their new PCs and laptops as the ultimate life jacket. The state 
of the health of system security stagnated, although the AVT kitchen was huffing 
and puffing with lots of cooking and boiling, but AVT providers did not offer innova-
tive solutions to address the escalating cybercrime/cyberterrorism. There were lots of 
updates and new covers. Zero-day attacks were big time and it was party time for the 
Black Hat community. Microsoft lost the lead and the Bill Gates era passed into obliv-
ion. Apple, Google, and Amazon took the lead in software and stunned the market 
with awesome innovations. Microsoft became the fifth behind Apple, Google, Oracle, 
and CISCO, dragging its feet with imitated gadget. Microsoft fooled everyone with 
A flaw discovered
The flaw published
by hackers
Microsoft notified by
Symantec and others
The flaw fixed by
Microsoft
Updates sent to
legitimate users
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
Malware spread window
Zero-day attack timeline
(T4 – T3)
Crucial recovery
period for users
Figure 4.6  Timeline of the notorious zero-day exploit, the Achilles of Microsoft IE.

89
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Others, 4.3%, 4%
Android
Browser, 10.5%,
10%
Safari, 25.5%, 26%
Chrome, 34.6%,
35%
Internet
Explorer, 12.5%,
13%
Firefox, 11.9%,
12%
Web Browser Usage
Operating Systems Usage
April 2014
OS X, 6.4%, 7%
Windows 8, 6.3%,
7%
Windows XP,
23.8%, 25%
Windows 7, 51.7%,
55%
Linux, 2.7%, 3%
Windows Vista,
3.1%, 3%
Figure 4.7  Statistics show that Microsoft is losing its grip. (From Shareaholic, www.shareholic.com.)

90
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
its phony promises. Windows has lost its shine and became fragile and brittle. With 
the emergence of tablets, even Amazon threw its hat in the ring with its fire tablet. 
Security technology hit a cul-de-sac and consumers have decided to switch to tablets.
Two-Generation Leap
Figure 4.8 clearly shows the progression of the AVT industry and the quantum leap 
of the new system, CEWPS. From the beginning of the antivirus software industry 
of 1986 until the present time, there has been substantial progress and sophistication 
among all the competing AVT vendors. Their contribution is in fact monumental 
to say the least. However, looking at the state of the art of malware, we realize that 
AVT is losing its grip on malware and in fact, it has reached the plateau of stagnation. 
In general, AVT software is not designed as an expert system. It does not have any 
artificial intelligence (AI) components. AVT software does not have any autonomic 
computing or self-managing capabilities of distributed computing resources, adapting 
to unpredictable changes while hiding intrinsic complexity to operators and users. The 
first characteristic is self-configuring to adapt to dynamically changing environments. 
The second characteristic is self-healing for business resilience by discovering, ana-
lyzing, and acting to prevent disruptions. The third characteristic is self-­optimizing 
to achieve operational efficiency by tuning resources and balancing workloads to 
Security technological sophistication
This is the objective of
the R&D project.
This is the level of the
antivirus state of the art.
CEWPS
2
1
Fully autonomic, grid, early warning, on demand
Intelligent, no grid, proactive
Smart, no grid
Reactive
1990
DOS
NT 4.0
W2000
Win XP
Vista
Windows 7
Windows 8
2000
2010
2020
Symantec
Trend Micro
F-Secure
Sphos
McAfee
Kaspersky
Ad-Aware
PC Tools
Figure 4.8  CEWPS is two generations ahead of the present Antivirus Technology (AVT). To win the war on cyberterror-
ism, we have to leap two generations into the artificial intelligence domain. That is why CEWPS was developed. Technology 
pioneers such as Google, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft, and IBM should be part of this new paradigm shift.

91
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
maximize the use of system resources. The fourth characteristic is self-protecting by 
anticipating, detecting, identifying, and protecting against attacks. The present AVT 
software does not operate on an intelligent grid. Each user PC has to have a copy. 
AVT vendors made killing by selling static copies and forced customers to a yearly 
subscription to download updates. Vendors use every dirty trick to scare users. Often, 
users are hijacked unaware that a copy of an unknown antivirus sneaks into their PC. 
To add insult to injury, the downloaded antivirus immobilizes the original antivirus 
and imposes control over the user. The software licensing trauma left a bitter taste in 
the user’s mouth. Microsoft made its billions with its monopoly of shrink-wrap and 
click-wrap licenses. Software license contracts were written for the benefit of the ven-
dors and shoved down the user’s throat. Users had to click “yes”; otherwise, they could 
not install the software, despite having paid for it. AVT vendors copycatted all this 
mischief and drummed up agreements with Dell, IBM, HP, and the rest of the pack 
to amalgamate software and PC and fool the user as a great deal.
InfoSec Community Forums in November 2012 published an article titled “The 
Shortcomings of Anti-Virus Software” authored by Daniel Wesemann where he sys-
tematically showed how corrupt the AVT vendors are.
None of the AVT software has an early warning component to alert the user about 
an attack forecast—pretty much like the weather forecast. This feature is very complex 
and requires a Reasoning Engine with a Knowledge Base where all historical attacks 
are semantically stored. Another feature that is missing from all the AVT software 
is the forensic tracking. To delete or quarantine an attack causes a serious problem: it 
modifies or eradicates evidence. The alert is not enough; a detailed explanation on the 
removed threat and why it was eradicated will be beneficial. In other words, if the AV 
software removes a registry key to release a DLL, why could not the AV log tell us 
where this registry key was and when it was created? This would give a strong indica-
tion on how far back we have to investigate and determine what data were compro-
mised. The same holds true for the actual threat files that get deleted or quarantined: 
a full MAC (modify/access/create) time stamp in the logs could be very beneficial to 
have. The MD5 message-digest algorithm could be added to verify the data integrity 
before and after the attack.
Based on all the evidence presented, the new system, CEWPS, has been designed 
to cover all the deficiencies of the present AVT software (Figure 4.8).
Winning the war on cyberterrorism requires a totally new way of looking at digital 
security. Building a cognitive immune defense system like the Human Immune System 
will take security to the highest level. This approach will offer two robust advantages:
	
1.	An early warning alert capability to increase the preparedness of the public, 
the government, and private business
	
2.	A responsive vaccination capability to inoculate critical infrastructure systems 
(CISs) with the Smart Vaccine, which is autonomically released in case of a 
surprise intrusion or stealth attack

92
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
We need to look at the solution with a holistic vision. We cannot rely on after-the-attack 
forensic techniques to recover damage and endure emotional distress. Rather than think-
ing tactically and reacting to new threats, we need to think strategically by building a 
smarter environment to alert and quickly defend our critical infrastructures and systems.
The digital world, without system immunity, will have the same destiny of the human 
world without immunity protection. Our critical infrastructures systems will become 
very vulnerable with regular crippling attacks. Furthermore, the attacking viruses will 
become more smart and potent as technology brings advances and new tools.
The Smart Vaccine (SV) in the heart of the Cognitive Early Warning Predictive 
System (CEWPS) kicks off a new generation in cybersecurity beyond the most sophis-
ticated Antivirus Technology of today:
•	 A semantic Attack Knowledge Engine (AKE), which uses ontology to clas-
sify and store all the historical attack episodes for early warning prediction. 
Also the knowledge engine stores causality attack rules.
•	 Reverse engineering and forensic analysis component to study the anatomy 
of the most complex attacks and the impact. This will enable CEWPS to 
calculate the probability of risk and to know how to eradicate future attacks.
•	 The word predictive in CEWPS is very meaningful in AI because our predic-
tion is based on well-established cognitive science (Bayesian network mod-
eling). Early warning, on the other hand, is a descriptive term that can be 
visual, audible, or based on a hunch.
•	 The Reasoning Engine (RE) in CEWPS operates in a three-state cycle: match 
rules, select rules, and execute rules. The rules are logical premises, modus 
ponens with semantic properties, and relational constructs leading to a conclu-
sion. Reasoning rules are logically chained to represent a specific violent situation.
•	 A Reasoning Engine using Bayesian logic to perform unbiased inference deter-
mines the likelihood of future attacks, based on the occurrence in the past.
•	 CEWPS operates on a smart grid, like the nervous system, to facilitate the 
communication and transfer of early warning alerts, inoculation outcome, and 
navigation commands between the Smart Vaccine and the central command. 
The advantage of the grid is that it allows central command to broadcast alert 
instructions and allow systems to interact and alert one another. None of the 
AVT software, at this time, operates on a smart grid. This is one of the crucial 
components that gives CEWPS a tremendous operating advantage. Chapter 5 
will discuss the CEWPS grid component in detail. The nervous system is an 
incredible microcosm made of multilevel interconnected grids with millions 
of miles of “nervous system” highways that transmit directionally sensory and 
motor intelligent signals.
One of the reasons why CEWPS runs on an intelligent grid is because grid technology 
offers a tremendous security advantage for smart cities. Here are some more benefits.

93
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
An intelligent grid allows critical systems to collaborate and exchange information. 
If one system (node) is down, then the rest of the systems will compensate and offer 
temporary help until the damaged system is repaired. The grid server that oversees the 
operation of the grids makes sure that all systems are running normally. Figure 4.9 
shows how all systems collaborate on the CEWPS grid.
The Smart Vaccine is a cognitive system. It extracts critical answers through percep-
tion, reasoning, intuition, and previous knowledge.
The CEWPS Cockpit Is Fully Autonomic
CEWPS is like the Human Immune System that is equipped with a set of autonomic 
components with its most creative radar-like feature of predictive cognition.
Let’s explain what predictive cognition means.
Predictive depicts one of the most relevant concepts in cognitive neuroscience, which 
emphasizes the importance of looking into the future, namely, prediction, preparation, 
anticipation, prospection, or expectations in various cognitive domains. Predictive 
processing is the type of processing that incorporates information from the past, the 
present, but even the future. Predictive processing is the conjugate of cognitive pro-
cessing, which supports perception and motor and cognitive control.
Cognition is all mental abilities and processes related to knowledge. It includes 
attention, working memory, judgment and evaluation, reasoning and computation, 
problem solving and decision making, and comprehension and production of lan-
guage. Simply speaking, cognition is responsible for information processing before 
it is stored as knowledge in the brain. Looking at cognition from a different angle, 
we can say experience (the biological process created by external sensation or internal 
reflection) is received by cognition and converted into knowledge and stored as the 
Healthy systems
Send alert
Smart Vaccine
system
Smart Vaccine
system
Early warning server
Inoculated systems
Grid
commanding
server
Damaged system
Figure 4.9  Collaboration between the City Grid Commander and the Smart Vaccine Commander. The damaged system 
triggers a whole new phenomenon of vaccination service. All systems will be served with the same vaccine. No system will 
stay behind. The attack will be saved in the Attack Knowledge Base. Being humans, we learn and gain knowledge from our 
mistakes.

94
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
neurological description of experience. Furthermore, knowledge later is split as con-
scious and unconscious categories, concrete or abstract, intuitive or conceptual.
The success in smart cities is in its end-to-end integration with its infrastruc-
ture. In fact, smart cities utilize an On-Demand Operating Environment (ODOE) to 
achieve better infrastructure management and Digital Immunity. In fact, the main 
purpose of ODOE is to optimize the management of infrastructures. The same 
applies to CEWPS that uses ODOE, which fits like a hand in a glove. CEWPS 
is fully integrated within the Smart City on-demand environment, where the 
Smart Vaccine offers its magic vaccination services whenever the central command 
instructs it to do so. So what is a CEWPS On-Demand Operating Environment? 
And how does it work?
To transform a city such as Dubai into a smart city is a true integration challenge for 
an On-Demand Operating Environment. All infrastructures have to be integrated, 
automated, and self-managed.
CEWPS is designed specifically to protect the infrastructures in smart cities. The 
architecture of the CEWPS environment includes autonomic computing, grid com-
puting, Artificial Intelligence, knowledge engineering, and on-demand computing, 
all bundled with service-oriented architecture (SOA). Let’s review the diagram in 
Figure 4.10 and see how it works.
This layer is the brain of the CEWPS operating environment. It is the cockpit 
where all the components are autonomic and self-configuring. The early warning 
Incoming
attacks
Attacks
Early warning
signal
Nullified
attack
Attacks
Preattack
inoculation
Preattack
inoculation
Early warning
signal
Attacks
Attack
KB
Vaccine
KB
Episode
KB
Central
command
Early warning predictor/malware collector grid layer
Infrastructure critical systems grid layer
Smart Vaccine Defense Grid Layer
Attack prediction
Reasoning Engine
Figure 4.10  The logical view of CEWPS in motion. The Central Coordination Center (CCC) invokes intelligence messages 
(instances) that are in an active state. The Smart Vaccine Commander also invokes order (state) instances to its team. The 
vaccination session data will all be reserved at the Attack Knowledge Base.

95
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
predictor (EWP) is always on the alert constantly evaluating the situation. It gets 
signals from honeypots and constantly inquires from the Reasoning Engine about 
possible future attacks. The Knowledge Base (KB) semantically stores all the historical 
attack episodes. The knowledge engine (called inference) examines all these historical a 
priori attack cases and applies causality rules to generate forecast and prediction alerts.
The early warning layer communicates with the Smart Vaccine Defense and the 
infrastructure critical system layers through a whole portfolio of service-oriented 
messages.
The Smart Vaccine Defense Grid Layer is the most innovative and intelligent 
layer. The Smart Vaccine receives regular intelligence signals and alerts before any 
eminent attack. All SV servers are pathologically connected and are ready to inocu-
late the critical systems with the right vaccine. If the vaccine is not available, then 
the SV servers would issue a vaccine service request to the vaccine registry for dis-
covery. Most importantly, the central command would issue alert messages to all the 
critical systems prior to the attack. At the same time, the SV servers would rush to 
inoculate the critical system with the right vaccine prior to the attack. The diagram 
in Figure 4.11 offers a further explanation on the flow and processing of messages 
(data and instructions) in CEWPS.
Inoculation Missions of the Smart Vaccine
The Smart Vaccine is the life saver of the critical systems that reside on the grid. The 
Smart Vaccine constantly receives instructions from the grid central command before 
it delivers the vaccination services to the proper systems. The diagram in Figure 4.12 
shows the type of vaccination services that are delivered.
Honeypot farm
trapped attacks
From the outside
Early warning
alert server
Command
center server
Attack
knowledge
engine
Smart
Vaccine
server
MsgAttack
MsgAttack
MsgAlert
MsgVirus
MsgVaccine
SVService
Virus identified
Vaccine prepared
Send vaccine
to critical
systems
Store the attack in the
Knowledge Base
Figure 4.11  The Central Coordination Center (CCC) receives information from the early warning alert server. The 
CCC also gets advice from the Attack Knowledge Base on what to do next. Next, the Smart Vaccine Commander gets its 
marching orders.

96
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Analytic Thinking Reduces Belief in Conspiracy Theories
Cognition Magazine (volume 133, issue 3), from Elsevier, published an interesting 
paper on the relationship between analytic thinking and conspiracy. We think the 
same logic would apply to cyberterrorism theories. The paper states:
Belief in conspiracy theories has been associated with a range of negative health, civic, and 
social ­outcomes, requiring reliable methods of reducing such belief. Thinking dispositions 
have been highlighted as one possible factor associated with belief in conspiracy ­theories, 
but actual relationships have only been infrequently studied. In Study 1, we examined 
the association between belief in conspiracy theories and a range of measures of thinking 
dispositions with a population sample of 990. Results indicated that a stronger belief in 
conspiracy theories was significantly associated with lower analytic thinking and open-
mindedness and greater intuitive thinking. In Studies 2–4, we examined the causational 
role played by analytic thinking in relation to conspiracist ideation. In Study 2 with a sam-
ple population of 112, we showed that a verbal fluency task that elicited analytic thinking 
reduced belief in conspiracy theories. In the third, Study 3 with 189 samples, we found 
that an alternative method of eliciting analytic thinking, which related to cognitive disflu-
ency, was effective at reducing conspiracist ideation in a student sample. In Study 4, we 
replicated the results of Study 3 with a sample population of 140 in relation to generic 
conspiracist ideation and belief in conspiracy theories about the July 7, 2005, bombings in 
London. Our results highlight the potential utility of supporting attempts to promote ana-
lytic thinking as a means of countering the widespread acceptance of conspiracy theories.
The Immune System and the Nervous System
According to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), 
there is clear evidence that our immune system and nervous system are tightly coupled 
Attacking
virus
Healthy system
Autonomically
monitored to keep
system healthy.
Service Type 1
Smart Vaccine
Service Type 2
Service Type 3
When virus attacks
the grid, adaptive
vaccine response is 
performed.
Reverse engineering
first before the
immune system is
rebuilt from scratch.
System is back on the
grid and autonomically
monitored.
Infected system
Damaged system
Healthy system
Figure 4.12  The Smart Vaccine has three vaccination services: The first is to scan healthy systems and make sure they 
are fully vaccinated and immune against attacks. The second is to help the infected system quarantine the virus and collect 
all information about the attack. The third is to isolate the partially damaged system, switch it to the backup system, and 
rebuild its destroyed immunity from scratch.

97
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
in several ways. One well-known connection involves the adrenal glands. In response 
to stress messages from the brain, the adrenal glands release hormones into the blood. 
In addition to helping a person respond to emergencies by mobilizing the body’s 
energy reserves, these stress hormones can stifle the protective effects of antibodies and 
lymphocytes.
Another link between the immune system and the nervous system is that the 
­hormones and other chemicals that convey messages among nerve cells also speak 
to the immune system cells. Indeed, some immune cells are able to manufacture 
­typical nerve cell products, and some lymphokines can transmit information to the 
nervous system. Moreover, the brain may send messages directly down nerve cells 
to the immune system. Networks of nerve fibers have been found to connect to the 
lymphoid organs.
The neuroimmune system, as the name implies, is the area where the immune 
­system interacts with the nervous system. The nervous system grid is the information 
highway that carries crucial signals to navigate the immune cells during the attack.
Psychoneuroimmunology studies the interactions between human behavior and 
the immune system. Believe it or not, there are regulating components, under the 
name of endocrines that provide chemical balance and stability to the nervous system. 
For example, the brain modulates the immune system hardwiring sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nerves (autonomic nervous system). Reciprocally, the immune system 
modulates brain activities such as sleep and body temperature. From fever to stress, the 
influence of one system on the other has evolved in an intricate manner to help sense 
danger and to mount an appropriate adaptive response.
CEWPS (the Digital Immune System) incorporates similar features and 
­capabilities, and its three grids are tightly coupled and interact heavily with perfect 
collaboration. Chapter 5 will discuss the details of the system and how it works.
The Running Mind of the Hacker “Catch Me If You Can”
Breakthroughs in molecular biology are making it possible for researchers to examine 
DNA and explore how genetics may affect the brains of criminals. Neurolaw experts 
are troubled by the potential human rights issues presented here. Should those with 
brains predisposed to violence be given lighter sentences or, conversely, be locked away 
to prevent them from causing further harm? Should an accused killer be forced to have 
a brain scan? And if a child or young adult’s brain scan indicates a violent disposition, 
should he be relegated to a detention or prevention program? So far brain scans have 
not conclusively given a scientific validity or findings. However, neuroscientific theo-
ries, as intriguing and promising as they are, must be proven beyond any reasonable 
doubt. And the controversy goes on with its slippage, while crime proliferates and 
gradually is migrating into the cyberworld. The cliché “my brain made me do it” is 
becoming elusive and justified in cybercrime.

98
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
For as long as evil has existed, people have wondered about its source, and you do 
not have to be too much of a scientific reductionist to conclude that the first place to 
look is the brain. There is not a thing you have ever done, thought, or felt in your life 
that is not ultimately traceable to a particular Web work of nerve cells firing in a par-
ticular way, allowing the machine that is you to function as it does. So if the machine 
is busted—if the operating system in your head fires in crazy neurons—are you fully 
responsible for the behavior that follows?
Glossary: Technical Terms about Computer 
Viruses and Antiviruses
ActiveX: This technology is used, among other things, to improve the functionality 
of Web pages (adding animations, video, 3D browsing, etc.). ActiveX controls 
are small programs that are inserted in these pages. Unfortunately, as they are 
programs, they can also be targets for viruses.
Address Book: A file with WAB extension. This is used to store information about 
other users such as e-mail addresses.
Administrator: A person or program responsible for managing and monitoring an IT 
system or network, assigning permissions, etc.
Administrator rights: These rights allow certain people to carry out actions or opera-
tions on networked computers.
ADSL: This is a kind of technology that allows data to be sent at very high speed 
across an Internet connection. It requires a special ADSL modem.
Adware: Programs that display advertising using any means: pop-ups, ban-
ners, changes to the browser home page or search page, etc. Adware can 
be installed with the user consent and awareness, but sometimes it is not. 
The same happens with the knowledge or lack of knowledge regarding its 
functionalities.
Algorithm: A process or set of rules for calculating or problem solving.
Alias: Although each virus has a specific name, very often it is more widely known by 
a nickname that describes a particular feature or characteristic of the virus. In 
these cases, we talk about the virus alias. For example, the virus CIH is also 
known by the alias Chernobyl.
ANSI (American National Standards Institute): A voluntary organization that sets 
standards, particularly for computer programming.
Antidebug/antidebugger: These are techniques used by viruses to avoid being 
detected.
Antivirus/antivirus program: These are programs that scan the memory, disk drives, 
and other parts of a computer for viruses.
API (Application Programming Interface): This is a function used by programs to 
interact with operating systems and other programs.

99
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Armoring: This is a technique used by viruses to hide and avoid detection by the 
antivirus.
ASCII: A standard code—American Standard Code for Information Interchange—
for representing characters (letters, numbers, punctuation marks, etc.) as 
numbers.
ASP (Active Server Page): These are particular types of Web pages that allow a site 
to be personalized according to user profiles. This acronym can also refer to 
application service provider.
Attributes: These are particular characteristics associated with a file or directory.
Autoencryption: The way in which a virus codifies (or encrypts) part or all of itself, 
making it more difficult to analyze or detect to analyze.
AutoSignature: This is normally a short text including details like name and address 
that can be automatically added to new e-mail messages.
Backdoor: This is a program that enters the computer and creates a backdoor through 
which it is possible to control the affected system without the user realizing.
Banker Trojan: A malicious program, which uses different techniques, steals confiden-
tial information to the customers of online payment banks and/or platforms.
Banner: An advert displayed on a Web page, promoting a product or service that may 
or may not be related to the host Web page and that in any event links directly 
to the site of the advertiser.
Batch files/BAT files: Files with a BAT extension that allow operations to be 
automated.
BBS (bulletin board system): A system or service on the Internet that allows sub-
scribed users to read and respond to messages written by other users (e.g., in 
a forum or newsgroup).
BHO (Browser Helper Object): A plugin that automatically runs along with the 
Internet browser, adding to its functionality. Some are used for malicious 
ends, such as monitoring the Web pages viewed by users.
BIOS (Basic Input/Output System): A group of programs that enable the computer 
to be started up (part of the boot system).
Bit: This is the smallest unit of digital information with which computers operate.
Boot/master boot record (MBR): Also known as the boot sector, this is the area or 
sector of a disk that contains information about the disk itself and its proper-
ties for starting up the computer.
Boot disk/system disk: Disk (floppy disk, CD-ROM, or hard disk) that makes it 
possible to start up the computer.
Boot virus: A virus that specifically affects the boot sector of both hard disks and 
floppy disks.
Bot: A contraction of the word robot. This is a program that allows a system to be 
controlled remotely without either the knowledge or consent of the user.
Bot herder: A person or group that controls the botnet. They are also known as bot 
master or zombie master.

100
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Botnet: A network or group of zombie computers controlled by the owner of the bots. 
The owner of the botnets sends instructions to the zombies. These commands 
can include updating the bot, downloading a new threat, displaying advertis-
ing, or launching denial-of-service attacks.
Browser: A browser is the program that lets users view Internet pages. The most com-
mon browsers are Internet Explorer, Netscape Navigator, Opera, etc.
Buffer: This is an intermediary memory space used to temporarily save information 
transferred between two units or devices (or between components in the same 
system).
Bug: This is a fault or error in a program.
Bus: Communication channel between different components in a computer (commu-
nicating data signals, addresses, control signals, etc.).
Byte: This is a unit of measurement of digital information. One byte is equal to 8 bits.
Cache: This is a small section of the computer’s memory.
Category/type (of virus): As there are many different types of viruses, they are 
grouped into categories according to certain typical characteristics.
Cavity: Technique used by certain viruses and worms to make them more difficult 
to find. By using this technique, the size of the infected file does not change 
(they only occupy cavities in the file affected).
Chat/Chat IRC/Chat ICQ: These are real-time text conversations over the Internet.
Client: IT system (computer) that requests certain services and resources from another 
computer (server), to which it is connected across a network.
Cluster: Various consecutive sectors of a disk.
CMOS (complementary metal-oxide semiconductor): This is a section of the com-
puter’s memory in which the information and programs needed to start up the 
system are kept (BIOS).
Code: Content of virus files—virus code, written in a certain programming language. 
It can also refer to systems for representing or encrypting information.
In its strictest sense, it can be defined as a set of rules or a combination of 
symbols that have a given value within an established system.
Common name: The name by which a virus is generally known.
Companion/companion virus/spawning: This is a type of virus that does not insert 
itself in programs but attaches itself to them instead.
Compressed/compress/compression/decompress: Files, or groups of files, are 
­compressed into another file so that they take up less space.
Cookie: This is a text file that is sometimes sent to a user visiting a Web page to reg-
ister the visit to the page and record certain information regarding the visit.
Country of origin: This generally refers to the country where the first incidence of 
virus was first recorded.
Cracker: Someone who tries to break into (restricted) computer systems.
CRC (CRC number or code): A unique numeric code attached to files that acts as 
the file ID number.

101
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Crimeware: All programs, messages, or documents used directly or indirectly to 
fraudulently obtain financial gain to the detriment of the affected user or third 
parties.
CVP (Content Vectoring Protocol): Protocol developed in 1996 by Check Point that 
allows antivirus protection to be integrated into a firewall server.
Cylinder: Section of a disk that can be read in a single operation.
Damage level: This is a value that indicates the level of the negative effects that a virus 
could have on an infected computer. It is one of the factors used to calculate 
the threat level.
Database: A collection of data files and the programs used to administer and organize 
them. Examples of database systems include Access, Oracle, SQL, Paradox, 
and dBase.
DDoS/distributed denial of service: This is a denial-of-service (DoS) attack where 
multiple computers attack a single server at the same time. Compromised 
computers would be left vulnerable, allowing the attacker to control them to 
carry out this action.
Debugger: A tool for reading the source code of programs.
Deleted items: A folder in e-mail programs that contains messages that have been 
deleted (they have not been eliminated completely from the computer). After 
deleting a message containing a virus, it is advisable to delete it from this 
folder as well.
Detection updated on: The latest date when the detection of a malware was updated 
in the virus signature file.
Dialer: This is a program that is often used to maliciously redirect Internet connec-
tions. When used in this way, it disconnects the legitimate telephone con-
nection used to hook up to the Internet and reconnects via a premium rate 
number. Often, the first indication a user has of this activity is an extremely 
expensive phone bill.
Direct action: This is a specific type of virus.
Directory/Folder: Divisions or sections used to structure and organize information 
contained on a disk. The terms folder and directory really refer to the same 
thing. They can contain files or other subdirectories.
Disinfection: The action that an antivirus takes when it detects a virus and elimi-
nates it.
Distribution level: This is a value that indicates the extent to which a virus has spread 
or the speed at which it is spreading. It is one of the factors used to calculate 
the threat level.
DNS (domain name system): System to enable communication between computers 
connected across a network or the Internet. It means that computers can be 
located and assigns comprehensible names to their IP addresses.
DNS servers are those computers in which these names are handled (resolved) 
and associated with their corresponding IPs.

102
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
DoS/denial of service: This is a type of attack, sometimes caused by viruses, that 
prevents users from accessing certain services (in the operating system, Web 
servers, etc.).
Download: This is the process of obtaining files from the Internet (from Web pages 
or FTP sites set up specifically for that purpose).
Driver/controller: A program, known as a controller, used to control devices con-
nected to a computer (normally peripherals like printers and CD-ROM 
drives).
Dropper: This is an executable file that contains various types of virus.
Dynamic link library (DLL): A special type of file with the extension DLL.
EICAR: European Institute for Computer Antivirus Research. An organization that 
has created a test to evaluate the performance of antivirus programs, which is 
known as the EICAR test.
ELF files: Executable and Linking Format. These are executable files (programs) 
belonging to the Unix/Linux operating system.
Emergency disk/rescue disk: A floppy disk that allows the computer to be scanned 
for viruses without having to use the antivirus installed in the system, but by 
using what is known as the command line antivirus.
Encryption/self-encryption: This is a technique used by some viruses to disguise 
themselves and therefore avoid detection by antivirus applications.
EPO (Entry Point Obscuring): A technique for infecting programs through which a 
virus tries to hide its entry point in order to avoid detection. Instead of taking 
control and carrying out its actions as soon as the program is used or run, the 
virus allows it to work correctly for a while before the virus goes into action.
Exceptions: This is a technique used by antivirus programs to detect viruses.
Exploit: This can be a technique or a program that takes advantage of a vulnerability 
or security hole in a certain communication protocol, operating system, or 
other IT utility or application.
Extension: Files have a name and an extension, separated by a dot: NAME.
EXTENSION. A file can have any NAME, but the EXTENSION (if it 
exists) has a maximum of three characters. This extension indicates the type 
of file (text, Word document, image, sound, database, program, etc.).
Family/group: Some viruses may have similar names and characteristics. These 
viruses are grouped into families or groups. Members of the group are known 
as variants of the family or the original virus (the first to appear).
FAT (File Allocation Table): This is a section of a disk that defines the structure 
and organization of the disk itself. It also contains the addresses for all the files 
stored on that disk.
File/document: Unit for storing information (text, document, images, spreadsheet, 
etc.) on a disk or other storage devices. A file is identified by a name, followed 
by a dot and then its extension (indicating the type of file).

103
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Firewall: This is a barrier that can protect information in a system or network when 
there is a connection to another network, for example, the Internet.
FireWire: A high-speed communication channel, used to connect computers and 
peripherals to other computers.
First appeared on: The date when a particular virus was first discovered.
First detected on: The date when the detection of a certain malware was first included 
in the virus signature file.
Flooding: Programs that repeatedly send a large message or text to a computer 
through messaging systems like MSN Messenger in order to saturate, col-
lapse, or flood the system.
Format: Define the structure of a disk, removing any information that was previously 
stored on it.
Freeware: All software legally distributed free of charge.
FTP (File Transfer Protocol): A mechanism that allows files to be transferred 
through a TCP/IP connection.
Gateway: A computer that allows communication between different types of plat-
forms, networks, computers, or programs.
GDI (Graphics Device Interface): A system that allows the Windows operating 
system to display presentations on-screen or in print.
Groupware: A system that allows users in a local area network (LAN) to use resources 
like shared programs; access to the Internet, intranet, or other areas; e-mail; 
and firewalls and proxies.
Hacker: Someone who accesses a computer illegally or without authorization.
Hacking tool: Program that can be used by a hacker to carry out actions that cause 
problems for the user of the affected computer (allowing the hacker to control 
the affected computer, steal confidential information, scan communication 
ports, etc.).
Hardware: Term referring to all physical elements in an IT system (screen, keyboard, 
mouse, memory, hard disk, microprocessor, etc.).
Header (of a file): This is the part of a file in which information about the file itself 
and its location is kept.
Heuristic scan: This term, which refers to problem solving by trial and error, is used 
in the computer world to refer to a technique used for detecting unknown 
viruses.
Hijacker: Any program that changes the browser settings to make the home page or 
the default search page different from the one set by the user.
Hoax: This is not a virus, but a trick message warning of a virus that does not actually 
exist.
Host: This refers to any computer that acts as a source of information.
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol): This is a communication system that allows 
Web pages to be viewed through a browser.

104
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
IFS (Installable File System): System used to handle inbound/outbound informa-
tion transfers between a group of devices or files.
Identity theft: Obtaining confidential user information, such as passwords for 
­accessing services, in order that unauthorized individuals can impersonate the 
affected user.
IIS (Internet Information Server): This is a Microsoft server, designed for ­publishing 
and maintaining Web pages and portals.
IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol): This is a system or protocol that allows 
access to e-mail messages.
In circulation: A virus is said to be in circulation, when cases of it are actually being 
detected somewhere in the world.
In the wild: This is an official list drawn up every month of the viruses reported caus-
ing incidents.
Inbox: This is a folder in e-mail programs that contains received messages.
Infection: This refers to the process of a virus entering a computer or certain areas of 
a computer or files.
Interface: The system through which users can interact with the computer and the 
software installed on it. At the same time, this software (programs) commu-
nicates via an interface system with the computer’s hardware.
Interruption: A signal through which a momentary pause in the activities of the 
microprocessor is brought about.
Interruption vector: This is a technique used by a computer to handle the inter-
ruption requests to the microprocessor. This provides the memory address to 
which the service should be provided.
IP (Internet Protocol)/TCP–IP: An IP address is a code that identifies each com-
puter. The TCP/IP is the system, used in the Internet, that interconnects 
computers and prevents address conflicts.
IRC (Chat IRC): These are written conversations over the Internet in which files can 
also be transferred.
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network): A type of connection for digitally 
transmitting information (data, images, sound, etc.).
ISP (Internet Service Provider): A company that offers access to the Internet and 
other related services.
Java: This is a programming language that allows the creation of platform-indepen-
dent programs, that is, they can be run on any operating system or hardware 
(multiplatform language).
Java Applets: These are small programs that can be included in Web pages to improve 
the functionality of the page.
JavaScript: A programming language that offers dynamic characteristics (e.g., 
­variable data depending on how and when someone accesses, user interaction, 
and customized features) for HTML Web pages.

105
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Joke: This is not a virus, but a trick that aims to make users believe they have been 
infected by a virus.
Kernel: This is the central module of an operating system.
Key logger: A program that collects and saves a list of all keystrokes made by a user. 
This program could then publish the list, allowing third parties to access the 
data (the information that the user has entered through the keyboard: pass-
words, document texts, e-mails, key combinations, etc.).
LAN (local area network): A network of interconnected computers in a reasonably 
small geographical area (generally in the same city or town or even building).
Links/hyperlinks: These are parts of a Web page, e-mail, or document (text, images, 
buttons, etc.), which when clicked on, they take the user directly to another 
Web page or section of the document.
Link virus: This is a type of virus that modifies the address where a file is stored, 
replacing it with the address of the virus (instead of the original file). As a 
result, when the affected file is used, the virus activates. After the computer 
has been infected, the original file will be unusable.
Logic bomb: This is a program that appears quite inoffensive, but which can carry out 
damaging actions on a computer, just like any other virus.
Loop: A set of commands or instructions carried out by a program repeatedly until a 
certain condition is met.
Macro: A macro is a series of instructions defined so that a program, say Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint, or Access, carries out certain operations. As they are programs, 
they can be affected by viruses. Viruses that use macros to infect are known 
as macro viruses.
Macro virus: A virus that affects macros in Word documents, Excel spreadsheets, 
PowerPoint presentations, etc.
Malware: This term is used to refer to all programs that contain malicious code ­(malicious 
software) or contain malicious code, whether it is a virus, Trojan, or worm.
Map: This is the action of assigning a shared network disk a letter in a computer, just 
as if it were another drive in the computer itself.
MAPI: Messaging Application Programming Interface. A system used to enable 
­programs to send and receive e-mail via a certain messaging system.
Mask: This is a 32-bit number that identifies an IP address in a certain network. This 
allows the TCP/IP communication protocol to know if an IP address of a 
computer belongs to one network or another.
Means of infection: A fundamental characteristic of a virus. This is the way in which 
a virus infects a computer.
Means of transmission: A fundamental characteristic of a virus. This is the way in 
which a virus spreads from one computer to another.
Microprocessor/processor: This is the integrated electronic heart of a computer or 
IT system, for example, Pentium (I, II, III, IV), 486, and 386.

106
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions): This is the set of specifications 
that allows text and files with different character sets to be exchanged over the 
Internet (e.g., between computers in different languages).
Modem: A peripheral device, also known as modulator–demodulator, used to trans-
mit electronic signals (analogical and digital). It is designed to enable com-
munication between computers or other types of IT resources. It is most often 
used for connecting computers to the Internet.
Module: In IT parlance, this is a set or group of macros in a Word document, Excel 
spreadsheet, etc.
MS-DOS (Disk Operating System): This operating system, which predates 
Windows, involves the writing of commands for all operations that the user 
wants to carry out.
MSDE (Microsoft Desktop Engine): A server for storing data, which is compatible 
with SQL Server 2000.
MTA (message transfer agent): This is an organized mail system that receives ­messages 
and distributes them to the recipients. MTAs also transfer messages to other 
mail servers. Exchange, sendmail, qmail, and Postfix, for example, are MTAs.
Multipartite: This is a characteristic of a particular type of sophisticated virus, which 
infects computers by using a combination of techniques used by other viruses.
Mutex (mutual exclusion object): Some viruses can use a mutex to control access to 
resources (e.g., programs or even other viruses) and prevent more than one 
process from simultaneously accessing the same resource.
By doing this, they make it difficult for antiviruses to detect them. These 
viruses can carry other malicious codes in the same way that other types, such 
as polymorphic viruses, do.
Network: Group of computers or other IT devices interconnected via a cable, tele-
phone line, or electromagnetic waves (satellite, microwaves, etc.), in order to 
communicate and share resources. The Internet is a vast network of other 
subnetworks with millions of computers connected.
Newsgroup: An Internet service through which various people can connect to discuss 
or exchange information about specific subjects.
Nuke (attack): A nuke attack is aimed at causing the network connection to fail. A 
computer that has been nuked may block.
Nuker: Person or program that launches a nuke attack, causing a computer to block 
or the network connection to fail.
OLE (Object Linking and Embedding): A standard for embedding and attaching 
images, video clips, MIDI, animations, etc., in files (documents, databases, 
spreadsheets, etc.). It also allows ActiveX controls to be embedded.
Online registration: System for subscribing or registering via the Internet as a user of 
a product or services (in this case, a program and associated services).
Operating system (OS): A set of programs that enables a computer to be used.

107
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Overwrite: This is the action that certain programs or viruses take when they write 
over a file, permanently erasing the content.
P2P (peer to peer): A program—or network connection—used to offer services via 
the Internet (usually file sharing), which viruses and other types of threats can 
use to spread. Some examples of this type of program are KaZaA, Emule, and 
eDonkey.
Packaging: An operation in which a group of files (or just one) is put into another 
file, thus occupying less space. Packaging is similar to file compression, but 
is the usual way of referring to this in Unix/Linux environments. The differ-
ence between packaging and compression is in the tools used. For example, a 
tool called tar is normally used for packaging, while zip or gzip—WinZip—is 
used for compressing.
Parameter: A variable piece of data indicating how a program should behave in any 
given situation.
Partition: A division of a computer’s hard disk that enables the operating system to 
identify it as if it were a separate disk. Each partition of a hard disk can have 
a different operating system.
Partition table: An area of a disk containing information about the sections or parti-
tions that the disk is divided into.
Password: This is a sequence of characters used to restrict access to a certain file, 
­program, or other areas, so that only those who know the password can 
enter.
Password stealer: A program that obtains and saves confidential data, such as user 
passwords (using key loggers or other means). This program can publish the 
list, allowing third parties to use the data to the detriment of the affected 
user.
Payload: The effects of a virus.
PDA (personal digital assistant): A pocket-sized, portable computer (also called 
palmtops). Like other computers, they have their own operating system, have 
programs installed, and can exchange information with other computers, the 
Internet, etc. Well-known brands include Palm and Pocket PC.
PE (Portable Executable): PE refers to the format of certain programs.
Permanent protection: This is the process that some antivirus programs carry out of 
continually scanning any files that are used in any operations (albeit by the 
user or the operating system). It is also known as sentinel or resident.
Phishing: Phishing involves massive sending of e-mails that appear to come from 
­reliable sources and that try to get users to reveal confidential banking infor-
mation. The most typical example of phishing is the sending of e-mails that 
appear to come from an online bank in order to get users to enter their details 
in a spoof Web page.
Platform: Refers to an operating system, such as, Windows, Unix, or Linux.

108
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Plugin: A program that adds new functionality to an existing system.
Polymorphic/polymorphism: A technique used by viruses to encrypt their signature 
in a different way every time and even the instructions for carrying out the 
encryption.
POP (Post Office Protocol): This is a protocol for receiving and sending e-mails.
Pop-up menu: List of options that is displayed when clicking on a certain item or 
area of a window in a program with the secondary mouse button (usually the 
right). These options are shortcuts to certain functions of a program.
Pop-up windows: A window that suddenly appears, normally when a user selects an 
option with the mouse or clicks on a special function key.
Port/communication port: Point through which a computer transfers information 
(inbound/outbound) via TCP/IP.
Potentially unwanted program (PUP): Program that is installed without express 
permission from the user and carries out actions or has characteristics that can 
reduce user control of privacy, confidentiality, use of computer resources, etc.
Prepending: This is a technique used by viruses for infecting files by adding their 
code to the beginning of the file. By doing this, these viruses ensure that they 
are activated when an infected file is used.
Preview pane: A feature in e-mail programs that allows the content of the message to 
be viewed without having to open the e-mail.
Privacy policy: This is the document that sets out the procedures, rules, and data 
­security practices of a company to guarantee the integrity, confidentiality, 
and ­availability of data collected from clients and other interested parties 
in accordance with applicable legislation, IT security needs, and business 
objectives.
Proactive protection: Ability to protect the computer against unknown malware by 
analyzing its behavior only and therefore not needing a virus signature file 
periodically updated.
Process killer: A program that ends actions or processes that are running (active) on 
a computer, which could pose a threat.
Program: Elements that allow operations to be performed. A program is normally a 
file with an EXE or COM extension.
Programming language: Set of instructions, orders, commands, and rules that are 
used to create programs. Computers understand electronic signals (values 
0 or 1). Languages allow the programmer to specify what a program must 
do without having to write long strings of zeros and ones, but using words 
(instructions) that are more easily understood by people.
Protocol: A system of rules and specifications that enables and governs the commu-
nication between computers or IT devices (data transfer).
Proxy: A proxy sever acts as a middleman between an internal network, such as an 
intranet, and the connection to the Internet. In this way, one connection can 
be shared by various users to connect to an Internet server.

109
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Quick Launch bar: The area next to the Windows Start button or menu, which con-
tains shortcut icons to certain items and programs: e-mail, the Internet, anti-
virus, etc.
RAM (random-access memory): This is a computer’s main memory, in which files or 
programs are stored when they are in use.
Recycle bin: This is a section or folder on the hard disk where deleted files are stored 
(provided they have not been permanently deleted).
Redirect: Access one address via another.
Remote control: The action of gaining access to a user’s computers (with or without 
the user’s consent) from a computer in a different location. This access could 
pose a threat if it is not done correctly or for legitimate purposes.
Rename: Action whereby a file, directory, or other element of a system is given a new 
name.
Replica: Among other things, the action by which a virus propagates or makes copies 
of itself, with the aim of furthering the spread of the virus.
Resident/resident virus: A program or file is referred to as resident when it is stored 
in the computer’s memory, continuously monitoring operations carried out on 
the system.
Restart: Action whereby the computer is temporarily stopped and then immediately 
starts again.
Ring: A system governing privilege levels in a microprocessor and controlling the 
operations that can be performed and its protection. There are various levels: 
Ring0 (administrator), Ring1 and Ring2 (administrator with less privileges), 
and Ring3 (user).
ROM (read-only memory): This is a type of memory that under normal circum-
stances cannot be written on, and therefore, its content is permanent.
Root directory: This is the main directory or folder on a disk or drive.
Rootkit: A program designed to hide objects such as processes, files, or Windows 
registry entries (often including its own). This type of software is not mali-
cious in itself but is used by hackers to cover their tracks in previously com-
promised systems. There are types of malware that use rootkits to hide their 
presence on the system.
Routine: Invariable sequence of instructions that make up part of a program and can 
be used repeatedly.
Scam: Any illegal plot or fraud in which a person or group of persons are tricked into 
giving money, under false promises of economic gain (trips, vacations, lottery 
prizes, etc.).
Scanning ports, IP addresses: The action of identifying the communications ports 
and/or IP addresses of a computer and getting information about their status. 
This action can sometimes be considered an attack or threat.
SCR files: These files, which have the extension SCR, could be Windows screensav-
ers or files written in script languages.

110
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Screensaver: This is a program that displays pictures or animations on the screen. 
These programs were originally created to prevent images from burning onto 
the screen when the computer was not used for a while.
Script/script virus: The term script refers to files or sections of code written in 
­programming languages like Visual Basic Script (VBScript) and JavaScript.
Sector: This is a section or area of a disk.
Security patch: Set of additional files applied to a software program or application to 
resolve certain problems, vulnerabilities, or flaws.
Security risk: This covers anything that can have negative consequences for the user 
of the computer (e.g., a program for creating viruses or Trojans).
Sent items: A folder in e-mail programs that contains copies of the messages 
sent out.
Server: IT system (computer) that offers certain services and resources (communica-
tion, applications, files, etc.) to other computers (known as clients), which are 
connected to it across a network.
Service: The suite of features offered by one computer or system to others that are 
connected to it.
Services applet: An applet in Windows XP/2000/NT, which configures and moni-
tors system services.
Shareware: Evaluation versions of a software product that allow users to try out a 
product for a period of time before buying it. Shareware versions are normally 
free or significantly cheaper than complete versions.
Signature/identifier: This is like the virus passport number. A sequence of characters 
(numbers, letters, etc.) that identify the virus.
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol): This is a protocol used on the Internet 
exclusively for sending e-mail messages.
Software: Files, programs, applications, and operating systems that enable users to 
operate computers or other IT systems. These are the elements that make the 
hardware work.
Spam: Unsolicited e-mail, normally containing advertising. These messages, 
usually mass mailings, can be highly annoying and waste both time and 
resources.
Spammer: A program that allows the mass mailing of unsolicited, commercial e-mail 
messages. It can also be used to mass-mail threats like worms and Trojans.
Spear phishing: This attack uses phishing techniques but is aimed at a specific tar-
get. The creator of this type of attack will never use spam to obtain a massive 
avalanche of personal user data. The fact that it is targeted and not massive 
implies careful preparation in order to make it more credible and the use of 
more sophisticated social ­engineering techniques.
Spyware: Programs that collect information about users’ browsing activity, prefer-
ences, and interests. The data collected are sent to the creator of the applica-
tion or third parties and can be stored in a way that it can be recovered at 

111
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
another time. Spyware can be installed with the user consent and awareness, 
but sometimes it is not. The same thing happens with the knowledge or lack 
of knowledge regarding data collected and the way it is used.
SQL (Structured Query Language): A standard programming language aimed at 
enabling the administration and communication of databases. It is widely 
used in the Internet (e.g., Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, etc.).
Statistics: A sample of malware has statistics whenever its infection percentage is 
among the 50 most active threats.
Status bar: A section that appears at the bottom of the screen in some Windows pro-
grams with information about the status of the program or the files that are 
in use at the time.
Stealth: A technique used by viruses to infect computers unnoticed by users or 
­antivirus applications.
String: A sequence of characters (letters, numbers, punctuation marks, etc.).
Subtype: Each of the subgroups into which a type is divided, in this case, a group of 
viruses or threats within the same category or type, with certain characteris-
tics in common.
Symptoms of infection: These are the actions or effects that a virus could have when 
it infects a computer including trigger conditions.
System services: Applications that normally run independently when a system is 
started up and that close, also independently, on shutting down the system. 
System services carry out fundamental tasks such as running the SQL server 
or the Plug & Play detector.
Targeted attack: Attacks aimed specifically at a person, company, or group that are 
normally perpetrated silently and imperceptibly. These are not massive attacks 
as their aim is not to reach as many computers as possible. The danger lies 
precisely in the customized nature of the attack, which is designed especially 
to trick potential victims.
Task list: A list of all programs and processes currently active (normally in the 
Windows operating system).
Technical name: The real name of a virus, which also defines its class or family.
Template/global template: This is a file that defines a set of initial characteristics that 
a document should have before starting to work with it.
Threat level: This is a calculation of the danger that a particular virus represents to 
users.
Title bar: A bar on top of a window. The title bar contains the name of the file or 
program.
Track: A ring on a disk where data can be written.
Trackware: All programs that monitor the actions of users on the Internet (pages 
visited, banners clicked on, etc.) and create a profile that can be used by 
advertisers.
Trigger: This is the condition that causes the virus to activate or to release its payload.

112
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Trojan: Strictly speaking, a Trojan is not a virus, although it is often thought of 
as such. Really they are programs that enter computers appearing to be 
harmless ­programs, install themselves, and carry out actions that affect user 
confidentiality.
TSR (terminate and stay resident): A characteristic that allows certain programs to 
stay in memory after having run.
Tunneling: A technique used by some viruses to foil antivirus protection.
Updates: Antiviruses are constantly becoming more powerful and adapting to the new 
technologies used by viruses and virus writers. If they are not to become obso-
lete, they must be able to detect the new viruses that are constantly appearing. 
To do this, they have what is called a virus signature file.
UPX: This is a file compression tool (Ultimate Packer for eXecutables) that also 
allows programs compressed with this tool to be run without having to be 
decompressed.
URL (uniform resource locator): Address through which to access Internet pages (or 
other computers).
Vaccination: An antivirus technique that allows file information to be stored and 
possible infections detected when a change is noted in the file.
Variant: A variant is a modified version of an original virus, which may vary from the 
original in terms of means of infection and the effects that it has.
Virus: Viruses are programs that can enter computers or IT systems in a number of 
ways, causing effects that range from simply annoying to highly destructive 
and irreparable.
Virus constructor: A malicious program intended to create new viruses without 
­having any programming skills, as it has an interface that allows to choose 
the ­characteristics of the created malware: type, payload, target files, encryp-
tion, ­polymorphism, etc.
Virus signature file: This file enables the antivirus to detect viruses.
Volume: This is a partition of a hard disk or a reference to a complete hard disk. This 
term is used in many networks where there are shared disks.
Vulnerability: Flaws or security holes in a program or IT system, often used by 
viruses as a means of infection.
WAN (wide area network): A network of interconnected computers over a large 
­geographical area, connected via telephone, radio or satellite.
Windows desktop: This is the main area of Windows that appears when you start 
up the computer. From here you can access all tools, utilities, and programs 
installed on the computer, via shortcut icons, options in the Windows Start 
menu, the Windows taskbar, etc.
Windows Explorer: Program or application available in Windows to administer the 
files available on the computer. It is very useful for getting an organized view 
of all directories.

113
State of the Art of Antivirus and CEWPS Technologies
Windows Registry: This is a file that stores all configuration and installation infor-
mation of programs installed, including information about the Windows 
operating system.
Windows Registry Key: These are sections of the Windows Registry that store infor-
mation regarding the system’s settings and configuration.
Windows System Tray: Area in the Windows taskbar (usually in the bottom right 
corner of the screen), which contains the system clock, icons for changing 
system settings and viewing the status of the antivirus protection, etc.
Windows taskbar: This is a bar that appears at the bottom of the screen in Windows. 
The bar contains the Start button, the clock, icons of all programs resident 
in memory at that moment, and shortcuts that give direct access to certain 
programs.
WINS (Windows Internet Name Service): A service for determining names associ-
ated with computers in a network and allowing access to them. A computer 
contains a database with IP addresses (e.g., 125.15.0.32) and the common 
names assigned to each computer in the network (e.g., SERVER1).
Workstation: One of the computers connected to a local network that uses the ser-
vices and resources in the network. A workstation does not normally provide 
services to other machines in the network in the same way a server does.
Worm: This is similar to a virus, but it differs in that all it does is make copies of itself 
(or part of itself).
Write access/permission: These rights or permissions allow a user or a program to 
write to a disk or other type of information storage unit.
Write protected: This is a technique used to allow files on a disk or other storage 
device to be read but to prevent users from writing on them.
WSH (Windows Script Host): The system that enables you to batch process files 
and allows access to Windows functions via programming languages such as 
Visual Basic Script and JavaScript (script languages).
XOR (OR exclusive): An operation used by many viruses to encrypt their content.
Zip: A particular format of compressed file corresponding to the WinZip application.
Zombie: A computer controlled through the use of bots.
Zoo (virus): Those viruses that are not in circulation and that only exist in places like 
laboratories, where they are used for researching the techniques and effects of 
viruses.
Websites
http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/people/leslieann.goldberg/papers/virus.pdf.
http://www.cwjobs.co.uk/careers-advice/it-glossary/cyber-crime-timeline.
http://www.digitalcraft.org/?artikel_id=295 http://www.google.com/patents/US7231667.
http://www.pandasecurity.com/usa/homeusers/security-info/glossary/.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

115
5
Architecture of Early 
Warning Predictive System 
for Smart Cities
Digital Immunity: A New Dawn
We all remember the famous business metric “If you can measure it, you can control it.” 
Well, the Internet has become a mega–gravitational force establishing new rules and 
regulations. We are riding the Internet whether we like it or not. Cybercrime and 
cyber terrorism have been making drastic black holes in our societal fabric and thriv-
ing on profound immorality and political poisoning. The World Trade Center disaster 
was above all a failure of imagination as lamented by Senator Thomas Keen during the 
9/11 Commission Report.
Since necessity is the mother of invention and in order to control or at least to man-
age global malware, we need to have a holistic and scientific strategy (a new prescrip-
tion because the present one is going flat) that focuses on collaborative efforts among 
government, industry, and academia R&D. Like the Human Immune System, the 
Cognitive Early Warning System (CEWPS) is the counterpart in the digital world, 
championed by the magical agent called the Smart Vaccine. If vaccination has been 
contributing to the longevity of mankind, then CEWPS will extend to the longev-
ity of healthy systems. The Smart Vaccine (SV) offers unique adaptive vaccination 
services that are the true life jackets of a city’s systems. The Smart Vaccine is actually 
from the third kind with a much higher level of intelligence to beat the best hacking 
brains. Does it sound like science fiction huh? So let’s start with the design of the 
CEWPS Knowledge Base.
Smart Cities Are Like the Human Body
The closest analogy of The Smart City (SC) ecosystem that comes to my mind is the 
human body, which is holistically administered by the brain and by federated systems 
(organs) that perform autonomically with perfect precision. No waterway on Earth is 
as complete, as commodious, or as populous as that wonderful river of life called the 
Stream of Blood. The violin, the trumpet, the harp, the grand organ, and all the other 
musical instruments are mere counterfeits of the human voice.

116
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Another marvel of the human body is the self-regulating process (so-called auto-
nomic) by which nature keeps the body temperature in health at 98°. Whether in 
India, with the temperature at 130°, or in the arctic regions, where the records show 
120° below freezing point, the body temperature remains the same, practically steady 
at 98° despite the extreme to which it is subjected. It was said that “All roads lead to 
Rome!,” but modern science has discovered that all roads of real knowledge lead to the 
human body.
And you think cities are crowded now? For the first time in history, more than 50% 
of the world’s population lives in cities. By 2030, more than 5 billion people will live in 
urban settings. But before we get to that kind of population density, we have to optimize 
our cities. We need to make them smarter, safer, and above all more secure. Yes, tech-
nology can help. Modern cities compete with each other to attract businesses, talent, 
skills, and taxpayers. As a result, administrations are becoming entrepreneurial, valuing 
innovation, technology, marketing, and communication. The smart city (SC) ecosystem 
is a broad partnership between the public and private sector. City planners and develop-
ers, nongovernmental organizations, IT system integrators, software vendors, energy 
and utility providers, the automotive industry, and facility control providers, as well as 
technology providers for mobile technology, cloud computing, networking, and system-
to-system (S2S) and radio frequency identification (RFID) have a role to play.
Again, like the human body, component connectivity is one of the principal pre-
requisites for building smart city. Smart city live by their smart grids, that is, their 
nervous system. It allows cities to breathe, to facilitate exchange of information, and 
to respond promptly to danger. In case of a massive cyberattack on the city, the smart 
grid will be the best savior. The grid will help isolate the attack and the infected sec-
tion of the city. By design, integrating CEWPS into the smart grid will offer several 
advances. For one thing, it will predict and deter the attack and alert everyone on the 
grid. Even if part of the grid is crippled by the attack, CEWPS will be able to reach 
out to all the other critical systems and offer vaccination help.
Keeping the city thriving on quality living is critical. Transportation strategies have 
an impact on public safety, the environment, energy, rapid response services, the abil-
ity to do business, and critical deliveries have to fit precisely in this gigantic jigsaw 
puzzle while keeping the general quality of life. Real-time traffic flow information, 
coupled with Telco, Global Positioning Systems (GPS), machine-to-machine com-
munication, Wi-Fi, and RFID technologies, as well as data analytics and prediction 
techniques, can all be used to enhance private and public travel. Smart cities live 
by their sensors that collect information about traffic conditions at critical city spots 
and send via wireless or GPS communication to centralized control systems. These 
data can, for example, contribute to the optimization of synchronized traffic lights as 
shown in Figure 5.1.
By definition, smart city implies smart government, smart citizens, smart tech-
nologies, and more importantly, smart future. Predicting the future has always been 
a human endeavor since the beginning of time. History tells us interesting stories 

117
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
about how the future was predicted. Romans, Egyptians, and Greeks had high 
priests who influenced the rules with predictions about calamities, sickness, and 
wars. Temples were holy places where mysterious rituals were performed by priests, 
which included sorcery, exorcism, and astrology. Today, we consider all these rituals 
nonsense and without true scientific basis.
CEWPS Is the Electronic Shield of Smart Cities
CEWPS, shown in Figure 5.2, which surrounds The Smart City, will be able to iden-
tify the attack and build the proper vaccine to eradicate it. CEWPS has several crucial 
responsibilities, not only to destroy the attacking virus but also to preserve a copy of the 
virus and keep its structure in the Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB) for future attacks. 
More importantly, CEWPS will notify the city’s Coordination Command Center 
(CCC) about the attack, its nature, its expected impact, and its whereabouts. The CCC 
will broadcast alerts to all the critical systems, using its smart grid. One thing to remem-
ber is that CEWPS has its own grid also referred to as the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG), 
while The Smart City has its own Smart Grid (SG). The CEWPS Central Coordination 
Center exchanges information with the city’s Coordination Command. CEWPS and 
The Smart City CCC has to quickly draw up an emergency response plan covering all 
possible situations of the attack.
The most prominent feature in CEWPS is its intelligent early warning predictive 
system. It is the radar of the city. It is a complex artificial intelligence system that oper-
ates like the human brain. Before we describe its anatomy, we would like to enrich 
your knowledge with two important terms: causality and prediction.
What Is Causality?
Let’s first examine what causality or causal inference means. Causality is the relation-
ship between an event (the cause) and a second event (the effect), where the second 
Grid
commanding
center
Traffic
commanding
center
Accident
Figure 5.1  The city’s smart grid is a big contributor to optimize the flow of traffic by synchronizing the traffic lights when the 
traffic is heavy or there is an accident in a congested area of the city. The traffic command center knows the location of the lights 
and the hourly estimated flow. The traffic is monitored remotely, especially around school crossings, and traffic data are relayed to 
the city directorate for predictive analyses.

118
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
event is understood to be the consequence of the first. Causality governs the rela-
tionship between events. There are however two cases of causality. The first case is 
called necessary causes: If x is a necessary cause of y, then the presence of y necessarily 
implies the presence of x. The presence of x, however, does not imply that y will occur. 
The ­second case is called sufficient causes: If x is a sufficient cause of y, then the presence 
of x necessarily implies the presence of y. However, another cause, z, may alternatively 
cause y. Thus, the presence of y does not imply the presence of x.
What Is Prediction?
By definition, a prediction of this kind might be inductively valid if the predictor is 
a knowledgeable person in the field and is employing sound reasoning and accurate 
data. But as a rule, predicting an event E(tf) to happen in the future (tf) is perfectly 
valid, if previously, one or several similar events did occur at the same place and time 
E(tf − 1), E(tf − 2), E(tf − 3).
The probability that event E(tf) will occur, provided that event E(tf − 1) did occur. 
Using probability formalism, we can write P(E(tf)|E(tf − 1)).
In summary, we can deduce causal mechanisms from past data. Causality is an 
ingredient of the CEWPS Reasoning Engine.
Banks
Manufacturing
Transportation
Power
Hospitals
Universities
Telecom
EMS
Water
Food
Borders
Massive
attacks
Early warning layer
Massive
attacks
Massive
attacks
Massive
attacks
Smart city
grid
CEWPS
super grid
Cameras
Military
Coordination
Command
Center
Figure 5.2  Smart cities can come in any form or shape. In this configuration, the Cognitive Early Warning Predictive 
System shields the critical infrastructures from massive distributed malware. If the attack succeeds to penetrate the grid, 
the Coordination Command Center (CCC) will order the Smart Vaccine Commander to send its army to inoculate the critical 
systems with the proper vaccine.

119
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Anatomy of CEWPS and Its Main Components
The CEWPS comes with an arsenal of offensive and defensive systems. It is designed 
specifically to defend, by offense, smart city, and large metropolitan areas. CEWPS is 
in fact an incredible brain that controls a multitude of autonomic subsystems, which 
are connected through CEWPS sensory and motor grid. This book often describes 
CEWPS with different configurations, depending on the subject and the content. 
CEWPS has nine subsystems headed by the Central Coordination Command, which 
acts as the “nerve center” and control hub. In fact, all the subsystems are dynamic 
components with a specific set of responsibilities and unique skill sets to support the 
Smart Vaccine in the battlefield. Figure 5.3 shows the nine interlinked operating sub-
systems. Here’s an explanation of each component.
Component 1: The Central Coordination Command (CCC)
The CCC is the nerve center of CEWPS. It is an incredible hub of transactional traf-
fic, orchestrating autonomically all CEWPS activities, inspecting performance read-
ings from the operating components, routing alert messages, and dispatching service 
Critical
Infrastructure
Systems
Reverse
Engineering
Center
Reasoning
Engine
Knowledge
Acquisition
System
Smart Vaccine
Center
Smart grid offers
virtualization and faster
vaccination response
Offer on-demand
vaccination services
All captured viruses in the
honeypot or intrusion
penetration systems are
sent to the reverse
engineering center for
decomposition and analysis
5
4
3
9
1
6
7
8
2
Smart 
Vaccine Grid
Central
Coordination
Center
Early warning
attack
prediction
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Figure 5.3  The topology of CEWPS is unique: All nine of the components are equally critical. However, they receive com-
mands from the Central Coordination Center. During an attack, all the components are mobilized and work together. The 
main focus is to protect the critical systems from the attack through vaccination and, at the same time, capture the virus 
and determine its identity and save it for the next attack.

120
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
requests to the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC). The CCC also relies heavily on its 
Causality Reasoning Engine, which provides significant intelligence information on 
incoming attacks.
CEWPS comes with dynamic steering dashboard equipped with 3D visualization 
feature to see everything before deciding on the next action. The dashboard offers 
visibility to trap attacks before they penetrate the city’s smart grid. CCC regularly 
receives performance data from the city’s smart grid.
The CEWPS main dashboard has the highest administrative authority over the 
following information:
	
1.	Connectivity of all the subscribed infrastructure critical systems
	
2.	Control of the security thresholds and risk proximities before and during the 
attack
	
3.	Maintenance and administration of the infrastructure critical systems key 
performance indicators
	
4.	Registry and authorization of all the vaccination services
	
5.	Monitoring the vaccination in progress
	
6.	Monitoring the attack in progress
	
7.	Authentication and authorization of the attack alerts
	
8.	Communication with the operation centers of the infrastructure critical systems
Figure 5.4 shows the main screen of the dashboard. There are 60 dynamic subscreens 
to provide the status of CEWPS–Smart Vaccine activities. The administrator can add 
dynamically additional screens or run an ad hoc SQL query on demand.
There is also another layout of the CEWPS dashboard with more details in the 
“CEWPS Screens Layout” section at the end of this chapter.
CEWPS draws its predictive analytics from its Attack Knowledge Base (AKB), 
the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB), the Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB), and the 
Reasoning Engine. Building a synergistic alliance with AVT providers gives CEWPS 
higher credibility and, more importantly, feeds CEWPS with a steady fresh flow of 
malware data ready to be converted into vaccine knowledge.
CEWPS is also equipped with a network of smart honeypots to capture cyberat-
tacks, which will be reverse engineered to help make matching vaccines.
CEWPS Component 2: The Knowledge Acquisition Component
Where Wisdom, Experience, and Knowledge Are Distilled  Let’s define some basic terms 
that will be heavily used throughout the book. By analogy, we can compare the acqui-
sition process to our sense system, which is made of sensory cells that collect external 
data for distillation, filtration, and conversion into stimuli stored in the brain.
What Is Experience?  Experience is in fact a conscious event that creates a brain process 
and gets stored internally in sensory cortex of the brain. Once an experience episode 

121
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
gets into the brain, a memory record is created and ready to be stored. There are three 
types of memory records: The first is the sensory stage, which is the front end. The 
registration of information during perception occurs in the brief sensory stage that 
usually lasts for only a fraction of a second. It is your sensory memory that allows a 
perception such as a visual pattern, a sound, or a touch to linger for a brief moment 
after the stimulation is over. Second, after that first flicker, the sensation is stored in 
short-term memory, which has fairly limited capacity; it can hold about seven items 
for no more than 20 or 30 seconds at a time. Third, long-term memory can store 
unlimited amounts of information indefinitely. People tend to more easily store mate-
rial on subjects that they already know something about, since the information has 
more meaning to them and can be mentally connected to related information that is 
already stored in their long-term memory. That is why someone who has an average 
memory may be able to remember a greater depth of information about one particular 
subject. Most people think of long-term memory when they think of memory itself. 
Biologically, information must first pass through sensory stage and short-term mem-
ory before it can be stored as a long-term memory.
So, experience Ej is an event or an episode that we participate in or live through. 
We all learn from experience, regardless if they are ugly, bad, or happy ones. 
Experience is cumulative and gets transformed into knowledge later. Experience 
is gained by repeated trials. We all experience it in life. Quantitatively speaking, 
(©2014 Merit Cybersecurity Group. All rights reserved.)
Figure 5.4  The main dashboard of CEWPS, showing all the features of the system. Staff of the Central Coordination 
Center have administrative privileges, but biometrics and two-factor authentication apply to everyone. Behind the main 
screen, there are 60 subscreens to collect and request vital data. The system is also equipped with an SQL query feature to 
interrogate any of the Knowledge Bases of the system.

122
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
experience is a function of time f(t) with a start time Ejt1 and a finish time Ejt2. 
Experience duration is expressed as t2 − t1. Since experience can have many modes 
such as physical, emotional, mental, spiritual, vicarious, or virtual, the parame-
ter j represents the experience mode. So, Ej represents experience for a particular 
mode m. When we add the time duration to a particular experience including its 
mode, we get the following.
Ejtj m m is the mode (1 = physical, 2 = mental,…). Once experience is stored in the 
brain, it gets magically converted into knowledge.
CEWPS considers a cyberattack as an independent discrete event that has a start 
and finish. But knowing about the past cyberattacks Ej − 1 (a priori) can definitely help 
forecast incoming attacks. CEWPS is a smart machine, and it is built for one purpose: 
to catch cyberattacks before they occur. That is the magic of CEWPS.
What Is Knowledge?  Knowledge, on the other hand, is different from experience. It is 
the derivative of experience.
	
K
d
dt E
t
t
=
(
)
Knowledge can be defined as “the fact or condition of knowing something with famil-
iarity gained through experience or association.” The knowledge engine takes dispa-
rate experience episodes Ejtj.m and converts them into knowledge patterns and catalogs 
them in the brain for subsequent neural response. Intelligence is another human char-
acteristic, but it refers to the fast ability of retrieving knowledge, connecting pieces of 
knowledge together, or processing knowledge quickly.
CEWPS stores a priori knowledge extracted from previous cyberattacks on the 
smart grid. Attackers already know that there is a smart grid, and they design their 
attack vector to penetrate the grid from the weakest side and hide until the time comes 
for spreading to the center of the grid.
Six Stages of Cybercrime  No one has ever analyzed a cyberattack on a smart grid in a 
smart city. Let’s not forget that the smart grid is not only a power grid. It is a resil-
ient and secure platform that connects all the infrastructure critical systems together. 
Smart grids are the new paradigm where technology and security vendors are jockey-
ing to learn about it and introduce their new products. Smart grid cyberattacks will 
usher the beginning of the new cyber war, and we had better be ready for it. CEWPS 
is designed to defend smart grids, which are the backbone of a future smart city.
As we described earlier, a cyberattack is an unknown event where its occurrence 
can be represented as a Bayesian network model (BNM) as conditional dependen-
cies in probability distributions. We can deduce from experience that all cyberattacks 
follow the same six stages as shown in Figure 5.5.
So, the attack on the smart grid has to be well studied, engineered, and executed. 
The smart grid is equipped with the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) which is totally new 

123
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
to terrorists. One way for them to penetrate the grid is with the cooperation of an 
internal help—someone who can pass some key access information to the terror-
ists. If they succeed to penetrate any of the critical systems with an admin password 
and open a port, then they can upload a backdoor Trojan with a worm that carries 
a malicious payload. Generally, most cyberattacks on large installations or critical 
infrastructures occur through some internal help. The terrorists will also try to target 
insecure installations on the grid, but their trail could be detected. The cyberterror-
ists most likely studied the grid (stage 2) and tried different hacks (stage 3) and have 
decided on the final target. Nowadays, cyberattacks are driven mostly by political 
and religious motifs. Cyberterrorism is planned and executed by expert cyber hackers 
who know where the most vulnerable spots are in the major cosmopolitan city in the 
world. Each country has its electronic army, which is equipped with the latest sym-
metrical technologies. Cyberterrorists learn from their success and failures and will 
try to launch several “distractive” attacks at different locations on the city grid. Most 
likely organized electronic armies have similar technologies as CEWPS, where they 
model attacks and develop new payloads. In other words, smart cities are attacked by 
smart attacks.
The FBI, the Dutch Korps Landelijke Politiediensten, UK Interpol, the French 
Sûreté, and the German Bundeskriminalamt have automated fingerprint identi-
fication systems (AFIS) that they share among themselves in order to catch serial 
cyberterrorists. Often cybercriminals at one time had a security job with the govern-
ment or big institution, then they were lured to join a terrorist organization like ISIS 
for money and women. There are many Crime Service Providers (CSP) that exist 
under a fictitious business name, and attract anti-government activists and hack-
tivists. CEWPS will be a great help for law enforcement agencies to use advanced 
technologies to hunt cybercriminals and cyberterrorists. CEWPS collects also crime 
data from many global sources, even Big Data will be used in predictive reasoning to 
generate cybercrime analytics.
Plan
Study
grid
Trial
Set start
time
Attack
Check outcome
Preattack phase
StageØ1
StageØ2
StageØ3
StageØ4
Tattack
StageØ5
StageØ6
Postattack
Figure 5.5  Most cyberattacks share the same pattern. There are six stages to a cyberattack. The attack is just as good 
as its plan. The success of one will trigger successive attacks with “augmented” learning from the previous ones. Skipping 
one stage makes the attack less successful.

124
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Cybercrime Raw Data Distillation Process  There is an invaluable “deep web” of dispa-
rate crime data that could be collected and distilled. In order for CEWPS to be effec-
tively successful as an early warning predictive machine, it needs first a reliable and 
rich Attack Knowledge Base (AKB) and second an intelligent Reasoning Engine. 
The distillation process of raw crime data will create the Attack Knowledge Base in 
five basic steps as shown in Figure 5.6. The Causality Reasoning Engine (CRE) will 
be discussed in the next section.
Step 1: The raw data feeders: U.S./global intelligence agencies and the local law 
enforcement agencies have to feed fresh and all historical data. The millions of 
crime case will enrich the Knowledge Base and enhance the performance of the 
inference engine.
Step 2: Raw input data: Since cybercrime records are coming from many different 
law enforcement agencies, research organizations, or other crime repositories, obvi-
ously, data would be disparate, redundant, structured with different formats, or even 
processed by different software systems. Each country, for example, has its own propri-
etary finger or face identification system. The data collector will homogenize the data.
Figure 5.7 shows the graphical representation of a typical premeditated cyber-
crime “episode” with all its attributes. It is not a pure Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) 
because the attributes (variables) did not come with conditional probabilities. They 
need to be converted into a uniform Bayesian network model with conditional prob-
abilities and interdependencies before they can be used for reasoning inference.
Step 3: Raw data cleansing: All unedited cybercrime episodes will be routed to an 
intermediate repository for cleaning and filtering. This process is pretty much like an 
iron mill where iron will be smelted and cast or even like the oil refinery.
Semantic attack patterns
Step-5
Step-4
Step-3
Step-2
Step-1
U.S./global
intelligence
grids
Local law
enforcement
Monitoring
sources
Disparate
unstructured
attacks
Attack collectors
raw tank
Attack Knowledge Base
The distillation process
Ontological and semantic
transformation
Figure 5.6  The unstructured raw data is collected from many sources (Big Data is a potential feeder of attack data). 
Then the collected raw data go through an ontology and semantic engine and transform into uniform patterns stored in the 
attack Knowledge Base. The pattern is a data model that represents an attack with all its attributes.

125
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Step 4: Ontological and semantic transformation: In this step, we try to convert all the 
raw crime data into knowledge records. First, let’s define two important words: ontol-
ogy and semantics.
Ontology: It has a lot of Greek history, but here it has a different meaning. In the 
context of knowledge, it refers to the technology that creates a knowledge model. 
CEWPS uses ontology to convert unstructured cybercrime episodes into a crime 
knowledge model ready for reasoning. In simple terms, it is a network of attributes 
centered around a common subject.
Ontology components are as follows:
	
1.	Instances or objects
	
2.	Classes, types, kinds
	
3.	Attributes, properties, predicates, features
	
4.	Relationships—how one variable relates to another; parent-to-child 
relationship
Semantics is the technology that converts a pattern from the Attack Knowledge Base 
into a semantic framework called a document. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) 
and Resource Description Framework (RDF) are the two dominating languages that 
enable the encoding, exchange, and reuse of structured metadata. The two languages 
are application of XML, which impose needed structural constraints to provide 
unambiguous methods of expressing semantics.
In summary, step 4 is the conversion of the mishmash of all the cybercrime cases 
to a standardized format (semantic attack pattern) to facilitate reasoning and causal 
prediction using Bayesian network modeling technique.
The Domain of a Cyberattack
Background
Criminal
organization
Countries
involved
Targeted
platform
Target
location
Payload
Tools
Impact
Type of
malware
Forensics
Recovery
Technology
used
Alarm
Country of
origin
Criminal
histroy
Alias
U.S.
entry
U.S.
education
Work
visa
Hacker
Motives
Skills
Attack
plan
Attack
time
Figure 5.7  Attributes of a cyberattack represented graphically as a network of activities. It is considered a nonstandard 
raw model, which will be transformed into a semantic pattern used in reasoning and attack prediction. All priori (from the 
earlier) episodes will also be stored as semantic patterns.

126
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Ontology and Semantic Technologies  Two techniques will be utilized in the Knowledge 
Base to prepare the data for the next stage. Ontology is the technique of converting a 
cyberattack into a knowledge model. OWL will do the conversion. The second tech-
nique is called semantics, which uses the RDF language to store it in the AKB.
CEWPS comes with two knowledge engines that include databases. The first 
one is the Attack Knowledge Base (AKA virus DB) and the second is the Vaccine 
Knowledge Base (VaKB). The two knowledge engines are CEWPS components 7 
and 8 as shown in Figure 5.3.
Step 5: The AKB is a well-organized, centralized, and dynamic repository designed 
with the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and Resource Description Framework 
(RDF/XML) knowledge building languages. AKB uses special cybercrime taxon-
omy codes for the first time. CEWPS also complies with the standards of the World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to build the cybercrime knowledge patterns.
The activities shown in Figure 5.7 need to be converted into knowledge model. 
Data attributes will be converted “semantically” into equivalent meaningful data ele-
ments. Then, the new semantic model will be stored in the Attack Knowledge Base 
(AKB). Semantic translation links the activities into edges and vertices, following a 
logical sequence that describes the premeditated attack by a terrorist. In the end, we 
converted the raw model into a Bayesian Network Model as shown in Figure 5.8.
Let’s remember that in a Bayesian network graph, each feature is represented with a 
node (box) in the graph, and an arrow from one node X to another node Y in the graph 
Political
motif
Religious
motif
Plot
attack
Attack
location
Repeat
job
Level
success
Attack
time
Special
motif
Setup
team
Xi=The criminal activity in sequence i
P = II P(Xi|Pai)
Inside
job
Attack
type
Payload
Assess
damage
Specific
critical
system
Level
of risk
Backdoor
Build
virus
E-mail
Virus
Figure 5.8  This graph represents a knowledge model of a cyberattack. It is also called a Bayesian network model. 
All cyberattacks can be transformed into this model. Ontology is the technique that is used to convert a cyberattack into 
a knowledge model. Web Ontology Language does the conversion. The semantic Resource Description Framework (RDF) 
stores it in the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB). The vertices (circles) represent the variables (criminal activity), and the arcs 
(arrows) represent the causal relationship between the activities.

127
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
represents the probabilistic dependence of Y on X (not shown here; see supplementary 
information S1 for further details). Note that the direction of an arrow between two 
nodes does not necessarily reveal causality or hierarchy but merely shows a probabilis-
tic relationship between the two corresponding features.
The CEWPS Attack Knowledge Base is actually a very smart engine with high-
level autonomicity and intelligence. It is an expert library that contains significant archi-
val crime episodes from around the world. Cyberterrorism is the biggest global supply 
chain in the world with a monitory flow of $16 billion per year. Cybercrime and its 
older brother cyberterrorism are the most affluent profession in the world. Forty-nine 
law enforcement agencies will be the regular crime data feeders into CEWPS AKB. 
CEWPS will have the biggest crime refinery in the world. The AKB engine will be run-
ning 24/7 trying to convert data into knowledge. Like crude oil, raw crime episodes go 
into an extensive distillation process to convert into a uniform structure. The formatted 
episode data will then be routed into the AKB and will be transformed into a knowledge 
model before it goes into the inference engine for predictive induction.
CEWPS Component 3: The Reasoning Engine
The Reasoning Engine (RE) is the smart guy component of CEWPS, often referred 
to as the knowledge-based system. CEWPS refers to it as the early warning predictor 
(EWP). The early warning predictor is an inference reasoning engine that relies on the 
Bayesian network model (BNM) to generate probabilistic attack forecast. Some of the 
benefits of using BNM are as follows:
	
1.	They are graphical models, capable of displaying relationships clearly and 
intuitively.
	
2.	They are directional, thus being capable of representing cause–effect relationships.
	
3.	They can handle uncertainty.
	
4.	They handle uncertainty through the established theory of probability.
	
5.	They can be used to represent indirect, in addition to, direct causation.
Bayesian network is a set of local conditional probability distributions. Together with 
the graph structure, they are sufficient to represent the joint probability distribution 
of the domain
	
Pr(
)
Pr(
Pa )
1
X
X
X
X
n
i
i
i
n
,
,
,
2 ¼
=
=Õ
1
where Pai is the set containing the parents of Xi in the Bayesian network.
We Can Forecast the Weather, Why Can’t We Predict Crime?  Let’s take a look at other 
forecast systems such as weather and stock forecasting systems. Weather forecast-
ing is the application of science and technology to predict the state of the atmo-
sphere for a given location. Weather forecasts are made by collecting in the first 

128
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
step quantitative weather data from weather satellites about the current state of the 
atmosphere on a given place and using scientific methods of atmospheric processes 
to project how the atmosphere will change. In the second step, data are loaded into 
a mathematical weather model to generate credible prediction results.
Anatomy of the Reasoning Engine?  The Reasoning Engine (RE) is an AI-based sys-
tem. It is commonly known as the reasoning inference engine (IE). This type of engine 
is the holy grail of artificial intelligence science. It is highly educated and a fast-
learner machine. Let’s take a look at its anatomy as shown in Figure 5.9.
An inference engine cycles through three sequential steps: match rules, select rules, 
and execute rules. The execution of the rules will often result in new facts or goals being 
added to the Knowledge Base, which will trigger the cycle to repeat. This cycle con-
tinues until no new rules can be matched.
In the first step, match the rules, the inference engine finds all of the rules that are 
triggered by the current contents of the Knowledge Base. In forward chaining, the 
engine looks for rules where the antecedent (left-hand side) matches some facts in the 
Knowledge Base. In backward chaining, the engine looks for antecedents that can 
satisfy one of the current goals.
In the second step, select the rules, the inference engine prioritizes the various rules 
that were matched to determine the order to execute them.
In the third step, execute the rules, the engine executes each matched rule in the 
order determined in step 2 and then iterates back to step 1 again. The cycle continues 
until no new rules are matched.
Attack
payload
Virus
Knowledge
Database
Causality
Reasoning Engine
Crime domain expert
Select optimal
predictive
attack
Dispatch
vaccine
Build the smart
vaccine
Facts
Rules
Early warning
predictor
Attack
Knowledge
Base
Attack
Knowledge
Base
Raw unedited
historical attacks
Bayesian network
attack models
Crime domain expert
Incoming attack clues
Vaccine
Knowledge
Database
Issue alert to critical
systems
Figure 5.9  The Causality Reasoning Engine is the heart of the CEWPS. It extracts information from the Attack Knowledge 
Base (AKB) and Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB) and applies the proper facts and rules to generate probabilistic forecasts.

129
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
The Attack Knowledge Base represents facts about the cyberattacks, 
cybercriminal profiles, victims, and impact of the attack. The world was represented as 
classes and subclasses, and instances and assertions were replaced by values of object 
instances. The rules worked by querying and asserting values of the objects.
CEWPS Component 4: Reverse Engineering Center (REC)
Reverse Engineering Center is responsible for decomposing all attacking unknown 
viruses and learning everything about their code and technologies. The pathology 
reports on captured and quarantined viruses will be cataloged and stored in the Virus 
Knowledge Base (ViKB). Information coming from other forensic centers will also 
be stored in ViKB. Meanwhile, the corresponding antivirus vaccine will be stored in 
the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB). The Central Coordination Center (CCC) will 
receive daily bulletins from the reverse engineering center (REC). The Smart Vaccine 
center (SVC) is getting ready for its fast response vaccination services.
Tools of reverse engineering are categorized into debuggers or disassemblers, hex edi-
tors, and monitoring and decompiling tools. Profession cybercriminals possess librar-
ies of Reverse Engineering. They can’t live with them.
	
1.	Disassemblers: A disassembler is used to convert binary code into assembly 
code and also used to extract strings, imported and exported functions, librar-
ies, etc. The disassemblers convert the machine language into a user-friendly 
format. There are different disassemblers that specialize in certain things.
	
2.	Debuggers: This tool expands the functionality of a disassembler by supporting 
the CPU registers, the hex duping of the program, view of stack, etc. Using 
debuggers, the programmers can set break points and edit the assembly code 
at run time. Debuggers analyze the binary in a similar way as the disassem-
blers and allow the reverser to step through the code by running one line at a 
time to investigate the results.
	
3.	Hex editors: These editors allow the binary to be viewed in the editor and 
changed as per the requirements of the software. There are different types of 
hex editors available that are used for different functions.
	
4.	Portable executable and resource viewer: The binary code is designed to run on 
a Windows-based machine and has a very specific data that tell how to set up 
and initialize a program. All the programs that run on Windows should have 
a Portable Executable that supports the Dynamic Link Libraries, which the 
program needs to borrow from.
CEWPS Component 5: Smart City Critical Infrastructure
The Smart City Critical Infrastructures (SCCI) is part of CEWPS environment 
because the critical infrastructures (i.e., critical systems) are wired inside the Smart 
Vaccine Grid (SVG).

130
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
In the domain of terrorism, the term critical infrastructure became of paramount 
importance. In fact, certain national infrastructures are so vital that their incapacity 
or destruction would have a debilitating impact on the defense or economic security of 
the United States. This is the reason we included the critical infrastructures as a part 
of the CEWPS environment. These infrastructures include the following:
	
1.	Telecommunications
	
2.	Electrical power systems
	
3.	Gas and oil storage and transportation
	
4.	Banking and finance
	
5.	Transportation
	
6.	Water supply systems
	
7.	Emergency services (including medical, police, fire, and rescue)
	
8.	Continuity of government
	
9.	Chemical and manufacturing plants
	 10.	Postal services and shipping
	 11.	Agriculture
	 12.	Banking services
	 13.	Academia and universities
More details on how CEWPS protects the critical infrastructures will be covered in 
the smart grid section.
CEWPS Component 6: The Smart Vaccine Center
The Smart Vaccine center is the Marines of CEWPS. We can also refer to it as a mobile 
emergency hospital. It receives marching orders from CCC to perform its vaccination 
services to all the critical systems on the smart grid. The Smart Vaccine negotiates 
with the critical system to take the vaccine on time before any attacks. The vaccine 
will immunize the critical system against a particular attack. The vaccine has already 
been approved by the reverse engineering center and CCC and stored in the Vaccine 
Knowledge Base (VaKB). The Smart Vaccine army is described in detail in Chapter 2.
CEWPS Component 7: The Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB)
The VaKB is the intelligent pharmacy that has all prescriptions of all possible 
vaccines that were manufactured for previous attacks. It works very closely with the 
Causal Reasoning Engine. Further explanation will be provided in the next section.
CEWPS Component 8: The Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB)
The ViKB is the repository (we call it the morgue) that contains all the attack pay-
loads, attack anatomy, the originating source, cause of death, and the expected target. 

131
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
It is also the documentation (battle report) library of the attack episodes. It works very 
closely with the Causality Reasoning Engine (CRE) during the analysis and predic-
tion of future attacks.
Figure 5.10 shows the compelling matching process between the virus and the 
vaccine. The matching is necessary because of the “specificity” of the virus. Not 
all vaccination services are successful, simply because the right vaccine was not 
matched. Often there will be situations where the virus is new (not available in the 
Virus Knowledge Base), and its matching vaccine is not ready, then the infected sys-
tem will provide samples of the virus, and a vaccine will promptly be fabricated for 
the rest of the critical systems on the grid. The prediction process for future attacks 
will continue regardless.
CEWPS Component 9: CEWPS Smart Grid
Let’s assume the state of New Jersey decided to use the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) 
to protect all the critical systems of all the power grid. The first thing to do is to 
identify the location of the power plants. The NJ Geospatial RDBMS can be used 
to identify the location (coordinates) of the power plants across the state. In case the 
power plant data are not available, the New Jersey Geographic Information System 
(GIS) (https://njgin.state.nj.us/) and the Digital Orthoimagery databases can be 
tapped to capture the information, or the US Energy Information Administration 
Reverse
engineering
of the attack
Virus
payload
Attack
methods
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Historical
and present
attacks
Causality Reasoning
Engine
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Inoculation
methods
Caught
attacking
virus
On-demand vaccine
manufacturing
Instructions come
from the Central
Coordination Center
Figure 5.10  The parallelism between virus reverse engineering (once it is caught by honeypots) and vaccine process-
ing is uncanny and fascinating. Using Bayesian visualization reasoning, CEWPS comes up with amazing predictions to 
vaccinate the critical systems before the attack spreads to the other critical systems.

132
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
(http://www.eia.gov/state/?sid=NJcan) can provide the locality of New Jersey power 
plants, their characteristics, generating capacity, consumption, and the demography 
of the consumers, and most importantly, the hardware/software used at each plant.
One should set up the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG), which will connect all the power 
plant systems together, including SCADA systems that are used to collect and monitor 
the physical process through the Programmable Logic Controller (PLC). One should 
also remember that the power plants are already tied to their own power grid and should 
not be touched.
Figure 5.11 shows how the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) will be tied to all the critical 
systems of the power plants. The Central Coordination Center will be pathologically con-
nected in real time to the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG). The CEWPS screen in Figure 5.11 
shows how the State of New Jersey counties and subcounties has been mapped into a 
grid-centric screen with all the critical systems that control the major infrastructures in 
the state. The grid has 2D coordinates to facilitate the location of any particular system. 
Each critical system is recognized by a location code and type of infrastructure. CEWPS 
was using infrastructure data from the State of New Jersey during its development.
Figure 5.11  This is one of the most unique features of CEWPS. On the left, we see the grid of the state New Jersey 
with some of the critical power plant identified by the number of their respective subgrids. On the right, we see the grid 
of Newark with all the critical systems identified by 2D coordinates. In case of an attack, the grid will blink and show the 
target system. All city attacks would show on the screen with its entry location. The smart vaccine team got the call and 
is ready to respond.

133
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
The New Jersey Grid  New Jersey is rich in Critical Infrastructure and Key Resources 
(CIKR), situated in or near the most densely populated real estate in the country. The 
U.S. Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) program has an ongoing and robust orga-
nizational structure with identified roles and responsibilities in two functional areas: 
risk mitigation and field operations. Both branches support structured sector working 
groups (SWGs) comprised of private and public sector partners that meet regularly. 
The mission of the bureau is to ensure the protection, preparedness, and resiliency 
of New Jersey’s CIKR through the implementation of the National Infrastructure 
Protection Plan (NIPP).
The State of New Jersey has a total population of 8.9 million people (ranked as 
the 11th in the nation). However, it is the most densely populated state in the union. 
New Jersey is growing grayer and more ethnic, and its residents are increasingly 
abandoning the suburbs and rural pockets in favor of cities. New Jersey is located in 
one of the most important industrial regions of the U.S. eastern corridor. It is one 
of the most dynamic hubs centered between New York City, Washington DC, and 
Philadelphia. 
Having said that, New Jersey has great vulnerability and susceptibility to massive 
cyberattacks from the inside and outside. Our dependence on electric energy has 
increased by 800% from 1960 to 2013. There have been 25 blackouts in the north-
eastern and eastern regions of the United States with millions of people subjected to 
a traumatic experience. The most notable one is the northeast blackout of 2003 on 
August 14, where a wide-area power failure in the northeastern United States and 
central Canada affected over 55 million people. Protecting the critical infrastructures 
is like protecting a house of cards. There is a tremendous risk that needs to be evalu-
ated and controlled (Figure 5.12). Risk is generated by threat, which is as defined by 
the International Standards Organization 73 as “The combination of the probability 
of an event and its consequence.”
During the design of CEWPS, we looked at the risk issue and how it can be 
best managed; we realized that the only way it can be mitigated—not completely 
eliminated—is to incorporate a Smart Grid like the human nervous system. There 
are several unique advantages to the smart grid. For one thing, it is an incredible 
piece of middleware to transfer services, data, and alerts. More importantly, a 
smart grid (SG) is the best medium to inform adjacent systems during an attack. 
Also, it will detect failures and attacks and will provide failover mechanism as 
shown in Figure 5.13.
Connectivity of Critical Systems to a City’s Smart Grid  The main purpose of having 
the smart grid is to allow the critical infrastructure systems (CIS) to be in real-
time binding with the Central Coordination Center. The smart grid would be the 
main transport of vaccination services, attack outcome status, system-to-system 
(S2S) ­messaging, and important administrative instructions to the Smart Vaccine 
Commander (SVC).

134
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System
Smart Vaccine Grid
Sustainable critical infrastructures
The Smart City Grid
Figure 5.13  The Smart City is a replica of the human nervous system. There are three contiguous components that 
are virtually amalgamated together. CEWPS as the top component, a Smart Vaccine Grid as the middle component, and 
Sustainable Critical Infrastructures as the bottom component.
Vulnerability
Actor
Motivation
Financial
Political
Publicity
Person
Organization
Government
Flaw
Weakness
Figure 5.12  Any attack includes the three threat sources. The circles are not geometrically equal in area. Motivation is 
the main driver. Cyberterrorists have access to key data on the Web, which is confidential and should be removed. Having 
cameras on every corner and entrance of government venues helps both the cyberterrorists and law enforcement agencies.

135
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
The autonomic adapter (AA) engine (see Figure 5.14) is the smart interface between 
the critical infrastructure system and the smart grid. It carries on its back the follow-
ing important mechanisms:
•	 Delivery of the vaccination services to the CIS, which is also called the 
client system
•	 Sending out attack outcome status to the Central Coordination Center
•	 Authentication of grid users
•	 Vaccination schedules and provisions
•	 Security bulletins and alerts
•	 Attack data from infected systems
•	 Connectivity between system-to-system
The autonomic adapter (AA) engine includes seven functional components as shown 
in Figure 5.14.
	
1.	The Sensors: They collect information about the attack, the nature of the attack-
ing virus, and the damage and sends this information through the smart grid 
to the Central Coordination Center (CCC) for immediate response. At the 
same time, the collected information is sent to the knowledge gear to be con-
verted to knowledge.
	
2.	The Effectors: As the name indicates, it describes vaccination services due to an 
attack. Effectors work very closely with the Smart Vaccine Commander dur-
ing vaccination.
CEWPS smart grid
Knowledge
gear
Virus outcome
messages
Damage
monitor
Vaccine
monitor
Critical infrastructure assets
Critical systemJ; Location(A,4); Grid(2,Power–1)
Autonomic adapter
Grid(2,Power–1)
Sensors
Effectors
Vaccination
services
Planner
Executioner
Analyzer
Monitor
1
2
5
6
7
3
4
Figure 5.14  Each critical system, like an appliance, is connected to the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG), which is the nervous 
system of CEWPS. Connection is made through the autonomic adapter (AA), which has all the expert components to carry 
vaccination services, and relay to the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) the attack outcomes.

136
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
3.	The Analyzer: It provides the mechanism to evaluate the situation (normal 
versus attack) based on performance and security metrics and rules.
	
4.	The Monitor: It monitors the sensors that provide real-time signals from the 
CIS according to the rules of the analyzer.
	
5.	The Planner: It packages a list of vaccination services for the attack and passes 
them to the commander.
	
6.	The Executioner: It receives the vaccination services from the planner and 
passes them to the critical infrastructure systems.
	
7.	The Knowledge Gear: It gathers activity sensor and effector data from all of 
the four functional components of the AA and gets converted into knowl-
edge and can be discussed between the four components and the Smart 
Vaccine Commander.
Critical Infrastructures in Smart Cities
What Is Criticality?  It is also appropriate to clarify the subject of criticality, because 
it is very closely related to threat, risk, and attacks. Criticality is a relative measure of 
the consequences of a failure mode and its frequency of occurrences. To say that the 
power grid is highly critical means that a blackout will create a very grave impact. The 
power grid is very complex and has many interconnections and components. Failure 
can either be human, mechanical, electrical, or in the design of the system. The resul-
tant failure therefore can be either catastrophic, critical, or marginal. Failure mode 
is defined as the way in which a failure is observed. It describes the way the failure 
occurs and its impact on equipment operation. A failure mode deals with the present, 
whereas a failure cause happened in the past and a failure effect deals with the future. 
Let’s analyze the situation numerically.
The formula of criticality due to a failure is
	
C
t
m
p
= bal
	
Criticality mode
probability of nexthigherfailure
failurem
=
´
(
) (
oderatio
partfailurerate
durationof applicablemissionp
)
(
) (
´
´
hase)
Total item criticality (Cr) is a joint probability of the item under all the failure 
modes:
	
C
t
n
j
n
r
p
=
=å
1
(
)
bal
where
Cr is the criticality probability
n is the initial failure mode of the item being analyzed where n = 1, 2, 3, 4,…, j
j is the number of failure modes for the item being analyzed

137
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Severity is an attribute associated with the damage caused by the cyberattack. There 
are four levels of severity: negligible, marginal, critical, and catastrophic (Figure 5.15).
A Smart City Is Idealistic Hype  Let’s start with a realistic note: a smart city is idealistic 
hype, although the term is very attractive, but it will not happen soon. It is a moving 
target with so many uneasy-to-control variables. For one thing, smart city needs an inex-
haustible approved budget but, above all, a stable government led by credentialed vision-
ary leader. Building a smart city and setting up a base city take at least 20 years. No one 
started a smart city from scratch, which is a futile endeavor, if not impossible. According 
to the United Nations, there are 196 capital cities of sovereign on Earth. None of them 
is a true smart city. My personal observation is that Dubai is steadfastly moving toward 
a smart city. It has the money, the plan, and the leadership. So, a smart city is nothing 
but a cross-pollinated booming urbanite with some inherent beauty. It can be on the 
ocean, in the ocean, or in the middle of the desert. The term smart cities is a bit ambigu-
ous. Some people choose a narrow definition—that is, cities that use information and 
communication technologies (ICT) to deliver services to their citizens. My favorite defi-
nition of a smart city is that it is a booming metropolis with resilient and future-ready 
infrastructures, bundled with intelligent information and communication technologies 
(ICT) to secure the use of its key resources and managed by a team of smart citizens and 
smart government. But the most influencing variable in The Smart City polynomial is its 
ability to secure itself from physical human-provoked attacks and catastrophes. A smart 
city should have a mechanism to defend itself, mitigate danger, and eliminate it.
Criticality of any critical infrastructure can be computed with the given formula Cr= Σj
n=1(βαλpt)n
Failure mode
Frequent
Criticality curve
Trade spying
Telecom
Transportation
Suicide
bombing
Water
Grid
Government
spying
Blackouts
Criticality space
Severity categories
Negligible
Marginal
Critical
Catastrophic
Probable
Occasional
Remote
Unlikely
Figure 5.15  Most of the attacks on infrastructures are considered critical and associated with high failure probability. 
Smart cities cannot afford to have infrastructures with high levels of vulnerability. Predictive Analytics comes in handy to 
offer predictable future scenarios.

138
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Protecting the Critical Infrastructure and Key Resources (CIKR) in The Smart 
City requires a brand-new approach to cybersecurity and a new set of technologies. 
CEWPS was specifically designed to meet the crucial security requirements in smart 
cities. As we have seen in Chapter 3, CEWPS is two generations ahead of the present 
Antivirus Technologies (AVT).
What are the Critical Infrastructure and Key Resources that smart cities have to 
worry about?
The National Strategy for Homeland Security has identified 13 critical sectors. As 
we learn more about the threats, the means of attack, and the various criteria that 
make targets lucrative for terrorists, this list will evolve. The critical infrastructure 
sectors consist of, first, agriculture and food, water, public health, emergency services, 
government; second, the defense industrial base, information, and telecommunica-
tions; and third, energy, transportation, banking and finance, chemicals and hazard-
ous materials, and postal and shipping.
Smart cities should be characterized by optimum urban performance reflected in 
13 critical sectors. But smart cities are more than the sum of those sectors. We can say 
that smart city is a digitally intelligent city. In other words, it is the balanced hybrid 
mixture of networked infrastructures and human capital. CEWPS (call it the holy 
grail) would only qualify to protect the 13 critical sectors of the city.
What Is a Critical Infrastructure  We keep using the term critical infrastructure every-
where. But what does it mean in terms of a smart city?
In a smart city, energy, water, transportation, public health and safety, and other 
key services are managed in concert to support smooth operation of critical infra-
structure while providing for a clean, economic, and safe environment in which to 
live, work, and play. Timely logistics information will be gathered and supplied 
to the public either by the cloud, secure information highways, or social media 
networks.
The energy infrastructure is arguably the single most important feature in any city. 
If unavailable for a significant enough period of time, all other functions will eventu-
ally cease. This is why CEWPS utilizes the smart grid to offer on-demand vaccina-
tion services to immunize the power grid as well as the other critical infrastructure 
system.
Critical infrastructure is a term coined by governments to represent the backbone 
of The Smart City’s economy, security, and health. People are aware of it as the 
power they use at homes, the water they drink, the transportation that moves them, 
and the communication systems they rely on to stay in touch with friends and family. 
The corollary of this can be stated as “smart city cannot exist without a smart grid 
protecting its critical infrastructures.”
How did a particular infrastructure become critical? This is an interesting question. 
Infrastructures were born with cities. The oldest infrastructures were aqueducts and 
roads. The Egyptians built canals and irrigations systems. They did not make so many 

139
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
roads. Roads were not so important because they relied on the Nile for transportation. 
The Romans build aqueducts, roads, and bridges. As cities became more and more 
populated, the infrastructures became more important, and additional sections were 
added to the old ones.
Engineering, medicine, and the military became the most important elements of 
civilization survival. The first one is to build healthy city, the second one is to maintain 
healthy citizens, and the third one is to defend the city. George Stephenson invented 
the steam locomotive engine in 1820, Karl Benz invented the modern car in 1879, and 
the Wright Brothers invented the airplane in 1903. All these three inventions brought 
to the modern world three new infrastructures. Thomas Edison gave us the grace of 
electricity in 1879, Alexander Graham Bell gave us the telephone in 1876, Thomas 
John Watson, Sr. gave us the International Business Machines computer in 1953, 
and then Leonard Kleinrock and Vinton Cerf gave us the Internet, and that was the 
beginning of the electronic Big Bang that we are living in today.
The reality of living defies predictions and forecasts. Today, 54% of the world’s 
population lives in urban areas, a proportion that is expected to increase to 66% by 
2050. Just 10 years ago, the number of Internet users was 910 million with a world 
population of 6.4 billion. These numbers have jumped to a whopping 3.1 billion 
with a world population of 7.2 billion. Cities are becoming more crowded and nois-
ier, with more crime and poverty. But governments are fighting all these miseries 
by seriously considering jumping on the smart city bandwagon. The strategy is to 
utilize innovation and ability to solve social problems and use ICTs to improve this 
capacity. The intelligence lies in the ability to solve problems of these communities 
and is linked to technology transfer when a problem is solved. In this sense, intelli-
gence is an inner quality of any territory, any place, city, or region where innovation 
processes are facilitated by ICTs. What varies is the degree of intelligence, depend-
ing on the person, the system of cooperation, and digital infrastructure and tools 
that a community offers its residents. Take for example Tokyo, it tops the popula-
tion list and remains the world’s largest city with 38 million dwellers. Amazingly, 
Tokyo is rated as the third most impressive smart city on Earth. The website (http://
freshome.com/2013/02/07/10-most-impressive-smart-cities-on-Earth) 
describes 
the article “10 Most Impressive Smart Cities On Earth” authored by Rick Delgado 
on February 7, 2013. This is the secret.
After months of rolling blackouts due to lack of nuclear power, the need for the 
Japanese to innovate has never been greater. Japan’s biggest companies are behind 
the Smart City revolution taking place around the globe and are using Tokyo as their 
proving ground. Panasonic, Sharp, Mitsubishi, and many other big names are work-
ing very hard to infuse smart technology into this massive city.
CEWPS Screen Layout  CEWPS/SV system will have around 150 dynamic screens 
and 100 online reports categorized by component. Selective main screens are shown 
in Figures 5.16 and 5.17.

140
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Figure 5.17  This is a real-time of what happens in the battlefield. The uniqueness of CEWPS comes in its accurate predic-
tion. As soon as the virus reaches the grid, the smart vaccine army will be ready to protect the critical system. The cognitive 
smart vaccine grid (SVG) is of paramount importance in the victory. (©2014 Merit Cybersecurity Group. All rights reserved.)
CEWPS Main Dashboard
The Central Coordination Center
City Smart
Grid Admin
Smart Grid
Operations
Reasoning
Engine Models
Honeypot
Operations
Physical
Postattack
Vaccination
Critical
Infrastructure
Desc.
Attack Episode
Reports
Attacks
Model Results 
and Analysis
Predictive
Analysis
Reverse
Engineering
Administration
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Recovery
Main Menu
Reverse
Engineering
Operation
Preattack
Vaccination
Smart Vaccine
Grid
Early Warning 
and Forecast
Main Menu
Attack
Main Menu
Smart Grid
Operations
Main Menu
Infrastructures
Documentation
Main Menu
Figure 5.16  The CEWPS main dashboard and main operations screens. Each block is equipped with dynamic reporting 
capability. Each block will have additional subblocks (now shown). Administrators are well trained on how to respond to a 
preemptive massive attack.

141
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Glossary with Bibliography*
Accommodation (Piaget and Inhelder, 1969): A process to which Piaget referred in 
his theory of cognitive development, whereby an individual’s existing under-
standing is modified from a new experience.
Adaptable hypermedia systems (De Bra, 1998): Systems in which users can explic-
itly set preferences or establish profiles through filling out forms to provide 
information for the user model, which is then used to determine the presenta-
tion of information.
Adaptable systems (Streitz, 1988): Systems in which users have the ability to diag-
nose their own progress and modify student/user models as needed.
Adaptation model (Wu, Houben, and De Bra, 2000): The component of an adaptive 
hypermedia system that allows the system to modify information presentation 
so that reading and navigation style conform to user preferences and knowl-
edge level and that specifies the way in which the user’s knowledge modifies 
the presentation of information.
Adaptive multimedia presentation (De Bra, 1998): A type of content adaptation in 
which the selection of the presentation medium is based on the needs of the 
user but which does not yet allow for the adaptation of individual elements of 
multimedia content.
Adaptive navigation (Brusilovsky, 1998): Adaptive hypermedia techniques that 
modify the links accessible to a user at a particular time; link adaptation.
Adaptive presentation (Brusilovsky, 1998): Techniques that modify the contents of 
a page based on the user model; content adaptation.
Adaptive systems (Streitz, 1988): Systems that modify the student/user model to 
adjust to progress and characteristics of users.
Adaptive text presentation (Brusilovsky, 1998): A type of content adaptation in 
which the user model determines a page’s textual content. While there are 
various techniques for adaptive text presentation, they look similar from the 
perspective of what can be adapted, that is, those with varying user models see 
different textual content as the content for the same page.
Adaptive tutoring systems (ATS) (Streitz, 1988): What many refer to as intelligent tutor-
ing systems, though Streitz is reluctant to ascribe intelligence to technical systems.
Aesthetic entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that engages 
the senses through works of art that relate to the subject matter being stud-
ied. Also, concepts and examples have their own aesthetic properties, which 
can be examined and discussed in conjunction with the topic at hand.
Assimilation (Piaget and Inhelder, 1969): A process of adaptation to interactions 
with the environment through which individuals add new experiences to their 
base of knowledge according to Piaget’s theory of cognitive development.
*	 From http://www.brainjolt.com/multi-intelligent-e-learning/glossary/.

142
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Asynchronous learning (Jackson, 2001): Directed study or self-study that does not 
occur in real time or in a live instructor-led setting.
Asynchronous Web technology (Harasim, 1999): A type of computer-mediated 
communication that involves the use of the World Wide Web to provide 
information in non-real time.
Behaviorism (Graham, 2000): A major school of thought on the nature of learning 
and the properties of knowledge that was dominant in the 1950s and 1960s 
and focused on the observation of behavior and the adaptation of organisms to 
the environment. Behaviorist learning theories view knowledge as objective, 
given, and absolute.
Bodily kinesthetic intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential that 
involves using one’s body for processing information in order to solve problems 
or build products.
Bug catalog (Psotka, Massey, and Mutter, 1988): A set of errors compiled and ana-
lyzed by an intelligent tutoring system to indicate where a particular learner 
is having difficulty.
Categorization (Bruner, Goodnow, and Austin, 1956): The basis of a cognitive learn-
ing theory developed by Jerome Bruner, a cognitive psychologist and educator. 
According to Bruner’s theory, people interpret the world in terms of similarities 
and differences among various events and objects. While engaged in catego-
rizing, people employ a coding system based on a hierarchical arrangement of 
categories that are related to each other, with successively more specific levels.
CGI (NCSA, 1998): Common Gateway Interface; a standard for external gateway 
programs to interface with information servers such as Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP) servers used for the World Wide Web.
Classicism (Eliasmith, 1998): An approach to modeling thinking from the field of 
cognitive science that employs symbolic processing to model thought pro-
cesses, also referred to as symbolicism.
Cognitive constructivism (Chen, 2000): A school of thought within constructivism 
that postulates that learning occurs as a result of the exploration and discovery 
by each individual learner. In the view of cognitive constructivists, knowledge 
is a symbolic, mental representation in the mind of each individual.
Cognitive psychobiology (Hebb, 1949): Interdisciplinary field of study involving 
biological neural studies. D.O. Hebb is considered by many to be the father of 
cognitive psychobiology.
Cognitive science (Audi, 1995): The interdisciplinary study of mind and intelli-
gence, which attempts to further an understanding of intelligent activities 
and the nature of thought. The major contributing disciplines to the field 
include philosophy, psychology, computer science, linguistics, neuroscience, 
and anthropology.
Cognitivism (Gardner, 1985): Major school of thought that employs an information 
processing approach to learning and uses a model based on the input–output 

143
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
information processing architecture of digital computers. Though cognitivist 
learning theories are based on active mental processing on the part of learners, 
such theories still maintain the behaviorist perspective on knowledge, consid-
ering knowledge to be both given and absolute.
Computational system (Gardner, 1985): A term used in cognitive science to denote 
a system that uses discrete mathematics to model cognitive agents and the 
process of cognition.
Computer-assisted (-aided) instruction (Lawler and Yazdani, 1987): Usually refers 
to sequentially ordered linear programs. CAI generally follows a step-by-step 
procedural approach to the presentation of subject matter, based on the prin-
ciples of behaviorist psychology.
Computer-based instruction (CBI) (Psotka et al., 1988): Using computers for train-
ing and instruction. However, the term “CBI” usually refers to instruction that 
does not use technology from artificial intelligence. Production rules and expert 
systems are generally not used for sequencing the elements of information that 
are presented to the student. This approach generally produces linear sequences 
of information, and such CBI programs are referred to as linear programs.
Computer-based learning environments (Lawler and Yazdani, 1987): Systems that 
use a constructivist approach based on Piaget’s theory of active learning, with 
the objective of providing an environment in which students can develop their 
own authentic knowledge. Examples of computer-based learning environ-
ments are Papert’s Mindstorms (Papert, 1980/1999) and Lawler’s Microworlds 
(Lawler, 1984).
Computer-based training (CBT) (Beck, Stern, and Haugsjaa, 1996): Developed in 
the 1950s, CBT bases its training approach on behaviorist psychology theory. 
CBT teaches courses by presenting knowledge to be learned through a step-
by-step procedure, leading students from one item to be learned to the next.
Computer-mediated communication (Harasim, 1999): The passing of messages or 
sharing of information through networking tools, such as e-mail, conferenc-
ing, newsgroups, and websites.
Connectionism (Eliasmith, 1998): An approach to modeling thinking developed 
in the field of cognitive science that views thought processes as connections 
between nodes in a distributed network.
Constructionism (Resnick, 1998): A term coined by an Masssachusetts Institute of 
Technology researcher to connote the combination of constructivist learning 
theories with the creation and development of individually designed learning 
projects.
Constructivism (Houghton Mifflin, 2001): Major school of thought on the nature 
of knowledge that views knowledge as a constructed entity developed by each 
individual. According to constructivist theory, information is transmitted but 
knowledge cannot be transmitted from teacher to student, parent to child, or 
any one individual to another; rather, knowledge is (re)constructed by each 

14 4
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
individual in his/her own mind and is relative, varying through time and 
space.
Constructivist learning theory (Chen, 2000): The theory, originally based on the 
research of Jean Piaget, holds that learning is the result of an individual’s 
mental construction. The theory posits that individuals learn by actively con-
structing their own understanding, incorporating new information into the 
base of knowledge they have already constructed in their own minds.
Content adaptation (Brusilovsky, 1998): Techniques that adapt the content of a 
page based on the user model; also known as adaptive presentation.
Course management system (Jackson, 2001): A type of online learning system, 
categorized in terms of its functions of content delivery, assessment, and 
administration.
Deconstruction (Rorty, 1995): An analytical method to uncover multiple inter-
pretations of text developed by Jacques Derrida, a French philosopher, in 
the 1960s.
Differential equations (van Gelder, 1998): A branch of mathematics used in dynamic 
systems theory to describe a multidimensional space of potential thoughts and 
behaviors, traversed by a path of thinking followed by an agent under certain 
environmental and internal pressures.
Direct guidance (Brusilovsky, 1998): An adaptive navigation technique providing a 
link to the page that the system determines to be the most suitable next stop 
along the path to the user’s information goal. Usually provided via the “next” 
button, direct guidance offers a guided tour based on user needs.
Domain model (Wu et al., 2000): The component of an adaptive hypermedia applica-
tion that describes the structure of the information content of the application. 
The domain model specifies the relationship between the concepts handled by 
the application and the connection between the concepts and the information 
fragments and pages.
Dynamic (dynamical) systems theory (van Gelder, 1998): The theoretical approach 
that uses differential equations to describe a multidimensional space of poten-
tial thoughts and behaviors, traversed by a path of thinking followed by an 
agent under certain environmental and internal pressures. Some cognitive 
scientists view dynamic systems theory as a promising approach to modeling 
human thinking.
Educational adaptive hypermedia (Brusilovsky, 1998): One of the six major appli-
cation domains within existing adaptive hypermedia systems. Educational 
hypermedia constitutes one of the earliest application areas and is still the 
most widely encountered application domain for adaptive hypermedia sys-
tems. Most educational hypermedia systems limit the size of the hyperspace 
by focusing on a specific course or topic for learning. User modeling-based 
adaptive hypermedia techniques are useful in educational hypermedia sys-
tems since knowledge level varies widely among users, the knowledge of an 

145
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
individual user can expand very quickly, and novice users need navigational 
assistance even in a limited hyperspace.
Educational hypermedia (Brusilovsky, 1998): One of the six major application 
domains within existing adaptive hypermedia systems. Educational hyperme-
dia constitutes one of the earliest application areas and is still the most widely 
encountered application domain for adaptive hypermedia systems. Most edu-
cational hypermedia systems limit the size of the hyperspace by focusing on 
a specific course or topic for learning. User modeling-based adaptive hyper-
media techniques are useful in educational hypermedia systems since knowl-
edge level varies widely among users, the knowledge of an individual user can 
expand very quickly, and novice users need navigational assistance even in a 
limited hyperspace.
Entry point framework (Gardner, 1999a): An educational methodology that 
accommodates individual differences by providing multiple ways to intro-
duce a topic. While certain entry points activate particular intelligences, 
a one-to-one correspondence does not exist between entry points and 
intelligences.
Epistemology (Heylighen, 2000): The branch of philosophy that studies knowledge 
and attempts to answer basic questions about knowledge, such as what dis-
tinguishes true or adequate knowledge from false or inadequate knowledge.
Existential/foundational entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic 
that allows individuals to approach a topic through addressing fundamen-
tal questions, such as the meaning of life. Philosophical issues invite certain 
learners to engage on a deep level, which piques and holds their interest in 
studying a particular topic.
Expert model (Beck et al., 1996): An intelligent tutoring system component that pro-
vides a representation of the knowledge in a way that a person who is skilled in the 
subject matter represents such knowledge. In recent intelligent tutoring systems, 
the expert model is a runnable program with the facility to solve problems in the 
subject matter domain. The expert model is used to compare the learner’s solution 
to the expert’s solution; in this way, the intelligent tutor identifies specific points 
that the learner does not yet understand or topics the learner has not yet mastered.
Explanation variants (Brusilovsky, 1998): Content adaptation method that involves 
storing variations of sections of information and presenting each individual 
with the particular variation that best fits the individual’s user model.
Formative evaluation (Tessmer, 1996): The evaluation of a working prototype or, in 
some cases, a rough draft of a system.
g Factor (Jensen, 1998): The theory that there exists a single, monolithic, and mea-
surable, general mental ability in humans referred to as g.
Generative topics (Perkins, 1998): Topics that are central to one or more disciplines 
or subjects, accessible and interesting to students, as well as connected to 
teachers’ passions.

146
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Global guidance (Brusilovsky, 1998): A method for adaptive navigation support 
that helps the user follow the shortest and most direct path to reach the infor-
mation goal by telling the user which link to follow next or sorting links from 
a given node according to their relevance to the overall goal.
Global orientation (Brusilovsky, 1998): A method for adaptive navigation support, 
offering annotation landmarks and hiding nonrelevant information so that 
users understand the structure and position in hyperspace.
Hands-on entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that engages 
learners in constructing experiments with physical materials or through com-
puter simulations. Other hands-on approaches invite learners to learn by 
building or manipulating a physical manifestation of some aspect of the topic 
they are studying.
Hypermedia (Wu et al., 2000): Technology that focuses on information nodes and 
the connections between the nodes.
Instrumentalism (Dewey, 1938/1963): Naturalistic understanding and philoso-
phy that was developed by John Dewey based on the underlying belief that 
thought is the product of the interaction between an organism and the envi-
ronment and knowledge, guiding and controlling the interaction between the 
organism and the environment.
Intelligences (Gardner, 1999b): Biopsychological potentials for processing infor-
mation, solving problems, and developing products valued by the culture in 
which the person resides.
Intelligent computer-aided instruction (Sleeman and Brown, 1982): Sleeman and 
Brown consider intelligent computer-aided instruction to be the same as intel-
ligent tutoring systems.
Intelligent educational systems (IES) (Goodyear, 1991): Systems that advise learn-
ers and treat them as collaborators rather than directing them in an authori-
tarian manner. IES provide learner models that can be inspected and modified 
by the learners themselves.
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) (Psotka et al., 1988): An advanced form of intel-
ligent computer-aided instruction (ICAI) and computer-based instruction 
(CBI) that attempts to individualize instruction by creating a computer-based 
learning environment. The environment performs in a manner similar to a 
human teacher, working with students to indicate when they make errors, 
offering suggestions on how best to proceed, recommending new topics to 
study, and collaborating with students on the curriculum. Such systems 
should be able to analyze student responses and keep track of the preferences 
and skills of each individual learner, customizing materials to fit the needs of 
individual students.
Interpersonal entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that 
engages learners with each other so that they can interact, cooperate, work 

147
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
together, or alternately debate and argue with each other. Students learn 
from each other through group projects, in which each student contributes 
to the overall effort.
Interpersonal intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential that 
involves a person’s ability to understand the intentions, motivations, and 
desires of other people and, therefore, to relate effectively with other people.
Intrapersonal intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential to under-
stand oneself and to construct an effective working model of personal capa-
bilities and difficulties as well as to employ such knowledge for managing 
one’s life.
Knowledge-based tutoring systems (KBTS) (Streitz, 1988): Systems that incorpo-
rate knowledge about the subject matter, principles of teaching, characteristics 
of individual learners, and human–computer interaction.
Learning management system (Jackson, 2001): Online learning system categorized 
by function, similar to course management systems, which contain content 
delivery, assessment, and administration functions with an integrated view of 
all active courses, with assessment and goal-tracking facilities.
Learning objects (Innes, McGreal, and Roberts, 2000): Components, lessons, 
modules, courses, or programs that are individually structured digital or non-
digital entities, for use or reference in online learning systems.
Legacy systems (Brinson et al., 2001): Existing applications or systems within an 
organization that are not Web based or are not integrated with the Web.
Linguistic intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential that involves 
the ability to learn and use spoken and written language to process informa-
tion and achieve specific goals.
Link adaptation (Brusilovsky, 1998): Adaptive hypermedia techniques that modify 
the links accessible to a user at a particular time; adaptive navigation.
Local guidance (Brusilovsky, 1998): A method for adaptive navigation support that 
offers suggestions for the most relevant link to follow for the next step, based 
on the user’s preferences, knowledge, and background.
Local orientation (Brusilovsky, 1998): A method for adaptive navigation support 
that helps users understand their location in hyperspace and nearby informa-
tion, offering information about nodes available from the current location or 
limiting navigation possibilities, focusing on the most relevant links.
Logical entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that allows learn-
ers to deduce the cause and effect of certain occurrences and apply deductive 
reasoning to understand the relationships among various factors involved in 
the study of a particular topic.
Logical–mathematical intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential 
that involves the ability to conduct logical analysis of problems as well as sci-
entific investigations and to carry out mathematical operations.

148
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Logical positivism (Thagard, 1996): School of thought in philosophy that was widely 
accepted in the early 1950s, which questioned the value of systematic inquiry 
into the operation of the mind.
Marxism (Wilson, 1997): The philosophy developed by Karl Marx (1818–1883) that 
truth can be discerned by analyzing economic structures.
Modernity (Wilson, 1997): A period during the Enlightenment when the worldview 
was based on using rational, empirical, and objective approaches to discern 
the truth.
Multimedia technologies (Cisco, 2001): A number of different media-based tech-
nologies provide delivery services for online learning. These technologies 
include live, streaming video, audio, and slides; on-demand prerecorded video 
and/or audio with accompanying graphics; browser-based Web conferencing 
combined with audio conferencing; interactive graphics, slide shows, audio 
and video clips, and Web pages.
Multiple representations (Gardner, 1999a): An educational methodology that is 
used to convey the definitive aspects of an idea or topic, by modeling them 
through abstract or natural representation systems. The form of the repre-
sentation may be closely tied to the physical subject, such as a photographic 
record, map, or chart, or may provide a formal model. Contrary to estab-
lished approaches, Gardner argues for a family of representations rather than 
a single representation that is considered to be the best. Multiple representa-
tions allow students to choose elements from known reference areas to rep-
resent and model the new topic. The use of multiple representations allows 
students to understand on a deeper level through developing models of the 
new subject matter.
Musical intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential that involves 
the ability to perform, compose, and appreciate musical patterns.
Narrative entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that engages 
students in learning through relating stories. Linguistic, intrapersonal, and 
interpersonal intelligences are activated through verbal storytelling, with 
additional intelligences activated through symbolic narrative forms, including 
movies and mime.
Naturalist intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): A biopsychological potential that involves 
the ability to recognize and classify many species that constitute the flora and 
fauna of a person’s environment.
Neopragmatist (Rorty, 1979): A philosophical approach adopted by Richard Rorty, 
similar to the pragmatist view, based on the belief that as humans, we cre-
ate ourselves and our worlds and that human understanding is based on our 
interpretation of the world through a variety of paradigms rather than on an 
objective structure of the mind.

149
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Numerical entry point (Gardner, 1999a): A way to introduce a topic that offers stu-
dents who like to deal with numbers and numerical relations the opportunity 
to learn through measurement, counting, listing, and determining statistical 
attributes of the topic being studied.
Ongoing assessment (Perkins, 1998): Asks the question: how will you and your stu-
dents know what they understand? Students reflect on their own learning 
experiences throughout the process, and there are multiple ways for students 
to demonstrate to the teacher and to themselves what they understand.
Online learning (Harasim, 1999): Educational technology using computer-medi-
ated communication facilities that generally arise from the use of the Internet 
and Web technology.
Overlay model (Beck et al., 1996; Psotka et al., 1988): The standard type of stu-
dent model in which a student’s knowledge is considered to be a subset 
of that of a subject matter expert. A technique for student modeling that 
involves measuring the student’s performance against the standard of an 
expert’s model.
Page variants (Brusilovsky, 1998; De Bra, 1998): Content adaptation technique of 
fragment variants in which a fragment is an entire page. Multiple versions of 
particular pages exist and are selected based on variables in the user model. 
Users receive structurally different explanations of concepts based on user 
model attributes. Easy to implement, this technique offers a variant for each 
user stereotype.
Papert’s principle (Minsky, 1985): Papert’s belief that major steps in mental growth 
are based on acquiring new ways to organize and use what a person already 
knows, not just on learning new skills.
Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958): A system invented by Frank Rosenblatt in 1957 
through research in connectionism with which Rosenblatt demonstrated 
learning by a machine when the Mark I Perceptron learned to recognize and 
identify optical patterns.
Performances of understanding (Perkins, 1998): Asks the question: what will students 
do to build and demonstrate their understanding? Students can build and demon-
strate their understanding through presentations, portfolios, and other approaches 
to demonstrate to the teacher and to themselves what they have learned.
Pragmatism (Dewey, 1938/1963): A school of thought developed by William James 
(1842–1910) and adopted by John Dewey. Dewey then developed a theory of 
knowledge based on pragmatism that encompassed a view of the world as one 
in which active manipulation of the environment is involved throughout the 
process of learning.
Primacy effect (Gardner, 1999a): A psychological effect that means that students are 
particularly apt to remember the starting point in a learning experience.

150
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Postmodernism (Wilson, 1997): A philosophy based on a belief in the plurality of 
meaning, perspectives, methods, and values, and an appreciation of alterna-
tive interpretations. Postmodernists distrust theories that purport to explain 
why things are the way they are, believing in the existence of multiple truths 
based on various perspectives and ways of knowing.
Psychoanalytic movement (Wilson, 1997): School of psychology begun by Sigmund 
Freud (1856–1939), understanding an individual’s psyche through an exami-
nation of the unconscious.
Self-directed learning (Harasim, 1999): Self-paced, asynchronous online learning 
with the learner proceeding at his/her own pace through course materials.
Situated learning (Brown, Collins, and Duguid, 1989): Instruction that places an 
emphasis on the context in which learning occurs and provides students with 
opportunities to construct new knowledge and understanding in real-life situ-
ations, thereby seeking to avoid the decontextualized nature of typical class-
room learning.
Social constructivism (Chen, 2000): A school of thought that stresses the collabora-
tive efforts of groups of learners as sources of learning and considers the mind 
to be a distributed entity extending beyond the bounds of the human body 
into the social environment.
Spatial intelligence (Gardner, 1999b): The biopsychological capacity to recognize 
and manipulate patterns in both wide spaces and confined areas.
Stereotype user model (Kobsa, 1993): A model used to represent the user’s knowledge 
offering a quick assessment of the user’s background knowledge. Stereotype 
user models can be used to classify a new user and initialize the state.
Structural linguistics (Wilson, 1997): A model of language developed by Ferdinand 
de Saussure (1857–1913), based on the belief that meaning comes not from ana-
lyzing individual words but from considering the structure of a whole language.
Structuralism (Wilson, 1997): A term credited to anthropologist Claude Levi-
Strauss (1908–2009), who applied models of linguistic structure to the study 
of the customs and myths of society as a whole. Believing that individuals do 
not control the linguistic, sociological, and psychological structures that shape 
them and that can be uncovered through systematic investigation, structural-
ists moved away from the existentialist view that individuals are what they 
make themselves.
Symbolicism (Eliasmith, 1998): A school of thought in cognitive science that 
employs what is now referred to as classicism, using symbolic processing to 
model thought processes.
Synchronous learning environments (Smith et al., 2001): Online learning systems 
that use audio or video conferencing (or a combination thereof) as their pri-
mary delivery modality to support live simultaneous interaction, similar to an 
in-person instructor-led classroom situation.

151
ARCHITECTURE OF EARLY WARNING PREDICTIVE SYSTEM
Teaching for understanding (TfU) framework (Perkins and Blythe, 1994): 
Educational methodology designed to assist teachers in course development. 
The starting point in teaching for understanding is to develop generative top-
ics, topics that are central to a discipline, and understanding goals to provide 
focus to the instruction.
Theory of multiple intelligences (Gardner, 1983/1993): The cognitive theory, 
developed by Howard Gardner, that each individual possesses multiple 
intelligences rather than one single intelligence. Based on evidence from psy-
chology, biology, and anthropology, Gardner delineates criteria used to define 
eight specific human intelligences: linguistic, logical–mathematical, bodily 
kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal, musical, spatial, and naturalist. 
According to Gardner, these intelligences are both biological and learned or 
developed. Though everyone possesses these intelligences, individuals differ 
in which intelligences are more developed than others.
Thinking style (Sternberg, 1997): A preferred way of using a person’s abilities accord-
ing to how the individual likes to do something rather than how well he/she 
can actually carry out a task.
Throughlines (Perkins, 1998): Ideas that are developed across the curriculum.
Understanding goals (Perkins, 1998): What the teacher wants the students to learn; 
explicit and public goals that are focused on key concepts, methods, purposes, 
and forms of expression, as well as linked to assessment criteria.
User-adaptive system (Kobsa, 1993): An interactive computer system that adapts 
itself to current users, employing a user model for adaptation purposes.
User model (Wu et al., 2000): A component of an adaptive hypermedia application 
that represents such individual characteristics as the user’s preferences, knowl-
edge, goals, and navigation history and may include observations of the user’s 
behavior while using the system.
Web-based online learning (Harasim, 1999): Educational technology using com-
puter-mediated communication facilities based on World Wide Web.
Websites
http://bayes.cs.ucla.edu/BOOK-99/book-toc.html.
http://bayesian-intelligence.com/bwb/2012-03/how-to-model-with-bayesian-networks/.
http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r350.pdf.
http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/computing/software/predictive-analytics-and-deciding-who-
should-receive-organ-transplants.
http://stanford.edu/~ngoodman/papers/LTBC_psychreview_final.pdf.
http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/.
http://www.bayesserver.com/.
http://www.brainjolt.com/multi-intelligent-e-learning/glossary/.
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dmarg/Papers/PhD-Thesis-Margaritis.pdf.
http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/myllymak/bnets.pdf.

152
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Bayes/bnintro.html.
http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/predictive-analytics.
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/top-15-predictive-analytics-software/.
https://www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid.
References
Joshy Joseph, Craig Fellenstein, “Grid Computing”, IBM Press series 2004, Prentice Hall, 
ISBN 0-13-145660-1.
Richard Murk, “Autonomic Computing”, IBM Press Series 2004, Prentice Hall, ISBN 
0-13-144025-X.
Carl Kesselman, “The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure”, Morgan Kaufmann 
1999, ISBN 1-55860-475-8.

153
6
CEWPS Knowledge 
and Intelligence
CEWPS Is the Beginning of Singularity
One of the most inspirational terms in our technology millennium is singularity. The 
term was originally coined by mathematician John von Neumann in 1958. Then, Ray 
Kurzweil picked it up and made it famous. So, technological singularity is synon-
ymous to human intelligence explosion. Although technological progress has been 
accelerating, it has been limited by the basic intelligence of the human brain, which 
has not, according to Paul R. Ehrlich, changed significantly for millennia. However, 
with the increasing power of computers and other technologies, it might eventually be 
possible to build a machine that is more intelligent than humans. The movie Terminator 
gives us a quasi-realistic scenario how a cyborg (short for cybernetic organism) assassin 
with his runaway bionic mind was programmed to create havoc and massive destruc-
tion. Well, the symmetric warfare between good and evil will resume.
Singularity is something new but it has already a value in the scientific commu-
nity. To say that the accelerating progress in technologies will cause a runaway effect 
wherein artificial intelligence will exceed human intellectual capacity and control. 
Simplistically, we can say that if we add artificial intelligence, which is the work of 
man, to human intelligence, we can benefit and improve the quality of life, but at the 
same time, it will benefit the evil mind. CEWPS is designed with AI technologies 
with a new approach to defeat the evil mind.
We would like to define some key terms that CEWPS uses extensively throughout 
the book:
Experience: Is the biological process created by external sensation and/or internal 
reflection. We can say that an episode is an experience event that took place of 
the past, and it may be repeated in the future. For example, I have the experience 
of driving a car.
Knowledge: A neurological (related to the nervous system) description of expe-
rience, stored in the brain. We could refer to it as the derivative of experi-
ence. We can say that knowledge is experience stored as a neurological data 
in the brain. Without experience, there is no knowledge. For example, I gained 
knowledge to avoid accidents.
Episode: CEWPS considers it an event of attack on a critical system, with defined 
purpose and objective, duration, start and stop times.

154
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Ontology: The collection of related objects that constitute a knowledge model. 
Ontology is built with a special XML language called Web Ontology 
Language (OWL), which is a knowledge representation language.
Semantics: THe science that takes a word with different meanings and builds a 
relationship among them. A word can have many meanings. Semantics builds 
a relationship tree for them. Here is an example of how semantics work:
Crash can mean auto accident, a drop in the stock market, to attend a party without being invited, 
ocean waves hitting the shore, or the sound of a cymbal being struck together.
The unique thing about CEWPS is that it stores human intelligence in the form of 
knowledge and experience. In this respect, CEWPS achieves the judgmental capacity 
of the human mind.
Quantitatively, we can represent CEWPS in the following polynomial:
	
CEWPS
EarlyWarning
Digital
munity
edictiveCausality
Hum
=
+
+
+
Im
Pr
anKnowledge
CyberTerrorismKnowledge
+
When we talk about knowledge representation (KR) in CEWPS, we are referring to 
cybercrime (we use cybercrime and cyberterrorism interchangeably) episodes. CEWPS 
represents cybercrime episodes as a knowledge model as shown in Figure 6.1. In seman-
tic network modeling, we know the objects (in the circle) of the episode and the causal 
relation among the objects (arrows, not necessarily one-on one). Here is a sample of a 
cybercrime episode represented as a semantic directed acyclic graph (DAG).
Political
motif
Religious
motif
Plot
attack
Attack
location
Repeat
job
Level
success
Attack
time
Special
motif
Setup
team
Xi=The criminal activity in sequence i
P = II P(Xi|pai)
Inside
job
Attack
type
Payload
Assess
damage
Specific
critical
system
Level
of risk
Backdoor
Build
virus
E-mail
Virus
Figure 6.1  This directed acyclic graph represents a knowledge model of a cyberattack. It is also called the Bayesian net-
work model. All cyberattacks can be transformed into this model. Ontology is the technique that is used to convert a cyber-
attack into a knowledge model. Web Ontology Language (OWL) does the conversion. The Semantic Resource Description 
Framework (RDF) stores it in the Attack Knowledge Base. The vertices (circles) represent the variables (criminal activity), 
and the arcs (arrows) represent the causal relationship between the activities.

155
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Structure of the CEWPS Knowledge Center
One of the most original and vital components of CEWPS is its Knowledge Center, 
which comprises the Reasoning Engine and the Virus Knowledge Base and the 
Vaccine Knowledge Base. The diagram in Figure 6.2 describes how the incoming 
attack is detected by the Early Warning Center (EWC), which in turn instantiates a 
series of command requests to the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) to be ready for 
a vaccination mission. SVC issues a mobilization request to its army. These activities 
constitute the Digital Immunity process.
The Knowledge Center is where all the reasoning and causality analyses take place. 
It is the cognition center where all the intelligent thinking processes take place. The KC 
decides based on the outcome of its Reasoning Engine what the next decision will be. The 
KC establishes the causality rules and the reasoning metrics for all vaccination services.
Ontology creates knowledge model from similar concepts (objects). In other words, 
it takes several objects that are related to one another and creates a model. Let’s give 
an example: we take the human parts, the nervous system, the skeletal system, and 
the digestive system and link them all together through relations. In the end, we have 
a human ontology. In CEWPS, a cyberattack episode is represented as an ontology 
model. The model is structured as a schema with related attributes (classes). Figure 6.3 
is an ontological representation of a cyberattack that is stored in the Attack Knowledge 
Base (AKB). Any user could retrieve any specific attack by searching on any attribute.
CCC was alerted
An attack detected
by the early warning
Early warning
center
Knowledge and
Reasoning Engine
center
Smart Vaccine
vaccination
center
Get vaccine
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Check virus
KB for attack
Rush for vaccination
Critical systems
Smart grid
SV was alerted
Central Coordination
Center
1
2
3
5
6
4
Figure 6.2  CEWPS with its major components represents the nuclear reactor of Digital Immunity. We can consider 
each center as a factory or an assembly line of many information pieces, all work together to provide services for the 
center. This comprises many subcomponents that perform specific cognitive duties to provide complete protection to the 
critical systems.

156
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The Cybercrime Knowledge Model
The ontological structure of the smart grid cyberattack is a hierarchical representation 
of the classes, and they are related to each other, as shown in the layout that follows:
	
1.	Subschema 1 describes the attack.
	
2.	Subschema 2 qualifies the attacking organization.
	
3.	Subschema 3 describes the attacked infrastructure.
Here are the descriptions of the attributes of the three classes that represent a cyber-
attack on the smart grid and will be coded later in the Web Ontology Language 
(OWL). Actually, OWL is not a real acronym. The language started out as the Web 
Ontology Language but the working group disliked the acronym WOL. We decided 
to call it OWL. The working group became more comfortable with this decision when 
one of the members pointed out the following justification for this decision from the 
noted ontologist A.A. Milne who, in his influential book Winnie the Pooh, stated of 
the wise character OWL: “He could spell his own name WOL, and he could spell 
Tuesday so that you knew it was not Wednesday…” a quote from Jim Hendler, co-chair 
of the W3C Web Ontology Working Group, and the W3C Communications Team.
Index: Is the key of the schema for faster search and retrieval.
Attack type: Describe the type of attack: Trojan, virus, DOS … and if the attack 
was sent as an e-mail, picture, or website, also if it was physically stored on a 
USB, CD, or sent via a mobile device.
Cyberattack
Attacker
Attack
Properties
Technology
Used
Motives
Industry
Technology
Used
Taxonomy
Skills
Attack 
Vector
Vaccine
Attributes
Classes
Crime
History
Smart Grid
Attacked
Target
Figure 6.3  The ontological structure of a cyberattack. Ontology is the glue that we use to put together a structure that 
we call the knowledge model. The cyberattack has three basic classes that describe completely the nature of the attack, 
the cyberterrorist, and the destination of the attack.

157
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Causality: THis attribute is so critical and mathematically true. David Hume 
(1711–1776), the British Empiricist of the Early Modern period, is one of the 
most famous contributors to the philosophy of causation (Figure 6.4). In his 
A Treatise of Human Nature, he states the following rules:
An object precedent and contiguous to another, and where all the objects resembling 
the former are placed in like relations of precedency and contiguity to those objects that 
resemble the latter. An object precedent and contiguous to another, and so united with 
it, that the idea of the one determined the mind to form the idea of the other, and the 
impression of the one to form a more lively idea of the other.
So, causation is the relation between two interrelated events where the second event 
is caused by the first one. It can be political, religious, or social. Attacking critical 
infrastructures is a serious crime triggered by a major event. CEWPS examines a 
multitude of factors and adds them to the causality of the attack. When there is a war 
between two countries, it is very likely that one country will resort to attacking critical 
infrastructure of the other country. Although the attacking country will deny it, crime 
will always leave a trail.
Attack
Index
Attack
Plan
Country of
Origin
Subschema 1
Subschema 2
Subschema 3
Causality
Criminal
Organization
U.S.
Entry
U.S.
Education
Motives
U.S.
Entry
Work
Visa
Skills
U.S.
Education
Motives
Target
Location
Hacker
Alias
Background
Criminal
History
Attack
Type
Infrastructure
Countries
Involved
Attack
Time
Means of
Access
Technology
Used
Payload
Vaccine
Forensics
Outcome
Recovery
Targeted
Platform
Tools
Alarm
Impact
1
2
3
Hacker
Index
Infrastructure
Index
Location
Industry
Grid
Figure 6.4  The ontological representation of a cyberattack with its three interrelated subschemas will be stored in the 
Attack Knowledge Base under the cybercrime ontology domain.

158
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Outcome: THe result of the attack, which could be physical or digital. CEWPS 
examines the impact and the damages of the attack and computes the threat 
coefficient, which is critical for the future attacks.
Attack time: THe time of the attack. CEWPS computes the preattack planning 
and rehearsal times. This information becomes very valuable for the alert 
broadcasting and informs the Smart Vaccine for its preattack vaccination 
services.
Technology used: THe type of hacking technique and tools used for the attack. 
CEWPS will determine the spying technique, the nature of the malware, and 
its currency.
People: the qualifications of the attackers, where the attack was launched from 
and the terrorist organization they belong to. CEWPS has the skills to 
assemble all the pieces on the identity of the attackers, their skills, and their 
motivation for the attack.
Vaccine used: THe vaccine that was used to abort the attack. Often, the attack 
infects some of the servers on the smart grid, and the Smart Vaccine has to 
rush and vaccinate the healthy servers before the attack. If the attack took 
place and there was no time to perform any vaccination, then the attack 
will be reverse engineered and a new vaccine will be developed for future 
attacks.
Target: THe critical infrastructure that was targeted during the attack. There is a 
correlation between the nature of the infrastructure and the type of attacks. 
CEWPS will study the evidence, and with the help of the inference engine, 
it will be easier to determine how to learn more about the anatomy of the 
attack.
Location: THe geographical location where the attack took place. The attack may 
have been launched from another continent or from a vessel in the ocean, or 
from several simultaneous locations. CEWPS will study the evidence and 
store it in the Attack Knowledge Base (Figure 6.5).
How Does CEWPS Predict Cyberattacks on the Smart City?
Predicting a cybercrime does not rely on prayers. It is based on scientific foundation, 
human intelligence, and computing power. Computer scientists and AI specialists 
have developed sophisticated mathematical models that use complex algorithms and 
previous cybercrime episodes to predict when the second shoe will drop. Academia 
researchers have claimed that major international cyberattacks follow predictable pat-
terns. It is a qualified truth.
It is true that all infrastructures share several common denominators, but they 
differ in technical structure, the type of service rendered, and the skill set of people 
to support them. Table 6.1 shows how attacks differ from one infrastructure to 
another.

159
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Selection of a specific
attack by any semantic
attribute
Semantic
Search Engine
1
2
3
4
5
Cyberattacks stored as ontology schemas
Attack
Index
Country of
Origin
Countries
Involved
Hacker
Index
Criminal
Organization
U.S.
Entry
U.S.
Education
U.S.
Entry
U.S. 
Education
Motives
Work
Visa
Skills
Motives
Target
Location
Hacker
Alias
Background
Criminal
History
Targeted
Platform
Payload
Forensics
Infra-
structure
Infra-
structure
Index
Location
Industry
Grid
Means of
Access
Technology
Used
Outcome
Recovery
Attack
Plan
Attack
Type
Attack
Time
Tools
Alarm
Impact
Figure 6.5  Law enforcement agents from their remote station can zoom in with a magnifying glass on the details of crime. They can run an ad-hoc queries from to the Attack Knowledge Base 
by using the semantic search engine. They retrieve five cyberattack cases for review. By running several iterations, they will be able to get more information on the crime. If none of the cases 
apply to the crime, CEWPS has an interface adapter to other crime repositories. The schema is open ended and new attributes can be added to the Attack Knowledge Base.

160
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Now that we have shown how deep the Internet is, predicting smart city cyberat-
tacks is a fairly complicated task. At the same time, cybercriminals are increasingly 
using sophisticated social engineering techniques leading to disruptions in the societal 
fabric of the Smart City.
CEWPS utilizes sophisticated modeling tools including a stochastic model and a 
Bayesian network model to analyze and predict an incoming surprise attack on the 
smart grid.
In modeling an attack, we have to consider so many quantitative assumptions 
derived from past attacks on the grid, attacks extracted from Big Data, the Deep 
Web, and the knowledge security domain experts. Here are some of the variables that 
will play a big role in the outcome of the predictive model:
The target of the attack should be defined first by location, nature, and impact. 
There are two important security metrics that need to be included in the model: vul-
nerability and exploitability. The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) is an 
open standard for scoring IT security vulnerabilities. It was developed to provide orga-
nizations with a mechanism to measure vulnerabilities and prioritize their mitigation. 
There are six metrics that are used to calculate the exploitability and impact subscores 
of the vulnerability. These subscores are used to calculate the overall base score.
	
Exploitability = 20 × AccessVector × AccessComplexity × Authentication
	 Impact = 10.41 × (1 − (1 − ConfImpact) × (1 − IntegImpact) × (1 − Avail Impact)
	BaseScore = roundTo1Decimal (0.6 × Impact) + (0.4 × Exploitability) – 1.5 × f  (Impact)
Table 6.1  Infrastructure Attacks and Their Related Impact and Physical Damage
INFRASTRUCTURE 
THREAT/IMPACT 
CONTROL SYSTEM 
DATA ASSETS 
PHYSICAL DAMAGE 
Power plants/substations
Very high/panic
Cascade failure
Sabotage
Partial
Airports/roads/bridges
Very high/panic
Hard failure
Sabotage/compromise
Partial
Water systems
Very high/panic
Soft failure
Sabotage/compromise
Partial
Public health
Moderate
Partial
Sabotage/compromise
Partial
Telecom
Very high/panic
Hard failure
Sabotage
Sabotage
Banking and finance/retail
Very high
Hard failure
Sabotage
Sabotage
Food and agriculture
Very high
Partial
Sabotage
Partial
Defense/military/law 
enforcement
Very high
Soft failure
Sabotage
Partial
Chemical plants
Very high
Hard failure
Sabotage
Sabotage
Postal and shipping
Very high
Soft failure
Sabotage
Partial
Academia
High
Partial
Sabotage/compromise
Partial
Note:	 Cascade failure: Breakdown in workload, causing one system to collapse after another
Hard failure: System abruptly goes down
Soft failure: System quickly goes down
Sabotage: Data damage, theft, or deletion
Compromise: Data theft

161
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
The U.S. federal government uses the CVSS standard as the scoring engine for its 
National Vulnerability Database (NVD), which has a repository of over 45,000 known 
vulnerabilities and is updated on an ongoing basis.
Prediction requires the knowledge of trained people with previous experience 
in cyberattacks, which includes a repertoire of advanced prediction tools to model 
the attack. 
The vaccination process is a follow-up to the attack (whether it succeeds or not).
The diagram in Figure 6.6 sheds more light on the stages of the attack and the 
Smart Vaccine.
Explanation of the prediction screen: The early warning predictive system (EWS) 
will broadcast prediction at regular intervals. If the incoming attack is caught by 
the second prediction, a series of alerts will be broadcast throughout the grid. In the 
meantime, the CEWPS Central Coordination Center will order the vaccination 
center to dispatch Smart Vaccine agents throughout the grid for protective (unsched-
uled) vaccination. The attack was caught, quarantined, and decomposed, and a new 
vaccine was assembled before it was stored in the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB). 
Figure 6.6  Here is explanation of how CEWPS is fighting and defusing the attack. Prediction-1 (P-1) sent an alert that 
there is an attack coming soon. Another prediction-2 (P-2) followed with three alerts to the Central Coordination Center 
(CCC). A third prediction (P-3) predicted that the attack is scheduled to hit the grid at T0. An urgent vaccination mission 
arrived at Tv2 and vaccinated the target system. The first attack never happened. The second attack was going to hit at T3 
that did not materialize either. Vaccination mission 3 vaccinated the system and Attack-2 never occurred.

162
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The attack will never reach the targeted critical system on the Smart Vaccine Grid 
(SVG). Figure 6.7 shows the sequence of events before and during the attack.
How Does CEWPS Prevent Cyberattacks on Smart Cities?
Smart cities depend on a smart grid to ensure resilient delivery of energy to sup-
ply their many functions, present opportunities for conservation, improve efficiencies, 
and, most importantly, enable coordination between urban officialdom and infrastruc-
ture operators, those responsible for public safety and the public. The Smart City is all 
about how the city organism works together as an integrated whole and survives when 
put under extreme conditions. Energy, water, transportation, public health and safety, 
and other aspects of a smart city are managed in concert to support smooth operation 
of critical infrastructure while providing for a clean, economic and safe environment 
in which to live, work, and play.
The city’s smart grid (CSG) has three functionalities. First, it connects all power 
systems together through autonomic and self-healing designs, remote monitoring, and 
control. We can call it the “power grid.” Second, the smart grid is a major network of 
information arteries that informs and educates consumers about their utilities usage 
and cost, in addition to information from other critical systems including cybercrime 
attacks. Third, the smart grid will provide safe, secure, and reliable integration of 
cross-discipline systems. Thus, a smart grid covers the whole city, which cannot fully 
exist without its smart grid.
CEWPS uses its own smart grid which is called the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) 
to connect all critical systems to the Central Coordination Center in real time mode. 
The SVG is tightly coupled with the City Smart Grid (CSG), and its main objective is 
to protect the systems that operate the critical infrastructures. CEWPS provides early 
warning attack forecasts, and the Smart Vaccine provides scheduled and unscheduled 
Time to reach target T0
Time to eliminate attack T1
Time to predict T2
Alert and vaccinate T4
Schedule
Attack
Alert
Attack
Eradicated
Prediction
Vaccinate
Systems
Smart Grid
Incoming
Attack
Response time 
T3
Figure 6.7  The same attack scenario in terms of timing: The prediction time is crucial and it should be a minimum: 
T2 < T0. Response time + vaccinate should be done before the attack reaches the grid: T3 + T4 < T0.

163
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
vaccination services. If any of the critical systems gets accidentally or intentionally a 
viral attack, the CEWPS Central Coordination Center (CCC) will know immedi-
ately and will dispatch an army of the Smart Vaccine to inoculate all the healthy and 
compromised systems on the grid. Inoculation is a routine preventive measure that 
takes place all year around, and not necessarily after an attack.
Causality Rules
We define causality (also referred to as causation) as the relation between a cyberattack 
(the cause event) and its outcome on a system (the effect event), where the outcome is 
understood as a physical consequence of the attack. As is known, “correlation does not 
mean causation.” More generally, observing a statistical dependency between a cyber-
attack and a circuit breaker failure or that a circuit breaker failure causes a cyberattack.
Causality is likened to conditional probabilities as in P(cancer | smoking) reads “the 
probability of finding cancer in a person known to smoke,” or P(power failure | cyber-
attack), which reads “the probability of having a power failure must be because of a 
cyberattack on the grid.”
Hills Criteria of Causation outlines the minimal conditions needed to establish a 
causal relationship between two items:
Temporal relationship: Exposure always precedes the outcome. If attack “A” is 
believed to cause a damaging outcome, then it is clear that attack “A” must 
necessarily always precede the occurrence of the outcome.
Strength: This is defined by the size of the association as measured by appropri-
ate statistical tests. The stronger the association, the more likely it is that the 
relation of the attack “A” to the outcome “B” is causal.
Dose–response relationship: An increasing amount of exposure increases the risk. 
If a dose–response relationship is present, it is a strong evidence for a causal 
relationship.
Consistency: The association is consistent when results are replicated. This is true 
with most cyberattacks. They follow pretty much the same attack pattern: 
plan, rehearse, set a time, attack, watch outcome, repeat.
Plausibility: There needs to be some theoretical basis for positing an associa-
tion between the attack vector and the outcome of the attack. One may, by 
chance, discover a correlation between Siemens SCADA and the attack of 
Stuxnet, but there is not likely to be any logical connection between the 
two agents.
Specificity: When specificity of an association is found, it provides addi-
tional support for a causal relationship. Causality is most often multiple. 
Therefore, absence of specificity in no way negates a causal relationship. 
For example, Siemens SCADA collects and monitors the smart grid, but it 

164
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
is not the only SCADA system. There are other SCADAs that will do the 
job just as well.
Coherence: Another important criterion in predicting reasoning. The associa-
tion should be compatible with existing theory and knowledge. For example, 
Microsoft (IE) browser, in theory, is an excellent browser, but it picked up bad 
reputation with its zero-day bug. However, as with the issue of plausibility, 
research that disagrees with established theory and knowledge is not auto-
matically false. So, there still could be a relationship between an IE tarnished 
credibility and cyberattacks.
Cybercrime Predictive Analytics for Smart Cities
Predictive Analytics (PA) is one of the most versatile sciences of mathematics, sta-
tistics, and even operations research. People like its fancy term and it was stretched 
in every direction. We can define Predictive Analytics as the science of predicting the 
future by extracting and analyzing data from the past.
The worldwide explosion of user-generated digital information has created a tsu-
nami of information about individuals’ and organizations’ past, present, and planned 
actions and intentions.
Criminal interests also find this digitized information to be multibillion dollar 
businesses. A June 2014 report from cybersecurity firm McAfee places the annual 
global cost of cybercrime to be between $400 and $575 billion, exceeding the 
national income of most countries. Also, a new report from the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies (CSIS) estimates that cybercrime costs businesses some 
$400 billion a year worldwide. These figures will be on the rise, and cybercrime will 
continue to win the battle and the war. Why? Because there are so many bad cats out 
of the bag already, which makes the situation hard to control. But at least, we believe 
some of the influencing factors could identified, which in turn are contributing to the 
“accelerating returns” of cybercrime. 
Universities in the United States and Canada report that international student 
enrollments at colleges and universities in the United States increased by 3% since 
last year, according to the annual Open Doors report. China is the leading country 
of origin of international students, overtaking India. The number of students from 
China is up 30% from 2008 to 2009. The most popular host state is California; while 
the most popular city is New York. Most of the Chinese students major in Business 
and Management and Engineering. Forty-five percent of the Chinese graduates go 
back to China enriched with the latest technologies in information and communica-
tion technologies (ICT).
According to a report sponsored by Intel’s McAfee security division, “Allegations of 
economic espionage in cyberspace have been one of the main issues between the United 
States and China for several years. Recently, it came to a head when the United States 
indicted members of the Chinese military for hacking U.S. companies. Though China 

165
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
denied the charges, FBI Director James B. Comey accused the Chinese government 
of using cyber-espionage as a means to give an advantage to industries it controls.”
Antivirus Technology (AVT) vendors realize that cyber vandalism is still on the 
loose and that it has surpassed AVT by a big shot. Cybercrime statistics are still incon-
sistent, and forecasts seem often unreliable. But all the major AVT vendors agree 
on one thing and that the total damage done to the world economy by the activ-
ity of virus writers, hackers, and spammers has long since exceeded tens of billions 
of dollars annually. The amount continues to grow. According to research carried 
out by Computer Economics, total losses in 2004 were close to $18 billion, with a 
trend toward a 30%–40% annual growth rate. Although the total market for the AVT 
industry was estimated as being $2.7 billion in 2003 and $3.3 billion in 2004, with 
$3.8 billion being the predicted figure for 2005, this figure escalated according to 
IDC to $14.3 billion for 2014. According to InfoSec Institute, the global price tag of 
consumer cybercrime is $113 billion for 2012.
General Brian Alexander, who served as the Director of the National Security 
Agency, told U.S. Congress that cyberattacks are causing “the greatest transfer of 
wealth in history,” and he cited statistics from, among other sources, Symantec 
Corp. and McAfee Inc., which both sell software to protect computers from hackers. 
Crediting Symantec, he said the theft of intellectual property costs American compa-
nies $250 billion a year. He also mentioned McAfee estimates that the global cost of 
cybercrime is $1 trillion. “That’s our future disappearing in front of us,” he said, urg-
ing the Congress to enact legislation to improve America’s cyber defenses.
Now, how could technology offer a true solution to this malignant suffering? It 
seems there is a perplexing duality between technology advancement and cybercrime 
sophistication. As we advance from the first generation of the Internet (client/server) 
into the second (e-Commerce) and the third (the Cloud), cybercrime has become a 
very prosperous business growing 31% per year and ballooning into $67 billion in 
revenues in 2012. While looking at the AVT industry, we see much lower numbers, 
$14 billion in 2012.
If we analyze the medical progress of the medical field of immunology, we see that 
as technology has fully permeated into this complex medical field and as a result, 
we benefited and our immune system became more robust and more predictive. The 
focus was solely to improve human immunity and predict new diseases and viruses. 
We need to think a little harder and learn from our immune system. Our ability to 
analyze and predict new diseases got better, thanks to nanotechnology and artificial 
intelligence research. We need to tackle cybercrime with the same approach.
Professor Vasant Dhar, Stern School of Business, New York University said, “The 
powerhouse organizations of the Internet era, which include Google and Amazon, 
have business models that hinge on predictive models based on Artificial Intelligence 
and machine learning.”
Here is an interesting phenomenon that we can learn from our immune system: 
When we become infected with a pathogen, for example, a virus, bacteria, fungus, or 

166
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
parasite, there are rapid changes in gene activity in the cells of our immune system at 
the site of infection. The genes help to produce a large number of a chemical called 
cytokines, which plays the role of cell signaling and alert (i.e., communication), which 
starts the mobilization for the defense. During infection, the B cells identify the 
attacking agents and draw a plan of attack. The memory cells and killer cells remem-
ber the attack and collectively all the activities resulting from infection is referred to 
as the immune signature of the infection. Immune signatures are generated by an infec-
tion with pathogens (we call them the culprits).
A close analogy to the immune signature would be the mug shot and the criminal 
record of a criminal. Analyzing immune signatures can give us a composite picture 
of how the host is responding during disease, how this response will change with 
drug therapy, and about the processes contributing to disease. In the future, the 
analysis of immune signatures should play a key role in supporting the detection 
and identification of more complex inflammatory and infectious diseases and their 
monitoring and treatment.
CEWPS is a throbbing cognitive system, with capabilities to watch the outside, 
monitor the inside, collect data, and make decisions. CEWPS is actually a replica of 
the human intelligence with its assistive services to compensate for any missing infor-
mation during its decision-making process.
Smart cities will rely heavily on CEWPS as its immune system. It offers similar 
services as the Human Immune System. In addition to protecting the critical sys-
tems with vaccination services, CEWPS offers a reliable predictive windows about the 
future with data mining engines. Enriched by a priori cybercrime knowledge, smart 
city social, environmental data, and Big Data, CEWPS is truly the “Holy Grail” of 
the smart city. Offering Digital Immunity to smart cities is a grand endeavor, but who 
said climbing the Himalayas is a picnic (Figure 6.8).
Observer
Outside
Big
Data
Cases and 
episodes
Alerts
Monitor the Smart City
Knowledge
Base
VaaS
Early warning
Cognitive
Kernel
Reasoner
Collect data
Data mining
Predictive
Analytics
Cybercriminal data
Figure 6.8  CEWPS is an intelligent and fast learning system. Its cognitive ability to transform data from the different 
components, into decision making knowledge and predictive analytics on potential cyberattacks in Smart City.

167
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Why Do We Need a Predictive Analytics Model for Smart Cities?
Data are static energy; predictive analytics turns it into kinetic energy!
CEWPS is a great architecture that ushers the start of the new paradigm of Digital 
Immunity. It is a new territory but it will be adopted as the best security layer for the 
Smart City. Modeling the Smart City is a delightful project, but there are so many 
loose ends to tie. It is delightful because it gives an aerial view of how the city has trans-
formed from a small town to the present metropolis and how it will become a smart 
city in the future.
Predictive analytics is blueprinting of the future, it is the map that smart city own-
ers will implement to combat the risk of failure. Cities have many miseries starting 
with crime, electricity, availability of primary care facilities, traffic, and disconnection 
everywhere. PA is a fitness program to bounce back and put things in order. Or better 
than that, PA is bringing back the vision to see ahead! Figure 6.9 shows the mecha-
nism of PA with its basic steps.
Understanding Cybercrime Data in Smart Cities
The project starts with using well-defined security objectives for the Smart City. Setting up 
the grid is one of the vital elements of the city. A smart grid also has highly critical security 
Crime Data
from
Big Data
Understand
Crime Data
Law
Enforcement
Agencies
1. Big Data
2. Law Enforcement
3. Deep Web
4. Darknet
Global Crime
Repositories
CEWPS Attack
Knowledge
Base
Early Warning
System
Bayes Network
Reasoner
Collect
Crime Data
Smart Cities
Crime Data
Smart Grid
Crime Data
Mathematical
Modeling
Smart Grid
Security Metrics
Analyze
Crime Data
Model
Crime Data
Review and
Decide
Figure 6.9  The process of building Predictive Analytics for a Smart City with a focus on combating the whole continuum 
of cybercrime.

168
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
requirements and predicting its performance and shortcomings must be entrenched in the 
plan (Figure 6.9). In short, there are two vital objectives to Predictive Analytics:
	
1.	Persistent and pervasive smart security for the smart grid
	
2.	Early warning of cyberattacks
Collection of Cybercrime Data
There are actually four main feeders of essence data for our smart city’s PA. We need 
to extract every piece of data related to cybercrime and/or cybersecurity. These are the 
most utilized gold mines of cybercrime:
	
1.	Big Data
	
2.	Law Enforcement
	
3.	Deep Web
	
4.	Darknet
There are not many cyber city–cyber grid predictive analytics sources. CEWPS is 
unique and going to show the world how Digital Immunity works. But we can use 
similar data, reformat it, and retrofit it for our analysis. Some of the statistical tests and 
procedures used in our PA process are as follows:
•	 Analysis of variance to compare the variation of two data groups.
•	 A Chi-squared test is the statistical test commonly used to compare observed 
data with data we would expect to obtain according to a specific hypothesis.
•	 Correlation is an important test to compare the dependence of two sets of 
crime data.
•	 Mean square weighted deviation (MSWD) is used to measure the goodness of 
fit of data relative to a criterion.
•	 Regression analysis is an important test to estimate the relationship among 
crime data.
•	 The naïve Bayes classifier is the probabilistic classier based on using Bayes’ for-
mulas to analyze crime data and recognize patterns.
Cybercrime data from other established smart grids would be very useful to enrich 
our PA. Big Data is a deep universe by itself that is expanding at an astronomical rate. 
Pumping relative data and cleansing it takes time, but Big Data is an effective course 
to train our model and make it more predictive. Overall, the quality of the final data 
indicates the quality of our model.
Let’s not forget that cybercrime data from Big Data and global crime repositories 
are also potential data feeders to CEWPS Virus Knowledge Base to receive cyber-
crime episodes that get reverse engineered and stored with its attack vectors and sig-
nature. This is shown in Figure 6.9.

169
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Building the Cybercrime Data Model
There is a big menu of predictive analytics software packages on the market that can 
be used. You cannot believe the sales people, so you need to resort other smart way 
to select the most suitable product. Academia is another source, where most of the 
statistical packages are available for their students. These geeks will tell you the best 
program. Or, we can try to run several of them on the same data and choose the final 
model by scoring them and select the highest.
Deployment of the Cybercrime Data Model
Predictive modeling leverages statistics to have better understanding of the out-
comes. In predictive modeling, we have two important variables that need to be 
available. By definition, a predictor variable is an independent variable used in pre-
dictive modeling to predict another variable, which is called response. The response 
variable is the variable whose value is dependent upon the value of the predictor vari-
able. So, if we change the value of the predictor variables, it will change the value of 
the response variable. Think of a predictor variable as a changing factor and response 
variable as influenced factor.
What we want to predict is how well CEWPS and the Smart Vaccine will protect 
the smart grid from malicious and stealth attacks. We believe there is a reputable 
product using Bayesian network modeling called Bayesialab that CEWPS uses for 
cyberattack knowledge representation and prediction. http://www.bayesia.com/en/
products/bayesialab.php.
A list of classified data by subject that were extracted from data feeders is as follows:
•	 Growth of the critical systems on the smart grid
•	 Distribution of the type of the critical systems on the smart grid
•	 Future logistics of the Smart Vaccine during vaccination services
•	 Growth pattern of the attacks on the smart grid
•	 Time to predict an incoming attack
•	 Response time to eliminate an attack on a critical system
•	 Time improvement to vaccinate a critical system
•	 Pattern to dispatch an alert to the critical systems on the smart grid
•	 Distribution of the type of attacks on the smart grid
•	 Estimated number of attacks on the smart grid
•	 Time to catch an attack with a honey net
•	 Time to reverse engineer an attack vector
•	 Time to manufacture a vaccine
Mathematical modeling is another viable tool that aims to describe the different 
aspects of the real world, their interaction, and their dynamics through mathematics. 
Our mathematical model uses mathematical equations to forecast their future behav-
ior. Queuing theory will be used as the science to create and evaluate the behavior 

170
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
of our CEWPS attack model relative to protecting the smart grid. A detailed math-
ematical model is beyond the scope of this book.
Processes and Variables of the Data Model
The Attacker
•	 Planning an attack
•	 The attacker
•	 The attacking machine
•	 The virus used
•	 The attacker escapes or is caught
The Immune System
•	 The vaccine smart grid
•	 The alert response system
•	 The target systems
•	 The systems in the grid
•	 The vaccine commander
•	 Mobilize vaccinators and paramedics
The Engagement
•	 Vaccinators have recognized the virus
•	 The killer vaccinators have quarantined the virus
•	 Paramedics service time and utilization
•	 Total time of the attack
The Recovery
•	 Recovery time
•	 Mean time between failures
Storing the Experience
•	 The attack vector is decomposed and the strategy of the attack has been 
deciphered. The whole attack episode is saved and stored in the Document 
Knowledge Base for future referral (Figure 6.10).
The general model evaluates the response time of the attack. We can manipulate the 
arrival rate of the attacker and change the time to select the virus to get a family of 
curves for different input assumptions.
The Smart Vaccine inoculation (vaccination) service is unique. The Smart Vaccine 
has to work with three types of systems: healthy, infected (sick), dead (the operat-
ing system was crippled by the attack). Priority number one is to capture the virus 
(culprit) and save the healthy system. The captured system will be sent for pathology 
and forensic analysis.

171
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Figure 6.10 shows a simple model of an attack using 10 activities.
It is not surprising that the behavior of the vaccination service is asymptotic. The 
more critical systems are attacked, the more they need help, the longer the time to 
response. This is true in the emergency department with many patients and mini-
mum nurses and care providers. A queuing model, as shown in Figure 6.11, is an 
operating necessity to describe the basic steps of attacks (with different parameters), 
Attack
He plans the attack
at unknown time
Cyber
Terrorist
Select
Attack/Virus
Attack
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Select
Target Machine
Select Vaccine
Store Episode
Smart Grid
The model selects
a random attack
from the AKB
The model selects
a mathcing
vaccine from the 
VKB
Alert
Response
Immunize
System
Remember
Attack
Eliminate
Attack
Alert and 
Respond
Vaccination
Recovery and
Documentation
Figure 6.10  The model replicates (with 10 stages) how the Smart Vaccine uses the strategy of defense by offense to 
nullify the attack.
Random arrival,
exponential service time
Random arrival,
exponential service time
Target
machine
Attacking
machine
Honeypot
machine
Trapping 
machine
Attack in
progress
Dispatch
vaccine to grid
Trigger
response
Issue
grid alert
Trigger vaccine
response
Attack
Knowledge
Base
Target
machine
Analyze
attack data
Store attack in
Knowledge Base
Build matching
vaccine
Figure 6.11  This is the process flow of the queuing model to replicate a typical attack scenario on a critical system 
on the grid.

172
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
which helps in sizing CEWPS and planning its capacity for the city’s smart grid 
(CSG). The results of the model after several what ifs trials will determine the 
behavior of CEWPS and the Smart Vaccine on the city’s smart grid. Figure 6.12 
shows the behavior of the system with different trials.
CEWPS Abbreviations
AKB	
Attack Knowledge Base
CCC	
Central Coordination Center
CSG	
City Smart Grid
DI	
Digital Immunity
DKB	
Document Knowledge Base
KC	
Knowledge Center
RE	
Reasoning Engine
SG	
Smart Grid
SVG	
Smart Vaccine Grid
VaKB	
Vaccine Knowledge Base
ViKB	
Virus Knowledge Base
References
Kleinrock, L., Queueing Systems. Vol. 1: Theory, Wiley, January 2, 1975.
Kleinrock, L., Queueing Systems. Vol. 2: Theory, Wiley, April 22, 1976.
Time spent during vaccination in minutes
N is the average arrival time of vaccine
S is the average time for vaccination
M is the number of systems waiting for vaccination
B is the probability that all systems are vaccinated at the 
   same time
tq = B
S
M (1–ρ)+S
M=1 system
4 = one system
M = 6 system
5
4
3
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
nS
M Vaccine service utilization
Figure 6.12  Modeling the performance of the Smart Vaccine service is nonlinear and is a function of the number of 
critical systems on the Smart Grid. The behavior is asymptotic and is normal and fully understood. The Smart Vaccine server 
could be upgraded whenever necessary to meet the service level agreement.

173
CEWPS Knowledge and Intelligence
Websites
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CVSS.
http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/James_Martin_%28author%29.
http://securelist.com/analysis/36063/the-contemporary-antivirus-industry-and-its-problems/.
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/mathematical-model.html#ixzz3TWlzOyzv.
http://www.nimr.mrc.ac.uk/mill-hill-essays/immune-signatures-in-disease-and-visions-for-
their-future-use.
http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue65/ChenPearl65.pdf.
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/top-15-predictive-analytics-software/.
http://www.securityaffairs.org/about.
http://www.securityweek.com/cybercrime-costs-businesses-more-400-billion-globally-report.
http://www.universitiesintheusa.com/opendoors-2009–10-news.html

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

175
7
Big Data of Cybercrime 
and Terrorism
How to Capture and Manage It
What Is Big Data and What Does It Mean?
To set the right tone for Big Data, I would like to tell you about the legend of the 
chessboard.
About AD 1260, Ibn Khallikan, a Kurdish historian living in the Abbasid Empire 
(modern Iraq), wrote an encyclopedia with biographies of many famous men (though 
no women). One of the biographies includes a story about chess and the meaning of 
exponential growth. The story takes place in India, because Ibn Khallikan knew that 
chess was a game that came from India.
According to this story, King Shihram was a tyrant who oppressed his subjects. 
One of his subjects, a wise man named Sissa ibn Dahir, invented the game of chess for 
the king to play and to show him that a king needed all his subjects and should take 
good care of them. King Shihram was so pleased that he ordered that the game of 
chess should be preserved in the temples and said that it was the best thing he knew 
of to train generals in the art of war, a glory to religion and the world, and the founda-
tion of all justice.
Then King Shihram asked Sissa ibn Dahir what reward he wanted. Sissa answered 
that he did not want any reward, but the king insisted. Finally, Sissa said that he 
would take this reward: the king should put one grain of wheat on the first square of a 
chessboard, two grains of wheat on the second square, four grains on the third square, 
eight grains on the fourth square, and so on, doubling the number of grains of wheat 
with each square (an exponential rate of growth).
“What a dummy!” thought the king. “That’s a tiny reward; I would have given him 
much more.” He ordered his slaves to bring out the chessboard and they started put-
ting on the wheat. Everything went well for a while, but the king was surprised to see 
that by the time they got halfway through the chessboard the 32nd square required 
more than 4 billion grains of wheat, or about 100,000 kg of wheat. Now Sissa did not 
seem so stupid anymore. Even so, King Shihram was willing to pay up.
But as the slaves began on the second half of the chessboard, King Shihram gradu-
ally realized that he could not pay that much wheat—in fact, to finish the chessboard 
you would need as much wheat as six times the weight of all the living things on Earth.

176
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
How many grains total are placed on a chessboard? Since this is a geometric series, 
the answer for n squares called a Mersenne Prime number:
	
2
2
1
0
1
i
n
i
n
=
-
=
-
å
Plugging in n = 8 × 8 = 64 then it gives 264 − 1= 18,446,744,073,709,551,615.*
The term Big Data is a very interesting word … we live among so many big things 
without realizing. The Internet has made us aware of the term big. Everything is 
relative though, for example, 1 light year is the distance light can travel in vacuum 
in 1 year’s time. This distance is equivalent to roughly 9,461,000,000,000  km or 
5,878,000,000,000 miles. This is such a large distance. For comparison, consider the 
circumference of the Earth when measured at the equator: 40,075 km!
So, the Internet is the culprit which is making us thirstier for information. We all 
have become information junkies, with excessive affinity for more information dig-
ging. We create more information waste than information that we could use to our 
benefit. My research into Big Data reveals an interesting reality:
	
Usefulextractedinformation
Totalsearchedinformation = 0 002
.
5
In other words, we search 10,000 documents before we extract 25 useful actionable 
documents. This is truly overwhelming.
Our Societal Waste Is Big Data
Big Data is similar to a large solid waste dump where almost all of it is recyclable. 
Every year, the United States generates approximately 230 million tons of trash—about 
4.6 lb per person per day. Less than one-quarter of it is recycled; the rest is incinerated 
or buried in landfills. With a little forethought, we could reuse or recycle more than 
70% of the landfill waste, which includes valuable materials such as glass, metal, and 
paper. This would reduce the demand on virgin sources of these materials and elimi-
nate potentially severe environmental, economic, and public health problems.
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, many of the country’s 
landfills have been closed for one or both of these two reasons:
	
1.	They are full.
	
2.	They are contaminating groundwater. The water that flows beneath these deep 
holes is our drinking water. Once groundwater is contaminated, it is extremely 
expensive and difficult, and sometimes even impossible, to clean it up.
*	 London, 1843–1871, Biographical Dictionary of Ibn Khallikan, vol. III, p. 71.

177
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Resource Conservation and 
Recovery published a report in February 2014 “Municipal Solid Waste Generation, 
Recycling, and Disposal in the United States,” referenced in website http://www.epa.
gov/solidwaste/nonhaz/municipal/pubs/2012_msw_dat_tbls.pdf. The report discusses 
our affinity to paper. We focused specifically on paper (books, magazines, wrapping 
paper). The pie charts in Figure 7.1 reveals interesting realities about our social habits.
Even though we are totally submerged in the cyber world, we breathe, eat, drink 
soft data, and we are generating half of the municipal waste from residential, com-
mercial, institutional, and industrial sources. But we are doing great job in recover-
ing a significant amount of paper and paperboard 76%, compared to metal 5.5%. 
Unfortunately, 24.9% of the paper used gets discarded and buried in the ground.
In the Beginning, There Was a Crashed Message
This is the way the Internet started: On Friday October 29, 1969 at 10:30 pm, the first 
Internet message was sent from computer science Professor Leonard Kleinrock’s labo-
ratory at UCLA, after the second piece of network equipment was installed at Stanford 
Research Institute (SRI). This connection not only enabled the first transmission to be 
made but is also considered the first Internet backbone. The first message to be distrib-
uted was “LO,” which was an attempt at “LOGIN” to log into the SRI computer from 
UCLA. However, the message was not completed because the SRI system crashed. 
Shortly after the crash, the issue was resolved, and he was able to log into the computer.
The Internet started with two computers in 1969 with modest fanfare. Today, Mother 
Internet carries 8.7 billion devices in its belly with no complain. How did this cyber 
bang take off like this? Leonard Kleinrock, one of the pioneers of the Internet, explains
“As we talk about some of the technology, you have to understand the key to the success 
of the Internet wasn’t the technology being developed, but the environment,” he said. “It 
was a golden era where creativity and good ideas were flowing all over the place. It’s an era 
not to be repeated, unfortunately.”
Today, we take the Internet for granted as it is a part of everyday life, but how often 
do we think about its true impact on the world today? Let’s take cyber waste, for 
example. We are talking about digital waste. Today, there are 2,802,478,934 users on 
the Internet, and each user session creates more data, more pictures, more upload files, 
more download files, more e-mails. It reminds us of air pollution in the 1960s when 
we became aware that it will be our demise unless we do something about it. Well, we 
did a lot about it. Now, everything is turning green because we now abide by the rules 
of ecology and we are reaping tremendous benefits.
My focus in dedicating a chapter to Big Data is cybercrime data. I am going 
to call it Cybercrime Big Data. It is true that Big Data will follow informatics and 
Internetworking to take its place as the third epoch of the information age. It will 
definitely change the way corporations and business will evolve.

178
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Containers and packaging materials generated, recovered, and
discarded* in municipal solid waste, 2012
(in percent of total generation, recovery, and discards)
Paper and
paperboard
50.5%
Wood, other
6.2%
Paper and
paperboard
74.6%
Paper and
paperboard
24.9%
Glass
16.9%
Metals
4.9%
Wood, other
20.7%
Plastics
32.6%
Plastics
4.9%
Metals
5.5%
Glass
8.3%
Wood, other
13.2%
Generation (75.23 million tons)
Recovery (38.75 million tons)
Discards (36.48 million tons)
Plastics
18.3%
Metals
5.5%
Glass
12.5%
Figure 7.1  Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States. Tables and Figures for 2012. (From the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Office of Resource 
Conservation and Recovery.)

179
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Gordon Moore came up with his golden law that says “The number of transistors 
incorporated in a chip will approximately double every 24 months.” It was the driver 
behind designing better cost/performance integrated circuit, faster and less heat, given 
that electrons would consequently travel less distance and processing cycle would be 
shorter. The big mainframes, which weighed several tons, mutated to few ounces iPads 
and with Mac Book Air. Ray Kurzweil proposed “The Law of Accelerating Returns,” 
according to which the rate of change in a wide variety of evolutionary systems tends to 
increase exponentially. He gave further focus to this issue in a 2001 essay entitled “The 
Law of Accelerating Returns,” which described the extension of Moore’s law to describe 
the exponential growth of diverse forms of technological progress. Whenever a tech-
nology approaches some kind of a barrier, according to Kurzweil, a new technology 
will be invented to allow us to cross that barrier. We definitely support Kurzweil’s 
theory when digital computing bit itself in the derrière and merged with cyber comput-
ing to create a new chapter of the information age. Big Data is the offspring of this 
new age. We can conservatively say that Big Data is a snowball rolling downhill with 
exponential acceleration. The snowball is getting bigger picking up more mass and is 
smashing everything in its way. By the way, The Deep Web and the Dark Web that are 
the invisible part of the Internet carry a universe of solved and unsolved cases of cyber-
crime. These two Webs cannot be indexed by search engines, or available to the public.
Attributes of Big Data
Here are the six gracious attributes:
Generated volume—The quantity of data that are generated is very important in 
this context. It is the size of the data that determines the value and potential 
of the data under consideration and whether it can actually be considered as 
Big Data or not.
Variety—The next aspect of Big Data is its variety. This means that the category 
to which Big Data belongs to.
Generation speed—The term speed in the context refers to how fast the data are 
generated and processed.
Variability—This refers to the inconsistency and nonuniformity.
Veracity—The quality of the data being so close to representing truth and reality.
Multisegment complexity—Data management can become a very complex pro-
cess, especially when large volumes of data come from multiple sources. These 
data need to be linked, connected, and correlated in order to be able to grasp 
the information that is supposed to be conveyed by these data.
The New Cybercrime Big Data
Mind-boggling statistics: BusinessWire site in its issue of January 8, 2013 mentioned 
that a newly released forecast, from International Data Corporation (IDC), projects 

180
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
that the worldwide Big Data technology and services market will grow at a 31.7% 
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) about seven times the rate of the overall 
information and communication technology (ICT) market with revenues reaching 
$23.8 billion in 2016.
Gartner estimates that “Big data will drive $28 billion of worldwide IT spending 
in 2012, according to Gartner, Inc. In 2013, Big Data is forecast to drive $34 billion 
of IT spending.” The truth is that Big Data is not exact science. No one can count its 
beans and give an exact figure.
As we said earlier, our main focus is to collect Big Data for cybercrime and cyber-
security. Big Data promises an enormous revolution in fighting global terrorism and 
cybercrime. Right now, the attention of Big Data has been on business profitability, 
productivity, budget planning, and supply chain. Big Data has been the buzzword 
making headlines from improving medical diagnosis and treatment to energy conser-
vation. Businesses around the world are using Big Data analytics to transform the data 
they stored into actionable information.
Open Sesame Big Data
Big Data is a goldmine when it comes to fighting cyberterrorism and cybercrime. It 
is unfortunate that Big Data has been applied to most of the business sectors, and 
fighting cybercrime was left on the back burner. Big Data has the potential to offer 
intelligent-driven model to support reliable early warning cyberattack prediction. 
Big Data analytics must enter the combat of cybercrime combat from the front gate. 
Figure 7.2 gives an idea about the Big Cybercrime Data traffic in the world. The big 
Figure 7.2  This is not the telecommunications network in the world, it is Big Data crime activities. No country is immune 
from it. The term Big Data will soon be replaced with Bigger Data. (From http://binarybiryani.com/2013/12/big-data-in-india/.)

181
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
challenge in Big Data is usability. The interesting thing about the crime pie in 
Figure 7.3 is how the U.S. government can store the tsunami of crime records since 
the creation of the computing age.
Cybercriminals have been clever by harnessing Big Data to their advantage. They have 
been using Big Data engineering to learn more about actionable intelligence to improve 
their own efficiency. They have developed a variety of tools to better sort, analyze, and 
monetize the volumes of data they collect. For cybercriminals, the information collected in 
drop zones through Trojans on infected PCs (some of which have over a million infected 
PCs) is clogging their infrastructure. As a result, malware authors have developed differ-
ent parsing solutions and implemented the use of separate databases in their command 
and control administration panels in order to distill only the most pertinent data.
Several security companies have diligently got on the bandwagon to learn more about 
these malware professionals and the way they are robbing banks, stealing trade, and com-
promising government secret records. One of these security companies is Rivest, Shamir, 
and Adelman company known as (RSA). It was using sophisticated forensics tools to 
trace and reverse engineer the ways that cybercriminals are using Big Data methodolo-
gies within their illicit operations. We can name the two tools IntelegentBot log-parser 
plug-in and the Citadel Trojan’s Money Panel plug-in, used for their clever evil work.
IntelegentBot plug-in for log parsing allows botmasters to connect to their Trojan 
databases and search for specific words such as bank URLs or names. It also allows 
botmasters to search for only credit card data. Through the use of this plug-in, 
botmasters are able to quickly and easily mine and monetize credit card data.
Money Panel plug-in is designed to steal only credit card data. It uses a special set 
of Web injections specifically targeting credit card data, 16 numerical characters. The 
Web injection displays when a victim accesses a specific site, such as a bank site or 
Facebook. As soon as a victim enters their card information into the injected field, the 
data are collected.
Fraud
28%
Big Data
12%
SPAM
14%
Hacking
22%
Copyright
6%
Terrorism
6%
Espionage
12%
New types of cybercrime in the United States
SPAM
Big Data
Fraud
Espionage
Terrorism
Copyright
Hacking
Figure 7.3  Cybercriminals are becoming smarter by harnessing Big Data to their advantage, since Big Data has become 
a dynamic source of information assets for big corporations, global banks, retail chains, and insurance companies. (From 
International Crime Data, 2013.)

182
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
In addition, cybercriminals use Big Data analytics to enhance their cracking tech-
niques and to acquire more cybercrime experience for more complex attacks. The 
sophistication, agility, and speed at which a cybercriminal operates and monetizes 
their fraudulent information have improved through the use of Big Data analytics. 
Cybercriminals can now sort their collections of data more quickly to extract financial 
details and view performance metrics for current malware applications. This is cer-
tainly a trend to keep an eye on. As cybercriminals continue to master the concepts 
of Big Data and apply it to their operations, their cyberattacks stand to become more 
effective. To combat these attacks, businesses will need to use intelligence-driven solu-
tions that also leverage Big Data to deliver timely, actionable security decisions.
CEWPS and Big Data Synergism
There will be great synergism between CEWPS and Big Data. CEWPS is a very smart 
system that runs on cybercrime data. CEWPS is a power plant that delivers Digital 
Immunity and vaccination services to Smart City’s critical infrastructures. Big Data is a 
gargantuan dump of unstructured data that were discarded by 2.802 billion information 
consumers while using 8.7 billion devices. A snapshot in October 2014 registered, in 1 
day, 2.5 exabytes (2.5 × 1018) of data that were processed and consumed over the Internet.
The technology of Big Data and CEWPS is compatible. Hadoop, which is a cluster 
of distributed file system (HDFS) running on commodity server, can definitely be the 
big brother of CEWPS. MapReduce processor can feed CEWPS with significant data 
about cybercrime for its early warning analytics (Figure 7.4).
CEWPS Cybercrime Analytics
Let’s start first with the definition of analytics. It is an attractive and rich term that 
is much fancier than its cousin analysis. It also implies deep intelligent thinking. 
CEWPS
Vaccination
Power Plant
Big Data
Raw Energy
Data
Transformers
MapReduce
Early Warning Analytics
Figure 7.4  Conservation of data energy from static data into kinetic data. We may be impressed to know that Big Data 
contains mega heaps of cybercrime data that CEWPS can use to develop effective vaccines. It maybe tedious but it pays 
off. We would also be impressed to know that one ton of ore contains only a quarter of an ounce of gold.

183
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
But in simple terms, it is the discovery of meaningful patterns in data. It relies on 
statistics, computer programming, and operations research to quantify performance. 
It also favors data visualization (bar charts and pies) to be more expressive and com-
municative insight.
What Kind of Data Do Smart Cities Need?
CEWPS will be the vehicle to extract some of the significant data for the Smart City 
and its smart grid. Once we tap into Big Data, we need ample data for the Smart 
City. There are over 30 smart cities in the world that are considered models and met 
the newest smart city standard (ISO 37120:2014). ISO 37120 defines 100 city perfor-
mance indicators that could or should be measured, and how. Specifically, ISO 37120 
defines 46 core and 54 supporting indicators that cities either shall (core) or should 
(supporting) track and report. ISO 37120 also provides for a set of profile indicators, 
such as population and GDP, to help cities determine which cities are most relevant 
for comparisons. Table 7.1 shows the 17 subjects for city services and quality of life. 
Strangely enough, a security indicator is not included.
Security unfortunately is not included in the standards, but we are sure crime will 
be a vital issue for law enforcement. However, Big Data has lots of raw data about 
cybercrime in smart cities. Here are some of the cybersecurity data that we got from 
Big Data shown in Figure 7.5:
Marketing analytics has been used successfully in the business world for years. 
For example, cell phone providers use churn models that predict the likelihood that 
certain customers will switch service providers, online retailers model buying habits 
in an effort to identify and suggest additional purchases, and grocery stores display 
ready-to-eat mashed potatoes in the meat section to remind you to buy side dishes to 
go with your pot roast. The same approach that lenders use to prequalify potential loan 
applicants can be used to assess the risk for escalation in a series of burglaries, while 
the models used to classify shopping patterns and purchasing decisions can be used to 
identify the motive in a homicide or predict the next incident in a crime series.
Table 7.1  ISO 37120 Indicators for City Services 
and Life Quality
Economy
Safety
Education
Shelter
Energy
Solid waste
Environment
Telecom
Fire and emergency
Transportation
Finance
Urban planning
Governance
Wastewater
Health
Water and sanitation
Recreation
Economy
Note that the security of the city is not included.

184
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Data analytics covers the process of examining hidden cybercrime patterns and rela-
tionships in large amounts of information. This also allows us to make accurate and 
reliable predictions of future events, based on the characterization of these patterns 
and trends in historical data. The data analytics approach helps us solve the revolving 
door problem: the more information, the more difficult and time-consuming it is to 
effectively extract meaning from the data. By using a clear process and powerful ana-
lytic technologies, data mining quickly and thoroughly explores mountains of data, 
helping us identify the valuable or actionable nuggets of information.
Data analytics uses extensively data mining engines in law enforcement investigations 
to discover hidden crime patterns that become visible and complete the crime puzzle. 
Dark Reading Web magazine published on January 12, 2012 the article “FBI Seeks 
Data-Mining App for Social Media.” Crime analytics has been tremendously successful 
in capturing serial killers, human traffickers, drug dealers, and credit card fraudsters.
Perhaps the most important required skill in cybercrime analytics is to be immersed 
in the knowledge reasoning domain. For example, we could find a strong relationship 
between firing a data center analyst and hacking the payroll system a week after. On 
the other hand, identifying a relationship between exit interview procedures, employ-
ee’s last performance review, his social behavior, and his access authorization level 
could certainly connect the dots and make necessary security precautionary measure 
before dismissing disgruntled employees.
Now, if we examined say, 100 cases of corporate data breaches, we could develop a 
knowledge model that would help us learn more about the human character to com-
mit crime. If we had 1000 cases of corporate data breaches, we could learn more about 
the demographic profile of the hackers, their motif, their civility at work, and their 
IT skills. But most importantly, infer the causality of the attack, and the tools that 
DDoS
Trojans
ID theft
Middleman
Ransomware
Fraud
POS attacks
Virus attacks
Figure 7.5  Methods of attack derived from Big Data raw files. Each cybercrime research study focuses on specific subjects 
of interest, as shown in this pie chart. Antivirus Technology providers have the most reliable data. It can be seen that the big 
bang of Big Data is expanding and carrying with it cybercrime and cyberterrorism. (Courtesy of Kaspersky Lab, June 3, 2013).

185
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
were used in the attack. Once we build the Knowledge Base, we could use the data to 
generate some interesting predictive analyses and probabilistic projections, for attack 
profiling on the smart grid, in the future based on historical evidence. Some of the 
gold nuggets that we can use:
•	 Data center downtime due to a cyberattack
•	 Breakdown of the infrastructure systems by attack
•	 What frequency of attacks each type of infrastructure gets (per day, per month)
•	 Methods of penetration into the critical system
•	 Antivirus performance
•	 Role of the Chief Security Officer, his employees, and their security level
Data Extracted from Law Enforcement Crime Repositories
Criminal data are abundant in Big Data, but obtaining them is a great challenge. 
We can turn to law enforcement agencies around the world to get crime data in 
smart cities. Each country has a cluster of computer crime-related data. Here in 
the United States, we have federal data, state data, and city data. The U.S. National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) (https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ncic) stores 
all the crime data for the FBI. In the United Kingdom, all law enforcement agen-
cies can enter information into the Police National Computer. In Poland, they have 
the National Criminal Register (KRK). Germany has the Federal Central Criminal 
Register. The Swedish Criminal Records Registry is administered by the Swedish 
National Police Board. All European Countries has a centralized data register. The 
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS) (https://www.fbi.
gov/about-us/cjis/fingerprints_biometrics/iafis/iafis) is the national fingerprint and 
criminal history system that responds to requests 24/7/365. And the list goes on.
Big Data Support for the Critical Infrastructures
The devil advocates are targeting now juicier critical application domains such as 
e-commerce, corporate networks, data centers, and selected critical infrastructures. 
On July 2010, the well-known Stuxnet cyber missile was launched to damage gas centri-
fuges located at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant in Iran by accelerating their speed very 
quickly and sharply. On August 2012, the Saudi oil giant Aramco was subjected to a large 
cyberattack that affected about 30,000 workstations. On April 2012, the big payment 
processing provider Global Payments (www.globalpaymentsinc.com) confirmed a massive 
breach that compromised about 1.5 million cards. On January 2013, the U.S. Department 
of Energy underwent an intrusion to 14 of its servers with many workstations located at 
the Department’s headquarters, aimed at stealing employees’ personal information.
So, cyberspace has become the Mecca for technological malware innovation. It is 
the new Olympiad of crime with a new type of event: Terror as a Service. The race 
is open for everyone. The event is called a Paralysis of Critical Infrastructures (PCI). 

186
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The malware spectrum covers attractive items such as smart power grids, transport 
systems, and financial infrastructures.
There is one scary tag attached to these holy systems and that is no resilience tag. 
These critical systems were erected some time ago with commodity computing facili-
ties some two generations ago, with little planning on cyberterror and cyber threats. 
Despite the use of monitoring tools, recent attacks have proven that current defensive 
mechanisms for these critical infrastructures are not effective enough against most 
advanced threats. The accelerating pace of the Internet has also accelerated the tech-
nological advancement and proliferation of industrial sabotage and brought to the 
surface an advance face of malware continuum.
Amazingly, Big Data analytics showed some pretty interesting surprises in the 
domain of cybercrime. While technology has advanced at a logarithmic pace, Internet 
has become our Aladdin lamp, we can rub it and request anything, et voilà! And with 
this Amazonian explosion, cybersecurity collapsed under the pressure. Our present 
Antivirus Technologies (AVT) have been humiliated and got overrun by a tsunami 
of malicious cyberattacks managed like a business by organized mafias. Big Data has 
the unstructured evidence and documentation to all these attacks that no country 
was immune of, nor is capable to overcome and win the malware battle. CEWPS is 
capable with its early warning immunity mechanism to immobilize cyberattacks and 
win the battle against malware.
When the term ecology was born some short time ago, we started to pay attention 
to protecting the environment and to waste recycling. Then Big Data was born and we 
became conscious of the fact that our digital dump contains priceless nuggets that can 
help us acquire more visibility for a better future. At the same time, Big Data has, in its 
ore, significant amount of residual knowledge on cybercrime. We can extract this crime 
organism from the big heap and recycle it and learn the atomic structure of malware, but 
more importantly, the psychological motives for cyber sabotage. Extracting cybercrime 
data from Big Data warehouses is a great resource for CEWPS Attack Knowledge Base.
Interfacing CEWPS with Big Data
Right now, Web attackers are amassing a global arsenal of knowledge and resources, which 
is allowing them to expand their reach well beyond financial services to virtually every 
industry, everywhere. Smart city infrastructures are the most attractive low hanging fruits 
for these modern information terrorists. They have the knowledge, the tools, and the time.
Let’s go back to extracting data from Big Data. We use Hadoop to do its magic…
this is how:
Hadoop is an open-source software framework for storing and processing Big 
Data in a distributed fashion in large clusters of commodity hardware. Essentially, 
it accomplishes two tasks: massive data storage and faster processing. Open-source 
software differs from commercial software due to the broad and open network of 

187
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
developers that create and manage the programs. Traditionally, Open-source has been 
free to download, use, and contribute, although more and more commercial versions 
of Hadoop are becoming available.
Big Data is an incredible value-added resource to CEWPS. Big Data has two large 
data feeders into CEWPS: structured and unstructured. Figure 7.6 shows the inter-
connectivity of Big Data (BD) with CEWPS.
Hadoop consists of a storage part Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) and a 
processing part MapReduce. Hadoop splits files into large blocks (default 64  MB 
or 128  MB) and distributes the blocks among the nodes in the cluster. Hadoop’s 
MapReduce and HDFS components were inspired by Google papers on their 
MapReduce and Google File System.
Facebook and Yahoo are users of Hadoop which is used in regular data centers as 
well as via the cloud. It is available on Microsoft Azure, Amazon Elastic Compute 
Cloud (EC2). CEWPS will be using Hadoop to extract and process Big Data’s 
cybercrime data (Figure 7.6).
Big Data Cybercrime Data
Intelligent data mining engines will extract significant amount of infrastructure mal-
ware data from Big Data clusters. We’re going to extract from Big Data the two cat-
egories of data as shown in Figure 7.6.
Critical infrastructure
CEWPS/SV
platform
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Structured
cyberattack data
MapReduce
Big Data 
Hadoop
HDFS
Unstructured
crime data
Structured crime 
data
Mining engines
Smart grid
Early warning
analytics
Smart Vaccine
Vaccination
Engine
Vaccination
as a Service
(VaaS)
Cloud CEWPS
 subscribers
CEWPS
cloud
National criminal data
Immigration records
International criminal data
Intelligence data
Figure 7.6  CEWPS and Big Data interfaces. Big Data leverages CEWPS early warning prediction and analytics. 
Vaccinations can also be offered as a service in the cloud.

188
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Category 1: Structured Data
Although this might seem like business as usual, in reality, structured data is tak-
ing on a new role in the world of Big Data. The sources of data are divided into two 
classifications:
	
1.	Computer or machine generated classification: Machine-generated data generally 
refer to data that are created by a machine without human intervention.
	
2.	Human generated classification: These are data that humans, in interaction with 
computers, supply.
Some experts argue that a third category exists that is a hybrid between machine and 
human. Here though, we are only concerned with the first two categories.
Classifcation 1 Machine-generated structured data can include the following:
•	 Sensor data: Examples include radio frequency ID tags, smart meters, medical 
devices, and Global Positioning System data. Companies are interested in this 
for supply chain management and inventory control.
•	 Web log data: When servers, applications, networks, and so on operate, they 
capture all kinds of data about their activity. This can amount to huge volumes 
of data that can be useful, for example, to deal with service-level agreements 
or to predict security breaches.
•	 Point-of-sale data: When the cashier swipes the bar code of any product that 
you are purchasing, all the data associated with the product are generated.
•	 Financial data: Lots of financial systems are now programmatic; they are 
operated based on predefined rules that automate processes. Stock-trading 
data is a good example of this. It contains structured data such as the company 
symbol and dollar value. Some of these data are machine generated, and some 
are human generated.
Classifcation 2 Examples of structured human-generated data might include the 
following:
•	 Input data: This is any piece of data that a human might input into a computer, 
such as name, age, income, non-free-form survey responses, and so on. These 
data can be useful to understand basic customer behavior.
•	 Click-stream data: Data are generated every time you click a link on a 
website. These data can be analyzed to determine customer behavior and 
buying patterns.
•	 Gaming-related data: Every move you make in a game can be recorded. This can 
be useful in understanding how end users move through a gaming portfolio.
When both classes are used by millions of other users submitting the same informa-
tion, the size is astronomical. Additionally, much of these data have a real-time com-
ponent to them that can be useful for understanding patterns that have the potential 
of predicting outcomes.

189
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Category 2: Unstructured Data
Unstructured data are data that do not follow a specified format for Big Data. If 20% 
of the data available to enterprises is structured data, the other 80% is unstructured. 
Unstructured data are really most of the data that you will encounter. Until recently, 
however, the technology did not really support doing much with them except storing 
them or analyzing them manually.
Unstructured data are everywhere. In fact, most individuals and organizations con-
duct their lives around unstructured data. As with structured data, unstructured data 
are either machine generated or human generated.
Here are some examples of machine-generated unstructured data:
•	 Satellite images: This includes weather data or the data that the government 
captures in its satellite surveillance imagery. Just think about Google Earth, 
and you get the picture.
•	 Scientific data: This includes seismic imagery, atmospheric data, and high-
energy physics.
•	 Photographs and video: This includes security, surveillance, and traffic video.
•	 Radar or sonar data: This includes vehicular, meteorological, and oceanographic 
seismic profiles.
The following list shows a few examples of human-generated unstructured data:
•	 Text internal to your company: Think of all the text within documents, logs, 
survey results, and e-mails. Enterprise information actually represents a large 
percent of the text information in the world today.
•	 Social media data: These data are generated from the social media platforms 
such as YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Flickr.
•	 Mobile data: These include data such as text messages and location information.
•	 Website content: This comes from any site delivering unstructured content, like 
YouTube, Flickr, or Instagram.
Where to Get Cyberterrorism Data?
Our addiction to information has created golden opportunities for terrorism and its 
sibling cyberterrorism. The FBI website www.fbi.gov posted on September 10, 2014, 
the testimony of Robert Anderson, Jr. Executive Assistant Director of FBI, before the 
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs that “The US 
government estimates 3 million anti-American cyberterrorists in the United States 
and abroad.” They are highly educated, professionals, and veterans who accumulated 
considerable amount of knowledge about critical infrastructures. They are highly paid 
intelligence gurus and spies, spending their full time to collect engineering data on 
target critical infrastructures and to build plans of attacks. It is easy to find informa-
tion about drug trafficking, human trafficking, money laundering, but cyberterrorism 

190
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
is one of the most secretive networks that involve affluent intelligence operatives, 
industry spies, politicians, and large number of computer scientists who use sophisti-
cated computers to extract infrastructure data from Big Data warehouses.
Some of the most crucial data that we get from Hadoop are the following:
Unsolved Cybercrime Cases: From smart cities as well as from law enforcement 
databases.
Cyberattacks from Foreign Countries: The attacks will continue on smart grids and 
the CEWPS needs to learn the attacker’s profile and the attack vectors.
Attacks to Damage Infrastructures: The attack starts online from somewhere and it 
affects the computers in substations, metros, bridges, and so on.
Industrial Espionage: Crime cases.
Organized Crime Organizations: In foreign countries and in adversary countries.
Intelligence Information: Data caught between terrorist organizations over the 
Internet to plot attacks on U.S. soil.
Websites: Those which are used by terrorists to plot attacks on U.S. soil.
Immigration Records and Cases: About suspects who legitimately entered the 
United States.
Technology Standards Organizations
We found lots of resources that can help us start making sense of the Big Data world. 
Standard organizations are tackling some of the key emerging issues with getting data 
resources to work together effectively. Open-source offerings can help you experiment 
easily so that you can better understand what is possible with Big Data. Lots of Big 
Data conferences and research groups are out there. Of course, all the vendors in the 
market have research, white papers, and best practices that they are happy to share. In 
this chapter, we offer you some ideas of the resources that are out there to help you.
For Big Data to mature and be able to fully help smart city, standards are required. 
A number of organizations are working hard to bring vendors together to help move 
the process forward. The following sections describe some of these organizations. 
Here is the list of standard organizations that will help establish a great bond between 
Big Data, CEWPS, and the smart grid.
The Open Data Foundation: The Open Data Foundation (ODaF) is a nonprofit 
organization that is organized to help promote the adoption of global metadata stan-
dards as well as the development of open source for the use of statistical data. The 
organization focuses on improving metadata in the fields of economics, finance, health 
care, education, labor, social science, technology, agriculture, development, and the 
environment. Its website is: www.opendatafoundation.org. 
The Cloud Security Alliance: The Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) was established to pro-
mote the use of best practices for providing and ensuring security within cloud computing 
and to educate people about the uses of cloud computing to help secure all other forms 
of computing. The organization has established the Big Data Working Group (BDWG) 

191
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
to help identify the scalable techniques for data-centric security and privacy problems in 
Big Data (https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/big-data).
The National Institute of Standards and Technology: The National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) is a U.S. government agency that focuses on emerging standards 
efforts. This organization has done a considerable amount of work defining and provid-
ing good information on everything from cloud computing to Big Data. In March 2012, 
NIST started a Big Data initiative. The focus of the new initiative is to help transform 
the capability of organizations to use Big Data for scientific discovery, environmental and 
biomedical research, education, and national security. It will collaborate with the National 
Science Foundation (NSF) Center for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research (CHMPR) 
in setting up a Big Data workshop. The issues to be addressed include the following:
•	 State-of-the-art core technologies needed to collect, store, preserve, manage, 
analyze, and share Big Data that could benefit from standardization
•	 Potential measurements to ensure the accuracy and robustness of methods 
that harness these technologies (www.nist.gov/itl/ssd/is/big-data.cfm)
The International Organization for Standardization: ISO 37120 is important in that it 
is the first ISO standard for smart city indicators. ISO 37120 defines 100 city perfor-
mance indicators that could or should be measured and how. Specifically, ISO 37120 
defines 46 core and 54 supporting indicators that cities either shall (core) or should 
(supporting) track and report. Note that ISO 37120 conformance will require third-
party verification of data, and the organization is in the process of defining an audit 
process with pilot cities. ISO 37120 also provides for a set of profile indicators, such 
as population and GDP, to help cities determine which cities are most relevant for 
comparisons (www.iso.org/iso/catalogue).
The Apache Software Foundation: The Apache Software Foundation provides orga-
nizational, legal, and financial support for a broad range of open-source software proj-
ects. It was founded in 1999 as a membership-based, not-for-profit corporation to 
ensure that the Apache projects continue to exist beyond the participation of individ-
ual volunteers. One of the organization’s key projects is its management of Hadoop. 
It offers an open-source software library that is a standards-based framework for pro-
cessing large data sets across clusters of computers (http://hadoop.apache.org).
The Open Access Same-Time Information System: One of the most important standards 
organizations is Open Access Same-Time Information System (OASIS), the Organization 
for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards. It is a nonprofit organization 
that has started to focus on Big Data standards. This process is at an early stage, but we 
expect that the organization will begin to focus on creating Big Data standards.
 Glossary: Big Data
We wanted to enrich the knowledge of the reader and provide additional information 
about the terms that joined the technical lingo. This glossary is related specifically to 

192
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Big Data and Predictive Analytics. There may be some additional terms that are out-
side the context of this chapter.
Aggregation: A process of searching, gathering, and presenting data.
Algorithm: A mathematical formula placed in software that performs an analysis on 
a set of data.
Anonymization: The severing of links between people in a database and their records 
to prevent the discovery of the source of the records.
Artificial intelligence: Developing intelligence machines and software that are 
capable of perceiving the environment and take corresponding action when 
required and even learn from those actions.
Automatic identification and capture (AIDIC): Any method of automatically iden-
tifying and collecting data on items, and then storing the data in a com-
puter system. For example, a scanner might collect data about a product being 
shipped via a radio frequency identification chip (RFID).
Avro: Avro is a data serialization system that allows for encoding the schema of 
Hadoop files. It is adept at parsing data and performing remote procedure 
calls.
Behavioral analytics: Using data about people’s behavior to understand intent and 
predict future actions.
Big Data scientist: Someone who is able to develop the algorithms to make sense out 
of Big Data.
Business intelligence (BI): The general term used for the identification, extraction, 
and analysis of data.
Cascading: Cascading provides a higher level of abstraction for Hadoop, allowing 
developers to create complex jobs quickly, easily, and in several different lan-
guages that run in the JVM, including Ruby, Scala, and more. In effect, this 
has shattered the skills barrier, enabling Twitter to use Hadoop more broadly.
Cassandra: Cassandra is a distributed and open-source database designed to handle 
large amounts of distributed data across commodity servers while providing a 
highly available service. It is a NoSQL solution that was initially developed by 
Facebook. It is structured in the form of key value.
Cell phone data: Cell phones generate a tremendous amount of data, and much of it 
is available for use with analytical applications.
Classification analysis: A systematic process for obtaining important and relevant 
information about data, also called metadata; data about data.
Cloud computing: A distributed computing system over a network used for storing 
data off-premises.
Clustering analysis: The process of identifying objects that are similar to each other 
and cluster them in order to understand the differences as well as the similari-
ties within the data.
Cold data storage: Storing old data that are hardly used on low-power servers. 
Retrieving the data will take longer.

193
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Comparative analysis: It ensures a step-by-step procedure of comparisons and calcu-
lations to detect patterns within very large data sets.
Chukwa: Chukwa is a Hadoop subproject devoted to large-scale log collection and 
analysis. Chukwa is built on top of the Hadoop distributed file system (HDFS) 
and MapReduce framework and inherits Hadoop’s scalability and robustness. 
Chukwa also includes a flexible and powerful toolkit for displaying monitor-
ing and analyzing results, in order to make the best use of this collected data.
Clojure: Clojure is a dynamic programming language based on LISP that uses the 
Java virtual machine (JVM). It is well suited for parallel data processing.
Cloud: A broad term that refers to any Internet-based application or service that is 
hosted remotely.
Columnar database or column-oriented database: A database that stores data by 
column rather than by row. In a row-based database, a row might contain a 
name, address, and phone number. In a column-oriented database, all names 
are in one column, addresses in another, and so on. A key advantage of a 
columnar database has faster hard disk access.
Comparators: Two ways you may compare your keys is by implementing the interface 
or by implementing the Raw Comparator interface. In the former approach, 
you will compare (deserialized) objects, but in the latter approach, you will 
compare the keys using their corresponding raw bytes.
Confabulation: The act of making an intuition-based decision appears to be data 
based.
Cross-channel analytics: Analysis that can attribute sales, show average order value, 
or the lifetime value.
Data aggregation: The act of collecting data from multiple sources for the purpose of 
reporting or analysis.
Data architecture and design: How enterprise data are structured. The actual struc-
ture or design varies depending on the eventual end result required. Data 
architecture has three stages or processes: conceptual representation of busi-
ness entities, the logical representation of the relationships among those enti-
ties, and the physical construction of the system to support the functionality.
Database as a Service (DaaS): A database hosted in the cloud and sold on a metered basis. 
Examples include Heroku Postgres and Amazon Relational Database Service.
Data cleansing: The act of reviewing and revising data to remove duplicate entries, 
correct misspellings, add missing data, and provide more consistency.
Data-directed decision making: Using data to support making crucial decisions.
Data exhaust: The data that a person creates as a by-product of a common activity, for 
example, a cell call log or Web search history.
Data feed: A means for a person to receive a stream of data. Examples of data feed 
mechanisms include RSS or Twitter.
Data governance: A set of processes or rules that ensure the integrity of the data and 
data management best practices are met.

194
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Data integrity: The measure of trust an organization has in the accuracy, complete-
ness, timeliness, and validity of the data.
Data mart: The access layer of a data warehouse used to provide data to users.
Data mining: The process of deriving patterns or knowledge from large data sets.
Data model, data modeling: A data model defines the structure of the data for the 
purpose of communicating between functional and technical people to show 
data needed for business processes, or for communicating a plan to develop how 
data are stored and accessed among application development team members.
Data point: An individual item on a graph or a chart.
Data profiling: The process of collecting statistics and information about data in an 
existing source.
Data quality: The measure of data to determine its worthiness for decision making, 
planning, or operations.
Data replication: The process of sharing information to ensure consistency between 
redundant sources.
Data repository: The location of permanently stored data.
Data science: A recent term that has multiple definitions, but generally accepted as a 
discipline that incorporates statistics, data visualization, computer program-
ming, data mining, machine learning, and database engineering to solve com-
plex problems.
Data scientist: A practitioner of data science.
Data security: The practice of protecting data from destruction or unauthorized 
access.
Data set: A collection of data, typically in tabular form.
Data source: Any provider of data, for example, a database or a data stream.
Data steward: A person responsible for data stored in a data field.
Data structure: A specific way of storing and organizing data.
Data visualization: A visual abstraction of data designed for the purpose of deriving 
meaning or communicating information more effectively.
Data warehouse: A place to store data for the purpose of reporting and analysis.
Deidentification: The act of removing all data that link a person to a particular piece 
of information.
Demographic data: Data relating to the characteristics of a human population.
Deep Thunder: IBM’s weather prediction service that provides weather data to orga-
nizations such as utilities, which use the data to optimize energy distribution.
Distributed cache: A data cache that is spread across multiple systems but works as 
one. It is used to improve performance.
Distributed object: A software module designed to work with other distributed 
objects stored on other computers.
Distributed processing: The execution of a process across multiple computers con-
nected by a computer network.

195
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Distributed file system: Systems that offer simplified, highly available access to stor-
ing, analyzing, and processing data.
Document store databases: A document-oriented database that is especially designed 
to store, manage, and retrieve documents, also known as semistructured data.
Document management: The practice of tracking and storing electronic documents 
and scanned images of paper documents.
Drill: An open-source distributed system for performing interactive analysis on large-
scale data sets. It is similar to Google’s Dremel and is managed by Apache.
Elastic search: An open-source search engine built on Apache Lucene.
Event analytics: Shows the series of steps that led to an action.
Exabyte: 1 million terabytes or 1 billion gigabytes of information.
Exploratory analysis: Finding patterns within data without standard procedures or 
methods. It is a means of discovering the data and to find the data sets main 
characteristics.
External data: Data that exist outside of a system.
Extract, transform, and load (ETL): A process used in data warehousing to prepare 
data for use in reporting or analytics.
Failover: The automatic switching to another computer or node should one fail.
Flume: Flume is a framework for populating Hadoop with data. Agents are pop-
ulated throughout ones IT infrastructure—inside Web servers, application 
servers, and mobile devices, for example—to collect data and integrate it into 
Hadoop.
Grid computing: The performing of computing functions using resources from mul-
tiple distributed systems. Grid computing typically involves large files and is 
most often used for multiple applications. The systems that comprise a grid 
computing network do not have to be similar in design or in the same geo-
graphic location.
Graph Databases: They use graph structures (a finite set of ordered pairs or certain 
entities), with edges, properties, and nodes for data storage. It provides index-
free adjacency, meaning that every element is directly linked to its neighbor 
element.
Hadoop: An open-source software library project administered by the Apache 
Software Foundation. Apache defines Hadoop as “a framework that allows 
for the distributed processing of large data sets across clusters of computers 
using a simple programming model.”
Hama: Hama is a distributed computing framework based on Bulk Synchronous 
Parallel computing techniques for massive scientific computations, for exam-
ple, matrix, graph, and network algorithms. It is a top-level project under the 
Apache Software Foundation.
HANA: A software/hardware in-memory computing platform from SAP designed 
for high-volume transactions and real-time analytics.

196
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
HBase: HBase is a nonrelational database that allows for low-latency, quick lookups 
in Hadoop. It adds transactional capabilities to Hadoop, allowing users to 
conduct updates, inserts, and deletes. EBay and Facebook use HBase heavily.
HCatalog: HCatalog is a centralized metadata management and sharing service for 
Apache Hadoop. It allows for a unified view of all data in Hadoop clusters 
and allows diverse tools, including Pig and Hive, to process any data elements 
without needing to know physically where in the cluster the data are stored.
Hadoop distributed file system: Hadoop distributed file system (HDFS), the stor-
age layer of Hadoop, is a distributed, scalable, Java-based file system adept at 
storing large volumes of unstructured.
Hadoop User Experience (HUE): HUE is an open-source Web-based interface for 
making it easier to use Apache Hadoop. It features a file browser for HDFS, 
an Oozie Application for creating workflows and coordinators, a job designer/
browser for MapReduce, a Hive and Impala UI, a Shell, a collection of 
Hadoop API, and more.
Hive: Hive is a Hadoop-based data warehousing-like framework originally developed 
by Facebook. It allows users to write queries in a SQL-like language called 
HiveQL, which are then converted to MapReduce. This allows SQL pro-
grammers with no MapReduce experience to use the warehouse and makes 
it easier to integrate with business intelligence and visualization tools such as 
Microstrategy, Tableau, and Revolutions Analytics.
Impala: Impala (by Cloudera) provides fast, interactive SQL queries directly on your 
Apache Hadoop data stored in HDFS or HBase using the same metadata, 
SQL syntax (Hive SQL), ODBC driver and user interface (Hue Beeswax) as 
Apache Hive. This provides a familiar and unified platform for batch-oriented 
or real-time queries.
In-database analytics: The integration of data analytics into the data warehouse.
In-memory database: Any database system that relies on memory for data storage.
In-memory data grid (IMDG): The storage of data in memory across multiple serv-
ers for the purpose of greater scalability and faster access or analytics.
Kafka: Kafka (developed by LinkedIn) is a distributed publish–subscribe messaging 
system that offers a solution capable of handling all data flow activity and 
processing these data on a consumer website. This type of data (page views, 
searches, and other user actions) is a key ingredient in the current social Web.
Key value stores: Key value stores allow the application to store its data in a schema-
less way. The data could be stored in a data type of a programming language 
or an object. Because of this, there is no need for a fixed data model.
KeyValue databases: They store data with a primary key, a uniquely identifiable 
record, which makes easy and fast to look up. The data stored in a KeyValue 
are normally some kind of primitive of the programming language.
Latency: Any delay in a response or delivery of data from one point to another.

197
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Linked data: As described by World Wide Web inventor Time Berners-Lee, “Cherry-
picking common attributes or languages to identify connections or relation-
ships between disparate sources of data.”
Load balancing: The process of distributing workload across a computer network or 
computer cluster to optimize performance.
Location analytics: Location analytics brings mapping and map-driven analytics to 
enterprise business systems and data warehouses. It allows you to associate 
geospatial information with data sets.
Location data: Data that describe a geographic location.
Log file: A file that a computer, network, or application creates automatically to record 
events that occur during operation, for example, the time a file is accessed.
Machine-generated data: Any data that are automatically created from a computer 
process, application, or other nonhuman source.
Machine2Machine data: Two or more machines that are communicating with each 
other.
Machine learning: The use of algorithms allows a computer to analyze data for 
the purpose of learning what action to take when a specific pattern or event 
occurs.
Mahout: Mahout is a data mining library. It takes the most popular data mining 
algorithms for performing clustering, regression testing, and statistical mod-
eling and implements them using the MapReduce model.
MapReduce: MapReduce is a software framework that serves as the compute layer of 
Hadoop. MapReduce jobs are divided into two (obviously named) parts. The 
“Map” function divides a query into multiple parts and processes data at the 
node level. The “Reduce” function aggregates the results of the “Map” func-
tion to determine the “answer” to the query.
Mashup: The process of combining different data sets within a single application to 
enhance output, for example, combining demographic data with real estate 
listings.
Metadata: Data about data; gives information about what the data are about.
MongoDB: MongoDB is a NoSQL database oriented to documents, developed under 
the open-source concept. It saves data structures in JSON documents with a 
dynamic scheme (called MongoDB BSON format), making the integration of 
the data in certain applications more easily and quickly.
MPP database: A database optimized to work in a massively parallel processing 
environment.
Multidimensional databases: A database optimized for data online analytical pro-
cessing (OLAP) applications and for data warehousing.
MultiValue databases: They are a type of NoSQL and multidimensional databases 
that understand 3D data directly. They are primarily giant strings that are 
perfect for manipulating HTML and XML strings directly.

198
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Network analysis: Viewing relationships among the nodes in terms of the network 
or graph theory, meaning analyzing connections between nodes in a network 
and the strength of the ties.
NewSQL: An elegant, well-defined database system that is easier to learn and better 
than SQL. It is even newer than NoSQL.
NoSQL: NoSQL (commonly interpreted as “not only SQL”) is a broad class of data-
base management systems identified by nonadherence to the widely used rela-
tional database management system model. NoSQL databases are not built 
primarily on tables and generally do not use SQL for data manipulation.
Object databases: They store data in the form of objects, as used by object-oriented 
programming. They are different from relational or graph databases and most 
of them offer a query language that allows object to be found with a declara-
tive programming approach.
Object-based image analysis: Analyzing digital images can be performed with data 
from individual pixels, whereas object-based image analysis uses data from a 
selection of related pixels, called objects or image objects.
Online analytical processing (OLAP): The process of analyzing multidimensional 
data using three operations: consolidation (the aggregation of available), drill-
down (the ability for users to see the underlying details), and slice and dice (the 
ability for users to select subsets and view them from different perspectives).
Online transactional processing (OLTP): The process of providing users with access to 
large amounts of transactional data in a way that they can derive meaning from it.
Open Data Center Alliance (ODCA): A consortium of global IT organizations 
whose goal is to speed the migration of cloud computing.
OpenDremel: The open-source version of Google’s Big Query java code. It is being 
integrated with Apache Drill.
Operational data store (ODS): A location to gather and store data from multiple 
sources so that more operations can be performed on it before sending to the 
data warehouse for reporting.
Oozie: Oozie is a workflow processing system that lets users define a series of jobs 
written in multiple languages—such as MapReduce, Pig, and Hive—then 
intelligently link them to one another. Oozie allows users to specify, for 
example, that a particular query is only to be initiated after specified previous 
jobs on which it relies for data are completed.
Parallel data analysis: Breaking up an analytical problem into smaller components and 
running algorithms on each of those components at the same time. Parallel 
data analysis can occur within the same system or across multiple systems.
Parallel method invocation (PMI): Allows programming code to call multiple func-
tions in parallel.
Parallel processing: The ability to execute multiple tasks at the same time.
Parallel query: A query that is executed over multiple system threads for faster 
performance.

199
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Pattern recognition: The classification or labeling of an identified pattern in the 
machine learning process.
Pentaho: Pentaho offers a suite of open-source business intelligence (BI) products 
called Pentaho business analytics providing data integration, OLAP services, 
reporting, dashboarding, data mining, and ETL capabilities
Petabyte: 1 million GB or 1024 TB.
Pig: Pig Latin is a Hadoop-based language developed by Yahoo. It is relatively easy to 
learn and is adept at very deep, very long data pipelines (a limitation of SQL).
Predictive analytics: Using statistical functions on one or more data sets to predict 
trends or future events.
Predictive modeling: The process of developing a model that will most likely predict 
a trend or outcome.
Public data: Public information or data sets that were created with public funding.
Query: Asking for information to answer a certain question.
Query analysis: The process of analyzing a search query for the purpose of optimizing 
it for the best possible result.
R: R is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics. It is a 
GNU project, which is similar to the S language. R provides a wide variety of 
statistical (linear and nonlinear modeling, classical statistical tests, time-series 
analysis, classification, clustering,…) and graphical techniques and is highly 
extensible.
Real-time data: Data that are created, processed, stored, analyzed, and visualized 
within milliseconds.
Recommendation engine: An algorithm that analyzes a customer’s purchases and 
actions on an e-commerce site and then uses that data to recommend comple-
mentary products.
Reference data: Data that describe an object and its properties. The object may be 
physical or virtual.
Reidentification: Combining several data sets to find a certain person within anony-
mized data.
Risk analysis: The application of statistical methods on one or more data sets to deter-
mine the likely risk of a project, action, or decision.
Root cause analysis: The process of determining the main cause of an event or 
problem.
Routing analysis: Finding the optimized routing using many different variables for a 
certain means of transport in order to decrease fuel costs and increase efficiency.
Scalability: The ability of a system or process to maintain acceptable performance 
levels as workload or scope increases.
Schema: The structure that defines the organization of data in a database system.
Search data: Aggregated data about search terms used over time.
Semistructured data: Data that are not structured by a formal data model but provide 
other means of describing the data and hierarchies.

200
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Sentiment analysis: The application of statistical functions on comments people 
make on the Web and through social networks to determine how they feel 
about a product or company.
Server: A physical or virtual computer that serves requests for a software application 
and delivers those requests over a network.
Software as a Service (SaaS): Application software that is used over the Web by a 
thin client or Web browser. Salesforce is a well-known example of SaaS.
Spatial analysis: It refers to analyzing spatial data such as geographic data or topo-
logical data to identify and understand patterns and regularities within data 
distributed in geographic space.
SQL: A programming language for retrieving data from a relational database.
Sqoop: Sqoop is a connectivity tool for moving data from non-Hadoop data stores—
such as relational databases and data warehouses—into Hadoop. It allows 
users to specify the target location inside of Hadoop and instruct Sqoop to 
move data from Oracle, Teradata, or other relational databases to the target.
Storage: Any means of storing data persistently.
Storm: (1) Storm is a system of real-time distributed computing, open source and 
free, born into Twitter. Storm makes it easy to reliably process unstructured 
data flows in the field of real-time processing, which made Hadoop for batch 
processing. (2) An open-source distributed computation system designed for 
processing multiple data streams in real time.
Structured data: Data that are organized by a predetermined structure.
Structured Query Language (SQL): A programming language designed specifically 
to manage and retrieve data from a relational database system.
Text analytics: The application of statistical, linguistic, and machine learning tech-
niques on text-based sources to derive meaning or insight.
Transactional data: Data that change unpredictably. Examples include accounts pay-
able and receivable data, or data about product shipments.
The Internet of Things: Ordinary devices that are connected to the Internet at any 
time anywhere via sensors.
Thrift: “Thrift is a software framework for scalable cross-language services develop-
ment. It combines a software stack with a code generation engine to build ser-
vices that work efficiently and seamlessly between C++, Java, Python, PHP, 
Ruby, Erlang, Perl, Haskell, C#, Cocoa, Smalltalk, and OCaml.”
Unstructured data: Data that have no identifiable structure, for example, the text of 
e-mail messages.
Value: All the available data will create a lot of value for organizations, societies, and 
consumers. Big Data means big business and every industry will reap the ben-
efits from Big Data.
Volume: The amount of data, ranging from megabytes to brontobytes.
Visualization: A visual abstraction of data designed for the purpose of deriving mean-
ing or communicating information more effectively.

201
Big Data of Cybercrime and Terrorism
Weather data: Real-time weather data are now widely available for organizations to 
use in a variety of ways. For example, a logistics company can monitor local 
weather conditions to optimize the transport of goods. A utility company can 
adjust energy distribution in real time.
WebHDFS Apache Hadoop: WebHDFS Apache Hadoop provides native libraries 
for accessing HDFS. However, users prefer to use HDFS remotely over the 
heavy client side native libraries. For example, some applications need to load 
data in and out of the cluster or to externally interact with the HDFS data. 
WebHDFS addresses these issues by providing a fully functional HTTP 
REST API to access HDFS.
XML databases: XML databases allow data to be stored in XML format. XML 
databases are often linked to document-oriented databases. The data stored 
in an XML database can be queried, exported, and serialized into any format 
needed.
ZooKeeper: ZooKeeper is a software project of the Apache Software Foundation, a 
service that provides centralized configuration and open code name registra-
tion for large distributed systems. ZooKeeper is a subproject of Hadoop.
Websites
http://aws.amazon.com/big-data/.
http://bigdatauniversity.com/.
http://csis.org/.
http://hackmageddon.com/.
http://research.google.com/.
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/bigdata/.
http://wikibon.org/wiki/v/2012_Big_Data_Revenue_by_Vendor.
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/.
http://www.cloudera.com/content/cloudera/en/why-cloudera/hadoop-and-big-data.html.
http://www.csl.sri.com/projects/cyber-ta/.
http://www.dummies.com/how-to/computers-software/Big-Data.html.
http://www.oracle.com/us/technologies/big-data/index.html.
http://www.sas.com/.
http://www.teradata.com/business-needs/BigData-Analytics/.
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/bdwg/Big_Data_Analytics_for_
Security_Intelligence.pdf.
https://hbr.org/2012/10/big-data-the-management-revolution/ar.
www.oasis-open.org.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Part II

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

205
8
CEWPS Anatomy, 
the Smart Vaccine, and 
the Man-Made B Cell
A Word on Virus Anatomy
Humans have a skewed view of viruses because we only notice them if they cause dis-
ease. In reality, however, viruses are much more than just pathogens. In fact, they play 
a crucial role in the evolution of life. Viruses were not only the probable precursors of 
the first cells, but they have helped shape and build the genomes of all species, includ-
ing humans. Viruses are present in every species and every ecological niche and affect 
every organism. They even influence the global climate by regulating the population 
densities of microorganisms—and thereby nutrient availability—in the oceans. We 
are the invaders of the viral world, not vice versa. Viruses have also been a major factor 
for the evolution of all life. They helped build the genomes (A genome contains the 
complete set of genetic instructions, needed to build an organism). Almost 50% of our 
genome is comprised of retro elements. If the shortest retro elements, 500,000 long 
terminal repeat promoters, were once full-length retroviruses, they would add up to 
the size of our genome. Are we therefore the descendants of viruses? This is impossible 
to prove, because viral footprints disappeared with time.
Tracing the origins of viruses is difficult because they do not leave fossils and 
because of the tricks they use to make copies of themselves within the cells they have 
invaded. Some viruses even have the ability to stitch their own genes (A gene is a 
small piece of the genome that contains information about the basic characteristics of 
the organism, like eye and hair color) into those of the cells they infect, which means 
studying their ancestry requires untangling it from the history of their hosts and other 
organisms. What makes the process even more complicated is that viruses do not 
just infect humans, they can infect basically any organism—from bacteria to horses, 
seaweed to people.
A virus has either a DNA or an RNA genome and is called a DNA virus (A DNA 
is the building block of an organism that contains the genetic code) or an RNA virus 
(An RNA is another type of building block similar to DNA), respectively. Viruses are 
by far the most abundant biological entities on Earth, and they outnumber all the oth-
ers put together. They infect all types of cellular life including animals, plants, bacte-
ria, and fungi. Interestingly enough, viruses that infect plants are harmless to animals, 
and most viruses that infect other animals are harmless to humans. The main purpose 

206
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
of a virus is to deliver its genome into the host cell to allow its expression (transcription 
and translation) by the host cell.
The Digital Immune System
Innovation in medicine is galloping in gigantic strides to catch up with infectious 
diseases and antibody synthesis. One of the great contributions to humanity was the 
discovery of the vaccine. Without adaptive immunity, one-fourth of the human race 
would have been terminally ill. Dr. Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur share this hon-
orable credit. Interestingly enough, with vaccination, man was able to conquer disease. 
It was unimaginable that immunity can be acquired and stored in the human body for 
the next attack.
On December 17, 1903, the Wright Brothers successfully replicated bird flying 
with their three-axis control invention. Human immunity was added to the annals 
of human wonders as super physicians and chemists raced to learn more about its 
mystery. It took 300 years of sweat and frustration before immunology produced a 
mature immune system based on molecular recognition of the attack. Fortunately, for 
most of us, our immune systems kept steadfastly vigilant in monitoring themselves to 
ensure that each cellular component behaves and interacts symbiotically to generate 
protective immune responses. Amazingly, the concept of human immunity can also 
be replicated and applied to the digital world. It is a revolutionary leap forward in the 
future of cybersecurity.
Computers can also be immunized with the help of an artificially intelligent agent 
called the Smart Vaccine™. Digital Immunity is a new concept that was never thought 
of before. After thoroughly studying immunology and the way it works, it was possible 
to replicate the human model and blueprint an architecture for the digital world. We 
called it Digital Immunity (DI).
Ever since Antivirus Technology (AVT) came into existence, AVT vendors have been 
paying homage to Microsoft and wouldn’t dare to outpace it. They have been marching to 
Microsoft’s drum beat and cautiously trying not to step on the turf of the software giant. 
The saying “what’s good for Microsoft is good for AVT” was true in the nineties but not 
in the post-9/11 years. Internet Explorer (IE) proved to be Microsoft’s Achilles’ heel. …
Cybercrime lords and terrorists got away with day-zero and the business world suffered 
from a global viral epidemic. Now, cyberterrorists have jumped on the Cloud bandwagon 
to market its novelty of Attack-as-a-service. AVT has not been able to match the sophisti-
cation of malware. Meanwhile, a silent worm called Stuxnet was able with its ingenious 
camouflage to penetrate Natanz nuclear enrichment plant and create havoc. Thus, cyber-
terrorism has become a real strategic weapon launched from anywhere in the world. There 
are over 3000 terror schools and institutes that have graduated professional terrorists with 
formal degrees in modern terrorism. Viral attacks have become self-mutating, self-heal-
ing, self-navigating and could outsmart the best firewalls, the Forbidden city moat, and 
the Great Wall of China. Terrorism has actually become the mother of invention.

207
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
Throughout history, we are finding out that man’s most worrisome fear was sickness. 
Once a virus attacks the body, then it is a fight between God and the Devil. Longevity 
was a mysterious and unexplainable quandary. Immunity was unknown and like a 
touch of luck. During the plague of Athens in 430 BC, the historian Thucydides 
noted that people who had recovered from a previous bout of the disease could nurse 
the sick without contracting the illness a second time. Louis Pasteur in 1857 devel-
oped the acquired immunity through vaccination. It was not until Robert Koch’s 1891 
proofs, for which he was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1905. The timeline shows the con-
tribution of the four immunology pioneers, who without them, the human race would 
have drastically fallen in jeopardy (Figure 8.1).
Today, the world is healthier with longer human life span because we now have the 
adaptive vaccine that helps the human body defeat the attacking virus. The human 
body also has become smarter with preventive vaccination ahead of the danger. It 
really makes the body invincible.
The secret sauce is to replicate the way vaccine helps the infected body. Let’s review 
how the vaccine works.
Vaccinations protect you from specific diseases that can make you very sick, disable, 
or even kill you. They boost your body’s own defense system, which is also called the 
immune system. Vaccines create immunity to protects us from an infection. Here is a 
list of how vaccines work:
•	 Most vaccines contain a little bit of a disease germ that is weak or dead. 
Vaccines do not contain the type of germ that makes you sick. Some vaccines 
do not contain any germs.
•	 Having this little bit of the germ inside your body makes your body’s defense 
system produce antibodies to fight off this kind of germ. Antibodies help trap 
and kill germs that could lead to disease.
•	 Your body can make antibodies in two ways: by getting the disease or by get-
ting the vaccine. Getting the vaccine is a much safer way to make antibodies 
without having the suffering of the disease itself and the risk of becoming 
disabled, or even dying.
1796
1857
1878
1890
Louis Pasteur
developed the
adaptive immunity
(vaccination)
Edward Jenner
discovered
smallpox
vaccine
Paul Ehrlik
discovered how
infection works on
humans
Robert Koch
discovered the
mechanics of 
infection
Figure 8.1  The famous timeline of the pioneers of the Human Immune System. Not only were they life savers, but human-
ity savers. No reward could be enough for these crusaders who defied the reaper.

208
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
•	 Antibodies stay with you for a long time. They remember how to fight off the 
germ. If the real germ that causes this disease (not the vaccine) enters your 
body in the future, your defense system knows how to fight it off.
•	 Often, your defense system will remember how to fight a germ for the rest of 
your life. Sometimes, your defense system needs a booster shot to remind it 
how to fight off this germ.
Analogy between the Human Immune and the Digital Immune Systems
The immune system protects the body against disease or other potentially damaging 
foreign bodies. When functioning properly, the immune system identifies and attacks 
a variety of threats, including viruses, bacteria, and parasites while distinguishing 
them from the body’s own healthy tissue. The most important components of the 
Human Immune System (HIS) are:
•	 The lymphatic system (white cells generator) consists of bone marrow, spleen, 
thymus, and lymph nodes. It is considered the smart grid for the Human 
Immune System.
•	 The spleen is the largest lymphatic organ in the body that contains white blood 
cells that fight infection or disease.
•	 The thymus (T cells generator) a specialized organ of the immune system where 
T cells mature. T cells help destroy infected or cancerous cells.
•	 Lymph nodes are nodes from the lymphatic grid, distributed widely throughout 
the body including the armpit and stomach. A distributes generating plant of 
B and T cells ready to fight infection and disease.
•	 Lymphocytes (B cells—white blood cells) are the generals of the infection war. They 
give orders to the natural killer cells (NK cells), mobilize the T cells (the com-
munication cells), and alert the lower rank of B cells to be ready for fighting.
•	 Leukocytes (B cells—white blood cells) to observe enemy lines.
Vaccines like a catalyst to expedite the deployment of body immunity, by mimick-
ing an infection. It is a drill to familiarize the defense system about the enemy. The 
immune system gets empowered by the vaccine and the morale gets high. By the way, 
fever is an attack alert and it supplies ammunition to the fighting B cells.
Once the infection drill goes away, the body is left with a supply of memory cells, 
another department of the T cells (T lymphocytes) that will remember how to fight 
that disease in the future. So, the invention of the vaccine is one of the most remark-
able inventions that saves mankind, because it allows memory cells to remember the 
disease in future attacks. We all are grateful to Pasteur for giving us a life extender. So 
do not forget to get flu shots on time.
Replicating the Human Immune System is an amazing idea. The Smart Vaccine 
(SV) replicates what the B cells and T cells are doing. It creates a miniature attack 
through a vaccination service, then have the system eliminate the attack and learn 

209
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
from it how to combat similar attacks. Thus, the system acquires immunity and the 
attack is saved as episode in the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB). The Smart Vaccine 
(SV) and the system antivirus share virus signature data for future attacks.
We will provide several examples of how the Smart Vaccine commands the battle.
Figure 8.2 shows how the Human Immune System fights the attacking virus 
(called pathogen). In ­actuality, it is a battle to the death between the attacking patho-
gens (biological virus) and between the B cells army. There will be many casualties for 
sure. If the body wins the battle, then it will be more immune against this particular 
attack. If the body loses the battle, then additional “specific” vaccine will be supple-
mented or the body will suffer (this means that the body is not producing enough 
B cell fighters) and eventually it will be a life-and-death situation.
Let’s describe how the body fights a viral attack step by step:
	
1.	The virus is discovered after penetrating the skin.
	
2.	The B cells try to identify the virus by coupling with it.
	
3.	As soon as it recognizes the nature of the virus, antibody generators (antigen) 
will induce an immune response in the body.
	
4.	Antibody will rush to capture the virus (pathogen) and quarantine it before it 
starts to reproduce.
	
5.	At the same time, the B cells will notify the T cells (killer cells) to be ready 
for the attack.
Killer cells ready to
attack the virus
Notify
killer cells
Killer cells
devour
pathogens
Antigen
Attacking
virus
(pathogen)
Dispose of
casualties
Quarantine
pathogen
B cell is notified 
to quarantine
Virus
discovered
Identify
virus
Dispatch right
antibody
Remember
the attack
Memory
cell
Memory
cell
Memory
cell
Memory cells 
remain in the 
infested cell
6
7
1
8
4
3
2
10
9
B cell
T
T
T
T
T
T
5
Figure 8.2  The Human Immune System implements the defense-by-offense mechanism to eradicate the virus. This is 
an atrocious battle that B cells and T cells fight to the death. Our amazing immune system is highly autonomic and self-
learning. The memory cells retain the dead infested cells to learn everything about the virus. The B cells would get the 
training for the next attack.

210
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
6.	The T cells are getting ready for the attack.
	
7.	The T cells capture the virus and devour a portion of it for future recognition 
and to quickly produce antibody.
	
8.	The remains of the virus are disposed of either through the blood or through 
the skin.
	
9.	The memory cells will remember the nature of the virus and keep it.
	 10.	They will remain in the infested cells and nurse the cells with antibody until 
they heal or die.
Anatomy of the Present Computer Virus
A Word about the Black Hat Community
We confess that the Black Hat Community, which started in 1997, is one of the most 
reputable organizations in global information security in the world. We do not know 
much about the foreign hack virtuosos. Black Hat has offered great knowledge to the 
security community around the world. Black Hat inspires professionals at all career 
levels, encouraging growth and collaboration among academia, world-class research-
ers, and leaders in the public and private sectors. They have great educational videos 
on youtube.com. You  can  visit  their  great website (https://www.blackhat.com/) and 
register to become a member.
A Word on Hackers
Hackers are gifted programmers who can build cyber bombs, traps, backdoor Trojans 
and be anywhere and can compromise any system. Virus designers are super software 
engineers with an arsenal of prefab rootkits. Most hackers are Internet junkies who 
live in the wild. Every company should hire ethical hackers and ask them to invade 
into their own critical systems, their clouds, and their networks.
Hackers are easily solicited to join anti-establishment or even terrorist electronic 
armies. Today, the world is plagued with cyber banditos and Jesse James who can rob 
any data vault. Oh, they are incredible spies who could snatch any design blueprint 
or top secret or and uncover any scandal. The FBI siphons their brain for lesser jail 
sentences. Their menu includes Robo-Stuxnet, Cloud Virus Rain, Ransomware, ID 
Theft, Grid-Lockers, Critical Infrastructure Bombs, Industrial Intelligence, Darth 
Vaders, Cyber Heart Attacks, Espionage, and Zombie Salvation Army.
We assume that an attack will have a smart payload and sophisticated attack vector. 
Most destructive attacks seem to be politically motivated to spy on global corpora-
tions, governments, and large cloud centers.
The virus is a master piece of ingenuity engineering and malice. It is a software 
booby trap to create havoc and most of the time some substantial destruction to vul-
nerable infrastructures.

211
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
Figure 8.3 shows the ingenious architecture of a smart virus:
	
1.	The Remote Dashboard: This is where the terrorist is hiding. He knows where 
his guided missile is going. There could be more than one terrorist to con-
duct a massive attack. They could be using IRC or spoofed IP to guide the 
Trojan.
	
2.	Instructions: These are instructions that are wired inside the kernel. They cover 
all possible situations that the attack could encounter. Some advanced attacks 
are autonomic and very lethal.
	
3.	Payload: A block of code designed to override the normal operation of a criti-
cal system, and hijack it, and change the software that control the infrastruc-
ture. Sometimes, the payload remains hiding until the right moment.
	
4.	Communicator: It is the dispatch center where communications from the ter-
rorists are relayed to the kernel and reports to them the attack progress.
	
5.	Actuator (Kernel): It is the Commander in charge. Its main mission is to launch 
the planned attack without any glitches.
	
6.	Replicator: It is part of the attack to create clones with different payload and 
identity and to slow down and delay the vaccination process with different 
hostile codes.
	
7.	The Navigator: Smart attacks need a good navigator that knows its way through 
firewalls and intrusion and detection systems.
The anatomy of the virus
The payload is the 
malware to be executed
according to the instructions 
of the hacker
The hacker issues the
virus as an e-mail or a
website. The virus is
masqueraded as an
executable file
Hacker guided virus
from remote dashboard
The virus attack comes with
navigational instruction on
where to go and where to hide.
The kernel is the pilot that
guides the virus attack. It dials
back the hacker and confirms
the success of the attack
The virus attack usually infects
several computers and not just
one. Also the attack may
require the virus to mutate and
change identity.
Payload
Communicator
Actuator
(kernel)
Replicator
Navigator
Instructions
Figure 8.3  A virus is a Swiss Army software robot (called a bot) that carries instructions (the payload to be executed 
once the target is reached). It travels in a stealth mode on the Internet (TCP/IP) and navigates its way until it reaches its 
destination. It can be a Backdoor Trojan, an e-mail, transfered file, or distributed through social media.

212
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
How Does the Classic Antivirus Work?
Generally, there are two ways that an off-the-shelf antivirus program can detect and 
identify a virus:
	
1.	The signature dictionary: Scans/monitors the programs by their code; if it finds 
a program code that match the virus code in its signature database, it will 
consider that program a virus.
	
2.	Behavior analysis: Scans/monitors the programs by analyzing their behavior, 
such as modification of critical system files/important data files; if any behav-
ior seems suspicious, then the antivirus program will alert the user that there 
is suspicious behavior, or it may alert the user that malicious actions are about 
to be performed and block that behavior.
These are the two most common ways that antivirus programs identify viruses.
Both of them have advantages and disadvantages. Signature-based detection 
can correctly detect a virus but cannot detect viruses that are not in the signature 
database.
Behavior-based detections (or heuristic detections) can detect viruses that are not in 
the signature database but can produce false positives, which means that a legitimate 
file might be identified as a virus.
Anatomy of the Smart Vaccine
If Stuxnet, Flame, Duqu, and Aurora are the most destructive cyber missiles for any 
country’s infrastructures, then the Smart Vaccine is David who beat Goliath. We can 
also claim that the Smart Vaccine is the holy grail of Digital Immunity. The secret 
is that the Smart Vaccine is designed with a quantum leap into a far more superior 
technology than malware technologies. I believe the future generations of the Smart 
Vaccine will be even smarter and will be programmed with the formidable reasoning 
repertoire of a chess grandmaster.
A Word on Artificial Intelligence
Before describing the different components of the Smart Vaccine, let us review some 
thoughts about artificial intelligence (AI) to accelerate the understanding of the reader.
Our intention was to build an intelligent cyborg (short for cybernetic organism) 
program it with indestructible bionic power, pretty much like the terminator in 
the movie Terminator 2. We have injected so much intelligence and cognitive skills 
into its structure, including the ability to defend itself, and interactively reason and 
decide to take the optimum solution. The Smart Vaccine (SV) is like the robo-cop of 
the Smart City Grid, roaming around looking for cyber villains. The Smart Vaccine 
is designed to reason and solve difficult situations and to manage its resources to 

213
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
nullify attacks, but most importantly, the Smart Vaccine amplifies its commanding 
knowledge from the experience of previous battles. Its additive experience makes the 
Smart Vaccine computationally intelligent to resolve complex battle situations. Its 
autonomic strength makes the Smart Vaccine persistent and self-protecting against 
surprise attacks. If you have not seen the movie Terminator 2, then go and see it, it 
will remind you of the Smart Vaccine (Figure 8.4).
Now let’s raise the hood and take a look at the engine of the Smart Vaccine:
	
1.	The Central Coordination Center (CCC): In the object programming world, 
objects communicate with one another, exchange information, and can couple 
with one another, start a service, and terminate it. It is a dynamic world by 
itself. This is what happens inside CEWPS™. CCC serves as the center of 
the constellation. It is the control tower of CEWPS, which is equipped with 
information dashboards collecting real-time data from the smart grid and all 
the systems attached to it. The main responsibility of CCC, as an information 
hub, is to make sure that the smart grid is secure. When CCC gets alert mes-
sages from the Early Warning Center about an attack, it will broadcast the 
alert to all the systems on the city grid and dispatch an emergency response 
request to the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC).
	
2.	Performatives: A collection of instructions to make sure the kernel execute them 
in a predefined order. These instructions are usually persistent (survive under 
any circumstance), serialized, and marshaled from one state into another.
Remotely monitored
predefined instruction,
marshaling orders.
Performatives
Paramedics
Actuator
(kernel)
Reasoner
Navigator
Communicator
Deletes potential errors and
initiates correcting actions
to prevent mission failure.
The Central Coordination
Center is 
monitoring the vaccination 
mission.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The CCC remote
dashboard follows the
mission. CCC could
override the mission.
The navigation instrument
knows where to go on the
smart grid.
The kernel is the pilot that
manages the vaccination
mission. It is in contact with the
CCC dashboard
Extensive reasoning during the
mission and rule matching.
Figure 8.4  The Smart Vaccine is more than the sum of its parts—It is a live robot programmed with artificial intel-
ligence, and equipped with an autonomic brain, vaccination management, self-healing, and even self-resurrecting skills. 
An avid learner from previous viral attacks.

214
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
3.	Paramedics: This is a very vital component in the design of the Smart Vaccine. 
Each agent carries its own paramedic in case it gets clobbered by the attack-
ing virus. Rules of self-healing are carefully defined and embedded in the 
paramedic component. Each Smart Vaccine agent will learn quickly from its 
own mistakes, and these incidents will be stored in the SV Knowledge Base 
to train other SV agents. This is one of the crucial characteristics of being an 
autonomic engine.
	
4.	The Communicator: It is another autonomic with two vital tasks: First, it 
allows the Smart Vaccine Commander to communicate with the Central 
Coordination Center (CCC) to get directives and pass on progress report on 
the status of attacks on the City’s Smart Grid and the outcome of the vaccina-
tion service. Second, it helps the SV Commander conduct the battle with its 
SV army and communicate with the SV vaccinators and the SV Paramedics.
	
5.	The Actuator (Kernel): It helps pass the commands of the battle to the rest of 
the Army. It checks the outcome of the vaccination services and dispatches 
progress data to CCC.
	
6.	The Reasoner: It has an important role to advise the SV Commander with its 
probabilistic reasoning on the success of the vaccination mission and outcome 
of the battle.
	
7.	The Navigator: The logistics of vaccinating several critical systems requires 
good navigation. Locating the right critical systems on the complex grid is 
challenging and requires real-time response. A good navigator is like the 
driver of a caring car, minimizing the risk when the situation gets messy.
Like any response mission, time and location to reach the compromised system are 
critical. The SV Commander gets all the attack information before it initiates its vac-
cination mission. The Commander also checks the Attack and the Vaccine Knowledge 
Bases for additional reference data.
The Smart Vaccine in the Battlefield
Figure 8.5 is the 3D panoramic view of how CEWPS is designed to defend the city’s 
smart grid (CSG). The Central Coordination Center (CCC) is the control tower 
where the total operations of CEWPS are displayed on dashboards in real time mode.
CEWPS has control over three major grids:
	
1.	The Top Grid: It is where the Central Coordination Center (CCC) is located, 
with the early warning predictor and malware collector. This grid has all the 
intelligence to predict an attack, capture the attack, and get to know its inter-
nals, and save it in the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB). The Attack Reasoning 
Engine (ARE) calculates the probability of causation and other discovery 
data about the origin of the attack. CCC gives orders to the Smart Vaccine 
Commander.

215
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
	
2.	The Middle Grid: It is the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) where the Smart 
Vaccine Commander (SVC) receives the early warning alert and mobilizes 
an army of Smart Vaccine agents (warriors) for the incoming battle. The 
Smart Vaccine Commander gets instructions from CCC and instantiates 
the vaccination process also called Vaccination-as-a-Service. The com-
mander fires two service requests. The first request is to vaccinate prior 
to the attack all healthy critical systems of the grid. The second request is 
to repair the attacked system and quarantine the attack and send it to the 
Attack Knowledge Base.
	
3.	The Bottom Grid: It is the city’s smart grid (CSG) where all the infrastructure 
critical systems reside on. Each critical system will be immunized with the 
proper vaccine. The CCC gets fresh information from the battle activities. 
The attack episode is recorded in the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB) to help 
the Smart Vaccine to outsmart all the incoming attacks in future.
The Digital Immuny Battlefield
The similarity between a computer attack and a biological viral attack are amazingly 
close. Like infectious agents (pathogens), digital attacks are open-ended and are 
becoming smarter and more vicious. We will describe the power grid attack later on, 
but for now, let’s explain a sample attack step by step. (Figure 8.6) shows in details the 
Incoming
attacks
Attacks
Attacks
Early Warning Predictor/Malware Collector Grid Layer
Infrastructure Critical Systems Grid Layer
Smart Vaccine Defense Grid Layer
Early warning
signal
Nullified
attack
Preattack
inoculation
Preattack
inoculation
Episode
KB
Vaccine
KB
Attack
KB
Central
Coordination
Center
Attack prediction
Reasoning Engine
Attacks
Early warning
signal
Figure 8.5  The three layers of CEWPS showing (the top layer) how the early warning attack alerts trickle down to the 
Smart Vaccine (the center layer) with the vaccination response to the critical systems (the bottom layer).

216
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
magnificent fight between the Smart Vaccine and the attacking virus. Let’s go over 
each step:
	
1.	The attacking virus is activated after it used a backdoor as a dormant worm. 
Instantly, the early warning system informed the Virus Knowledge Base about 
its behavior and it needs to be quarantined. Again, it is possible that CEWPS 
honeypot system caught it, and it means there will not be an attack. We rely 
on Hadoop data analytics, which come very handy.
	
2.	The attacking foreign virus was captured, and it is time to know everything 
about it, and the Smart Vaccine Commander was informed.
	
3.	The attacking foreign virus was quarantined ready for formal forensics to 
know its attack vector and its signature.
	
4.	The Smart Vaccine inquired from CCC to reverse engineer in order to know 
what was going to be damaged. The first line of defense (the Smart Vaccine 
intelligence) was sent for more information about the attack, in case there are 
other copies of the virus. Mutation could be possible.
	
5.	The Smart Vaccine Commander ordered to kill the attacking virus. Like in 
the human body, the B cells dismember the virus and retain the part as a 
memory taken for the next similar attack. The attack vector and payload will 
be documented and packaged ready to send to the Attack Knowledge Base. 
By now, the Smart Vaccine knows the strategy of the attack and its impact.
Virus pattern
recognition
receptors
Virus
pattern
recognition
Attack
predicted
by 1st line
defense
Pearl BN
reasoner
Trojan enters
system
Killer agents
kill virus
Store memory
code in KB
Make the right
vaccine
Quarantine
infected code
Build memory
code
Memorize episode
Inoculate grid
systems
The Smart
Vaccine
Issue alert to
grid systems
Early Warning Alerts
B & T Modules
Quarantine
virus
Reverse
engineer virus
Attacking
virus
activated
Virus
Knowledge
Base
1
3
5
5
13
14
12
Semantic Pattern Lib
9
8
7
11
10
6
2
4
Memory
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Virus
recognized
Dispatch code
to 1st line
defense
Figure 8.6  The amazing similarity between the Human Immunity and Digital Immunity. CEWPS is the replication system 
in the digital world. The Smart Vaccine which is like the B cells uses the same approach used in human immunity: defense 
by offense.

217
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
	
6.	The Smart Vaccine Commander issued an alert to the army of vaccinators to 
inoculate all critical systems with the created vaccine, just in case the worm 
might spread to the other systems.
	
7.	The Smart Vaccine Commander issues an alert to all the administrators of 
the critical system. CEWPS is an extremely intelligent and cognitive system 
with several autonomous subsystems as specific service providers. During the 
attack, the Smart Vaccine Commander orders vaccination service instances 
and each service instance has a destination, start, and finish.
	
8.	The inoculation services are taking place on the grid. Vaccine paramedics are 
also available to fix any damage caused by the attack.
	
9.	Once the anatomy of the virus has been known and the attack vector code 
has been reverse engineered, it will be packaged and ready to be stored in the 
Vaccine Knowledge Base.
	 10.	The proper vaccine code has already been coded and been ready for vaccina-
tion by the Smart Vaccine.
	 11.	The Attack Knowledge Base is the repository that stores all the attack vectors 
as documentation and reference for future attacks.
	 12.	The Vaccine Knowledge Base is the repository that stores all the prepared vac-
cines for the attack.
	 13.	As we can see, a viral attack is a complex operation and needs to be matched 
to a very intelligent commanding agent with lots of hands-on experience. This 
is why we call it the Smart Vaccine. The AVT is different from the autonomic 
intelligence of the Smart Vaccine. While viral attacks are becoming intel-
ligent and more potent, only the Smart Vaccine with his highly scalar intel-
ligence will take down the virus and nullify the attack.
	 14.	The Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB) stores the virus signature, structure and 
its ontology model for future battles.
The Appeal of Cyberterrorism
Cyberterrorism is an attractive alternative for modern terrorism for the following:
•	 First, it is more straightforward and easier than traditional terrorist meth-
ods. The young generation is highly hands-on in computer hacking learned 
in school and social media. They do not even need to learn using arms. They 
can build cyber missiles and launch then through a telephone line, a cable, or 
a wireless connection.
•	 Second, cyberterrorism could be stealth and committed from anywhere in the 
world as long as there is the Internet. They learned how to circumvent firewall, 
DMZ, and other intrusion tools.
•	 Third, cyberterrorists are aiming now at the critical infrastructures in large 
metropolitan cities, which are still vulnerable with high risk of attacks.

218
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
•	 Fourth, there are over 20 organized cybercrime companies that provide crime-
as-a-service to wealthy and influential terrorists. There are over 150 schools 
that offer an advance certificate in cyberterrorism.
•	 Fifth, the well-organized terrorists groups such as ISIS are recruiting young 
people from the United States and Europe to form their electronic army. They 
are luring the young with money and status.
Here is the list of the most notorious and destructive cyberattack types blessed by 
cyberterrorists:
Terrorism Levels
Terrorism Level 1: Information Theft—Cybercriminals are professional thieves. No, 
they do not snatch the purse of an old lady in the mall. They are smarter than 
that. Digitally, they tiptoe into the data banks of large corporations and, in par-
ticular, the government and grab copies of confidential records, money certifi-
cates, secret documents, and even classified military documents on ­foreign plots.
Terrorism Level 2: Espionage—It is considered an honest act for spies. The ends 
justify the means. Technology spies are back stabbers and cat burglars. An 
article from INFOSEC Institute describes in detailed granularity that “Cyber 
espionage is the greatest transfer of wealth in history…. The Chinese govern-
ment is considered the biggest aggressor in cyber-espionage, while US net-
works are the privileged targets of cyberattacks that hit every sector, from 
media to military.” We can write an encyclopedia on this subject.
Terrorism Level 3: Crime Service Provider—Equally alarming is the prospect of 
terrorists themselves designing computer software for government agencies. 
Remarkably, as Denning describes in “Is Cyber Terror Next?” at least one 
instance of such a situation is known to have occurred.
Terrorism Level 4: Organized Crime—This is the Mafia revisited. The Russian 
Business Network (RBN) and the Chinese Triads are very active in orches-
trating cyberattacks in the United States and Europe. Zeus Trojan is a mal-
ware designed as an open project that can be customized with new features to 
meet customer demands. Zeus Trojan is an agent able to steal banking infor-
mation by logging keystrokes and form grabbing; it is spread mainly through 
phishing and drive-by downloads schemes.
	
	
CEWPS uses the famous ZeuS Tracker, which is a crimeware kit that steals 
credentials private data from online services like social networks, online bank-
ing accounts, ftp accounts, e-mail accounts, phishing tricks. It also tracks ZeuS 
Command & Control (C&C) host servers, which control a huge network of 
remote botnets and malicious hosts that store files associated configuration 
files, binaries and drop zones. CEWPS provides special alerts to the admin-
istrators of the critical systems on the smart grid with ZeuS Tracker to block 
the spying from well-known ZeuS hosts and any potential infections on their 

219
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
internal networks. CEWPS main Central Coordination Center dashboard 
uses ZeuS Tracker (and other tracking tools) to alert smart grid subscrib-
ers. Interestingly enough, Web admins can purchase access to ZeuS for $700 
(source: RSA Security 4/21/2008) or purchase the exe builder for $4000. The 
ZeuS Tracker shows the topology of botnets and the millions of compromised 
computers (around 3.6 million in the United States). As of October 28, 2009, 
over 1.5 million phishing, messages carrying Zeus Trojan were sent through 
Facebook. The website https://zeustracker.abuse.ch/ provides updated statistics 
on the place of the Command & Control servers of the botnet network.
Terrorism Level 5: Nation-State Cyber Digital Attacks—These attacks are just as 
bad as level 5, except the targets are data centers and control houses that man-
age the physical infrastructures. If these critical systems are compromised and 
fail, then backup systems have to be activated until the primary systems are 
fully operational. CEWPS smart grid is the effective savior.
Terrorism Level 6: Nation-State Cyber-Enabled Infrastructure Attacks—They are 
true curses from hell. Wealthy nations sponsor such attacks with the help of 
stealth backdoor Trojans such as Stuxnet, Flame, and Duqu. These attacks are 
hard to trace their exact origin. Also they sneak inside in stealth mode and 
find the right time to get out of the closet. And when they are discovered, they 
already dumped their payload and went back into the closet.
These cyber missiles are aimed at physical infrastructures with high vulnerability. For 
example, mass transit systems, electrical power network, including generation plants, 
electrical grid, substations, and local distribution are very attractive target. CEWPS/
SV has enough intelligence to immobilize backdoor Trojans and reverse engineer 
them. We will provide scenarios of how the Smart Vaccine catches them before they 
unleash their payloads (Scenario-Power Grid later).
The Most Challenging Attacks for the Smart Vaccine
Since CEWPS is a replication of the human immune system (HIS), its success comes 
not only from its reasoning clout and the intelligence of its smart vaccine (SV), also its 
autonomic and cognitive smart grid. The grid covers the whole city and is connected 
pathologically (closely couples) to the City’s mart Grid (CSG) and all the critical 
systems. We can compare the grid to neural network where Smart Vaccine messages 
propagate bidirectionally to reach the compromised system. Simplistically, we can say 
the grid is a mesh of smart information buses with busy brokers routing and marshal-
ing SV massages. Then we have the knowledge engines that work overtime to pro-
vide heuristic evaluations and prediction scenarios to CEWPS Central Coordination 
Center (CCC). It should be known that the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) is tightly 
coupled with the City’s Smart Grid (CSG). Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
was implemented to facilitate the management of the messages. This is the most expe-
dient way to immunize and guard the critical system.

220
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
It is remarkable to know that the nervous system works hand in hand with the 
immune system. Evidence is clear that the immune system and the nervous system are 
linked in several ways. For example, the hormones and other chemicals that convey 
messages among nerve cells also speak to cells of the immune system. Indeed, some 
immune cells are able to manufacture typical nerve cell products and use T cells to 
help transmit information to the nervous system. Wow… that is what we replicated 
with CEWPS/Smart Vaccine to protect the city’s smart grid.
Analysis of Cyberterrorism
One of the advanced features of the Smart Vaccine is its ability to learn from its 
vaccination services. Cybercrime is actually the cross section between the creative 
mind and technology, but unfortunately, it has expanded into cyberterrorism driven 
by religious jihadism and political radicalism. As Jeremy Hammond described in the 
Guardian “Their blatant hypocrisy, threat inflation and militaristic rhetoric must be 
challenged if we are to have a free and equal internet.” We all know that no one owns 
cyberspace and cyberterrorists know it very well. Cyberspace does not have stop signs, 
red lights, lanes or tolls, or even cops. Cybertechnology has given us the good, the 
bad and ugly produced wonderful. We need to holistically address the ugly side of 
cyberspace.
We need a new holistic “defense-by-offence” approach to give us the upper hand in 
cyberwarfare. To win the battle, we need to know the enemy and the time of attack.
Cyberterrorism is an indispensable lethal weapon in political or religious conflicts. 
Cyberterrorism is the convergence of cyberspace and terrorism. Cyber vengeance (as 
I coin it) seems very rewarding to any terrorist group who could launch massive attack 
and knock down cyber defenses of the Smart City and cause substantial devastation 
or ransack financial data from any financial institution. The continuum of evil includes 
crippling control communications of the city and creating public hysteria. They could 
launch botnet-driven distributed-denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks to blind security 
forces at a border crossing point as a means of facilitating an infiltration operation, or 
a cyberattack in one area of a country could act as a diversion, while a plain terrorist 
attack can occur elsewhere. They could conduct Siemens Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition SCADA attacks on specific sites and the system is showing normal 
operation. A good example would be to open the valves at a chemical plant near a 
population center, creating a Bhopal-like event. The sophistication of malware got to 
the point terrorists could commandeer a civilian airplane. If we’re going to build smart 
cities, we’d better have good cyber fences to block any poisonous attack vectors.
Figure 8.7 is an interesting aerial view of a modern smart city. The city is fenced 
with two intelligent superimposed grids. The first one is the city’s smart grid (CSG), 
and the second one is the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG). Both grids shown as dotted 
lines are linked to all infrastructure critical systems (not to confuse the dotted lines 
with cloud bubbles).

221
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
The Miraculous Fight of the Smart Vaccine
The Attack on the Power Grid
Figure 8.8 is the topology of a large metropolitan smart city. Cyberattacks are 
actually premeditated and well planned. Random attacks simply do not exist. All 
attack vectors are carefully calculated and directed at a target. Cyberattacks on 
smart cities are a reality that should not be ignored. Power grids have become “the 
happy hour” of cyberterror, simply because the power grid is the most critical and 
vulnerable infrastructure in any smart metropolis. The Darth Vaders know that 
a cascaded blackout could paralyze the city and create an apocalyptic panic and 
disorder.
The city’s smart grid (CSG) is the nervous system of the Smart City (the outer 
perimeter in the diagram). The power grid are protected by the city’s smart grid 
(CSG), and of course, by the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) (the inner perimeter). The 
three SCADA systems balance the electricity load and collect data over the whole 
city.
The city purchased three Siemens SCADA top-of-the line control systems to manage 
the power grid. The three substations are interconnected to maintain load balancing.
Manufacturing
Government
CEWPS digital
immunity servers
Hospitals networks
Residential
Academia
Smart Vaccine grid
Social media
Smart city
storage
Smart city
servers
Smart grid
subscribers
Power grid
Business
Transportation
This is the city’s
smart grid
Figure 8.7  The City’s Smart Grid (CSG) ties all the critical systems together. The Smart Vaccine Grid (inside the City’s 
Smart Grid) is also tied to the critical systems through the City Smart Grid. The city’s servers preserve the key performance 
and contract data collected from the critical systems. The Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) guards and maintains the immunity of 
city’s critical systems. Vaccination-as-a-Service is one of the unique services that the city cannot ignore.

222
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The three SCADA systems have their own secure private network that connects 
them with their remote terminal units (RTU) located in the substations. CEWPS 
Central Coordination Center is also connected to the Smart Vaccine Grid and 
the City’s Smart Grid. If the Smart City decides to have a Smart Cloud, then 
SCADA systems will be securely connected to the cloud (which will be discussed 
in Chapter 9).
The attack aims at the major metropolitan city of 5 million people. The city is ramp-
ing up its technologies to become a smart city. There is one major power-­generating 
plant (not included in the diagram) that feeds power to the city through five distribu-
tion substations. Three substations are shown in the diagram shown in Figure 8.8 as 
follows: Substation-1 is the primary power substations that receive two high-voltage 
feeders (three-phase 500 KV). Substation-2 is located in the downtown area, which 
offers power to thousands of businesses, plus two hospitals. Substation-3 is located in 
the southside residential area of the city and serves 1500 homes plus 2 elementary, 1 
intermediate, and 1 high school.
The vulnerability arises from the fact that if the power substation goes down, it will 
affect substations 2 and 3 and eventually trigger a cascaded blackout. The diagnostics 
and repair will take at least 3 days. This will impact the credibility of the Smart City 
government, loss of revenues, loss of life, and the city life turns into havoc. The black-
out incident will go viral.
SCADA 2
Substation 2
Substation 3
Substation 1
Power Transformers
Smart Vaccine Grid
City’s Smart Grid
Smart City Boundaries
High-Voltage
Feeders
Smart Grid
Control
Center
CEWPS/Smart
Vaccine Coordination
Center
SCADA 3
VaaS
Smart City
Storage
Smart City
Servers
VaaS
VaaS
SCADA 1
Figure 8.8  The topological view of the smart city showing the City Smart Grid (outside dotted circle) which watches the 
power grid, while SCADA and the Smart Vaccine Grid (inside circle) are tightly coupled to protect the three critical substation 
systems. If the Smart City decides to have a Smart Cloud, then the SCADA systems will be securely connected to the cloud.

223
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
The Six Phases of the Attack
The terrorists were trained and paid by adversary government and were instructed 
to create a blackout in the Smart City. The selected attack time would be before a 
major holiday where roadways, bridges, and airports are into an almost a gridlock. 
The attack had six phases that were carefully planned and rehearsed to perfection, 
before the green light to launch was given for the three attacks. Figure 8.9 shows the 
systematic sequence of the attack plan. They spent more time planning because they 
are taking a big risk. The plan has to be executed with 100% success, otherwise there 
will not be a blackout. They do not know that the Smart Vaccine Grid is the jugger-
naut that will quash the attack.
The Purpose of the SCADA System
This is a short explanation of the Siemens Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) System, which is the de facto system for process visualization and data col-
lection in the control engineering industry. SCADA is designed with three tiers: First, 
the master control system (MCS) is on the top of the hierarchy; second, the master 
communication server is the intermediary layer; and third, the physical process is the 
third layer, which has the field data collection devices and programmable logic control-
lers (PLC). SCADA’s master control system is Windows based, which is considered 
first vulnerability. The hardware is acquired from HP, Sun Microsystems, and from 
Fujitsu. Siemens main integrated software is SIMATIC, which is compliant with ISO 
9000, IEEE, and NIST standards. SCADA is an open system that can run JAVA, 
C++, PERL, and PHP applications. SIMATIC uses Microsoft SQL server (second 
vulnerability) for real-time data logging, ad hoc reporting, and business intelligence. 
SCADA programmable logic controller (PLC) runs on proprietary software called 
SIMATIC WinCC/Step 7.
Preattack phase
Tattack
Plan
StageØ1
StageØ2
StageØ3
StageØ4
StageØ5
StageØ6
Rehearse
Check site
Set the
zero hour
Check results
Postattack
Attack
Figure 8.9  There are six stages to a cyberattack. The attack is just as good as its plan. One successful attack 
will breed more wicked terror with more intelligent and highly technological missiles, to attack brittle or even life-­
threatening systems without notice and mistakes. Most attacks follow the same pattern.

224
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
As we said earlier, the purpose of the attack is twofold: First, to drill a hole in the 
power grid that connects all the five substations then get to substation 1 and raise the 
temperature of the oil circuit breakers (OCBs) beyond the specified threshold, which 
will cause an explosion that will put the OCBs out of commission. Second, damage 
the PLC that controls the oil circuit breakers, which will eventually trip and bring the 
power station to a halt.
Oil circuit breakers rely upon vaporization of some of the oil to blast a jet of oil along 
the path of the arc. The vapor released by the arcing consists of hydrogen gas. Arc flash 
temperatures can reach or exceed 35,000°F (19,400°C) at the arc terminals. The mas-
sive energy released in the fault rapidly vaporizes the metal conductors involved, blast-
ing molten metal and expanding plasma outward with extraordinary force.
Switchgears are the control boxes that control the oil circuit breakers (located outside 
the yard of the substation). A switchgear is physically connected to a remote terminal unit 
(RTU), which is on the SCADA network. The switchgear is controlled and monitored 
by the substation control terminal. Operators watch the operation through the substa-
tion control terminal. The substation control terminal is connected to SCADA via radio, 
microwave, and secure Virtual Private Network (VPN).
The team wants to replicate Stuxnet attack (corrupted the power plant in Iran), which 
is designed to programmatically alter programmable logic controllers (PLCs) used in 
those facilities. In an industrial control system environment, the PLCs automate indus-
trial type tasks such as regulating flow rate to maintain pressure and temperature controls.
The Terrorist Team
Any terrorism group that attempts to damage a metropolitan substation must satisfy 
four success factors: First, knowledge in power generation and distribution, substation 
engineering and operations. The second factor is hands-on in networking and com-
munications. Third, extensive knowledge in hacking and malware programming. The 
fourth, extensive system administration of SCADA system.
The suggested terrorist group is made of six people covering the whole spectrum 
of cyberterrorism: two system engineers with experience in Siemens SCADA power 
and distribution system; two computer specialists with experience on hardware and 
software; and two specialists in hacking with experience in DDoS, SQL injection, 
SCADA SIMATIC WinCC Step-7 Zero-Day hacking.
The Smart City Attack
The group is solicited by a well-known Crime Service Provider from Eastern Europe 
to create a blackout in the Smart City. From a unknown remote server connected 
to the city, the terrorists would slip a backdoor Trojan into SCADA systems, so the 
group could roam around the systems and secretly distort the collected data from the 
remote terminal units (RTU) that monitor the substation transformers.

225
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
The first thing the terrorist group had to do is to develop a blueprint for the awe-
some attack, a back-up plan, and an exit plan.
The group got a small-scale SCADA for practice and configured it to connect with 
the ones in the city. The remote SCADA server of the terrorist group was invisibly 
connected to the city SCADA network as well as to the outside Internet.
The terrorist group have already programmed a malicious two backdoor Trojans. 
They ran a port scan first and selected on open port for Backdoor Trojan-1 to slip into 
SCADA-1. Backdoor Trojan-1 loads a keylogger and one rootkit to steal admin pass-
words. Backdoor Trojan-2 uploads a program to override the present configuration and 
softly change the operational parameters that control the temperature in the trans-
formers and oil-circuit breakers, controlled by SCADA-1 RTU.
The group knows from a partner group about the two security flaws that are still 
perking in Windows. Two Zero-Day Trojans are set to do the devilish task. A war dialer 
(telephone hacker) was also available to get entry access through dial-up communication.
The critical part of the mission is to remain stealth as long as possible while remov-
ing any evidence behind them. Backdoors were to carefully slip into the substation 
master computer to gain administrative access and change disk access permissions.
Here Is What the Smart Vaccine Did
Let’s not forget that the Smart Vaccine will demonstrate how artificial intelligence 
and autonomic computing work together. The Smart Vaccine is the culmination of the 
merger of our biological thinking and computing technology, resulting into a fully cog-
nitive system fueled by computational intelligence. The Smart Vaccine grid is like a 
complex arteries with a mesh of autonomic nodes that control the exchange of (request/
VaaS) messages between the CEWPS Central Coordination Center and the Smart 
Vaccine commander. Figure 8.10 is a cross section of a wide-band artery of the Smart 
Vaccine Grid (SVG), which carries all the intelligent communication commands with 
the SCADAs and the three substations.
As already shown in Figure 8.5, the top grid is the Early Warning Predictor and 
CCC. The middle grid is the Smart Vaccine Defense grid (SVG) that includes the Smart 
Vaccine army and the knowledge engines. The bottom grid is the City’s Smart Grid of 
the Smart City where all the other critical systems are connected to.
In reality, the city’s smart grid is the backbone information highway network 
of the city. The smart vaccine grid (SVG) is the immunity grid (call it the mobile 
Vaccination network) of the city. All grids are connected together, like in the human 
body all pipelines work together. SCADA systems collect data from the critical sys-
tems. Let’s not forget that all city’s critical systems, including SCADA systems, have 
their own antivirus software. The Smart Vaccine will immunize all the systems and 
leave the antivirus neutral shift.
In the Human Immune System, the vaccine imitates an infection by injecting 
a watered-down version of the pathogen (attacking disease), which will trigger the 

226
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
mobilization of the B cells armies and their arsenal of antibodies to fight the attacking 
microbe. Having this little bit of the germ inside the body will create a a mock attack 
for the B cells. So, vaccination makes the body more immune with better defense 
system against germs. The B cells will remember the mock drill and be ready for the 
real attack.
Upper communications to manage the Smart City
Smart metering, monitoring, reporting
Dispatch alert
Vaccine
servers
The Smart Vaccine grid highway
Infrastructure
critical system
Schedule vaccine
Routing message
Memory document
Confirm vaccination
Invoke service
Authenticate
Dispatch vaccine
Figure 8.10  The canonical rule states: Without a Smart Grid, there is no smart city. The Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) is 
the immune and nervous system of the smart city. The SVG is tightly coupled with the Smart City Grid. The ultrafast wide 
bandwidth carries attack alert messages from the critical systems directly to the SVG. The bottom pipeline is used by the 
Smart Vaccine team to save the attacked system. You can see that a Smart Grid is like an information bus where the Smart 
Vaccine takes the role of a dynamic cognitive broker.
Terrorists execution plan
Predictive response before the attack
Scenario-1
Smart Vaccine scenario-2
Plan
Predict
Analyze and
recognize
Something
abnormal is
looming
Honeypots
are working
Substation operators
reset the RTUs
Store attack episode
Attack
knowledge
engine
Similar fake
attacks have been
sent to power grid
Alarm SCADA and 
mobilize VS for fight
Learn how attack
worked, memorize
and document
Attack
failure
Rehearse
Check site
Set the
zero hour
Attack
Check
results
Figure 8.11  Comparison of Scenario-1 and Scenario-2: the Early Warning Predictor acted like a RADAR. This is where 
the versatility of CEWPS...Then the defense by offense strategy executed by the Smart Vaccine before the attack.

227
CEWPS ANATOMY, THE SMART VACCINE
Figure 8.11 shows how CEWPS eradicates the attack. In scenario-1, the terrorist 
group will launch a surprise attack. The group drafted a blueprint of the attack. The 
group studied the plan and and each got an assignment indicating the time and the 
place. The group had all the tools to attack backdoor Trojan, password cracker, and 
the malignant code.
In Scenario-2, the CEWPS/SV system was implemented. The predictor 
works full time to give the Central Coordination Center reliable forecasts. The 
Reasoning Engine uses heuristic and Bayesian modeling techniques to generate 
optimal prediction models of future attacks. Since most attacks follow a similar 
pattern, CEWPS stays ahead of the attack. The regular vaccination keeps the sys-
tems immunized.
The Making of an Antidote with Honeypots
A honeypot farm is configured to detect intruders by mirroring a real production sys-
tem. It appears as an ordinary server doing work, but all the data and transactions are 
phony. Located inside and outside the firewall, the honeypot is used to learn about an 
intruder’s techniques as well as determine vulnerabilities in the real system.
CEWPS/SV for the Smart City is equipped with a distributed network of hon-
eypots to protect SCADA and substation computers. The trapped attack will be for-
warded to the CEWPS Reverse Engineering Center (REC) for autopsy and learn 
more about its code. CEWPS Reverse Engineering analyzes the attack vectors, viruses, 
Trojans, and backdoors and creates replica of the program logic and works backward 
to understand the impact of the program (the poison). Then the Reverse Engineering 
Center writes the antidote (the vaccine code) and gives it to the Vaccine Knowledge 
Base (VaKB) and to the vaccinators for immediate vaccination. This completes one 
mission of one vaccination.
The vaccine code (digital antidote) is actually a mock attack very similar to a real 
human one. The Smart Vaccine executes the mock attack and fights it as though it is 
the real one. The critical system will acquire adaptive immunity against this type of 
malware, and more importantly, the VaKB will save the mock attack file and remem-
ber how to fight it in the next real attack.
Additional Reading for Electrical Engineers
Learning more about the operation of the oil circuit breaker (OCB), this high-voltage 
gradient between the contacts ionized the oil and consequently initiates arcing between 
the contacts. This arc will produce a large amount of heat in surrounding oil and vapor-
izes the oil and decomposes the oil in mostly hydrogen and a small amount of methane, 
ethylene, and acetylene. The hydrogen gas cannot remain in molecular form, and it is 
broken into its atomic form releasing lot of heat. The arc temperature may reach up 
to 5000 K. Due to this high temperature, the gas is liberated, surrounds the arc very 

228
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
rapidly, and forms an excessively fast-growing gas bubble around the arc. It is found 
that the mixture of gases occupies a volume of about one thousand times that of the oil 
decomposed. From this figure, we can assume how fast the gas bubble around the arc 
will grow in size. If this growing gas bubble around the arc is compressed by any means, 
then the rate of deionization process of ionized gaseous media in between the contacts 
will accelerate, which rapidly increase the dielectric strength between the contacts, and 
consequently, the arc will be quenched at zero crossing of the current cycle. This is the 
basic operation of an oil circuit breaker. In addition to the cooling effect of hydrogen 
gas, ­surrounding the arc path also helps the quick arc quenching in oil circuit breaker.
Websites
http://resources.infosecinstitute.com/cyber-espionage-the-greatest-transfer-of-wealth-
in-history/.
http://www.cleanenergyresourceteams.org/glossary.
http://www.siemens.com/.
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/04/government-cyberterrorism-­
concerns-pretext-their-own-hacking.
http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/sr119.pdf.
www.thesmartvaccine.com.
http:/ /www.iso.org/iso/smart_cities_report-jtc1.pdf; Smart Cities Preliminary Report 2014.
References
Joseph Weiss; Protecting Industrial Control Systems From Electronic Threats; Momentum 
Press 2010; ISBN-10 1-60650-197-6.
Frank J. Cilluffo & Richard Knop, The Journal of International Security Affairs -winter 2012; 
Getting Serious About Cyberwarfare.
Edward G. Amoroso; Cyber Attacks -Protecting National Infrastructure; Butterworth-
Heinemann 2013; ISBN:978-0-12-391855.

229
9
The Smart Cloud Is Here: 
Vaccination as a Service
Introduction of Digital Immunity
In this chapter, we are elevating Digital Immunity to the cloud. The CEWPS/
Smart Vaccine will bring a new dimension in cloud computing: A unique service 
that will bring a new paradigm in cybersecurity that we call Vaccination as a Service 
(VaaS).
Gartner’s 2014 Hype Cycle Special Report provides strategists and planners with an 
assessment of the maturity, business benefit, and future direction of more than 2000 
technologies, grouped into 119 areas. We took a few excerpts from this magnificent 
report for knowledge enlightenment.
Here is what the report said about the Hype Cycle and Emerging Technologies:
Since the Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies is purposely focused on more emerging 
technologies, it mostly supports the last three of these stages: digital marketing, digital 
business, and autonomous.
The following technologies on the Hype Cycle represent the Digital Marketing stage:
Software-Defined Anything; Volumetric and Holographic Displays; Neurobusiness; Data Science; 
Prescriptive Analytics; Complex Event Processing; Big Data; In-Memory DBMS; Content 
Analytics; Hybrid Cloud Computing; Gamification; Augmented Reality; Cloud Computing; 
NFC; Virtual Reality; Gesture Control; In-Memory Analytics;
It is ironic that research companies like Forrester and Gartner in their yearly pre-
dictions could not foresee the concept of Digital Immunity (DI) as the viable para-
digm shift in cyber secularity for the next decade. We challenge Gartner that Digital 
Immunity will prevail and it will chart a different course from the hype cycle of 2015. 
We believe that Smart Cities and Cloud Computing Providers will eventually adopt 
it. Figure 9.1 shows the trajectory of the Smart Vaccine as it matures and acquires 
experience for the next five years.
The focus in this chapter is twofold. First, it is necessary to explain the anatomy of 
Vaccination as a Service (VaaS) as one of the services of the cloud. A clear understand-
ing of the anatomy of the cloud would set the right tempo for the second item. Second, 
it is necessary to show how the Smart Vaccine immunizes the critical infrastructures 
of the Smart City with VaaS.

230
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Cloud 101 Primer
In 2006, Amazon’s chief Jeff Bezos took the stage at MIT’s Emerging Technologies 
conference to talk about two cloud computing products the company had announced 
and the ambitions the company had for them. Three years earlier, one of these 
products—EC2—was only an idea. EC2 stands for Elastic Compute Cloud and was 
developed first and foremost for Amazon’s internal infrastructure. It started out as an 
idea in the head of Chris Pinkham, who worked as an engineer in charge of Amazon’s 
global infrastructure in the early 2000s. Since its official launch in 2006, EC2’s value 
has grown and it has become the cornerstone of Amazon’s ecosystem of cloud services.
On March 1, 2011, IBM announced the IBM smart cloud framework to support 
Smarter Planet. Among the various components of the Smarter Computing founda-
tion, cloud computing is a critical piece. On June 7, 2012, Oracle announced the Oracle 
Cloud. While aspects of the Oracle Cloud are still in development, this cloud offering 
is posed to be the first to provide users with access to an integrated set of IT solutions, 
including the applications (SaaS), platform (PaaS), and infrastructure (IaaS) layers.
The name cloud is very interesting. We have the terms like the Web, crawler, meta-
crawler, cyber everything, and smart everything from smart chip to smart city, and 
now we have the cloud! No wonder, everybody is jumping on the cloud bandwagon. 
It is like a flock of geese following the leader. Amazon’s chief, Jeff Bezos, has already 
started setting up the rules for cloud computing.
The cloud is just a metaphor for the Internet. We are used to represent the Internet 
as a puffy, white cumulonimbus cloud, accepting connections and doling out infor-
mation as it floats. The big story is not about cloud technology but how it transforms 
organizations. CEWPS is about protecting systems from malware attack. We believe 
cloud computing is a value-added that should be included in the technology of the 
Smart Vaccine.
2014
2016
The Smart
Vaccine 
cloud
model
Accepted by
the antivirus
industry
More maturity and experience
Plateau of productivity
The classic Gartner hype cycle
Power grid immunity
model accepted
Expectation and acceptance
Concept accepted
2018
2020
The Smart Vaccine acceptance trajectory
Figure 9.1  The Smart Vaccine is taking a more realistic course than Gartner’s hype cycle. It will bypass the inflated 
expectation hump. Its rapid acceptance will be overwhelming, even though it is considered a disruptive technology.

231
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
The cloud is simply a collection of distributed data centers that are tied as a secure 
meganetwork that holds thousands of interconnected servers for applications and data 
repositories. The cloud is often referenced by its glamorous name Cloud Ecosystem. It is 
much more than the sum of these components. It is a formidable elastic multifaceted 
infrastructure. It is the trend in future. The cloud promotes the theme “it’s better to rent 
than to purchase.” A basic analogy is opening a checking/saving account at your friendly 
bank. We would feel better because the bank will save our money better than a safe at 
home. But we have to abide by the rules and regulations of the bank. The same applies 
to cloud computing subscription. We have to accept the rules of the Cloud Service 
Providers (CSP) and accept our dependence on their services. Utility companies are 
another similar model to the cloud. We connect to the utility network and do not worry 
about the way power is generated and distributed to our house. As long as we pay for the 
service, we would accept the heavy dependence on the service and take it for granted.
Almost all companies are moving, slowly but surely, to the cloud and cutting 
down their IT expenses. Technology companies realized the importance of the cloud 
and decided to revise their business plans and invest in the cloud. Google invested 
$850 million in its data center infrastructure in the first quarter of 2011. Microsoft 
invested $500 million in Dublin-based data center. Apple invested $1 billion in 
North Carolina data center. All of the major technology-providing companies are all 
of a sudden committed to cloud computing. This is another new world that we have 
to pay attention to.
Three Technologies into One: Cloud Computing, 
Web Services, and Service-Oriented Architecture
There is a strong coexisting relationship between Web services, SOA, and cloud 
computing. Web services encapsulate cloud computing because cloud computing uses 
Web services for connectivity and messaging. It is also possible to use Web services 
as part of SOA for connection. Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) ushers a new 
chapter in building platform-agnostic systems. SOA is the true software engineer-
ing bible that should be used in every critical project. We will be covering the three 
technologies and illustrate how they work together relative to CEWPS and Smart 
Vaccine as shown in Figure 9.2.
First Technology: Cloud Computing
Amazon is the leader in cloud computing with its formidable platforms called 
Amazon Web Services (AWS), which make up the Amazon cloud since 2006. The 
most central and well known of these services are Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
(EC2) and Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3). Let us not confuse AWS with the 
Web services.

232
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has a comprehensive 
definition of cloud computing. We would like to share it with you.
“Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released 
with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.”
This cloud model is composed of five essential characteristics, three service models, 
and four deployment models.
Essential Characteristics
On-Demand Self-Service: A consumer can unilaterally provide computing capa-
bilities, such as server time and network storage, as needed automatically 
without requiring human interaction with each service provider.
Broad Network Access: Capabilities are available over the network and accessed 
through standard mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin or 
thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, tablets, laptops, and workstations).
Resource Pooling: The provider’s computing resources are pooled to serve mul-
tiple consumers using a multitenant model, with different physical and vir-
tual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned according to consumer 
demand. There is a sense of location independence in that the customer gen-
erally has no control or knowledge over the exact location of the provided 
resources but may be able to specify location at a higher level of abstraction 
(e.g., country, state, or data center). Examples of resources include storage, 
processing, memory, and network bandwidth.
Cloud computing services
The cloud
W3C standard Web services
Oracle SOA suite
SOA services
Amazon Web services
Google computer engine
Oracle fusion middleware
Figure 9.2  Cloud computing still does not appear in the Oxford English Dictionary, but like the Trinitarian formula, every-
one believes in it. It does not matter who started the word, it is on the tip of every tongue. But for one thing, cyberterrorists 
use the cloud as their crime incubator: the three technologies symbiotically work together but compete against each other!

233
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
Rapid Elasticity: Capabilities can be elastically provisioned and released, in some 
cases automatically, to scale rapidly upward and downward commensurate 
with demand. To the consumer, the capabilities available for provisioning often 
appear to be unlimited and can be appropriated in any quantity at any time.
Measured Service: Cloud systems automatically control and optimize resource use 
by leveraging a metering capability 1 at some level of abstraction appropriate 
to the type of service (e.g., storage, processing, bandwidth, and active user 
accounts). Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported, provid-
ing transparency for both the provider and consumer of the utilized service.
The dynamics to get into cloud computing is mind-bending. Take for example 
Amazon, which has now more than a million people using its cloud services. Amazon 
has 11 cloud regions across the world, with each region having multiple sets of data 
centers, and there are 28 total sets across the world. Each set has one or more data cen-
ters, with a typical facility containing 50,000–80,000 servers. A conservative estimate 
puts Amazon over 1.5 million servers globally. Gartner puts it at 2 million or more.
The Three Cloud Service Delivery Models, and the Fourth One Is Coming Soon
The three predominant cloud service delivery models are Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). Here is a 
short description of each model:
Software as a Service (SaaS): Required software, the operating system, and network 
are provided. Defined as service-on-demand, where a provider will license software 
tailored. In the SaaS model, cloud providers install and operate application software 
in the cloud, and cloud users access the software from cloud clients. Cloud users do 
not manage the cloud infrastructure and platform where the application runs. This 
eliminates the need to install and run the application on the cloud user’s own comput-
ers, which simplifies maintenance and support.
Examples of SaaS include Google Apps, Microsoft Office 365, Onlive, GT Nexus, 
Marketo, and TradeCard.
Platform as a Service (PaaS): The operating system and network are provided. In 
the PaaS model, cloud providers deliver a computing platform typically including 
operating system, programming language execution environment, database, and Web 
server. Application developers can develop and run their software solutions on a cloud 
platform without the cost and complexity of buying and managing the underlying 
hardware and software layers.
Examples of PaaS include AWS Elastic Beanstalk, Cloud Foundry, Heroku, Force.
com, EngineYard, Mendix, OpenShift, Google App Engine, Windows Azure Cloud 
Services, and OrangeScape.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Just the network is provided. In the most basic cloud 
service model, providers of IaaS offer computers physical or (more often) virtual machines 

234
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
and other resources. IaaS clouds often offer additional resources such as a virtual-machine 
disk image library, raw (block) and file-based storage, firewalls, load balancers, IP 
addresses, virtual local area networks (VLANs), and software bundles. IaaS cloud pro-
viders supply these resources on demand from their large pools installed in data centers.
Examples of IaaS providers include Amazon EC2, Azure Services Platform, 
Google Compute Engine, HP Cloud, Oracle Infrastructure as a Service, Rackspace 
Cloud, and ReadySpace Cloud Services.
Big Data as a Service: Google started this by offering connectivity between its cloud 
and Big Data to the customer. Google has realized that the Internet is polluted with 
garbage data that can be captured and reincarnated into a valuable source of Predictive 
Analytics. No one really knows the tonnage of Big Data, and no one tried diligently 
to measure exactly because it seems irrelevant.
VaaS (Vaccination as a Service): This is the new service on the block, offered by the 
cloud to companies that have critical operations managed by specialized SCADA 
systems. CEWPS would reside in the application layer of the cloud and would offer 
its vaccination services through the Smart Vaccine. VaaS will be running on the 
Smart Vaccine grid (SVG), or on the Smart Vaccine Cloud (SVC), which connects all 
city’s critical systems on the City’s Smart Grid (CSG) or City’s Smart Cloud (CSC). 
Computer systems would like to minimize the risk of being attacked by malicious 
cyberterrorist acts. We will cover VaaS, in more detail, later in this chapter.
The Five Types of Cloud Models
The morphology of the Cloud can be broken down into five distinct types.
Private cloud: This deployment mode is appropriate for the CEWPS. The cloud 
infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization com-
prising multiple consumers (e.g., business units). It may be owned, managed, 
and operated by the organization, a third party, or some combination of them, 
and it may exist on or off premises.
Community cloud: This deployment mode is provisioned for exclusive use by a spe-
cific community of consumers from organizations that have shared concerns 
(e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). 
It may be owned, managed, and operated by one or more of the organizations 
in the community, a third party, or some combination of them, and it may 
exist on or off premises.
Public cloud: This deployment mode is appropriate for the Smart City. The cloud 
infrastructure is provisioned for open use by the general public. It may be owned, 
managed, and operated by a business, academic, or government organization, 
or some combination of them. It exists on the premises of the cloud provider.
Hybrid cloud: This deployment mode is a composition of two or more distinct 
cloud infrastructures (private, community, or public) that remain unique 

235
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
entities but are bound together by standardized or proprietary technology that 
enables data and application portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing 
between clouds).
Cloud Storage: This deployment mode is offered by Cloud Service Providers 
(CSP). Cloud storage means “the storage of data online in the cloud,” wherein 
a company’s data are stored in and accessible from multiple distributed and 
connected resources that comprise a cloud. Cloud storage can provide the 
benefits of greater accessibility and reliability, rapid deployment, for data 
backup, archival and disaster recovery purposes, and lower overall storage 
costs as a result of not having to purchase, manage, and maintain expensive 
hardware. However, cloud storage does have the potential for security and 
compliance concerns.
How Does the Digital Vaccination Work as a Service?
Any business that has critical computer systems in a smart city could get the ultimate 
digitial immunity by subscribing to the Smart Vaccine (VaaS) services. The prospec-
tive cloud user should connect first to the City Smart Grid (CSG), then to City Smart 
Cloud (CSC), and finally connect to the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) in this order. 
The customer vaccination subscription sequence is shown with circles in Figure 9.3.
	
1.	The customer subscribes directly to the cloud vaccination services; he also may 
do so through the Smart City smart cloud, if the customer is already on the 
city grid.
The Smart City’s Smart Grid
The Smart City’s Smart Cloud
1
2
3
4
VaaS Request
VaaS
VaaS Request
CEWPS
Servers
Smart Grid
Subscriber
Only
VaaS
The Smart Vaccine Grid
The City Smart Grid
connects the customer
systems. The Smart Vaccine
Grid offers vaccination
services to city customer
systems. Both grids are
tightly coupled.
Figure 9.3  For simple illustration purposes only, we separated all the components of the City Cloud. If the cloud cus-
tomer would like to subscribe to the vaccination services, he may do so through the smart city’s smart cloud, which is the big 
umbrella that contains CEWPS and the Smart Vaccine Grid. If the customer is already on the city grid, he could go directly 
to CEWPS, through the city’s cloud, and get perpetual vaccination membership and eliminate city taxes and service fees.

236
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
2.	The customer sends a request directly to the CEWPS for regular vaccination, 
which will immunize his computers from all the attack.
	
3.	The vaccination service will be regularly scheduled for the customer. The cus-
tomer may keep his antivirus software.
	
4.	The customer will be connected to CEWPS and receives the vaccination ser-
vice on time, or whenever there is an accidental attack.
Cloud Standards and Practices for the Smart Cloud
There are four standards and best practice areas that we need to examine when we’re 
shopping for a cloud:
Interoperability: It refers to cloud users being able to take their tools, applications, 
virtual images, and so on and use them in another cloud environment without hav-
ing to do any rework. Say one application runs in one environment and you need that 
application to operate with a partner’s application in another cloud environment. If the 
right interoperability standards are in place, you can do this without needing multiple 
versions of this application.
Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP), Representational State Transfer (REST), 
and Atom Syndication Format and Atom Publishing Protocol (both standards 
referred to as Atom) are all examples of widely used as interoperability standards 
and protocols.
Portability: It refers to taking one application or instance running on one vendor’s 
implementation and deploy it on another vendor’s implementation. For example, you 
might want to move your database or application from one cloud environment to 
another.
Integration: It refers to combining various hardware and software components 
together to create something. The same idea applies in the cloud. One example of 
integration is: easily integrating your data with a Software as a Service application. 
This is an example of taking some of your internal IT capability and integrating it into 
the cloud environment.
Portability and integration become major issues when cloud vendors have different 
platforms. This can lead to vendor lock-in, which means that moving to another cloud 
provider is so difficult that you do not even bother trying.
Security: It refers to subscribing to the vaccination services. CEWPS/SV is guaran-
teed to protect the information assets of the subscriber.
Connectivity Requirements for Cloud-Based Digital Immunity
Vaccination as a Service is the most innovative service on the cloud. It will revolution-
ize Antivirus Technology with a quantum leap. Traditionally, all that the Antivirus 
Technology vendors care about is to carve out a larger market share. Over the last 

237
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
20 years, they have done very well, but the approach to fighting malware has pla-
teaued, while other sectors of technology have been galloping with leaps and bounds. 
The world is still plagued with the second generation of malware and the Smart 
Vaccine is going to prevail as the new savior.
To vaccinate any critical system, the following connectivity requirements should be 
performed:
Hardware and software configurations: The customer should have a complete and 
detailed list of hardware systems and software applications. Also he should 
know the workload on each system and user acceptance criteria.
Subscriber’s Antivirus Role: The subscriber should recognize that the Smart 
Vaccine is the primary defense system. The Antivirus software becomes sec-
ondary, but it will collaborate with the Smart Vaccine Commander.
Connection with the Internet: A high-speed Internet ramp is a must, otherwise no 
VaaS vaccination will take place.
Registration with CEWPS: The Central Coordination Center (CCC) manages 
the registrations of all the cloud-based subscribers and critical infrastructure 
systems. CCC needs to know the presence of all the registrants in order to 
scale its system. CEWPS is elastic and highly scalable, but a workload man-
agement is a part of its fast response service.
Connection to the smart cloud: Companies that would like to be part of the smart 
cloud need to acquire a cloud Application Programming Interface (API). 
API is the necessary software interface that lets company’s applications 
plug in to the smart cloud. This is perhaps the most important place for 
standardization.
Connection with the smart grid: If the cloud subscriber would like his systems to 
acquire maximum digital immunity, then he should subscribe to the Smart City.
Connection with the grid vaccine grid: if the cloud subscriber would like to get 
maximum DI, then he should subscribe with the Smart Vaccine Grid, as 
shown in the diagram presented earlier.
The Smart Vaccine Cloud-Based Reference Architecture
The term reference architecture is a highly visible term and it implies systematic 
design and implementation. No engineer would touch a project without examin-
ing a blueprint and feeling comfortable about it. We call it the engineering culture 
of measuring twice and cutting it once. Looking at the following 3D diagram, it 
gives the reader the level of sophistication of CEWPS/Smart Vaccine ecosystem. 
Making this reference architecture a reality requires a well-established approach. 
Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is the roadmap that we will use to build the 
cloud-centric Smart Vaccine ecosystem (Figure 9.4).

238
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Second Technology: Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
Before we introduce the SOA approach, I wanted to bring up a philosophical note 
as a reminder to the folks who do not believe in orderly chaos. In the early days of 
computing, flowcharting was the only compass systems analysts had to get visibility 
on the scope of the system to be built. It was a diagrammatic representation and a 
workflow of the logic that will be coded by programmers. Keep in mind, system 
analysts were a notch higher than programmers and were responsible for flowchart-
ing. The Data Processing Department was responsible for the delivery of the system, 
whether the user liked it or not. The user’s involvement was to explain the business 
process and the system analyst will convert the process into logic flowchart. The result 
of the arrogance of Data Processing Department, and the “no entry” for the user, the 
majority of the systems of the 1960s and 1970s were overbudget, brittle, and had no 
capability for refactoring or scaling for this matter. I remember the Dutch SDM/70 
methodology was shoved down everyone’s throat. It was a horrible La Brea tar pit. 
EDP programmers either quit their job, or had a severe meltdown. It was cumber-
some with its plethora of forms to fill out. It was a productivity muzzler. The success 
rate of projects in those years did not exceed 40%, until the Internet became public in 
1992 and users took the lead in their projects. Then SOA was born as a true software 
engineering discipline. With the gracious leadership of Erik Townsend Wells Fargo 
who implemented SOA in his Internet banking project, success arrived. It was a great 
success story. The year 1996 was a good year. Today, there are hundreds of books and 
textbooks written on SOA and its contribution to the success of any IT project. Thank 
you Thomas Erl.
City Smart Cloud
Vaccine
Anatomy
Predictive
Engine
Virus
Anatomy
Virus
Pathology
Knowledge
Engines
VaaS
Alerts
Big Data
Access
Coordination
Command
Center
Alert
Engine
Scheduling
VaaS
CEWPS headquarters
Infrastructures connectivity
Smart City Smart Grid
Adapters
Login
Checkpoint
Login
Checkpoint
Smart Vaccine Grid
Adapters
VaaS
Episode
VaaS
VaaS
Big Data
Alerts
Vaccine Grid
City Smart Grid
Remember
Episode
Figure 9.4  The three-story Reference Architecture of CEWPS/Smart Vaccine shows all the operating components and 
how subscribers connect to the city cloud for vaccination services. It shows the components of each tier. The two advan-
tages of the Reference Architecture (RA) are the use of common vocabulary, which is very useful in the design of the system 
and the adherence to unified interoperability standards.

239
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
I can say, having worked with SOA, it is the best disciplinary set of tools for truly 
professional system designers much more than a technological approach and meth-
odology for creating IT systems. It is also a business approach and methodology. 
Companies have used the principles of SOA to deepen their understanding of how IT 
could galvanize business to be more future ready and profitable. One of the key ben-
efits of a service-oriented approach is that software is designed to reflect best practices 
and business processes instead of making the business operate according to the rigid 
structure of a technical environment. I rest my case.
Third Technology: Web Services
The number of disparate definitions for the term Web services is overwhelming. 
I decided to give my own simplistic definition. If you go to a petroleum refinery, all 
what you see is tanks, pumps, valves, and pipelines and lots of noise. On the average, 
a large-scale refinery has over 50,000 miles of pipes of different nature, such as steel 
pipes, cast iron pipes, plastic pipes, hot, cold, pressurized, and all of them are con-
nected together. One barrel of crude, which is 42 gal/barrel, is fractionated into 1000 
different products from gasoline to pharmaceutical products. Through adapters and 
interface joints, all the refining processes are tied together.
Web services have the catalytic ability to connect disparate systems and applica-
tions together in the Web. So, Web services are a set of tools (adapters) for sending 
and receiving data over the Internet and allowing programmatic access to that data 
using standard Internet protocols.
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) defines the architecture and associated 
standards of Web services http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-arch/ as follows:
Web services provide a standard means of interoperating between different software 
applications, running on a variety of platforms and/or frameworks. The Web Services 
Architecture (WSA) is intended to provide a common definition of a Web service, and 
define its place within a larger Web services framework to guide the community. The 
WSA provides a conceptual model and a context for understanding Web services and the 
relationships between the components of this model. The architecture does not attempt 
to specify how Web services are implemented, and imposes no restriction on how Web 
services might be combined. The Web services architecture is an interoperability archi-
tecture: it identifies those global elements of the global Web services network that are 
required in order to ensure interoperability between Web services.
Let’s try to give a simple descripotion of the four standardized tools of Web services:
	
1.	HTTP—Hypertext Transfer Protocol: The standard rules of the road where all 
the transactions will follow.
	
2.	SOAP—Simple Object Access Protocol: The standard rules of how messages 
will be packaged inside an envelope. It uses XML-based format for its 
messages.

240
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
3.	XML—Extensible Markup Language: is the standard language used 
between the service provider and the service requester. The Smart Vaccine 
will use XML-based format to communicate with CCC the city smart 
grid (CSG).
	
4.	WSDL—Web Services Description Language: is the standard of how to for-
mat a document in XML and to describe the functionality offered by the 
service.
In Digital Immunity context, here is a description of how CEWPS messages transact 
at the semantic level before and during vaccination session:
A critical system on the city grid is attacked by a Trojan. The system administrator 
instantiates a help request. Here’s how CEWPS responds:
•	 The help request travels using XML-based SOAP protocol.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander and (CCC) acknowledge the help request.
•	 The Smart Vaccine sends a request the vaccination army.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) asks the Virus Knowledge Base 
(ViKB) if its has a sample of the virus that compromised the system.
•	 The Virus Knowledge Base replies that there is a match with the attacking 
virus.
•	 The reply comes that there is a match with the attacking virus.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander receives the matching virus.
•	 The Commander sends a request to the Reverse engineering facility to ana-
lyze the virus.
•	 The Smart Vaccine sends the captured vaccine to the Reverse Engineering 
facility for analysis.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander sends the virus data to the Vaccine Knowledge 
Base to check if there is a vaccine (antidote) for the virus.
•	 The Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB) confirms that there is a vaccine for 
that virus, and a copy of the vaccine is sent back to the Smart Vaccine 
Commander.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander issues a request to the vaccinator to march 
and help the compromised system.
•	 The Vaccinator acknowledges the request and marches to the compromised 
system.
•	 The Vaccinator performs the vaccination service and sends a confirmation to 
the Smart Vaccine Commander.
•	 The Smart Vaccine Commander issues the attack report to the City Smart 
Grid Commander and the central Coordination Center.
•	 Throughout the book, we describe the attack in several different ways to 
help the reader get a comprehensive understanding the Digital Immunity 
paradigm.

241
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
All CEWPS Vaccination services documented in WSDL format will be stored in 
the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB). All service transactions will have the following 
elements:
	
1.	Types: Define the data types used by the Web service.
	
2.	Messages: Describe the messages that are exchanged between a client and a service. 
Also describes the data elements of an operation such as function parameters.
	
3.	Port Type: Defines a Web service, the operations that can be performed, 
and refers to input and output messages. Four basic operations supported by 
WSDL: one way, request response, solicit response, and notification.
	
4.	Bindings: Define how an operation will actually be transmitted; the mes-
sage format and protocol details for each operation in the Port Type section. 
WSDL includes built-in extensions for SOAP.
	
5.	Services: Specifies port address of each binding and the location of the service.
	
6.	UDDI_Universal Description, Discovery, and Integration: in Digital Immunity 
context, this UDDI represents all the knowledge bases of CEWPS:
The Virus Knowledge Base (ViKB) is the universal registry for all the captures 
virus and all the information relevant to the attack.
The Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB) is the universal registry for the manu-
factured vaccine.
The Attack Knowledge Base (AKB) is the universal registry that holds all the his-
torical combat episodes. We also call it the Documentation Knowledge Base. 
The Inference Knowledge Base (IKB) is the universal registry of all the rea-
soning rules used in the inference engine.
The Knowledge bases will be discussed in Chapter 12 with more detail.
The availability of a Web service for public consumption can be advertised. The Web 
service interfaces described by WSDL may be put into a directory called Universal 
Description, Discovery, and Integration (UDDI). The UDDI is a central directory 
service where businesses can publish, register, and search for Web services. The data 
stored in the UDDI directory are in XML format. The data captured within UDDI 
are divided into three main categories: white pages, yellow pages, and green pages. 
The white pages contain general information like name, description, and address 
about a company offering the service. The yellow pages contain general classification 
data on industrial categories based on standard taxonomies for either the company or 
the service offered. The green pages contain detailed technical information about a 
Web service allowing someone to write an application to use the Web service. These 
categories make it easy for users to search for industry-specific Web services and cre-
ate client applications to access them.
Cloud Vaccination Services
Let us take a look at another view of CEWPS architecture in Figure 9.5. CEWPS has 
three functional layers that are responsible for specific duties. The top layer belongs 

242
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
to the front end of the system, which includes the Early Warning Predictor and the 
Honeypot farm, and the Central Coordination Center. The second layer contains 
the heavy duty engines of CEWPS: The Collector engine, the Reverse Engineering, 
the reasoner, the knowledge libraries, and the Smart Vaccine Command. The third 
layer contains the critical systems attached to the city smart grid (CSG) and the 
smart vaccine grid (SVG). All the three grids are tied together and collaborate har-
moniously like the human immune system and the nervous system.
The diagram highlights the importance of the information bus in brokering the 
requests and services of the Vaccination-as-a Service (VaaS) process. Figure 9.6 shows 
the process cycle of the vaccination service from the start of the attack all the way 
to the elimination of the attacking villain. Here are the descriptions of each activity 
of the vaccination service cycle:
Vaccination: The VaaS is the main entity that is served by the Smart Vaccine.
Service provider: The Smart Vaccine is the entity that implements the vaccination 
specification.
Service requestor: The Subscriber system is the entity that calls for the service provider.
Malware
Jungle
CEWPS Smart Engine Arsenal
Collector
Engine
Infected Servers
Non-Immunized Servers
Immunized Servers
Autonomic
Adapter
Critical Infrastructure Systems
Reverse eng.
Engine
Reasoner
Engine
Knowledge
Engine
SV Engine
(Honeypot Farm)
Figure 9.5  A cross section of CEWPS architecture, showing how the message-oriented middleware (bus) is responsible 
for the delivery of messages to the proper service facility for processing vaccination services on the city grid. SOA and Web 
services can work together to meet the dynamic response of the Smart Vaccine, before, during, and after the battle.

243
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
Service locator: The registry that provides important information about where the 
VaaS will be offered (where is the clinic and what kind of service will be given).
Service broker: The agent that connects the vaccination request to the service pro-
vider (i.e., the Smart Vaccine). There may be some queuing issues that will be 
resolved during the triage. Infected systems get the highest priority. Although, 
the Smart Vaccine will vaccinate the healthy system to keep them immune.
Alert dispatcher: The central facility that will broadcast the attack alert before the 
attack.
Alert messenger: The agent that will carry the alert to the subscribing system and 
notify the Smart Vaccine.
Attack document: The agent that will perform the documentation process right 
after the attack.
Let’s go a little further and show the attributes of each component of the vaccination 
service model: Each transaction (request or delivery of service) has its pertinent attri-
butes that can be assembled upon request. There are a lot of more information that 
pass from one service to the other, but SOA uses the Web services for its model.
Process Workflow of the Vaccination Service (VaaS)
The vaccination process is like driving through Europe, you need visa to every coun-
try and a reliable and updated Garmin (GPS) navigational tool that will provide you 
with accurate arrival location. Now that you got the idea, the vaccination process is 
Attack
alert
Vaccination
broker
Vaccine
knowledge
registry
Type of
vaccine
Send infected
system
coordinates
Send instructions
Terminate service
Document episode
Instantiate service
Notify
Search
Confirm service
Analyze
Request vaccine
Outcome
Store in
Knowledge
Base
Vaccination
service
Service is done
Attack
starts
Infected
system
Immunized
system
Figure 9.6  Components of the vaccination service model. We see the SOA decomposition of the vaccination service 
showing the interchange of service units and requested data. Some components provide status, others provide service.

24 4
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
a pretty complicated mechanism, especially when its service delivery is on the cloud. 
There are private territories that require entry authorization and public territories 
that need special permission as well. Preparing a message flow diagram will clarify 
the process.
We have already characterized the systems on the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) and 
the City Smart Grid (CSG) into three types:
Infected system: is a system that was attacked by an illegitimate entry, either 
through a Trojan, masqueraded e-mail, or be part of an Internet Relay Chat 
(IRC), or unwelcome user from a social media network. The attack mali-
ciously and intentionally aims at damaging the system with the help of a 
small piece of software that we call virus. Infected systems need repair and 
recovery of the lost data (if possible). We have to remember, like in the real 
world, a patient has to raise a flag that he needs help, otherwise he will not 
get any treatment or medication.Similarly, in the CEWPS environment, the 
infected system, which is on the a grid, sends a “need help” message (state-1). 
The Smart Vaccine Commander instantiates a vaccination service response 
(state-2). Post Vaccination is (state-3).
Healthy system: is a system that is on regular vaccination schedule. Also, it gets 
inoculated whenever there is an attack on the grid. As long as the system is 
on the Smart Vaccine, it will remain healthy. It is not impossible for a healthy 
system to be hit by a sophisticated attack. But if the Smart Vaccine has mul-
tiple systems, and as soon as one of these systems gets infected, the auto-
nomic grid will alarm the other systems. The alarm will trigger an army of 
Smart Vaccines (one for each system on the grid). The grid is like the Human 
Immune System, it will mobilize an army of B cells that fought similar battle 
and memorized the strategy of the attack! Amazing, is not it?
New system: is a system that joined the Smart Vaccine grid and has no immuniza-
tion history. It needs to register and be on the schedule of the regular vaccina-
tion like the other healthy systems.
Three Scenarios of an SOA-Based Vaccination
The dictionary defines the term scenario as a projected sequence of events. We 
prefer to use this term, because it will be distinguished from the other confusing 
terms, plus it is easier to remember. In CEWPS context, a vaccination scenario is 
the artificial induction of immunity by boosting the present immunity of a critical 
system with a vaccine, which is an artificially intelligent AI software agent that 
administers the recovery of the critical system from the attacking virus. Artificial 
induction of immunity is preventive “adaptive” vaccination to specific attacks, 
which increases the immunity of healthy systems against sneaky attacks before the 
invasive attack.

245
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
The Smart Vaccine in Motion
Figure 9.7 shows an interesting attack-and-response relationship. We assume here the 
worst-case scenario when the attack reaches the city grid and compromises an infra-
structure critical system. The honeypots already identified the attacking virus and its 
payload is decomposed, and a new vaccine is built. CEWPS Reasoning Engine started 
to analyze the predictions for similar attacks. The city’s smart grid calls for help. The 
CEWPS Central Coordination Center notifies the City Grid Commander and the 
Smart Vaccine Commander. The Smart Vaccine Commander mobilizes a SWAT team 
made of vaccinators and paramedics. The priority of the Smart Vaccine Commander 
is to keep the healthy systems immunized first, before helping the infected systems.
Scenario-1 Vaccination of infected system: The system is severely damaged. The system 
was new on the grid and missed its vaccination schedule. The paramedics have to shut 
down the system and go into disaster recovery mode. The system is totally cleansed and 
production resumes. The compromised system was the Guinea pig of the grid, but the 
grid and the agility the Smart Vaccine team helped eliminate a major DDOS attack. 
Once the immunity war is over, systems will resume normal production. The grid is a 
survival necessity for the Smart City. The Smart Vaccine is a live organism empowered 
with human intelligence and experience of expert hackers and forensics expert.
Approaching
Attack
Alert
Commander
CEWPS
Coordination
Center
Smart Grid
Registry
Grid
Commander
Smart Vaccine
Commander
Documentation
Commander
Healthy system
V
V
V
V
V
Healthy system
Healthy system
Infected system
Healthy vaccinated 
system
Attack 
document
New system
Infected system recognized
Call 911
The Smart Vaccine
Intensive care unit
Figure 9.7  All critical systems are physically and logically connected to the Smart Vaccine Grid. When the attack anat-
omy is recognized and located on the grid, a convoy of SV paramedics rushes to the battlefield and the vaccination process 
is instantiated. The attacking virus is captured and its attack vector is analyzed, it will then be destroyed before it mutates 
and multiplies. The SV has two additional services: one to capture the virus and quarantine it. The second is to digest it 
and keep the remaining virus for the next battle. Once the battle is documented, it will go to the Virus Knowledge Engine.

246
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Let’s dig deeper into the vaccination process for the crippled system. Initially, the 
system administrator notices the abnormal behavior of the system, the screens flicker, 
and freeze, and strange screen pops up which doesn’t belong to the production. The 
administrator checks the status of the antivirus, which indicates the system is nor-
mal. He checks the firewall, and the response comes normal. All of a sudden, the 
administrator gets an emergency screen instructing him not to shut down or reboot 
the system. The Trojan, which is now inside the system (in memory), sends the fake 
pop-up screen to distract the administrator and to give the backdoor virus enough 
time to sneak into the system. The Trojan activates TCP port 31338 to allow a loaded 
Back Orifice to scoot into the system. The Back Orifice does not show up in the task 
list. The asymmetric Back Orifice rootkit is ready to do its evil things: sniff passwords, 
record keystrokes, access a desktop’s file system, while remaining undetected.
The Backdoor bomb arrives in binary executable code (machine-readable only), 
which is very hard to read. It is sophisticated enough to make changes to the produc-
tion source code and relocate some DLLs from the operating system while concealing 
itself. To add more insult to injury, the backdoor subverts the recompilation of the 
production source code by inserting a copy of itself in the production system. The 
Operator decides to recompile the compiler to eliminate the backdoor in the produc-
tion system. But a spare copy of the Backdoor source keeps getting inserted in the 
compiler. Every time the compiler recompiles, the backdoor gets resurrected.
As it was mentioned earlier, most versatile backdoors are asymmetric. An asymmetric 
backdoor will only be controlled remotely by the attacker who launches it, which makes 
it extremely hard to detect its presence or its point of origin. Generally, most backdoors 
are invisible and designed up to the imagination of the cybercriminal. Persistent attacks 
could come from compiler backdoor, login backdoor, or boot backdoor.
Scenario-2 Vaccination of healthy system: A normal day for system administrators is when 
their system dashboards show normal operation. Anytime, the honeypots capture a new 
attack, the Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) issues new vaccination alert to all the criti-
cal systems on the city’s smart grid. City’s smart cloud subscribers also get notices from 
(SVC) that a new vaccine was developed due to a new attack.
Scenario-3 Vaccination of a new system: Customers who would like to subscribe to city’s 
smart grid get registered and all the specification of the system and the level of security 
and the risk are registered in the smart grid Knowledge Base. Once the system is connect 
to the city’s smart grid or city’s smart cloud, they will get routine vaccination and the sys-
tem administrator will be trained on the emergency services in case of a surprise attack.
Criticality of the Smart Vaccine Response Time
Now, let’s analyze the attack graphically in Figure 9.8 for better understanding. Let’s 
assume that the system got attacked and damaged while on the city’s smart grid 
(CSG). Timing is very critical, because like in humans, medication or vaccination may 
come late and may not be able to save the system. Let us define the timeline variables:

247
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
t0 is the time when the attack hit the system.
t1 is the time the alert was issued.
tSV arrival is the time for the Smart Vaccine to vaccinate the attacked system.
tcritical is the time between the alert and the arrival of the Smart Vaccine.
t2 is the time where the system was immunized and saved from the attack.
Therefore, the vaccination time (Tcritical) shown as the gray area, should be between 
[t1 and t2], otherwise the vaccination is not going to help. During the design of the 
Smart Vaccine Grid, the calculation of the vaccination response time becomes crucial. 
Capacity planning and queuing theory are fundamental steps that should be applied 
during the design of the bandwidth of the grid.
Situation 1: The vaccination comes on time, even during the attack. The alert 
was broadcast to all systems and the Smart Vaccine army was able to vacci-
nate most of the systems as shown in the first part of the diagram. There may 
be some situations where confusion takes place and some systems get their 
help too late. They get attacked and may out of commission for a period of 
time (Figure 9.8).
Situation 2: The vaccination comes too late, as shown in the second part of the 
diagram earlier. The Smart Vaccine has to document the attack and learn to 
improve its response time. The antivirus of the troubled system will get an 
update on the attacking virus and will add it to the list of the other attacks.
Situation-1
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
System
attacked
System
damaged
Down time
Down time
Service time
Service time
t1
t2
t1
t2
t1
alert
issued
t2
system
beyond repair
System
attacked
System
damaged
t1
alert
issued
t2
system
saved
SV arrival
TSV arrival
SV arrival
TSV arrival
TSV arrival
TSV arrival
TCritical
TCritical
Situation-2
Figure 9.8  The criticality of the response time of the Smart Vaccine. (a) Situation 1, the response of the Smart Vaccine 
was within the interval (the shaded area), which saves the infected system. (b) Situation 2, the arrival of the Smart 
Vaccine was outside the critical area (the shaded area), which made the vaccination useless. Graph (c) on the top right 
shows how criticality of the system (the y axis) is lowest during vaccination. In graph (d), the system waits for the vaccina-
tion service, but misses it, and criticality returns back to high level as before.

248
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The most important feature that was in the design of the Smart Vaccine is its abil-
ity to learn from its vaccination missions and build knowledge models for the next 
fight. In other words, the Smart Vaccine is equipped with autonomic capability 
that allows it to make decision on its own. As an expert system, its cognitive
reasoning process gets better after every battle. Make no mistake, the Smart 
Vaccine is not an antivirus. It would not do justice if we compared the two prod-
ucts. The Smart Vaccine was designed to command complex vaccination services 
and establish persistent immunity throughout the Smart City.
Innate and Adaptive Digital Immunity
The designers of the operating system software such as Windows or Linux have 
included some basic defense logic against performance abnormalities that we call 
exceptions. These exceptions generate messages indicate something a SNAFU has 
occurred and the kernel overrode it and took an abrupt default action. These preven-
tive messages are somewhat like what we call innate immunity that keeps the system 
going without crashing. We add to our innate immunity additional immunity with 
vaccination. Similarly, the Smart Vaccine is the system immunity booster. We call it 
adaptive immunity. We envision the next generation of systems will have more robust 
immunity against malicious attack vectors, through newer generations of the Smart 
Vaccine. We also envision all the big league cloud service providers to adopt digital 
immunity because it will guarantee that their client systems have robust immunity. 
So how does the Smart Vaccine offer adaptive immunity? The diagram in Figure 9.9 
shows how digital immunity is accomplished:
The autonomic Smart Vaccine, once it responds to an alert and rushes toward the 
infected system, which is already on the grid. The Smart Vaccine will make sure the 
infected system gets the right vaccine and the right treatment. New systems however 
need to subscribe to the grid VS. They do not have any attack history in the Knowl-
edge Base, but they will be registered in the regular vaccination program, the same for 
the healthy systems.
Adaptive immunity is to build system resistance against a specific virus. There is no 
vaccine that can eliminate all the viral attacks. Like in Human Immune System, each 
vaccine is for specific disease. This attribute is called specificity that should be observed 
during the vaccination process, otherwise the vaccine will be counterproductive.
We mentioned that vaccination services (VaaS) are provided on the Smart Vaccine 
grid, which is tightly coupled with the city’s smart grid or through the city’s smart 
cloud. SVG is one of the most important factors in the success of the Smart Vaccine. 
SVG is a real-time network that enables the Smart Vaccine to respond in the most 
expeditious way. SVG is managed by the Smart Vaccine Commander, and monitored 
by the Central Coordination Center (CCC) that acts like the air traffic control tower. 
The control tower gets an alarm signal from the Early Warning quarters where the 

249
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
Start here
Healthy
System
Infected
System
New
System
On Grid
Register
on Grid
No
Yes
Registered
Notify CCC
Coordination
Center
Copy of the attack is trapped
Prepare for an alert
VaaS
Schedule
VaaS
Queue
Early
Warning
Check
Honeypots
Document
Attack
Copy of the attack forwarded
to Attack Knowledge Base
Send proper type of vaccine
What kind of vaccine was given last time
Check infection history
Vaccine
K Base
Attack
K Base
Inoculate
System
Check
Results
Document
VaaS
Check
History
Check
Attack
Figure 9.9  The autonomic Smart Vaccine, once it responds to an alert, vaccinators and paramedics arrive to the infected system, they will make sure the infected system gets the 
right vaccine and the right treatment. New systems on the grid do not have any history, but they will be registered and scheduled on the regular vaccination program, the same for the 
healthy systems. This is the way Digital Immunity is created for smart grid critical systems.

250
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
honeypot traps are located. The alert is dispatched to the Smart Vaccine Commander 
(SVC). All dispatched information is about the infected server (x, y, time, brand, 
name, …) At the same, the Smart Vaccine Commander goes to the Attack Knowledge 
Base (AKB) and the Vaccine Knowledge Base to learn about the attack vectors and 
the matching vaccine code. (Figure 9.9) tells the whole story.
There are actually two approaches to vaccinating the infected server.
	
1.	First approach is when the attack is known and the virus documentation is in the 
Virus Knowledge Base. The second approach is when the attack was unique, 
and the virus is new without any history or documentation in the VKB. In 
fact, the Smart Vaccine will face an uphill battle because it will have to create 
a brand-new vaccine for the infected server. The Central Coordination Center 
will get an autonomic notification from the infected server that it needs help. The 
administrator of the server will be notified by the Central Coordination Center 
that help is on the way, and that he will need to switch over to the mirror system 
with complete transparency to the users. The Central Coordination Center will 
notify the Smart Vaccine for the emergency response. The vaccination process 
will be performed off-line without disrupting the critical production schedule.
	
	 Again in this approach, previous similar attacks have been disassembled and 
generates assembly language source code will be generated from machine-exe-
cutable code. The reverse engineering step follows the capture of the attacker 
by CEWPS honeypots, and the vaccine code will be assembled and compiled 
and ready to be used on the infected server. The vaccine code will be loaded 
into the off-line infected server and gets executed.
	
2.	Second approach is where the attack was totally new and its payload has no 
historical records in the VKB. In fact, the attack was not caught by the hon-
eypot, which indicates that the attack was elusive and well planned by the 
attackers. In this case, the virus infiltrates into the server through a stealth 
Trojan that passed from an IRC session. The Smart Vaccine will have to use 
its past cognitive experience of combating previous attacks to outsmart and 
defeat the virus. Now that the server is on the operating table, the Smart 
Vaccine will use its arsenal of tools to perform the necessary forensics to track 
down the Trojan, extract it from its hiding place, and disassemble its execut-
able code to create its source code, then recompile the source code to analyze 
the way it detonated its payload and the damages created.
Again, like in the human body, the vaccine will trick the body into thinking it is under 
assault, and the immune system start making weapons that will provide a defense 
when a real infection becomes a threat. The Smart Vaccine will enter the sick system 
and will take charge of the cleansing process. The first thing it will do is to check the 
process monitor for some unusual activities that has nothing with production. One 
of the ways to understand the threat associated with a malicious software will be to 

251
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
examine its behavior in a controlled environment (off-line) and to watch its actions as 
it interacts with computer resources and responds to the various stimuli. The B cells do 
the same while they are getting ready to fire their antibodies. The Smart Vaccine will 
also examine the download files, because the Trojan may have been its hiding place.
The Smart Vaccine Is a Smart Sherlock Holmes
The Smart Vaccine will use a combination of process, disk, registry, and network mon-
itoring tools to study the Trojan’s activity on a sick off-line machine, and watch if the 
Trojan will attempt to connect to other systems. The Trojan may have created some 
temporary files that were deliberately deleted by the Trojan. The Smart Vaccine will 
use undelete utility that will replace the native system Recycle Bin with a Recovery 
Bin, which is able to capture all deleted files, even those deleted by non-GUI processes.
The Smart Vaccine pulled out its bag of tricks, an intrusion detection system (like 
SNORT) to analyze the traffic on the sick system, and determine if there was any 
tracks of payload packets. The Smart Vaccine will run the open port scanner to find 
out if the Trojan came through the Internet Char Relay (IRC). The Smart Vaccine 
checks any inbound connection attempts to TCP port 113 from an unknown host on 
the Internet, as well as unauthorized outbound connection attempts to a remote server 
on destination TCP port 6667. The Smart Vaccine concludes that the Trojan was con-
nected to an Internet Char Relay network, knowing that 6667 is an often used port 
for IRC servers. The Smart Vaccine starts up an IRC client with a special IP address 
and connects to that unknown host. It is indeed an IRC server. A quick check shows 
several users online are on the IRC.
For those who are not familiar with IRC, let us mention that IRC can be viewed 
as a network of interlinked servers that allow users to hold real-time online conversa-
tions. Participants of a conversation typically join a channel devoted to a particular 
topic or interest. This is accomplished by having the user’s IRC client connect to a 
server that participates in the desired IRC peering network. When a user types a 
message meant to be seen by channel participants, it is relayed to the IRC server, and 
the server resends the message to participating clients, as specified in the Request for 
Comments (RFC) document 1459.
The Smart Vaccine also examines any open files, and the Domain Name System 
(DNS) for any translation into an IP address. It also checks the HOST file for any 
modifications.
Now the Smart Vaccine gets deeper into its vaccination process. Initially, it concen-
trates on external aspects of the Trojan as it interacts with its environment, but it does not 
provide sufficient insight into the logic of the virus program. Like in Human Immune 
System, the B cell will need to identify the virus through its receptor cells. Similarly, the 
Smart Vaccine needs to decompose the virus and defuse its payload. The Smart Vaccine 
will use from its repertoire a debugger in conjunction with a disassembler to attempt to 

252
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
reverse engineer the Trojan’s executable, since the Smart Vaccine does not have the luxury 
of looking at its source code of the malware. The Smart Vaccine will rely on its knowl-
edge with previous vaccinations to overcome this challenge. It will rely on a disassembler 
to understand the basic structure of the Trojan and will proceed by stepping through it 
with the debugger to study the Trojan’s logic and to take a look at its runtime memory 
contents (smudgy fingerprints while committing the crime). End of the vaccination story.
Harnessing SOA Technology
The following diagram shows the major components of the Smart Vaccine Vaccination 
Service (VS) molded in the service-oriented architecture.
A system gets an attack and it requests Vaccination Service (VS). The alert service 
sends a request to the vaccination broker. The broker who acts as a mediator accepts 
the request that is routed to the Knowledge Registry to get the right vaccine. The right 
vaccine is selected and it is routed to the vaccination service provider (VSP). The VS is 
provided to the infected system and the attack is terminated. The outcome of the VS 
is saved. The diagram in Figure 9.10 shows the sequence of the Vaccination Service 
and all the attributes of each activity.
Attack alert
VaaS broker
VaaS service
VaaS K registry
Vaccine type
Outcome
Terminate attack
Instantiate attack
Infected system
+Start date: Date time
+Alert priority: String
+Vaccine name: String
+Vaccine type: String
+Virus type: String
+Attack type: String
+Vaccination: Time
+Document: String
+Vaccine name: String
+Vaccine type: String
+Virus type: String
+Vaccine name: String
+Vaccine type: String
+Virus type: String
+Vaccine name: String
+Vaccine type: String
+Virus type: String
+Outcome: String
+Attack type: String
+Date used: Date time
+Document: String
+Date: Date time
+Target: String
+Virus type: String
+Attack type: String
+Document: String
+Attack type: String
+Send message: String
+Message type: String
+Destination: String
+Server: String
+Queue: String
1
3
4
5
6
7
9
8
2
+Target: String
+Virus type: String
+Document: String
+Date: Date time
+Attack type: String
+Virus type: String
+Attack type: String
+Alert time: Data time
+Data used: Date
+Time: Date time
+Type: String
+Type: String
+Cause: String
Figure 9.10  CEWPS Digital Immunity process flow using the SOA/service concept.

253
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
Glossary: Cloud Computing
Advertising-based pricing model: A pricing model whereby services are offered to 
customers at low or no cost, with the service provider being compensated by 
advertisers whose ads are delivered to the consumer along with the service.
Amazon EC2: Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud Web service, which provides resiz-
able computing capacity in the cloud so developers can enjoy great scalability 
for building applications.
Amazon S3, Amazon Simple Storage Services: Amazon’s cloud storage service.
Billing and service usage metering: You can be billed for resources as you use them. 
This pay-as-you-go model means usage is metered and you pay only for what 
you consume.
CDN, content delivery network: A system consisting of multiple computers that 
contain copies of data, which are located in different places on the network so 
clients can access the copy closest to them.
Cloud: A metaphor for a global network, first used in reference to the telephone net-
work and now commonly used to represent the Internet.
Cloud application: A software application that is never installed on a local machine—
it is always accessed over the Internet. The top layer of the Cloud Pyramid 
where applications are run and interacted with via a Web-browser. Cloud 
Applications are tightly controlled, leaving little room for modification. 
Examples include Gmail or SalesForce.com.
Cloud arcs: Short for cloud architectures. Designs for software applications that can 
be accessed and used over the Internet. (Cloud architecture is just too hard to 
pronounce.)
Cloud as a Service (CaaS): A cloud computing service that has been opened up into 
a platform that others can build upon.
Cloud bridge: Running an application in such a way that its components are inte-
grated within multiple cloud environments (which could be any combination 
of internal/private and external/public clouds).
Cloud broker: An entity that creates and maintains relationships with multiple cloud 
service providers. It acts as a liaison between cloud services customers and 
cloud service providers, selecting the best provider for each customer and 
monitoring the services.
Cloudburst: What happens when your cloud has an outage or security breach and 
your data are unavailable? The term cloudburst is being use in two meanings, 
negative and positive:
Cloudburst (negative): The failure of a cloud computing environment due to the 
inability to handle a spike in demand.
Cloudburst (positive): The dynamic deployment of a software application that runs 
on internal organizational compute resources to a public cloud to address a 
spike in demand.

254
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Cloud center: A data center in the cloud utilizing standard-based virtualized compo-
nents as a data center–like infrastructure, for example, a large company, such 
as Amazon, that rents its infrastructure.
Cloud client: Computing device for cloud computing. Updated version of thin client.
Cloud computing: A computing capability that provides an abstraction between 
the computing resource and its underlying technical architecture (e.g., serv-
ers, storage, networks), enabling convenient, on-demand network access to 
a shared pool of configurable computing resources that can be rapidly pro-
visioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider 
interaction. This definition states that clouds have five essential characteris-
tics: on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid 
elasticity, and measured service. Narrowly speaking, cloud computing is cli-
ent-server computing that abstract the details of the server away; one requests 
a service (resource), not a specific server (machine). Cloud computing enables 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software 
as a Service (SaaS). Cloud computing means that infrastructure, applications, 
and business processes can be delivered to you as a service, over the Internet 
(or your own network).
Cloud enabler: A general term that refers to organizations (typically vendors) that are 
not cloud providers per se but make available technology, such as cloudware, 
that enables cloud computing. Vendor that provides technology or service that 
enables a client or other vendor to take advantage of cloud computing.
Cloud envy: Used to describe a vendor who jumps on the cloud computing band-
wagon by rebranding existing services.
Cloud governance and compliance: Governance defines who is responsible for what 
and the policies and procedures that your people or groups need to follow. 
Cloud governance requires governing your own infrastructure as well as infra-
structure that you do not totally control. Cloud governance has two key com-
ponents: understanding compliance and risk and business performance goals.
Cloud hosting: A type of Internet hosting where the client leases virtualized, dynam-
ically scalable infrastructure on an as-needed basis. Users frequently have the 
choice of operating system and other infrastructure components. Typically 
cloud hosting is self-service, billed hourly or monthly, and controlled via a 
Web interface or API.
Cloud infrastructure: The bottom layer, or foundation, of the cloud pyramid is the deliv-
ery of computer infrastructure through paravirtualization. This includes serv-
ers, networks, and other hardware appliances delivered as either Infrastructure 
Web Services or cloud centers. Full control of the infrastructure is provided at 
this level. Examples include GoGrid or Amazon Web Services.
Cloud manageability: You need a consistent view across both on-premises and 
cloud-based environments. This includes managing the assets provisioning 

255
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
as well as the quality of service (QOS) you are receiving from your service 
provider.
Cloud operating system: A computer operating system that is specially designed to 
run in a provider’s data center and be delivered to the user over the Internet or 
another network. Windows Azure is an example of a cloud operating system or 
cloud layer that runs on Windows Server 2008. The term is also sometimes used 
to refer to cloud-based client operating systems such as Google’s Chrome OS.
Cloud-oriented architecture (COA): A term coined by Jeff Barr at Amazon Web 
Services to describe an architecture where applications act as services in the 
cloud and serve other applications in the cloud environment. An architecture 
for IT infrastructure and software applications that is optimized for use in 
cloud computing environments. The term is not yet in wide use, and as is 
the case for the term cloud computing itself, there is no common or generally 
accepted definition or specific description of a cloud-oriented architecture.
Cloud OS: Also known as Platform as a Service (PaaS). Think Google Chrome.
Cloud platform: The middle layer of the cloud pyramid, which provides a computing 
platform or framework (e.g., NET, Ruby on Rails, or Python) as a service or 
stack. Control is limited to that of the platform or framework but not at a 
lower level (server infrastructure). Examples include Google AppEngine or 
Microsoft Azure.
Cloud portability: The ability to move applications (and often their associated data) 
across cloud computing environments from different cloud providers, as well 
as across private or internal cloud and public or external clouds.
Cloud provider: A company that provides cloud-based platform, infrastructure, 
application, or storage services to other organizations and/or individuals, usu-
ally for a fee.
Cloud providers: Computing service providers whose product/platform is based on 
virtualization of computing resources and a utility-based payment model.
Cloud pyramid: A visual representation of cloud computing layers where differing 
segments are broken out by functionality. Simplified version includes infra-
structure, platform, and application layers.
Cloud security: The same security principles that apply to on-site computing apply to 
cloud computing security.
Cloud servers: Virtualized servers running Windows or Linux operating systems 
that are instantiated via a Web interface or API. Cloud servers behave in the 
same manner as physical ones and can be controlled at an administrator or 
root level, depending on the server type and cloud hosting provider.
Cloud service architecture: A term coined by Jeff Barr, chief evangelist at Amazon 
Web Services. The term describes an architecture in which applications and 
application components act as services on the cloud, which serve other appli-
cations within the same cloud environment.

256
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Cloud sourcing: Outsourcing storage or taking advantage of some other type of 
cloud service.
Cloud standards: A standard is an agreed-upon approach for doing something. Cloud 
standards ensure interoperability, so you can take tools, applications, virtual 
images, and more, and use them in another cloud environment without hav-
ing to do any rework. Portability lets you take one application or instance 
running on one vendor’s implementation and deploy it on another vendor’s 
implementation.
Cloud storage: A service that allows customers to save data by transferring it over 
the Internet or another network to an offsite storage system maintained by a 
third party.
Cloud storm: Connecting multiple cloud computing environments. Also called cloud 
network.
Cloudstorming: The act of connecting multiple cloud computing environments.
Cloudware: A general term referring to a variety of software, typically at the infra-
structure level, that enables building, deploying, running or managing appli-
cations in a cloud computing environment.
Cloudwashing: Slapping the word cloud on products and services you already have.
Cluster: A group of linked computers that work together as if they were a single com-
puter, for high availability and/or load balancing.
Consumption-based pricing model: A pricing model whereby the service provider 
charges its customers based on the amount of the service the customer consumes, 
rather than a time-based fee. For example, a cloud storage provider might charge 
per gigabyte of information stored. See also Subscription-based pricing model.
Customer self-service: A feature that allows customers to provision, manage, and 
terminate services themselves, without involving the service provider, via a 
Web interface or programmatic calls to service APIs.
Data in the cloud: Managing data in the cloud requires data security and privacy, 
including controls for moving data from point A to point B. It also includes 
managing data storage and the resources for large-scale data processing.
Detection and forensics: Separating legitimate from illegitimate activity.
Disruptive technology: A term used in the business world to describe innovations 
that improve products or services in unexpected ways and change both the 
way things are done and the market. Cloud computing is often referred to as 
a disruptive technology because it has the potential to completely change the 
way IT services are procured, deployed, and maintained.
Elastic computing: The ability to dynamically provision and de-provision processing, 
memory, and storage resources to meet demands of peak usage without wor-
rying about capacity planning and engineering for peak usage.
Elasticity and scalability: The cloud is elastic, meaning that resource allocation can 
get bigger or smaller depending on demand. Elasticity enables scalability, 
which means that the cloud can scale upward for peak demand and downward 

257
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
for lighter demand. Scalability also means that an application can scale when 
adding users and when application requirements change.
Encryption: Coding to protect your information assets.
External cloud: Public or private cloud services that are provided by a third party 
outside the organization. A cloud computing environment that is external to 
the boundaries of the organization.
Funnel cloud: Discussion about cloud computing that goes round and round but 
never turns into action (never touches the ground).
Google app engine: A service that enables developers to create and run Web applica-
tions on Google’s infrastructure and share their applications via a pay-as-you-
go, consumption-based plan with no setup costs or recurring fees.
Google apps: Google’s SaaS offering that includes an office productivity suite, e-mail, 
and document sharing, as well as Gmail, Google Talk for instant messaging, 
Google Calendar and Google Docs, spreadsheets, and presentations.
HaaS: Hardware as a Service; see IaaS.
Hosted application: An Internet-based or Web-based application software program 
that runs on a remote server and can be accessed via an Internet-connected 
PC or thin client. See also SaaS.
Hybrid cloud: A networking environment that includes multiple integrated internal 
and/or external providers. Hybrid clouds combine aspects of both public and 
private clouds.
IBM smart business: IBM’s cloud solutions, which include IBM Smart Business Test 
Cloud, IBM Smart Analytics Cloud, IBM Smart Business Storage Cloud, 
IBM Information Archive, IBM Lotus Live, and IBM LotusLive iNotes.
Identity management: Managing personal identity information so that access to 
computer resources, applications, data, and services is controlled properly.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Cloud infrastructure services or Infrastructure as 
a Service (IaaS) delivers computer infrastructure, typically a platform virtual-
ization environment, as a service. Rather than purchasing servers, software, 
data center space or network equipment, clients instead buy those resources as 
a fully outsourced service. The service is typically billed on a utility computing 
basis and amount of resources consumed (and therefore the cost) will typi-
cally reflect the level of activity. It is an evolution of Web hosting and virtual 
private server offerings.
Internal cloud: A type of private cloud whose services are provided by an IT depart-
ment to those in its own organization.
Mashup: A Web-based application that combines data and/or functionality from 
multiple sources.
Microsoft azure: Microsoft cloud services that provide the Platform as a Service (see 
PaaS), allowing developers to create cloud applications and services.
Middleware: Software that sits between applications and operating systems, consist-
ing of a set of services that enable interoperability in support of distributed 

258
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
architectures by passing data between applications. So, for example, the data 
in one database can be accessed through another database.
On-demand service: A model by which a customer can purchase cloud services as 
needed; for instance, if customers need to utilize additional servers for the 
duration of a project, they can do so and then drop back to the previous level 
after the project is completed.
Pay as you go: A cost model for cloud services that encompasses both subscription-
based and consumption-based models, in contrast to traditional IT cost model 
that requires up-front capital expenditures for hardware and software.
Personal cloud: Synonymous with something called MiFi, a personal wireless router. 
It takes a mobile wireless data signal and translates it to Wi-Fi. It is pro-
nounced ME-fi, as in “the personal cloud belongs to me—but if you’re nice 
I’ll let you connect.”
Platform as a Service (PaaS): Platform as a Service—Cloud platform services, whereby 
the computing platform (operating system and associated services) is delivered 
as a service over the Internet by the provider. The PaaS layer offers black-box 
services with which developers can build applications on top of the compute 
infrastructure. This might include developer tools that are offered as a service 
to build services, or data access and database services, or billing services.
Private clouds: Private cloudvirtualized cloud data centers inside your company’s 
firewall. It may also be a private space dedicated to your company within 
a cloud provider’s data center. An internal cloud behind the organization’s 
firewall. The company’s IT department provides Software and Hardware as a 
Service to its customers—the people who work for the company. Vendors love 
the words private cloud.
Public cloud: Services offered over the public Internet and available to anyone who 
wants to purchase the service.
Roaming workloads: The backend product of cloud centers.
REST: Representational State Transfer, a stateless architectural approch that runs on 
HTTP.
Salesforce.com: An online SaaS company that is best known for delivering customer 
relationship management (CRM) software to companies over the Internet.
Self-service provisioning: Cloud customers can provide cloud services without 
going through a lengthy process. You request an amount of computing, stor-
age, software, process, or more from the service provider. After you use these 
resources, they can be automatically deprovisioned.
Service level agreement (SLA): A contractual agreement by which a service provider 
defines the level of service, responsibilities, priorities, and guarantees regard-
ing availability, performance, and other aspects of the service.
Service migration: The act of moving from one cloud service or vendor to another.
Service provider: The company or organization that provides a public or private cloud 
service.

259
The Smart Cloud Is Here: Vaccination as a Service
Software as a Service (SaaS): Cloud application services, whereby applications are 
delivered over the Internet by the provider, so that the applications do not 
have to be purchased, installed, and run on the customer’s computers. SaaS 
providers were previously referred to as ASP (application service providers). In 
the SaaS layer, the service provider hosts the software so you do not need to 
install it, manage it, or buy hardware for it. All you have to do is connect and 
use it. SaaS Examples include customer relationship management as a service.
Standardized interfaces: Cloud services should have standardized APIs, which pro-
vide instructions on how two application or data sources can communicate 
with each other. A standardized interface lets the customer more easily link 
cloud services together.
Subscription-based pricing model: A pricing model that lets customers pay a fee to 
use the service for a particular time period, often used for SaaS services. See 
also Consumption-based pricing model.
Utility computing: Online computing or storage sold as a metered commercial ser-
vice in a way similar to a public utility.
Vendor lock-in: Dependency on the particular cloud vendor and difficulty in moving 
from one cloud vendor to another due to lack of standardized protocols, APIs, 
data structures (schema), and service models.
Vertical cloud: A cloud computing environment that is optimized for use in a par-
ticular industry, such as health care or financial services.
Virtual private cloud (VPC): A term coined by Reuven Cohen, CEO and founder 
of Enomaly. The term describes a concept that is similar to, and derived from, 
the familiar concept of a Virtual Private Network (VPN), but applied to cloud 
computing. It is the notion of turning a public cloud into a virtual private 
cloud, particularly in terms of security and the ability to create a VPC across 
components that are both within the cloud and external to it. For example, the 
Amazon VPC that allows Amazon EC2 to connect to legacy infrastructure 
on an IPsec VPN.
Virtual private data center: Resources grouped according to specific business 
objectives.
Windows live services: Microsoft’s cloud-based consumer applications, which 
include Windows Live Mail, Windows Live Photo Gallery, Windows 
Live Calendar, Windows Live Events, Windows Live SkyDrive, Windows 
Live Spaces, Windows Live Messenger, Windows Live Writer, and 
Windows Live for Mobile.
References
Erl, T., Principles of Service Design. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2008.
Erl, T., Cloud Computing. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2013.
Kurtz, R. and Vines, R.D., Cloud Security. Wiley Publishing, New York, 2010.

260
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Websites
http://aws.amazon.com/.
https://code.google.com/p/soafaces/.
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2819918.
http://www.networkworld.com/article/2172366/cloud-computing/google-compute-engine-
vs -amazon-web-services-cloud--the-battle-is-on.html.
http://www.oracle.com/us/products/middleware/soa/overview/index.html.
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/solutions/soa/.
https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/support/download.shtml.
http://www.NIST.gov.
http://www.soasystems.com.

261
10
The Internet of Things, 
Convergence of SCADA 
and CEWPS
The Internet of Things (IoT) Is the Internet of Internet
It is a strange term but not a hostile one. It certainly is a new disruptive technology 
storm around the block. We have developed an excessive affinity toward the Internet 
that goes beyond computers and phones. As a matter of fact, any black box, either elec-
tric or electronic, solar, or wind driven, can subscribe to become a member of the IoT. 
Gartner claims that by 2020, there will be over 26 billion connected devices. I would 
say 54 billion devices will connect to the IoT tree. Time will tell who is right.
The Internet of Things is rather a galaxy of interconnected clouds connecting 
everything to everything. It did not fall down from the sky, but we created it, and 
now we need to seriously think about it. If you cannot visualize how it looks, think of 
a massive snowball rolling downhill and growing at geometric pace. Or, just look at 
the sky on a clear night and imagine all these stars are connected together. Now, you 
got the picture of our Internet of Things.
Thirty years ago, no one really anticipated that the Internet would grow as such an 
astronomical pace. It seems that there will not be any limit to it. Now that it morphed 
into the Internet of Things, it looks like a galaxy drifting in open space at its own pace.
If we examine the Internet of Things at the molecular level under a microscope, we 
will be amazed by its morphology and its structure. The Internet of Things follows an 
orderly pattern of chaos, which is a mysterious type of order. We all know that chaos 
is the science of surprises. The theory was summarized by Edward Lorenz as follows: 
“Chaos: When the present determines the future, but the approximate present does 
not approximately determine the future.”
Take, for example, the butterfly effect: it grants the power to cause a hurricane in 
China to a butterfly flapping its wings in New Mexico. It may take a very long time, 
but the connection is real. If the butterfly had not flapped its wings at just the right 
point in space/time, the hurricane would not have occurred. In other words, small 
changes in the initial conditions lead to drastic changes in the results. Our lives are an 
ongoing demonstration of this principle as shown in Figure 10.1.
The concept of the Internet of Things is not new. Kevin Ashton and Neil Gross 
deserve credit for coining the expression. I quote Neil Gross’ wonderful explanation of 
the Internet of Things from his article in Business Week in 1999, “In the next century, 

262
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
planet earth will don an electronic skin. It will use the Internet as a scaffold to support 
and transmit its sensations. This skin is already being stitched together. It consists of 
millions of embedded electronic measuring devices: thermostats, pressure gauges, pollu-
tion detectors, cameras, microphones, glucose sensors, EKGs, electroencephalographs. 
These will probe and monitor cities and endangered species, the atmosphere, our ships, 
highways and fleets of trucks, our conversations, our bodies—even our dreams.”
Kurzweil’s 5th Epoch
The trend and evolution of the Internet of Things amazingly coincides with Ray 
Kurzweil’s evolution theory in his famous book The Singularity Is Near as shown in 
Figure 10.2.
He classified evolution into six epochs. He was right when he said “Evolution is a pro-
cess of creating patterns of increasing order.” It seems that we are at the very beginning 
of Epoch 5, which is “The Merger of Human Technology with Human Intelligence.” 
We are not there yet, but the Internet of Things phenomenon seems to follow Epoch 5 
pattern, by bringing informatics, machines, and people into one convergence.
The impact on the Internet was phenomenally beyond any expectation. Predicting the 
future of the Internet has been very elusive. Even the fathers of the Internet could not see 
the end of the tunnel of Big Data or Internet of Things. I give Ray Kurzweil all the credit 
for making us aware of the concept of singularity and combining human intelligence 
with artificial intelligence. As a result, the Internet workload has increased exponentially 
The massive Big Data cloud
House area networks
Academics
Banking and
financial
Manufacturing
Transportation
Electronics
Energy
Retail
Pharmaceutical
Implant devices
Figure 10.1  The Internet of Things—A galaxy of thousands of clouds connected together. IoT doesn’t have a particular 
shape. It expands dynamically in every direction. Ray Kurzweil will tell you where it’s heading.

263
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
or even logarithmically, and we are going to hit the wall pretty soon with the IP address 
(IPv4), which gives us only a total of 232 (about 4.3 billion) possible addresses. We have 
already reached the ceiling with 96% capacity as of last May 2014. Most users have no 
idea what it means. Luckily, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) in 1998 had 
formalized the successor protocol. Internet protocol version 6 (IPv6) is coming to the 
rescue. IPv6 will offer greater scalability and should be enough for a while.
IPv6 uses a 128-bit address, allowing 2128, or approximately 3.4 × 1038 IP addresses, 
or more than 7.9 × 1028 times as many as IPv4. IPv4 and IPv6 protocols are unfor-
tunately not upward compatible or even interoperable, complicating the transition 
to IPv6. However, several IPv6 transition mechanisms have been devised to permit 
communication between IPv4 and IPv6 hosts.
As of now, Forrester Research estimates that there will be 25 billion smart devices 
and intelligent systems “things” connected to IoT around the world by 2020. Simplisti­
cally, it means 25 billion new IP addresses will be assigned to all these smart devices, 
which will consume a substantial reserve from the remaining IP available addresses.
Architecture of the Internet of Things
Because of the massive volume of data that IoT threatens to produce, the recent trend 
toward clustering applications per sector becomes more logical and cost effective. 
Smart cities will have to utilize smart infrastructures threaded with smart grids as the 
main highways to secure the transfer and exchange of information among applica-
tions. Advances in embedded sensors, processing, and wireless connectivity are bring-
ing the power of the digital world to objects and places in the physical world.
Vassy expanded human
intelligence (predominantly
nonbiological) spreads
through the universe
Technology masters the
methods of biology
(including human
intelligence)
Patterns of matter and energy in the universe become
saturated with intelligent processes and knowledge
Evolution works through indirection: it creates
a capability and then uses that capability to
evolve the next stage.
The methods of biology (including human
intelligence) are integrated into the (exponentially
expanding) human technology base
Smart City
Big Data
Smart Vaccine
The Internet
of Things
Technology evolves
Brains evolve
DNA evolves
Epoch 2 Biology
 Information in DNA
    Epoch 3 Brains
Information in neural patterns
   Epoch 4 Technology
Information in hardware and software designs
Epoch 5 Merger of technology
         and human intelligence
Epoch 6 The universe wakes up
Epoch 1 Physics and chemistry
     Information in atomic structures
The six epochs of evolution
Figure 10.2  Kurzweil’s theory of technology evolution. Smart City, Big Data, Internet of Things, and even the Smart 
Vaccine will be part of Epoch 5.

264
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Despite its gargantuan landscape and complexity, the Internet of Things is becom-
ing a true marvel of integration and polymorphism. IoT is a true kaleidoscope with 
intricate geometry and fabric. It will have a tremendous impact on all sectors of the 
economy and home. Services will be grouped by application and will be securely 
bundled with intelligent security layer offered by Cognitive Early Warning Predictive 
System (CEWPS) and the Smart Vaccine (SV).
Basically, the Internet of Things has a very simple concept, as shown in Figure 10.3.
There are three clouds that constitute the Internet of Things, which are as follows:
	
1.	First cloud: The front-end devices, which are the data-generating cloud. All 
censored data will be transmitted to the second cloud.
	
2.	Second cloud: This is where all the raw data get collected and distilled and con-
densed. This cloud is referred to as the middleware cloud.
	
3.	Third cloud: It contains all the applications that generate the end reports to the 
consumer.
The Smart Vaccine grid (SVG) plays a critical role in eradicating all the attacks on 
the middleware and the application clouds. SVG is the best security defense for the 
clouds. Digital Immunity (DI) will guarantee to offer the best shield.
Here are some of the most promising networks of IoT that will enhance the quality 
of our smart cities:
Category 1
A home area network (HAN) is a new emerging technology that connects everything 
at home as one network with IoT service providers. This is an awesome technology 
Distilled data
Smart Vaccine
grid
Raw sensor
data
The rash of attacks will
occur in these clouds
Back-end applications
This is the area most vulnerable
Middleware
Front-end devices
Data collectors, monitors,
controllers, immunizers
M2M devices
Embedded devices
Electronic devices
Figure 10.3  A view topology of the Internet of Things (IoT). Embedded systems are at the consumer side, then data gets 
distilled, and end up in the sanitized data warehouses (on the left). The new disruptive technology is around the corner. It 
is called “Edge Technology,” which empowers the consumers more and more. Basically, all computing in EC takes place at 
the consumer site.

265
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
with several tangible benefits. A home area network is the communication technology 
that will allow smart devices in the house to operate autonomically and responsibly. 
Call it the house of the future. The demand for HAN-enabled smart devices is grow-
ing quickly. I expect every modern house will be HAN-enabled. The price of smart 
devices will go down, and the household will become smart. Whirlpool has stated 
that 100% of their home appliances will be smart grid compliant by 2017, and in a 
recent survey by General Electric, 82% of Americans believe that smart meters and 
smart appliances are the future, and 88% are willing to use smart devices.
The main incentive will be economic. Utility companies will be pushing for 
HAN because it will simplify their infrastructure maintenance. It has to be a 
plug-and-play type of a deal. Instead of selling individual products, some service 
providers have begun offering complete and externally managed home automation 
and home security solutions that lease networked systems of devices in a subscrip-
tion model together with externally managed services. Smart grid technology and 
networking market a powerful and comprehensive suite of critical infrastructure 
networking solutions. Utility companies and cities in the United States and world-
wide are trying to partner with HAN companies, as technology intermediaries 
offer homes a complete suite of applications, which cover advanced metering, out-
age detection, voltage monitoring, demand response, network management, and 
even offer seamless Web services to utility’s back office applications as shown in 
Figure 10.4.
The Internet of Things Domain
Home metering system
HAN data will be collected and monitored by SCADA
Utility
systems
City’s smart grid
City’s smart cloud
Sensor-activated 
appliances
Smart Vaccine grid
Home area network
Smart Vaccine 
protection
SCADA
CEWPS
Clean HAN data
Raw HAN data
HAN data gateway
Figure 10.4  Category 1: Homes will have smart devices and appliances connected to a home area network. The conve-
nience, availability, and reliability of externally managed cloud-computing resources will continue to become an appealing 
choice for many home dwellers without interest or experience in IT.

266
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Some of the smart appliances that will be connected to HAN are as follows:
•	 HVAC: An integrated thermostat for air conditioning and heating
•	 Smoke/CO detectors: Reliable rejection with actual screen reading
•	 Garage door and gate openers: With smart program to recognize incoming 
automobiles
•	 Lighting: Smart programs to advise household on consumption and usage
•	 Wireless program-activated smart devices
•	 TV cable
•	 Telephone
•	 TV entertainment
•	 House alarm
Category 2
Health care wearable devices networks: Health care is one of the most crucial sec-
tors that could benefit from the Internet of Things. As a matter of fact, health care 
has been a troublesome area for the government. California Health Care Almanac 
(July 2014) report describes the health care situation: “Even with the slow growth 
in national health spending in recent years, the U.S. continued to spend a greater 
percentage of its wealth on health care than any other industrialized nation. In 2012, 
the U.S. spent an average of $8915 per person on health care, reaching a total of 2.8 
trillion dollars.”
The U.S. Department of Health has just released a report on the health of 
Americans, entitled appropriately Health, United States, 2003, http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/hus/hus03.pdf.
It is available in print and online. The online version is periodically updated and 
revised. It is worth reading. The report is full of both good news and bad. The good 
news is that the life expectancy of Americans has reached an all-time high. But the 
bad news is that, during the last 5 years, the report also includes preventive care to 
treat obesity, smoking, vaccination, and access to primary care.
With the potential to improve the health, safety, and care of billions of people, 
health care is one of the most promising industries for IoT. With Wi-Fi-enabled 
medical tools and devices, hospitals are able to collect, record, and analyze data faster 
and more accurately. This helps medical staff perform diagnosis and treatment and 
undoubtedly improve standards of care.
Health monitoring and wearable devices for patients are becoming extremely popu-
lar, as they are able to transmit a patient’s real-time, vital-sign data from their home to 
medical staff. Such Wi-Fi-powered devices include things such as glucometers, scales, 
heart rate, and ultrasound monitors. Furthermore, wearable devices are gaining atten-
tion among the elderly and those with chronic illness. With the push of a button, a 
person is able to alert the medical staff of an emergency situation.

267
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
The Magic of a VeriChip Implant
In 2002, Applied Digital Solutions manufactured the VeriChip, which is an injectable 
identification chip that can be inserted under the skin of a human being to provide 
biometric verification. VeriChip is about the size of a grain of rice. It holds an identi-
fication number, an electromagnetic coil for transmitting data, and a tuning capacitor; 
the components are enclosed inside a silicon and glass container that is compatible 
with human tissue. The chip, which uses an RFID (wireless transmission) technology 
similar to the injectable ID chips used by animal shelters to tag pets, can be read by a 
proprietary scanner up to 4 ft away. Unfortunately, like anything ahead of its time, cer-
tain privacy advocates have raised concerns regarding potential abuse of the VeriChip, 
with some warning that adoption by governments as a compulsory identification pro-
gram could lead to erosion of civil liberties. VeriChip needed further enhancements of 
its security features, which made it susceptible to cloning, which could present a risk 
of identity theft. VeriChip could have played a major role in identity theft protection 
(Figure 10.5).
Additionally, fitness bands such as the Nike FuelBand or Fitbit measure whole-
body movement throughout the day—transmitting the data wirelessly to the user’s 
computer, tablet, or smartphone. This trend also has the potential to impact the way 
health insurance companies operate.
A large part of the impact of IoT technology will be where health care data exist in 
a lot of fragmented areas, including equipment, electronic medical records, along with 
Figure 10.5  The VeriChip implant will be as ordinary as getting an airline ticket. It is like any disruptive technology, it 
has to show the benefits first. The Associated Press on October 13, 2004, published an article that highlighted “The Food 
and Drug Administration said Wednesday that Applied Digital Solutions of Delray Beach, Florida, could market the VeriChip, 
an implantable computer chip about the size of a grain of rice, for medical purposes.”

268
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
the handling of patient data, tracking admissions, and managing best practices. It also 
shows how connecting and funneling data can help make better-informed decisions.
With all the rumbling and brouhaha about IoT in health care, the federal Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 reminds everyone 
that the primary goal of the law is to make it easier for people to keep health insur-
ance, protect the confidentiality and security of health care information, and help the 
health care industry control administrative costs.
So keeping the patient’s health records private and secure (in the order) should be the 
goal of IoT and not embracing technology for the sake of technology, as many vendors 
believe. The fact that medical records are still vulnerable and not perfectly secure raises 
a major concern about the real objective of medical technology vendors (Figure 10.6).
Hacking medical records is a profitable business. There are thousands of crime service 
providers (CSP) who specialize in identity theft of medical records. Even insurance com-
panies resort to their services to collect evidence on insurance fraud from subscribers.
MIT Technology Review Journal, in its December 23, 2014 issue, published an 
alarming article titled 2015 Could Be the Year of the Hospital Hack. The article gives 
a reason for the hospital invasion “The cause of the uptick isn’t hard to diagnose. 
Medical organizations across the world are switching to electronic medical records, 
and computer security is not always a high enough priority during the process, says 
Leonard the security manager from Websense. Besides that, he says, easy and fast 
access to medical information often trumps security.”
The Internet of Things Domain
Medical data will be collected and 
monitored by SCADA
Health care
providers
Hybrid man-machine
Deep brain
neurostimulator
Cochlear 
implants
Cardiac
 defibrillator/
pacemaker
Insulin pumps
Implanted
 chip
Gastric
stimulator
Foot drop
implants
Secure 
data
SCADA
CEWPS
City’s smart 
grid
City’s smart cloud
The Smart Vaccine
smart grid
Wearable and
implant data
Wireless interface adapter
Smart Vaccine
 protection
Figure 10.6  Category 2: Smart wearable and implant medical devices will be securely collected and monitored by 
SCADA and the gracious support of CEWPS/Smart Vaccine. The integrity and security of the medical data will be one of the 
biggest advantages of the Internet of Things. Digital Immunity (DI) will be the Holy Grail. HIPAA will eventually recommend 
DI as a mandatory requirement for the health care industry. Do not be surprised!

269
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
Software vendors usually release patches to plug the holes in their antivirus sys-
tems, but still hundreds of thousands of systems are likely still vulnerable. Though 
there are many other ways that malware authors can infiltrate networks and steal 
sensitive information, “the massive number of systems that are susceptible to this vul-
nerability is unique,” says Websense’s Leonard.
The Heartbleed security bug, disclosed in April 2014 in the OpenSSL cryptogra-
phy library, caused so many hospitals to be attacked, and their private patient records 
were compromised and stolen for identity theft purpose.
It is becoming evident that the present Antivirus Technologies (AVT) have not 
been able to eradicate cybercrime in the financial and health care domains. The reason 
could be very obvious: AVT companies have higher financial incentives to market 
Trojans and viruses to cyber lords and crime service providers. After all, AVT compa-
nies are profit organizations and willing to market their virus services to foreign crime 
organizations and their (AVT) products to the general public. The fact that cyber-
attacks have been on the rise in the United States and over 60% of the health care 
systems in the United States are still vulnerable raises eye brows, and whistle blowers 
have been away on a wild-goose chase.
Zombies Are Made in China
China is the fourth biggest country in the world, but when it comes to cybercrime, it is 
second to none. For years, intelligence agencies and private security experts have warned 
that Chinese hackers are trying to steal western corporate secrets. The cries have grown 
even louder as the attacks have become bolder and signs of government involvement have 
surfaced. In a forthcoming book, Eric Schmidt, the executive chairman of Google, report-
edly brands China “the most sophisticated and prolific” hacker of foreign companies.
The Chinesed target health care because they knew that hospital system lack tight 
security. The Chinese Black Hatters went after companies such as HCA and CYH who 
operate large networks of health care facilities. For example, the Nashville-based HCA 
is the nation’s leading provider of health care services, managing about 165 hospitals and 
115 freestanding surgery centers in 20 states and England and employing approximately 
204,000 people. Approximately 4%–5% of all inpatient care delivered in the country today 
is provided by HCA facilities. The Franklin, Tennessee-based Community Health Systems 
(CYH) manages a network of 206 hospitals providing general and acute care services in 
29 states. These are the networks that the Chinese hackers are targeting to steal patient 
names, social security numbers, physical addresses, birth dates, and telephone numbers. 
This critical information, which is often used as currency among shadowy international 
hacker groups, is almost always stolen for the purpose of identity fraud, allowing thieves to 
open bank accounts and credit cards on the victim’s behalf.
CEWPS brings a new type of security layer to support the information assets of 
public and private institutions, as well as SCADA systems that monitor critical infra-
structure systems. Here is how it works.

270
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
People who have implants and wearable devices will be connected via secure Wi-Fi 
to City Smart Grid and Smart Vaccine Grid. Pretty much like at home, where we have 
wireless router connected to a modem and to a cable or to an Internet service provider 
(ISP). The modem is actually a node on the Smart Vaccine smart grid, which provides 
immune security for all the devices worn or implanted in the person.
Category 3
Machine-to-Machine Networks (M2M): This is going to be the most influential 
paradigm shift that the Internet of Things would offer. As a matter of fact, there is 
a little confusion about the similarity of M2M and IoT. Simply put, Machine-to-
Machine is where machines use a network or the City Smart Grid to communicate 
with remote applications that monitor and control, either the machine itself or its sur-
rounding environment. The potential interconnection of smart objects and the way we 
interact with the environment is what the Internet of Things is envisioned to be, where 
the physical world will merge with the digital world.
M2M is what provides the Internet of Things with the connectivity that enables 
capabilities, which would not be possible without it. M2M with Internet protocols 
could be considered a subset of the Internet of Things and understood from a more 
vertical and closed point of view. On the other hand, the Internet of Things encom-
passes a more horizontal and meaningful approach where vertical applications are 
pulled together to address the needs of many people.
We define M2M as the communication between a machine or device and a remote 
computer. M2M is about connecting a device to the cloud, managing that device, and 
collecting machine and sensor data. In essence, M2M is about connecting and com-
municating with a thing, where a thing can be a machine, device, or sensor, basically 
anything that can send data.
The rise of objects that connect themselves to the Internet—from cars to heart moni-
tors to stoplights—is unleashing a wave of new possibilities for data gathering, Predictive 
Analytics, and IT automation. It is the beginning of a new epoch. But let’s think as 
engineers and not like entrepreneurs. We are creating a complex galaxy of clouds where 
everything is connected to everything. Complexity requires reliable monitoring and man-
agement. Often, complex systems tend to oppose their own proper functions and exhibit 
unexpected behavior. Ask any engineer and he/she will tell you that systems often tend 
to malfunction conspicuously just after their greatest triumph. So, the corollary of this 
systemantics is to collect reliable data during testing and adjust the design. As the authors 
of the excellent Trillions: Thriving in the Emerging Information Ecology put it, “The data 
are no longer in the computers. We have come to see that the computers are in the data.”
The Anatomy of Machine to Machine
A point worth stressing is that data transfer patterns in the M2M-driven Internet of 
Things will differ fundamentally from those in the classic human-to-human (H2H) 

271
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
Internet. M2M communications will feature orders of magnitude more nodes than 
H2H, most of which will create low-bandwidth, upload-biased traffic. Many M2M 
applications need to deliver and process information in real time, or near-real time, 
and many nodes have to be extremely low-power or self-powered (e.g., solar powered) 
devices. Figure 10.7 shows the topology of M2M. The following is a partial list of 
M2M categories:
Appliances: The things in the IoT, or the machines in M2M, are physical enti-
ties whose identity or state (or the state of whose surroundings) is capable of 
being relayed to an Internet-connected IT infrastructure. Almost anything to 
which you can attach a sensor—a cow in a field, a container on a cargo vessel, 
the air-conditioning unit in your office, a lamppost in the street—can become 
a node in the Internet of Things.
Interface sensors: These are the components of things that gather and/or disseminate 
data—be it on location, altitude, velocity, temperature, illumination, motion, 
power, humidity, blood sugar, air quality, soil moisture, etc., you name it.
Communications: All IoT sensors require some means of relaying data to the outside 
world. There is a plethora of short-range, or local-area, wireless technologies avail-
able, including RFID, NFC, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Wireless M-Bus. For long-
range or wide-area links, there are existing mobile networks (e.g., using GSM, 
GPRS, 3G, LTE, or WiMAX) and satellite connections. New wireless networks 
such as the ultranarrowband Sigfox and the TV white-space NeulNET are also 
emerging to cater specifically for M2M connectivity. Fixed things in convenient 
locations could use wired Ethernet or phone lines for wide-area connections.
Physical equipment
The Internet of Things Domain
Autonomic servers for remote
measurement and control
The Smart Vaccine grid
Application-centric
servers
Industrial back-end
applications
SCADA-based
servers
M2M gateways
M2M service providers cloud
Back-end applications cloud
M2M devices
Capillary M2M networks
Embedded devices
Smart sensor data
Figure 10.7  Category 3: Topology of the Machine-to-Machine (M2M) Internet of Things. You notice that the Smart 
Vaccine Grid is always on the alert, by offering Digital Immunity, to protect the M2M service providers and the back-end 
application clouds.

272
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Server (on premises): Some types of M2M installation, such as a smart home or 
office, will use a local server to collect and analyze data—both in real time and 
episodically—from assets on the local area network. These on-premise servers or 
simpler gateways will usually also connect to cloud-based storage and services.
Local scanning device: Things with short-range sensors will often be located in a 
restricted area but not permanently connected to a local area network (e.g., 
RFID-tagged livestock on a farm, or credit-card-toting shoppers in a mall). 
In this case, local scanning devices will be required to extract data and trans-
mit it onward for processing.
Storage and analytics: If you think today’s Internet generates a lot of data, the 
Internet of Things will be another matter entirely. It will require massive, 
scalable storage and processing capacity, which will almost invariably reside 
in the cloud—except for specific localized or security-sensitive cases. Service 
providers will obviously have access here, not only to curate the data and tweak 
the analytics but also for line-of-business processes such as customer relations, 
billing, and technical support.
This is because the concept applies to and has grown from a wide range of market sectors.
In this chapter, we are going to introduce another concept that has never been addressed 
or discussed earlier. We are going to discuss how we can create a hybrid system that 
tightly couples two versatile systems together. The supervisory control and data system 
(SCADA) is widely used in the manufacturing and power industries as the nerve center 
to critical processes. Also, SCADA is used as the data collection and supervision in power 
plants and for the management of the critical infrastructures in large metropolitan cities.
SCADA is the de facto of the control (analog–digital) systems. In the olden days, we 
had IBM 1800. But when new chips and operating systems emerged it was no more 
used. One should remember that SCADA is a generic name. There are over a dozen 
SCADA brands with a variety of features, which are grouped by industry, by technol-
ogy, and, of course, by cost. Take, for example, the Siemens SCADA that is known for 
its versatility. We could add Digital Immunity (DI) to its performance, which would 
definitely offer the customer the best of two worlds.
Digital Convergence of the Internet of Things, SCADA, CEWPS, and Big Data
What Is Digital Convergence?
Digital Convergence (DC) is what I call cooperative engineering because it is an additive 
process that combines the strength properties of all converged elements. It is different 
from fusion, which trickled from the Latin word fundere, meaning melt, where all the ele-
ments involved will melt together and form one new element. Digital Convergence creates 
a multifaced platform that provides higher performance and greater economies of scale.
In a cloud-based environment, DC will offer near-real-time visibility, more respon-
sive control, better Predictive Analytics of assets, and more importantly, workforce 

273
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
enablement via remote collaboration tools. We are going to show how four emerg-
ing technologies have to converge onto one cloud-based environment: Information 
­Technology (IT), Consumer Technologies (CT), Operational Technologies (OT), 
and Infrastructure Technologies are subsets of the Internet of Things. All these 
technologies will be protected by the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG), which is the secu-
rity backbone of the Smart City. We added the Critical Infrastructure Technologies 
(CIT), which is the most crucial ingredient of the Smart City. It will also be protected 
by the Smart Vaccine cognitive grid. At the same time, Big Data is in the background.
Emerging Technologies: The Big League Players
Figure 10.8 represents how the mega-Digital Convergence abstraction framework is 
going to shape up. We see how the four technologies are going to coexist and inter-
connect. Big Data, the mother of all clouds, will be hovering in the background. IT, OT, 
CT, and the infrastructure technologies will prevail as the four major clouds in the 
Smart City. These four technologies will be plagued with constant Virus Rains and 
storms unless they are connected to an intelligent grid that would monitor and alert 
nearby system. Any attack on one of the IoT technologies (listed earlier) will prolifer-
ate and becomes pervasive and even uncontrollable. CEWPS/Smart Vaccine runs on 
its own cognitive smart grid (CSG), like the human nervous system supporting the 
immune system. The need for this intelligent grid is a matter of life and death. We will 
describe later how it will function and offer its security services (Figure 10.8).
The Big Data cloud
Operational 
technologies
Information 
technologies
Consumer 
technologies
Critical 
infrastructures
The Smart Vaccine Grid
powered by CEWPS
Figure 10.8  The megadigital convergence abstraction framework of emerging technologies. The Smart Vaccine will be 
one of the big players offering Digital Immunity to the other technologies that make up the Internet of Things.

274
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Group 1: Information Technology (IT)
It traditionally comprises resources and connectivity for processing and managing 
data to support business functions and transactions. Its goal is to ensure the confi-
dentiality, integrity, and availability of data and systems. IT includes solutions such 
as enterprise resource planning, HR management, customer service, transaction pro-
cessing, financial reporting, and corporate collaboration.
Group 2: Consumer Technology (CT)
It encompasses the products and services that companies provide to end users or 
customers. It includes smartphones, tablets, health- and fitness-monitoring devices, 
location-aware services, and gaming networks, to name just a few. Ubiquitous connec-
tivity and advanced mobility, combined with the boom in cloud-based services, have 
further fueled the surge of consumer products. Technologies such as near field com-
munication (NFC), radio frequency identification (RFID), and Bluetooth low energy 
are enabling a new wave of products like digital wallets and personal health monitors.
Group 3: Operational Technology
It is typically defined as systems and related automation assets that monitor and con-
trol physical equipment and events such as supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA) systems or systems that support the creation and delivery of products and 
services. Physical control of a process or any component of the critical infrastructures, as 
described in the book, is the most critical part of OT. Historically, operational systems 
have been managed and maintained separately from IT. That’s continuing to change as 
businesses begin to mesh OT and IT and connect the two public and private clouds. OT 
includes another category of systems such as environmental control, plant management, 
integrated facility management, air traffic control, and automated logistics operations.
Group 4: Critical Infrastructure Technologies
The critical infrastructure sectors are defined in Federal Costumer Identification 
Program Policy based on the President’s national strategy documents and Homeland 
Security Presidential Directive 7.
	
1.	Agriculture: Includes supply chains for feed and crop production
	
2.	Banking and finance: Consists of commercial banks, insurance companies, mutual 
funds, government-sponsored enterprises, pension funds, and other financial 
institutions that carry out transactions, including clearing and settlement
	
3.	Chemicals and hazardous materials: Produces more than 70,000 products 
essential to automobiles, pharmaceuticals, food supply, electronics, water 
treatment, health, construction, and other necessities
	
4.	Defense industrial base: Supplies the military with the means to protect the 
nation by producing weapons, aircraft, and ships and providing essential ser-
vices, including information technology and supply and maintenance

275
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
	
5.	Emergency services: Includes fire, rescue, emergency medical services, and law 
enforcement organizations
	
6.	Energy: Includes electric power and the refining, storage, and distribution of 
oil and natural gas
	
7.	Food: Covers the infrastructures involved in postharvest handling of the food 
supply, including processing and retail sales
	
8.	Government: Ensures national security and freedom and administers key pub-
lic functions
	
9.	Information technology and telecommunications: Provides information process-
ing systems, processes, and communications systems to meet the needs of 
businesses and government
	 10.	Postal and shipping: Includes the U.S. Postal Service and other carriers that 
deliver private and commercial letters, packages, and bulk assets
	 11.	Public health and health care: Consists of health departments, clinics, and 
hospitals
	 12.	Transportation: Includes aviation, ships, rail, pipelines, highways, trucks, 
buses, and mass transit that are vital to our economy, mobility, and security
	 13.	Drinking water and water treatment systems: Includes about 170,000 pub-
lic water systems that rely on reservoirs, dams, wells, treatment facilities, 
pumping stations, and transmission lines
There are a number of cybersecurity technologies that can be used to better protect 
critical infrastructures from cyberattacks, including access control technologies, sys-
tem integrity technologies, cryptography, audit and monitoring tools, and configu-
ration management and assurance technologies. In each of these categories, many 
technologies are currently available, while other technologies are still being researched 
and developed. The following list summarizes some of the common cybersecurity 
technologies, categorized by the type of security control they offer:
	
1.	Access control: Boundary protection firewall controls access to and from a net-
work or computer.
	
2.	Content management: Monitors Web and messaging applications for inappro-
priate content, including spam, banned file types, and proprietary information.
	
3.	Authentication biometrics: Uses human characteristics, such as fingerprints, 
irises, and voices, to establish the identity of the user.
	
4.	Smart tokens: Establish identity of users through an integrated circuit chip in 
a portable device such as a smart card or time-synchronized token.
	
5.	Authorization: User rights and privileges. Allow or prevent access to data and 
systems and actions of users based on the established policies of an organization.
	
6.	System integrity: Antivirus software provides protection against malicious 
code, such as viruses, worms, and Trojan horses.
	
7.	Integrity checkers: Monitor alterations to files on a system that are considered 
critical to the organization.

276
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
	
8.	Cryptography: Digital signatures and certificates use public-key cryptography 
to provide (1) assurance that both the sender and the recipient of a message 
or transaction will be uniquely identified, (2) assurance that the data have not 
been accidentally or deliberately altered, and (3) verifiable proof of the integ-
rity and origin of the data.
	
9.	Virtual private networks: Allow organizations or individuals in two or more 
physical locations to establish network connections over a shared or public 
network, such as the Internet, with functionality that is similar to that of a 
private network using cryptography.
	 10.	Intrusion detection systems: Detect inappropriate, incorrect, or anomalous activ-
ity on a network or computer system.
	 11.	Intrusion prevention systems: Build on intrusion detection systems to detect 
attacks on a network and take action to prevent them from being successful.
	 12.	Security event correlation tools: Monitor and document actions on network 
devices and analyze the actions to determine if an attack is ongoing or has 
occurred. Enable an organization to determine if ongoing system activities are 
operating according to its security policy.
	 13.	Computer forensics tools: Identify, preserve, extract, and document computer-
based evidence.
Cybercrime Hitting the Internet of Things with Virus Rain
What Is Virus Rain?
We coined the term Virus Rain to describe a massive surprise attack hitting a targeted 
Smart City with a rain of vicious viruses. Another term that we coined in 2001 is the 
Electronic Pearl Harbor. It is like a rapid epidemic that spreads a large quantity of infec-
tious diseases to a large number of people in a given population within a short period 
of time. The Virus Rain is a tsunami of thousands of stealth-active viruses ready to 
damage all the systems that control the critical infrastructures in any congested metro-
politan areas, including smart cities.
How is the Virus Rain created? Figure 10.9 shows the global manufacturing of the 
Virus Rain. Many crime organizations collaborate and prepare the attack from differ-
ent locations on the globe, which make it difficult to trace. In Chapter 13, we discuss 
the Electronic Pearl Harbor attack.
A hard look at the reality of things reveals that the Internet of Things has some real 
security concerns that need to be addressed. Cyberspace belongs to everyone, and no one 
owns it. All these wonderful emerging technologies including the Internet of Things 
do not have a formal custodian or an administrator that imposes governance and policy 
rules. Pervasive integration and this massive convergence of information, operational, 
and consumer technology ecosystems will transform the very nature of security risks. 
It will also open new opportunities for new breed of cyber thieves who will introduce 
new crime techniques and attacks that can have serious consequences on business 

277
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
operations, public health and safety, and consumer confidence. The convergence of 
technologies is already well under way, and connected devices will continue to pro-
liferate and evolve in ways that are impossible to predict. So, too, will security risks. 
Organizations that want to get ahead of the convergence curve should take action now 
to formulate a strategic approach to integrated security, one that balances the security 
objectives unique to information, operation, and consumer technologies. This is easy 
to say. But here is the big problem: companies will hire consulting firms and spend 
hundreds and days at millions of dollars, preparing a security strategic plan. For what? 
It will not go anywhere. How could it be implemented? And what are the technologies 
that will be incorporated in the development of this plan? Planning a security plan 
is an excellent corporate exercise, but implementing the plan is very challenging and 
often it becomes outdated the moment it rolls out for production.
Security is a critical operating necessity that should be incorporated in the design 
of things. Unfortunately, security trailed behind innovation and the technology curve. 
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) recently announced that a hacker 
group had successfully infiltrated a U.S. public utility, which is part of the critical 
infrastructures, via Internet cyber tunnels, and compromised its control system net-
work. While no damage was done, the incident underscores the fact that threats to 
critical infrastructure providers are very real. They are also on the rise. In 2013, the 
DHS Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) 
responded to 256 cyber incident reports, an increase of 86% over 2012.
And here is another example, consider, for instance, the introduction of consumer 
products and services in the health care industry. A new wave of implantable devices 
Figure 10.9  How the Virus Rain is launched against the northeastern region of the United States. Virus Rain is being 
packaged and assembled throughout the world from different adversary locations. Cyberterrorism comes in many different 
flavors. Basically, the Virus Rain is a massive cyber invasion from different fronts. It is the ultimate surprise attack with a 
huge variety of untraceable payloads.

278
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
such as pacemakers and glucose monitors are being deployed to monitor and wire-
lessly report patient health status to doctors and hospitals. Hackers have demonstrated 
that they can infiltrate these connected medical devices, a capability that could result 
in not only serious health and safety risks but also data-privacy concerns and legal 
exposure. These types of technologies have been deployed before their risks are fully 
understood, and only few health care providers are prepared to manage these risks.
The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has published 
a comprehensive cybersecurity framework (http://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/launch-
cybersecurity-framework-021214.cfm) that aims to reduce cyber risks related to critical 
infrastructure. The framework provides risk-based cybersecurity guidelines that, while 
voluntary, will in effect set a standard for cybersecurity that may be used in legal and 
regulatory investigations. As a result, security organizations may need to adapt to new 
regulatory, compliance, and safety requirements. For many, operational and consumer 
technologies will be a particular challenge because organizations may not have a holistic 
understanding of threats and an integrated approach to manage risks.
Design of the Intelligent Grid, the New Digital Immunity
When the movie The Terminator was released in 1984, it was about a cyborg assassin pro-
grammed to kill with his robotic emotionless might. The movie was apocalyptic and sin-
ister because it shows how technology was gone haywire mastered by AI-actuated robots 
that looked human. The most fascinating feature in the movie was that the Terminators 
became indestructible and were able to spawn life autonomically in themselves. The movie 
leaves you in awe and suspense. The moral of the story is that cybercriminals are real ter-
minators who are like programmed cyborgs who would like to control the cyber world.
The Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) with its army of vaccinators and paramedics will 
protect the city’s smart grid from cyber evil. SVG is powered with nondestructive 
residual memory leading to an enhanced response to subsequent attacks. The vaccina-
tion mechanism is the kinetic energy that constantly keeps the critical components of 
the smart city protected from preempted and persistent attacks.
Albert Einstein once said, “We cannot solve our problems with the same think-
ing we used when we created them. No problem can be solved from the same level of 
consciousness that created it. If I had an hour to solve a problem I’d spend 55 minutes 
thinking about the problem and 5 minutes thinking about solutions.”
Einstein said it right. He had great power of causality reasoning and common sense. 
Antivirus Technology (AVT) vendors did not think out of the box. Cybertechnology 
is in its fourth generation and yet AVT traders are spinning in their own revolving 
doors. Cybercrime industry has leapfrogged AVT. The Darth Vaders of cybercrime 
can shake the world from its roots. To overcome the accelerating cybercrime, we need 
to outrun it with different thinking and skill set.
President Obama has said early on in his tenure as president, “It’s the great irony of 
our information age, the very technologies that empower us to create and to build also 

279
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
empower those who would disrupt and destroy.” But cyberterrorism is a giant force 
that no one could arm wrestle with. Conventional military hardware is futile.
There are two Critical success factors that need to be satisfied in order to win the 
battle against cyberterrorism. The first factor is to predict the time of attack. The 
second factor is initiate the attack with better fighting skills. In other words, imitate 
the approach of the Human Immune System’s defense by offense. The Smart Vaccine 
replicates this approach, which gives it the upper hand in every battle.
The Smart Vaccine grid is equipped with a tremendous resilience and scalability. 
Its framework is reinforced with spectrum of technologies that dominates the twenty-
first century: on-demand computing, autonomic computing, AI grid computing, Big 
Data computing, and cloud computing. To remove any confusion about overlapping 
terms, between the Smart Vaccine and the Smart Vaccine grid, the Smart Vaccine is 
the AI-based commander that manages all the vaccination and paramedic services to 
critical systems that are of the city’s smart grid, while the Smart Vaccine grid is the 
grid that the Smart Vaccine uses to deliver its vaccination services. The Smart Vaccine 
resides on its SVG. The best analogy is the relationship of the locomotive and the rails. 
In this chapter, we will discuss the design of the SVG and how it works. The following 
are a list of the services performed Smart Vaccine grid:
•	 Grid identification services: Determine the destination grid and its content.
•	 Alert services: Created by the alert server commander and sent to CEWPS 
commander.
•	 Smart Vaccine support: It helps the Smart Vaccine commander locate infected systems.
•	 Attack/virus services: Collect information on the attack and nature of the pay-
load (virus) used.
•	 CEWPS services: Dispatch the alert to the grid commander.
•	 Grid directory services: Prepares information about the system on the grid.
•	 Grid broker services: Determines the best route for the vaccination of the criti-
cal system.
•	 Grid scheduler services: Determines the best time to instantiate the vaccination 
services.
•	 Grid state services: Keep track of the state of vaccination services.
•	 Grid vaccination services: Instantiate vaccination services.
•	 Grid documentation services: After the vaccination to save the vaccination and 
the attack episode.
Panoramic View of How SVG Fights to Defeat Cyberattacks 
Let’s talk for a minute about the nature of the vaccination services.
It is a software component that communicates using pervasive, standard-based 
Web technologies including HTTP- and XML-based messaging. The vaccination 
services are available anywhere on the Smart Vaccine grid, and it can service any kind 
of critical system at any time.

280
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Smart Vaccine services (SVS) are dynamic with its code reuse feature, which 
offers the positive side effect of vaccination services, interoperability, and flexibility. 
One service might be utilized by several systems that are working together to defeat 
the attack (Figure 10.10).
The Smart Vaccine grid will conduct the following services during an attack:
	
1.	The approaching attacks have been noticed.
	
2.	Tracked and analyzed by the early warning component of CEWPS.
	
3.	The alert commander gives all the details to the Central Coordination Center 
(CCC).
	
4.	The CEWPS commander relays all this information to the grid commander.
	
5.	The grid commander queries the directory (registry) for the proper vaccination 
services.
	
6.	The grid resource broker determines the right resources and the required services.
	
7.	The information is dispatched to the Smart Vaccine commander for execution. 
All healthy systems on the grid also get vaccinated before they are hit with a 
distributed attack.
	
8.	The Smart Vaccine commander instantiates the vaccination services at the 
infected system.
	
9.	The details of the attack are being documented and sent to documentation 
commander who will store the episode at the knowledge engine.
CEWPS/Smart Vaccine was designed to protect grid-centric infrastructure criti-
cal systems. The grid has many topologies and designs. CEWPS cognitive Smart 
Vaccine grid was developed to offer, like the human body, quick response for all the 
systems on the grid. The focus in the Smart Vaccine grid is not system virtualization 
Approaching
attack
CEWPS
commander
Alert
commander
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
8
9
Healthy 
system
Grid commander
Grid resource
broker
Infected system
Healthy system
Attack 
document
Healthy vaccinated system
Infected system
V
V
V
V
V
Grid system
directory
Smart Vaccine
commander
Documentation
commander
Figure 10.10  All critical systems are connected to City’s Smart Grid and to the Smart Vaccine Grid. When the attack 
is already on the grid trying to infect systems, a convoy of SV paramedics and vaccinators rushes to the battlefield, and 
the fighting starts. Vaccinators go to work, and damage control is activated. The attacking virus is captured and destroyed 
before it mutates and multiplies. The SV commander is directing the battle and in constant communication with CEWPS and 
City Grid Commanders. Once the battle is over, it will be documented and stored in the Attack Knowledge Base.

281
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
or computing ubiquity, or processing scalability or parallel processing. The Cognitive 
Smart Vaccine grid was solely designed to expedite the delivery of vaccination services 
to critical systems.
Digital Immunity Is the Holy Grail of Smart Cities
Take, for example, the following scenario: your finger accidently received a small cut 
by a rusty nail. There was some bleeding, which stopped with the help of some alcohol 
and iodine tincture. A couple of days later, you developed a stiff jaw, followed by a 
stiff neck, fever, and then muscular stiffness and spasms throughout the body. Other 
symptoms include difficulty in swallowing accompanied with headache and sluggish 
movement. The body goes into war and all defense armies (B cells) are mobilized, 
using the theme defense by offense, to eliminate the attacking germs (pathogens).
The nail was dirty and infected with tetanus bacteria. You vaguely remembered 
that a month ago you had taken a tetanus shot, which saved your life. The tetanus 
vaccine helped your white blood cells (B cells) to defeat the tetanus pathogen, and a 
few days later, you recovered. What really happened is a true biological miracle: the 
vaccine created fictitious battle (as an exercise) in the body, and the B cells developed 
the strength and knowledge to fight the tetanus bacteria. Our body’s immune system 
would learn about the nail accident and an army of B cells and killer B cells would 
fight with better weapons and artillery (antibody) to bring victory to the body. Had 
our body did not have the immune system that memorized the tetanus shot, the bac-
teria would have multiplied and brought eminent death.
Now, let’s assume that we installed CEWPS system and its Smart Vaccine grid in 
smart city loaded with hundreds of critical systems on its smart grid. Once we couple 
SVG with the city’s smart grid, all these critical systems would be immunized with an 
army of aggressive Smart Vaccine. Digital Immunity took over and the city can sleep 
comfortably. All the city’s critical systems would be monitored real time by SVG. If 
one of these critical systems, intentionally or unintentionally, suffered a backdoor worm 
attack (the detection system was sleeping on the job), then SVG would know about it 
and would issue an alert before the worm multiplies and infect the other critical systems.
Like in the human body, there would be a two-stage respond to the attack: the first 
stage is to identify the attacking virus, and the second stage is to learn the anatomy 
of the virus before it gets dismantled and its main parts would be saved for the next 
attack. The Smart Vaccine army would follow the same immunological response by 
isolating the infected system first; learn more about its attack vector, payload, and 
impact; and preserve its structure to build more robust vaccine for the next attack. The 
infected system was repaired, and it acquired a big dose of Digital Immunity.
Digital Immunity is the greatest paradigm shift. SVG is the immune system of 
smart cities. It is a contiguous living superorganism that we humbly call the Holy Grail 
of smart cities.
Figure 10.11 shows the systematic sequence of the vaccination services.

282
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
CEWPS Central
Coordination Center
Early Warning
Center
Causation 
Reasoning Engine 
Smart Vaccine
Vaccination Plant
Critical infrastructure
systems on the
Smart Vaccine Grid
The Smart Vaccine Grid
Secure Systems
Attack
Knowledge
Engine
Vaccine
Knowledge
Engine
Figure 10.12  CEWPS represented as a manufacturing plant showing how all the engines work in sync to deliver Digital 
Immunity to infrastructure critical systems.
Attack
alert
Notify
Search
Request
vaccine
Send infected
system
coordinates
Confirm
service
Send
instructions
Document
episode
Instantiate service
Terminate
service
Analyze
3
4
5
6
9
10
8
7
1
2
11
Vaccination
broker
Vaccination
service
Service is done
Vaccine
knowledge
registry
Type of
vaccine
Outcome
Store in
Knowledge
Base
Attack
starts
Infected
system
Immunized
system
Figure 10.11  The systematic sequence activities starting with the attack, how it was recognized matched with 
the specific vaccine (antidote), followed by the vaccination treatment, and finally storing the attack episode in the 
Knowledge Base.

283
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
The SVG vaccination services are in fact part of the Web services family; we believe 
that VS are of industrial strength because they are cognitive and autonomic. It raised 
the technology bar of the Web services (Figure 10.12).
Glossary: SCADA System
Access control list: List of all access permissions for a particular resource.
Access protection: Measures that authorize or limit access to plant elements accord-
ing to business and security aspects.
Antivirus software (virus scanners): A program for identifying and eliminating 
malware on computer-based systems and in networks.
Authentication: Process of verifying the identity of a user, process, or device. It is 
often a prerequisite for access to resources of an information system.
Authenticity: Genuineness of an object.
Authorization: Access right to system resources.
Backdoor: Covert, undocumented method for accessing a computer system. A back-
door is a potential security risk.
Bot: Short for robot; a program used for specific tasks, such as sending spam messages 
or sending an endless number of data packets in denial-of-service attacks.
Botnet: A large group of infected computers that can be used to mount coordinated 
attacks.
Boundary protection: A method for protecting an industrial control system (ICS) 
and for separating it from office IT systems and the Internet.
Bounds checking: Check to determine whether input parameters are within expected 
bounds. Helps to prevent buffer overflows.
Buffer overflow: If more data are transferred to an input interface than the input buf-
fer holds, this may cause data in other areas to be overwritten. Attackers use 
this method to crash a system or to introduce malicious code and take control 
of the system.
Certificate revocation list (CRL): List of certificates that the certification authority 
classifies as no longer valid.
Certification authority (CA): Institution that is regarded by one or more users as 
trustworthy for creating and assigning public key certificates.
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT): A group of IT security experts that 
evaluate current and potential security incidents and publish prompt warnings 
and countermeasures.
Configuration control: Monitoring of hardware, firmware, software, and documen-
tation in order to protect the system from nonpermissible changes before, dur-
ing, and after system implementation.
Control center: A central location according to ISA-99 from which a resource group 
is managed. Industrial infrastructures typically use one or more control centers 

284
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
to monitor and coordinate operation. In more complex plants, these are gen-
erally linked via a wide-area network (WAN). A control center includes the 
SCADA host computer, the associated operator displays, and auxiliary sys-
tems such as archive servers.
Control network: Security-critical networks that connect multiple control devices 
or operator control facilities of automation systems. A control network can 
be subdivided into multiple zones. At the same time, a company can have 
multiple control networks.
Control server: A server on which the overall control system is installed—typically, a 
commercially available application for a DCS or SCADA system.
Control system: A system for targeted specification of certain variables. Control sys-
tems include SCADA systems, DCS, PLC, and other forms of industrial 
instrumentation and controls.
Countermeasures: Actions, devices, procedures, or other measures that reduce the 
vulnerability of control systems.
Cyberattack: Malicious, unauthorized access to networks, computers, and control-
lers, the objective of which is to steal, modify, or delete data or manipulate 
processes.
Distributed control system (DCS): A control system whose distributed elements are 
connected for overall operation. Distributed process control systems are mostly 
used for continuous processes, such as oil refining, chemical production, and 
papermaking. However, they are also used in batch processes (manufacturing, 
packaging, and shipping of mechanical goods).
Defense in depth: Defense in depth is a graduated protection concept for computer 
networks. If one protection mechanism does not succeed, others can thwart 
the attack at another location.
Denial of service (DoS): The attempt to prevent authorized access to a resource or to 
limit the operability of a system.
Digital signature: A type of electronic signature that guarantees the identity of a 
person or device or the integrity of data.
Directory traversal: Directory traversal is a security gap that arises when invalid 
directory paths are input. While they typically occur with Web applications, 
all application types can be affected. Directory traversals result when an appli-
cation uses external inputs to create a file or a directory name. If the appli-
cation involved has not taken suitable precautions, protected content can be 
accessed by inputting control characters.
Demilitarized zone (DMZ): A demilitarized zone (DMZ)—also called a perimeter 
network—is a network area located between the network to be protected and 
an external network (usually the Internet). DMZs enable the configuration 
of a shell-type security model in which they act as intermediaries between 
the two networks. They guarantee secure transfer from a secure source to an 
unsecure destination or vice versa.

285
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
DNS cache poisoning: Manipulation of data of a domain name server so that users 
calling up one website are redirected to another fraudulent site.
Ethernet: The most commonly used LAN technology to combine multiple devices 
into a network.
Firewall: According to ISA-99, a firewall is an integral part of the connection between 
two networks and regulates the data communication between them. A fire-
wall can be either an application installed on a suitable computer or a separate 
device that forward or rejects data packets in a network. It enables or blocks 
access to certain ports based on defined rules.
Fuzzing or fuzz testing: A test method for software that analyzes the input behavior 
using random data. This method attempts to run code by providing random 
parameters (so-called fuzz) outside the usual area. In this way, it is possible to 
identify points in the program code that do not correctly process input data 
outside the expected area.
Hacktivism: Politically or ideologically motivated vandalism, for example, in the 
form of manipulated websites.
Hardening: Security measures that reduce the number of possible attack points of a 
system.
Honeypots: Devices or techniques designed to detect and monitor malicious code 
and to track its activities in a secure environment.
ICS-CERT: The Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team 
(ICS-CERT) concentrates on security aspects of control systems. It collabo-
rates closely with the US-CERT to analyze and respond to incidents that are 
relevant to control systems.
Identification: Verification of the identity of a user, process, or device; typically 
required for access to resources of an IT system.
Identity provider: Device that sets up, maintains, and manages identities.
Identity theft: Generating a false identity using stolen identification data (e.g., name, 
date of birth, address).
Incident: A situation that endangers confidentiality, integrity, or availability of 
data, systems, or security guidelines. These can be caused intentionally or by 
accident.
Incident response plan: A defined procedure for detecting, reacting to, and limiting 
the possible damage from cyberattacks.
Industrial automation and control system (IACS) or industrial control system 
(ICS): The combination of personnel, hardware, and software as a whole that 
can influence secure and reliable operation of industrial processes.
Industrial security: Industrial security describes measures to increase the industrial 
security standards of a plant for protection against cyberattacks and unau-
thorized access to overall control systems, industrial controls, and PC-based 
systems of the plant.
Information asset: Knowledge or data that are valuable to a company.

286
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Information security: Guarantee of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
information.
Information security event: Identified system, service, or network incident that indi-
cates a possible violation of information security or a loss of control.
Information security management system (ISMS): Part of the higher-level manage-
ment system; the aim of which is to ensure information security in every respect.
Information security risk: Probability that a vulnerability in the IT infrastructure 
and plant infrastructure will be exploited and cause damage to the company.
Integrity (data integrity): The certainty that data have not been modified by unau-
thorized persons. Data integrity pertains to the storage, processing, and 
transport of data.
Intrusion detection system (IDS): A security function that monitors networks and 
systems and looks for unauthorized accesses in order to issue timely warnings.
Intrusion prevention system (IPS): A system that detects unauthorized intrusions 
and attempts to defend against them.
IPSec: Short for IP security; a group of protocols that were developed by the Internet 
Engineering Task Force for the purpose of supporting exchange of data pack-
ets at the IP level. IPSec is an essential component of VPN. It provides two 
types of encryption: transport and tunnel. The transport mode encrypts only 
the payload and not the header. The more secure tunnel mode encrypts both 
the header and the payload. At the receiving end, an IPSec-capable device 
encrypts every packet.
ISA-99: ISA-99 is an international committee that specifies cybersecurity standards.
IT security: Protection of nonphysical, computer-related goods such as software 
applications, process programs, and personnel data.
Key logger: Program for covert recording of keyboard inputs. It is used to intercept 
passwords.
Least privileges: The principle that authorizations for certain functions are only 
granted to those who actually need them. Thus, many users may be authorized 
to query a database without also being granted permission to delete entries.
Logic bomb: A malicious program that is executed only under certain conditions, 
for example, deletion of data records if the name of an employee is no longer 
listed on the payroll.
MAC address: A globally unique identification number for each network-capable 
device.
Malicious code: See malware.
Malware: A program that is installed covertly on a computer and that jeopardizes the con-
fidentiality, integrity, and availability of data and applications on this computer.
Man-in-the-middle (MitM) attack: An attack on authentication processes in 
which the attacker is positioned between the requester and the authentica-
tion point, thus allowing the attacker to intercept and manipulate the data 
communication.

287
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
Network segmentation: Division of a network into subnets, each of which represents 
a network segment or network layer. Network segmentations can increase the 
performance and security of networks.
Password: A character string consisting of letters, numbers, and other symbols that a 
user uses to identify himself/herself or to gain access to a system.
Patch: Software used to eliminate known problems.
Patch management: Measures for providing, checking, and installing multiple 
patches on multiple computers.
Payload: Unauthorized activities of a malware.
Penetration test: Test of the vulnerability of computer systems using hacker tools.
Pharming: Redirection of data traffic from one website to another through 
interventions in the domain name system (e.g., as a result of DNS cache 
poisoning).
Phishing: The attempt to obtain confidential access information of a user. E-mails 
that appear to be authentic are used to lure users to a website where they are 
requested to enter their access data.
Port: The physical and/or logical interface of computers via which they communicate 
with other devices.
Port scanning: Automated examination of a computer with the goal of finding open 
ports and thus possible attack points.
Private key: A cryptographic key that is used in combination with a public key to 
decrypt and encrypt data. In contrast to the public key, the private key is kept 
secret.
Programmable logic controller (PLC): User-programmable controls—as opposed to 
hard-wired controls—that are used as the core for implementing industrial 
automation systems.
Protocol: A set of specifications (e.g., formats, procedures) that regulate the commu-
nication between devices.
Protocol analyzer: Software or a device that analyzes communication within a net-
work in order to check its operability.
Public key: A cryptographic key that is used in combination with a private key to 
decrypt and encrypt data. In contrast to the private key, the public key is not 
kept secret.
Public key certificate: A data record that identifies a person or application uniquely. 
It contains the public key and is digitally signed by a trustworthy institution.
Public key infrastructure: A framework that enables issuing, managing, and revok-
ing of public keys.
Role-based access control (RBAC): Role-based access control is one of certain func-
tional roles, and thus, certain authorizations are assigned to the users of a 
computer or network.
Rootkit: A collection of programs that a hacker uses to disguise his attack and to 
obtain administrator rights for a computer or a network.

288
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
SCADA: Supervisory control and data acquisition; refers to the monitoring and con-
trolling of technical processes using a computer system.
Scavenging: Searching discarded lists, source codes, and storage media for passwords 
and access information.
Security cells: The subdivision of an industrial network into individual, well-orga-
nized, and maintainable segments produces so-called secure automation cells. 
The cells are structured as logical segments based on spatial or functional 
aspects. They are protected with all required safety functions and operate fully 
autonomously. The data traffic and personnel traffic between the cells are sub-
ject to clearly defined controls and are monitored.
Security incident: One or more undesired and unexpected events that can interfere 
with company operation or jeopardize information security.
Security incident management: Procedures for detecting, announcing, and reacting 
to security incidents.
Social engineering: A nontechnical attack on the security structure. Attempt to 
obtain critical access data from employees through false pretenses.
Spoof: Forgery of an authorization for the purpose of executing unauthorized actions.
Spyware: Covertly installed software for collecting information about the user, the 
computer, or the associated company.
SQL injection: The attempt to gain control over a computer by transferring special 
characters to a SQL application on the computer.
Stuxnet: Stuxnet is a malware that appeared publicly for the first time in July 2010 
and operates using zero-day exploits, stolen certificates, and other components. 
It attacks Windows PCs on which a particular Siemens automation software 
is installed. After successful infection of the PC, Stuxnet attempts to obtain 
information about the system and to download blocks of code to the PLC. 
Stuxnet is directed toward very specific plant configurations.
Trojan: A computer program that provides functions that appear to be useful but that 
also contains malicious functions, for example, utilization of the authorization 
of the calling system part.
Trusted channel: A secure communication channel for data communication between 
two security zones.
US-CERT: A project between the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and pub-
lic and private institutions with the goal of protecting the Internet infrastruc-
ture of the United States. US-CERT coordinates the national defense against 
cyberattacks.
Virtual private network (VPN): An encrypted connection of computers or networks 
via the Internet. It enables exchange of confidential data over public networks.
Virus: Software with functions that are normally malicious and goal of which is to 
infect other programs or systems. Viruses typically require an interaction of 
the user to disseminate. This distinguishes the computer virus from the com-
puter worm, which is able to disseminate on its own.

289
The Internet of Things, Convergence of SCADA
Wardriving: Systematic search for wireless access points in which a person drives past 
houses and buildings while using a notebook to scan for unsecured WLAN. 
The goal is to gain unauthorized access to a computer or a plant controller.
Whitelisting: A measure that uses a positive list to limit access to certain resources 
and to prevent execution of unknown programs. Its main purpose is to protect 
computers and networks from malware and to prevent unnecessary wasting 
of resources.
A whitelist lists all applications that are permitted to be executed by a user or adminis-
trator. Before an application is started, a check is made to determine if it is on 
the list. An integrity check (e.g., using hash codes) ensures that the applica-
tion is in actuality the released application and not another program with the 
identical name.
Worm: A program that runs independently and can replicate itself in networks. Its 
dissemination ties up resources. Functionally speaking, worms may contain 
malicious code. It is typical for worms to have a more or less aggressive dis-
semination function that they can execute without a user.
Zero-day attacks: A zero-day attack is an attack that exploits previously unknown 
security gaps (so-called zero-day exploits).
Websites
http://blog.econocom.com/en/blog/smart-city-a-whole-ecosystem/ Smart City.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siberian_pipeline_sabotage.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuxnet.
http://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet.
http://www.businessinsider.com/nsa-firing-sysdadmins-2013–8#ixzz3NKnwJLPV.
http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-framework-021214-final.pdf.
http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/stuxnet-05-disrupting-uranium-processing-natanz.
http://www.wired.com/2011/07/how-digital-detectives-deciphered-stuxnet/7/ stuxnet great.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

291
11
Convergence 
of SCADA, CEWPS 
Dashboard, and 
Predictive Analytics
SCADA & CEWPS: The Best Techno-Solution for Smart Cities
The challenging issues for SCADA systems and projects today are not the same as they 
were a few years ago. Today, there is much more importance placed on integration, 
use of new communication and network technologies, and of course, security against 
hacking and cyberterrorism. We are using the German SCADA Siemens (SIMATIC 
WinCC) in our examples because we are familiar with this system and we could explain 
its operation in simple terms. The SIMATIC WinCC (SIMATIC stands for Siemens 
and TIC stands for Automatic) system is a modified version of Microsoft Windows, cus-
tomized to fit the industrial environment. WinCC is written for Microsoft Windows 
operating system. It uses a relational database engine and Microsoft SQL Server for 
logging, and some additional components written in VBScript and ANSI C, plus appli-
cation programming interface (API) plugs to facilitate integration. It is an open system 
that accepts products from different vendors and different platforms.
The idea of coupling SCADA with CEWPS, as shown in Figure 11.1, would be 
a double-barrel solution for safer smart cities. With SIMATIC, Siemens could offer 
smart cities with a state-of-the-art system featuring a big variety of high-performance 
functions for monitoring automated processes with total production transparency.
The statement “success of smart city is in its smart grid” is not totally accurate, 
because a grid is smart if it satisfies two critical conditions. The first condition is to 
bundle the grid with a cognitive system to control the dynamics of every signal on 
the grid. SIMATIC WinCC would definitely be the best nerve center to maintain 
steady optimum grid operation. The second condition is to couple the smart grid with 
a cognitive security grid (layer) using the innovative concept of Digital Immunity 
(DI). The Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS) is the culmination 
of AI defense mechanism to put an end to cyber vandalism and hooliganism that 
are plaguing all systems around the world. Organized cybercrime starts with a small 
organization and proliferates throughout the Smart City. Traditional ant-killing bait 
stakes from your friendly AVT vendor does not work for smart city cyber violence. 
CEWPS is a different type of weapon that The Smart City could rely on. Immunizing 

292
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
the critical systems of smart city infrastructures is the most effective security shield, 
inspired by the two immunization pioneers Pasteur and Jenner. Combining the 
strength of CEWPS and SCADA will provide an incomparable immunity shield 
against any vicious attack on the City Smart Grid (CSG) empowered by the Smart 
Vaccine Grid (SVG), illustrated by Figure 11.2.
SCADA systems, by design, tie topographically several decentralized facilities such 
as power plants and stations, oil refineries, water distribution, and wastewater treat-
ment systems. The move from proprietary black box technologies to a more open plat-
form, has facilitated connectivity and interoperability with SCADA systems, office, 
CEWPS
for
Digital Immunity system
SCADA
for
integrated automation 
support
Cognitive Data Collection Interface
Industrial process yard
Middleware
Figure 11.1  The loose coupling of CEWPS and SCADA offers a computing environment from the best of two worlds. The 
two systems are the state-of-the-art computing technology. The middleware slate is the medium that transfers messages 
and commands between the two systems. The industrial computers are connected to a multipurpose information bus that 
manages the traffic of collected data from the process and orchestrates the vaccination services.
SCADA System
CEWPS System
VaaS
Collected 
Data
Critical infrastructure systems
on the Smart Vaccine Grid
The Smart Vaccine Grid
The City
Smart Grid
Figure 11.2  SCADA and CEWPS hybrid configuration. While SCADA is responsible for the data collection and process 
management, the CEWPS/Smart Vaccine makes sure that all critical systems are immunized and safe from any malware. 
The City Smart Grid (CSG) is coupled with the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG). The SCADA collects the city’s performance data for 
predictive analytics from the critical systems.

293
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
and the Internet, but unfortunately it makes SCADA a big attraction for cyberter-
rorism. The U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) released a vul-
nerability advisory document cautioning users to observe strict access management. 
Consequently, the security of some SCADA-based systems has come into question as 
they are seen as potentially vulnerable to cyberattacks.
The creation of a hybrid loosely coupled SCADA/CEWPS configuration for the pro-
tection of smart cities would reinvent the concept of cybersecurity. Integrating human 
brainpower and knowledge in immunity and causality reasoning would bless smart 
cities with a cognitive and autonomic secure sphere ushering the acceptance of Digital 
Immunity. It would definitely make hackers think twice. CEWPS intelligent struc-
ture includes a reverse engineering engine that can dismantle any virus and reveal its 
genetics. Knowing thy enemy is the best way to defeat it. With the Internet of Things 
(IoT) becoming the new cyber fabric, the need for Digital Immunity could not be 
more timely and vital.
Merging SCADA and CEWPS
SCADA and CEWPS are two complementary systems that could easily achieve an 
optimum economies of scale. SCADA systems are in fact a special system designed with 
analog/digital conversion feature to manage, monitor, and collect process data from com-
plex industrial plants, including those of manufacturing, production, power plants, and 
refineries. SCADA’s umbrella also covers all public and private infrastructure processes.
CEWPS is a different creature with different purposes in life. First of all, it comes 
with highly trained commanders in counterattack and counterterrorism. The Early 
Warning Predictive System (EWPS) is like the RADAR of Air Traffic Control, built 
with great cognitive and reasoning power. The Smart Vaccine Commander (SVC) has 
an army of vaccinators (Smart Vaccine troops), an army of aggressive virus cannibals, an 
army of Smart Vaccine paramedics to repair the infected systems, and forensic agents to 
identify the anatomy of the attackers and their tools. CEWPS is equipped with smart 
knowledge engines to store battle episodes, a registry of attacks and viruses (Attack 
Knowledge Base), matched with a registry for all new and past vaccines ready for the next 
battle (Vaccine Knowledge Base). All CEWPS components are equipped with auto-
nomic features, which include self-configuring, self-healing, self-navigating, and self-
protecting. The vaccination team follows the orders of the Smart Vaccine Commander.
Both SCADA and CEWPS communicate with each other in real-time mode. 
They have their own dashboards, displaying interactively common information from 
each other. Let me put it this way: SCADA controls the process and CEWPS secures 
SCADA.
Anatomy of the CEWPS Dashboard
The dashboard is considered a cognitive magnifying glass that stretches our span of con-
trol over the performance of the system. CEWPS dashboard comes with two modes. 

294
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The first mode is the real-time visualization section, which displays immediate infor-
mation about the critical system. The second mode shows temporal historical data, 
trends, and variances against preset thresholds.
Mode 1: Real-Time Visualization Dashboard
The CEWPS real-time dashboard (CRD) is the most efficient way to check the pulse of 
the system. The dashboard is located at the Central Coordination Center and admin-
istered by authorized personnel only.
The “touch screen” dashboard allow administrators to modify dynamically neces-
sary to adjust key operational variables. The dashboard is refreshed dynamically with 
incoming real-time data from the real world. Figure 11.3 shows the main screen of the 
dashboard. CRD will also give you the ability to interrogate the system to make sure 
the readings are right. Sophisticated attacks could hijack the dashboard or internally 
modify the data while the screen indicates normal operation.
The dashboard is a live window: The intelligence of CEWPS is reflected in all the 
components including the dashboard. The cognitive features in the system can detect 
any abnormal situations, particularly if any of the critical systems on the grid is get-
ting compromised. Since the system is fully autonomic, it has the cognitive ability to 
locate an attack on the grid, correct the incoming data to the dashboard back to the 
preset parameters, and alert the administrators. Autonomic computing in CEWPS is 
not an option but the main ingredient which was incorporated in all the smart sys-
tems, particularly in the early warning prediction and the vaccination mission.
Figure 11.3  The main dashboard of CEWPS: It is fully autonomic and located at the Central Coordination Center (CCC). 
All CEWPS screens are touch screens, and the fields (buttons) can be moved around to the taste of the administrator, who 
can add new functions (buttons) if needed.

295
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
The Smart Vaccine Grid: Figure 11.4 shows one of the interesting features of 
CEWPS. The real-time screen shows the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) covering the 
whole region. In this example, we took the state of New Jersey (shown on the left of 
the screen). Every critical system is recognized by its coordinates. If a specific server, 
say, G-9 (right side of the screen), starts to blink, then the administrator can click on 
it and a blowout screen will come up showing the details of the server and what causes 
the blinking. Action will be taken immediately.
The quick response: Now, the Early Warning Predictive (EWP) system tries to locate 
the origin of the attack and checks with the Honeynet if the attack tried to penetrate 
the trap. The EWP activates heavy-duty tracking systems to find out more about 
the attack vector and its payload. EWE will activate a series of queries to the Virus 
Knowledge Base (ViKB) to get more information on the virus. Also, a request was 
instantiated to query the Vaccine Knowledge Base (VaKB) for the proper vaccine. 
Another request was instantiated to query the Documentation Knowledge Base 
(DKB) to select matching attack episodes.
Figure 11.5 shows an alert status screen giving the operator additional information. 
CEWPS responds quickly and the Smart Vaccine Commander takes charge.
Figure 11.4  The state of New Jersey as represented in a critical infrastructure smart grid. The power grid computers 
for the metropolitan areas of Jersey City, Newark, Trenton, Atlantic City, and Camden are shown. These areas are the most 
critical areas for CEWPS to secure. A blinking alert was issued for G-9. The cognitive system will show the cause and the 
recommended action.

296
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Critical System Parameters: The main dashboard has several screens that allow the 
administrator to see the key performance indicators (KPI) of the critical systems on 
the grid, before he can evaluate the situation and take necessary action. The KPI 
indicate the performance of the system in normal situation, the safety threshold, the 
workload, and the utilization of the resources.
CEWPS real-time operating features show the “live” readings of every section of 
the system. Here is the list of the critical parameters that have to be watched and 
regulated if necessary:
•	 Utilization of channel between SCADA systems on the grid and CEWPS
•	 Number of SCADA performance readings sent to CEWPS
•	 CEWPS readings
•	 Utilization of the Vaccine Knowledge Engine
•	 Utilization of the Virus Knowledge Engine
•	 Number of the attack documents stored
•	 Number of Smart Vaccine vaccination services per hour
•	 Average turnaround time of the vaccination service
•	 Average turnaround time of the vaccine fabrication time
•	 Average turnaround time of reverse-engineered attack
•	 CEWPS information exchange with other smart city systems
•	 Number of attack attempts per hour
•	 Number of early warning alerts per hour
Figure 11.5  The alert screen coming alive. Response will become fully autonomic and will trigger a family of predefined 
workflows to help the operator supervise the autonomic operations in case an override becomes necessary.

297
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
•	 Number of analyzed attacks
•	 Number of reverse-engineered viruses
•	 Number of successful attacks on the grid
Attack Status: One of the unique screens of CEWPS (Figure 11.6) shows how a virus is 
attempting to penetrate a system and how the Early-Earning Engine is predicting the 
arrival time. Simultaneously, alarms go off and vaccinators are ready to inoculate the 
system. It is a tug-of-war scene. The attack is never materialized. The first three alerts 
were timely, and the attack was eradicated. The scheduled attack is never materialized. 
The Smart Vaccine Commander dispatches the vaccination service on time, Vaccine-1 
missed the attack, but it was attacked by Vaccine-2. No system could watch the battle 
field real time from the headquarters (CCC) like this one!
Early Warning Alerts: The big challenge in the world is to see the future. In the 
world of cyberattacks, we try to eliminate any attack before it spills its payload and 
creates its planned pervasive devastation. Earlier, we mentioned the formula of defeat-
ing the attacker, which is as follows:
•	 First condition: Know the attacker’s weapons and time of attack
•	 Second condition: Have better weapons and higher skills
Figure 11.6  This screen shows exactly what happens in the vaccination battlefield: Prediction-1 said the attack is 
coming. Prediction-2 was triggered and succeeded with three alerts. The Smart Vaccine did not respond. Prediction-3 was 
instantiated and the Smart Vaccine started its vaccination services. When the attack arrived to the grid, it was eradicated. 
The attack was supposed to unleash its payload, but successive vaccinations and another alert did help. The attack was 
memorized and saved in the Document Knowledge Base (DKB).

298
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
If we apply it to cyberattack, our formula becomes as follows:
•	 Know the Arrival Time of the Virus to the Grid: This is a very difficult task to 
accomplish, as we resort to forsaking prior attack data. The time the alert was 
broadcast gives us a good estimate of the arrival of the virus to the grid.
•	 Get the Smart Vaccine army ready for the fight: We can assume the worst case 
when the captured virus had already created its own clones and they are on 
the grid. The Smart Vaccine had already vaccinated all the systems, and the 
army, the paramedics, and the virus killers have been mobilized and are pre-
pared for the virus clones to show up (Figure 11.7).
The main dashboard at the Central Coordination Center (CCC) has a chain of 
dynamic screens to check the pulse of the grids. Figures 11.8 and 11.9, for example, 
show the grid elements, location by coordinates, type of system, the industry, criti-
cality, the customer base, and the present and maximum load (the red zone) that 
can be handled.
Status of the Reverse Engineering Module: This is one of the most sophisticated 
components of CEWPS. It functions like the medical MRI to show how the 
malware software was intended to work. CEWPS is equipped with a versatile 
debugger and an interactive disassembler to decompose the attack and rebuild 
Figure 11.7  The uniqueness of CEWPS comes in its accurate prediction. As soon as the virus reaches the grid, the 
Smart Vaccine army will be ready to protect the critical system. The cognitive Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) is of paramount 
importance in the victory.

299
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
Figure 11.8  In order to use CEWPS and its Smart Vaccine Grid, we need to establish the grid first. Then we need to 
identify all the critical systems by coordinates in the region (in this case we selected the state of New Jersey). Then we need 
to store the characteristics of each system: the industry, the risk involved, and its contingency plan. A review of its past 
history is also valuable.
Figure 11.9  Screen-1 CEWPS is equipped with advanced biometric component for secure login to authorize and authen-
ticate users and system administrators. All users have to be in the active user registry.

300
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Figure 11.10  The Early Warning Engine is equipped with an online analytical processor (OLAP), a data-mining engine 
that generates analytical reports on vaccination services, and predictive reports for future viral attacks. Some of these soft 
reports are self-generated.
Figure 11.11  Screen-2 CEWPS takes security very seriously. The system people of the city’s system could access some 
of the CEWPS screens. They have to be authorized and then authenticated, in this order, and reviewed frequently by the 
Central Coordination Center (CCC).

301
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
the matching vaccine. A whole book could be written on this subject. That is 
why this module was designed by a team of reverse engineers.
Analysis of the Attack Payload: This is one of the most challenging parts of com-
puter science. It is comparable to defusing a bomb. It requires specialized 
experience in binary and assembly languages. The reverse engineers use very 
sophisticated tools such as interactive disassembler (IDA), which generates 
assembly language source code from machine-executable code. Also, OllyDbg 
is heavily used by our CEWPS reverse engineering team, which is an x86 
debugger that emphasizes binary code analysis. It is often the primary tool 
because of its ease of use and availability.
Virus Analysis: This information is vital for the fabrication of the matching vaccine. 
Again, it is like in the human body, no vaccine could be built without know-
ing the structure of the virus code. Some virus code runs very low down to the 
operating system level and building a matching vaccine would be very challeng-
ing. It would get very problematic if the attacking virus modified the operating 
system (since now Windows become open code and available to programmers).
Once the virus structure is known, it will be documented and stored in the Virus 
Knowledge Engine (ViKE) for future referral. Similarly, the matched vaccine 
would also be documented and stored in the Vaccine Knowledge Engine (VaKE).
Access Control and Management: For a complex system such as CEWPS, Access 
Control and Management is an operating necessity. Cyberterrorists and pro-
fessional hackers will test their skills by trying to penetrate through the Smart 
Vaccine Grid to the city’s smart grid and compromise some of the critical sys-
tems. CEWPS designers instituted a strict Access control & Management sys-
tems to perform authorization identification, authentication, access approval, 
and accountability of entities through login credentials including passwords, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), biometric scans, and physical or elec-
tronic keys. AI technologies were used to add a cognitive layer to the secu-
rity system. All CEWPS users credentials are stored in the User Registry. 
Figure 11.9 through 11.11 shows some access screens.
Vaccination Services: This is another form of useful information that tells the 
administrator the activities of the vaccination services that are being serviced 
at the time of the display. CEWPS Central Coordination Center (CCC) is 
the traffic control tower of the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG). The dashboard 
reflects the real-time logistics and status of each vaccination service (routine 
and emergency). A real-time snapshot screen is shown in Figure 11.12.
Attack Forecasts: The main principle of forecasting is to find the model that will 
produce the best attack forecasts. We rely on historical attack episodes to acquire 
complementary knowledge. We copied this concept from the Human Immune 
System that collects previous body attack. Once the patient is immunized, the 
body know the identity of the pathogen and the corresponding antidote. One 
of the most versatile components of CEWPS is its Reasoning Engine. It is a 

302
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
formidable predictor and causality model that calculates the discovery of attack 
causes. Prediction follows common sense. If historical data of (a priori) previous 
attacks were retrieved from the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB), and if a rela-
tionship is established with joint and conditional probabilities among these past 
attacks, then the Reasoning Engine with predefined logic rules could generate 
a reasonable forecast for similar future (posteriori) attacks.
Mode 2: Smart City Predictive Analytics Dashboards
In this mode, we show the Predictive Analytics reports for the Smart City. Again, 
we calculate the probabilities of incoming attacks and their impacts on the critical 
systems. Predictive Analytics reviews the past and the present attack data and extend 
it to the future. The Inference Engine applies predefined logical rules to the data and 
deduces new knowledge as shown in Figure 11.13.
CEWPS Performance
We track CEWPS performance, as a system, and make sure that the major compo-
nents are operating without degradation, and determine the bottlenecks. Also, we 
Figure 11.12  Screen-3 All users of the Smart City critical systems have been registered and fingerprinted with their 
images in the city’s employee register (revised weekly). The position of the user dictates the authorization level. Users have 
to be authenticated before they can access the system.

303
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
need to look at the capacity planning that evaluates if the system can handle the future 
growth. We know that the smart grid is going to have more systems attached to it, and 
the city has to provide the growth data in order to produce a credible capacity plan.
Attacks: The Documentation Knowledge Base has all the historical episodes, and 
the system can generate a report showing the most frequent attacks on the 
grid. It also shows the type of payload, attack vectors, and the time of attack 
and how long it took. These are very significant information about the profile 
of the attacks on the grid.
Viruses: A detailed analysis on the profile of the viruses, the forensics’ report, the 
code, and the strategy are involved in the attack.
Vaccines: Like the profile of the attacks, this information is the detailed analysis 
on the type of vaccine used for a particular attack, the time to produce the vac-
cine, how the Smart Vaccine commander is handling the vaccination, and all 
the data relevant to the vaccination itself, as shown in Figures 11.14 and 11.15.
Smart City Predictive Analytics
No one has the ability to capture and analyze data from the future. However, there is a 
way to predict the future using the data from the past. It is called Predictive Analytics, 
and organizations do it every day.
Predictive Analytics is the process of using a set of sophisticated analytic tools to 
develop predictive models and estimations of what the environment will do in the future. 
Predictive Analytics for The Smart City differs from PA for the smart grid, which also 
differs from the PA of CEWPS.
Figure 11.13  Einstein said once “The only source of knowledge is experience.” Prediction is the science of extracting 
future virtual realities from current and historical facts. CEWPS stores current and historical attacks, which make pre-
diction feasible (not necessity optimum). In this screen, we have four predictions with one showing 100% probability 
that an attack will occur soon. The attack hit the city grid after 6 hours, but alerts and vaccination services nullified 
the DDOS.

304
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The following are three primary categories of concern in conducting PA for The 
Smart City:
Category 1: Systems
City Smart Grid: The backbone of the city. Its incremental growth with the 
infrastructures, IoT workload, the city smart cloud.
CEWPS: Performance in the next 2 years. Reliability of the hardware and the 
software component. Capacity planning to make sure CEWPS can handle 
the workload. Interfacing with SCADA systems.
Vaccine Smart Grid (VSG): This is the backbone of CEWPS in managing the 
logistics of vaccination services. The response time to complete the VaaS. The 
performance of the paramedics in repairing the infected servers. Any bottle-
necks while interfacing with the city smart grid (CSG). What is the satura-
tion limit of the grid?
SCADA Systems: It is not the responsibility of CEWPS. However, the Smart 
Vaccine protects the communication links.
City Smart Cloud (CSC): Future scalability and performance during the VaaS. 
Any degradation areas that need to be monitored.
230
160
210
70
140
200
100
188
85
Boobytrap
10–2012
11–2012
12–2012
Backdoor
Spyware
Figure 11.14  CEWPS also generates a large variety of graphical reports and pie charts from all the Knowledge Bases. 
The city examines these reports and studies the risks involved, and then takes action.

305
CONVERGENCE OF SCADA, CEWPS DASHBOARD
Category 2: People
Growth of the Subscribers: They are the customers of the city grid, and one of the 
PA objectives is to gauge the affinity of customers toward being connected to the 
grid or to the cloud. It is one of the most critical metrics. Also, customer growth 
influences the traffic on the grid, which requires close performance management.
People Preferences: The Internet of Things is in full swing. Machine to machine is a 
great convenience to the populace. ABI research predicts that a holistic migra-
tion of people to infrastructure is the new wave. Research companies are rigging 
fancy estimates of  PA that more than 30 billion devices will be wirelessly con-
nected to the Internet of Things by 2020. A study done by Pew Research Internet 
Project has also an eye-popping survey: “a large majority of the technology experts 
and heavy Internet users who responded—83%—agreed that the Internet/Cloud 
of  Things, embedded and wearable computing will proliferate and reap beneficial 
effects by 2025!”
Power Consumption Growth: A very critical metric that needs a thorough predic-
tive analysis. Obviously, this sheep dip into the cybersphere-of-everything will 
create a tremendous strain on utility companies. Blackout is the bugaboo that 
ID theft and credit
20% growth
Bridge, city hall, banks 5% growth
30% growth
20% growth
5% growth
35% growth
50
100
150
Feb–Mar–Apr 2014
% Growth over the next 6 month 2014
This is the distribution of the attempted attacks on the city’s customers subscribed to the smart grid
Data extracted from the FBI database and documents from the department of justice
200
250
300
Backdoor Trojan
Tech espionage
DDoS
Credit card
Political sabotage
Infrastructure 
attack
Figure 11.15  Performance management and capacity planning were two prominent specialties that saved enterprises’ 
computing operating costs. The same techniques apply to malware prediction. Data mining is another valuable technique 
incorporated in the early warning subsystem. The city commander can learn a lot from this screen.

306
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
makes the utility companies sweat a lot. The smart grid is smart enough to 
buffer high spikes of power consumption.
Category 3: Predictive Analytics for Attacks
Attack Distributions: Once the vaccine smart grid is in full operation, the Attack 
Knowledge Engine (AKE) can determine the necessary statistics on the types 
of the grid attacks.
Attack Duration: AKE stores all the past (a priori) attack episodes. Queuing 
mathematical models (we have some samples in Chapter 9) can predict the 
times of attacks and early warnings.
Attack Growth: Adding more infrastructure nodes (critical systems) to city’s 
smart grid will correlate with the growth of attacks on vulnerable systems in 
terms of frequency and sophistication.
Attack Impact: Attack impact (financial damages and system breakdowns) cor-
relates with the growth of attacks. A very scary metrics.
Areas Most Damaged: The city smart grid will keep statistics on the city areas 
where damage was noticeable in terms of confusion and car gridlocks and 
delayed public transportation.
Smart Vaccine Performance: CEWPS keeps real-time data on the status of vac-
cination services and how the Smart Vaccine commander is managing to pro-
tect the critical system and the treatment of the attacked systems. All the 
statistics are available in the Vaccine Knowledge Engine.
Virus and Vaccine Distribution: Along with the performance of the vaccination 
service, CEWPS keeps real-time statistics on the types of attacks and how on 
the response of the Smart Vaccine.
Websites
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/cyber.
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ncic.
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/cyber/ncijtf.
http://hackmageddon.com/tag/denial-of-service-attack/.
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2372364,00.asp?obref=obnetwork.
http://www.state.nj.us/nj/safety/.

307
12
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
Introduction to Causal Discovery and Bayesian Networks
Democritus once said that he would rather discover a single cause than be the king of 
Persia “Beyond such discarded fundamentals as ‘matter’ and ‘force’ lies still another 
fetish amidst the inscrutable arcana of modern science, namely the category of cause 
and effect.”
The Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System is equipped with four knowledge 
engines that support the causal Reasoning Engine that is based on Bayesian network 
model as shown in Figure 12.1.
A simplistic analogy may help jump-start our introduction to Bayesian networks: in 
the same way, one can use a phone book, without having to memorize all the names 
and numbers, and one can deliberately (and correctly) reason with the domain knowl-
edge contained in a Bayesian network, without having to become a domain expert.
Over the past 25 years, Bayesian networks have emerged as a practically feasible 
form of know­ledge representation, primarily through the seminal works of UCLA 
Professor Judea Pearl. With the ever-increasing computing power, Bayesian networks 
are now a powerful tool for deep understanding of very complex, high-dimensional 
problem domains. Their computational efficiency and inherently visual structure make 
Bayesian networks attractive for exploring and explaining complex problems.
However, Bayesian networks are somewhat of a disruptive technology, as they chal-
lenge a number of common practices in the world of business and science. So, beyond the 
world of academia, promoting Bayesian networks as a new tool for practical knowledge 
management and reasoning still requires significant persuasion efforts. In the opinion 
of many AI researchers, Bayesian Network (BN) is the most significant contribution in 
AI in the past 10 years. They are used in many applications, for example, spam filtering, 
speech recognition, robotics, diagnostic systems, and even syndromic surveillance. The 
key benefits of Bayesian networks in prediction attacks are threefold:
	
1.	Knowledge unification
	
2.	Knowledge representation and communication
	
3.	Reasoning the occurrence of the attack
Short Course in Probability as Related to Predicting Incoming Cyberattacks
A probability is a number between 0 and 1 (including both) that represents a degree of 
belief in a fact or prediction. The value 1 represents certainty that a fact is true or that a 

308
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
prediction will come true. The value 0 represents certainty that the fact is false. The value 
0.5 means that a predicted outcome is as likely to happen as not.
Conditional Probability is a probability based on some background information. 
This is the reason CEWPS collects historical attack episode, so they can be used for 
future attack forecasts.
p(Attack A|Damage B): denotes the conditional probability of an Attack A occur-
ring, given that Damage B has already occurred.
Conjoint Probability is the probability that two things occurred at the same time. 
I write p(Attack A and Attack B) to mean the probability that Attack A and Attack B 
by accident occurred at the same time. But Attack A and Attack B are not connected 
to each other.
But this formula p(Attack A and Attack B) only works because in this case 
Attack A and Attack B are independent; that is, knowing the outcome of the first 
Attack A does not change the probability of the second Attack B. Or, more formally, 
p(B|A) = p(B).
Bayes’ Theorem
At this point, we have everything we need to derive Bayes’ theorem. We will start 
with the observation that conjunction is commutative, that is,
	
p(Attack A and Attack B) = p(Attack B and Attack A)
Long-term
procedural
memory
Visual
memory
Cerebellum
Episodic
most efficient
memory
Hippocampus
Sematic
long-term
declarative
memory (hard drive)
Verbal
memory
Short-term
memory
Figure 12.1  Associative memory puts it all together. “Green” means “go,” but what does “red” mean? Just about 
everybody says “stop.” Traditional memory stores data at a unique address and can recall the data upon presentation of the 
complete unique address. Associative memories are capable of retrieving a piece of data upon presentation of only partial 
information from that piece of data. They are used in AI and CEWPS.

309
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
for any Attack A and Attack B. Next, we write the probability of a conjunction:
	
p(Attack A and Attack B) = p(Attack A) p(Attack B|Attack A)
If we do not know anything about the nature of Attack A and Attack B, then we can 
say they are interchangeable. Interchanging them yields
	
p(Attack B and Attack A) = p(Attack B) p(Attack A|Attack B)
If I need to know the probability of Attack A and Attack B occurring at the same 
time, then it is equal to the probability of Attack B—in the future multiplied by the 
probability of Attack A—from the past & Attack B
	
p
A
B
p
A p
B
A
p
(
)
(
) (
)
(
Attack
and Attack
Attack
Attack
and Attack
Attac
=
k B)
And that is Bayes’ theorem! It might not look like much, but it turns out to be surpris-
ingly powerful.
CEWPS Works Like a Brain
Generally speaking, an expert system is an artificial intelligence (AI) computer pro-
gram designed to hold the accumulated knowledge in a specialized domain. The 
human brain holds information in the form of electrochemical and electrical impres-
sions. Researchers have been able to trace memory down to the structural and even the 
molecular level in recent years, showing that memories are stored throughout many 
brain structures in the connections between neurons and can even depend on a single 
molecule for their long-term stability.
There are three basic types of memory:
	
1.	Very-Short-Term Memory (the sensory register): This comes in visual and audi-
tory blips. We receive brief glimpses (1–2 seconds visually, may be 3–4 sec-
onds aurally) of experiences, like looking out a window then shutting your 
eyes and seeing the brief afterimage of the window. Neurons are firing very 
quickly to capture the experience.
	
2.	Short-Term Memory (working memory): This is the memory that you are aware 
of and can retrieve rather quickly. A helpful computer analogy is the term 
random-access memory (RAM), a limited form of memory that runs the pro-
grams of thinking and imagining—which is unlike accessing the hard drive.
	
3.	Long-Term Memory (the hard drive): Those experiences and associations of 
experiences that we have been exposed to over the course of our lives make 
up long-term memory (especially 2–5 or more years and the early, impression-
able years of our lives). Repeated experiences strengthen the neural pathways 
by developing more sensitive cell receptors; this process is known as long-
term potentiation. There are two types of long-term memory—declarative and 
procedural (Figure 12.1).

310
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The hippocampus takes simultaneous memories from different sensory regions of 
the brain and connects them into a single episode of memory, for example, you may 
have one memory of a dinner party rather than multiple separate memories of how 
the party looked, sounded, and smelled. As memories are played through the hippo-
campus, the connections between the neurons associated with a memory eventually 
become a fixed combination, so that if you hear a piece of music, for example, you are 
likely to be flooded with other memories you associate with a certain episode where 
you heard that same music.
In a brain scan, scientists see these different regions of the brain light up when 
someone is recalling an episode of memory, demonstrating how memories represent 
an index of these different recorded sensations and thoughts. The hippocampus helps 
solidify the pattern of connections that form a memory, but the memory itself depends 
on the solidity of the connections between individual brain cells, according to the 
research from McGill and from New York University.
Information processing starts with the input from the sensory organs and trans-
forms physical stimuli such as touch, heat, sound waves, or photons of light into 
electrochemical signals. The sensory information is repeatedly transformed by the 
algorithms of the brain in both bottom-up and top-down processing.
What Is an Expert System?
In artificial intelligence (AI), an expert system is a computer system designed to act 
like a human expert. CEWPS can analyze complex situations with the same skill and 
experience as a human expert. We have to admit that one day, computers will be able 
to reason faster than humans according to Dr. Ray Kurzweil in his famous book The 
Singularity Is Near. For now, CEWPS has the skills of a crime expert, experienced 
software forensician, military planner, software and hardware engineer, and finally a 
system paramedic. In sum, we put together an AI system, embedded with smart rules 
and decisions trees that replicate the human immunity.
Figure 12.2 shows the expert components of CEWPS. These are the vital organs 
of the Digital Immune System. We start with the Central Coordination Center, the 
Early Warning Center, the Knowledge Bases, the Smart Vaccine Center, the Inference 
Engine, and let’s not forget the domain expert who will add more crime knowledge 
and attack cases to the database. Let’s talk about the Knowledge Bases.
CEWPS main Knowledge Bases: These are massively scalable Amazon-like 
fulfillment centers with an army of Kiva robot drive units (metadata) 
working around the clock to meet the heavy workload of CEWPS. CEWPS 
Knowledge Bases store groups of similar entities linked together to form 
what we call a knowledge model. CEWPS has four Knowledge Bases; each 
one stores one facet of crime domain. Figure 12.2 shows the topology of the 
Knowledge Bases.

311
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
Virus Knowledge Base (AKB): It is part of the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB). 
It is considered the morgue of CEWPS especially after the battle. This deep 
repository stores the attack episodes with the captured viruses. The virus pro-
file information, their anatomy, and the reverse engineering data are stored 
in the database as organized relational tables with an index for fast retrieval. 
AKB contains two types of entities: the Attack Patterns and the Attack Ontology 
Models (also called Cyberattack Data Models) (Figure 12.3).
Vaccine Knowledge Base (VKB): Consider it the medical center of CEWPS, where 
each vaccine corresponds to a virus and attack. Vaccinators know the vaccina-
tion process, and the adaptive vaccine is injected into the infected system. The 
paramedics know how to revive the damaged system.
Early warning
center
Vaccine 
smart grid
Request
DKB
ViKB & AKB
VaKB
InRB
Document
Knowledge
Base
Virus
Knowledge
Base
Vaccine
Knowledge
Base
Inference
Knowledge
Base
Complementary
services
Smart Vaccine
center
Inference
Engine
City smart
grid
Central 
Coordination Center
The cognitive middleware center
Figure 12.2  CEWPS Knowledge Databases are considered fulfillment centers during attack/vaccination cycles. 
They work like the cylinders of a Ferrari during a quick response. When the Vaccine Smart Grid needs service, all the KB 
respond on time to the Smart Vaccine Commander.
Reverse
engineering
Semantics
relationship
This is a knowledge
model of a cyberattack
Virus
identity
Alert 
cases
Attack
documents
Glossary
Ontology attack
model
Attack
logistics
Routine
vaccination
Vaccine
identity
Attack
cases
Causality
reasoning
Figure 12.3  The purpose of ontology is to create a knowledge model from the attributes of an object. A cyberattack 
ontology, in the diagram, has 10 subject classes that are tied together to represent a cyberattack.

312
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Documentation Knowledge Base (DKB): Considering the library of CEWPS, the 
collected data about previous attack episodes are truly precious attack savings. 
In the Human Immune System, the T cells keep part of the virus and the anti-
gen that mobilized the B cells. Each document record describes how the attack 
occurred, the strategy of the attack, and tools used. The city grid will receive 
several hundred attacks as the statistics shows in Chapter 11. The Vaccine 
Commander has access to the DKB to determine the strategy of similar attacks.
Inference Rules Base (InRB): This is the center of the defense reasoning. We can 
say that one of the features of CEWPS is that it relies on rules to do its infer-
ence. The rules define the behavior of an attack and its vector while the Inference 
Engine executes the rules. The format of rules is usually the following:
IF < antecedent > THEN < consequent >
IF < attack > THEN < outcome >
IF < virus > THEN < quarantine >
So the rules collection of facts about the crime domain. The inference performs its 
causational interpretation and evaluates the facts in the Knowledge Base in order to 
provide an answer. Here are additional rules that are used by the Inference Engine for 
causal reasoning:
IF< Attack on the system > THEN <Intrusion Detection failed >
IF< Attack on the grid > THEN <Smart Vaccine was late >
IF< vaccine is not available > THEN< virus is not caught >
IF< Substation is down > THEN < SCADA did not respond>
The security specialist will interrogate in the Attack Knowledge Base (AKB) and 
retrieve specific attacks episodes from the Documentation Knowledge Base (DKB). 
The specialist will evaluate the attacks that met his or her query criteria. The Inference 
Engine with specific rules will offer him or her the best probabilistic reasoning solu-
tion. It is a two-way iterative process. The specialist will store some of his or her 
experience and knowledge in the Inference Knowledge Base (IKB). Over time, IKB 
will become more mature and will make the reasoning more accurate (Figure 12.4).
CEWPS is much more than an expert system. It is a cognitive system. It has the 
capability to think, reason, and remember incidents and episodes. CEWPS knowledge 
augmentation is caused by the challenging vaccination missions of the Smart Vaccine. 
All vaccination episodes contribute to the intelligence and cognition amplification of 
CEWPS. One important note: the Knowledge Base has to be populated (before it 
could be instrumental) with semantic structures such as Attack Patterns, honeypot 
traps, virus program logic, vaccine prescriptions, and most importantly vaccination 
episode documents. These documents are dynamically used in the Inference Engine 
to generate attack predictions and forecasts.
Semantics: One word on semantics: It is very useful in argumentation and studying 
the relationship between words that share something in common. It is like a large 
family with many siblings, children, and grandchildren. All the family members are 

313
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
tied to the father. Some members belong to the first generation, and others belong to 
the second or later generation. We can pick any member from the tree that could lead 
us back to the head of the family.
When we talk about a cyberattack, there are many words that can be linked to the 
word cyberattack, and by means of reasoning and backward chaining, we could learn 
more about in question. Figure 12.5 represents two crucial subjects that are integrated 
Attack Patterns
Knowledge 
acquisition
Knowledge queries
Adding knowledge to base
Cybercrime 
domain expert
Attack
forecasts
Iterations
Working memory
for pattern matching
Inference
 engine
Knowledge
Base
Attack Ontology
Models
Forecast
results
Figure 12.4  An expert system consists of a Knowledge Base and an Inference Engine. The Knowledge Base will contain 
two types of records: the Attack Patterns and the Attack Ontology Models. The domain expert will interrogate the system 
and check specific attacks from the past. Then he will select the attacks that meet his query criteria. The Inference Engine 
will offer him the best probabilistic solution. We can say that CEWPS is an expert system.
Payload
Hacker
Damage
Target
Backdoor
Affecting
Causes
Caused by
Caused by
Is a
Has a
Cyberattack
Critical system
Figure 12.5  This is an ontology of a cyberattack. We can say that ontology represents an attack as a knowledge model. 
In this example, an attack has six objects that are tied with a relation to the cyberattack. Therefore, we have a cyberattack 
knowledge model (CKM). During the reasoning process, these objects will be part of the rules used by the Reasoning Engine 
that computes a probabilitic forecast for future attack.

314
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
in the design of CEWPS knowledge engines: Ontology and Semantics. Ontology 
represents cyberattack as a knowledge model. Semantics collects all the words that are 
related to a subject, in our case it is a cyberattack. So, Ontology relies on Semantics 
for the development of an attack knowledge model.
Figure 12.6 shows the cyberattack knowledge model as the building block of the 
Attack Knowledge Base. The Cyberattack Knowledge Model has 10 distinct entities 
(objects) that describe the cyberattack. A cyberattack knowledge model can be rep-
resented numerically as the collection of relations, number of entities, and all related 
axioms.
In addition, the metadata engine adds an index to all the Cyberattack Knowledge 
Model (CKM) records before they are stored in the Attack Knowledge Base. Figure 
12.7 shows the colossal Knowledge Base in CEWPS. 
The cubes are aggregated and stored in the master CEWPS Knowledge Base. They 
are instances from the virus domain, vaccine domain, and memory domain.
Domain: It is defined as an open space that contains similar objects of the same 
nature. We can say that the cyberattack domain contains the cyberattack occur-
rences. The Cyberattack Knowledge Base is the repository of all the cyberattack 
knowledge models. Mathematically, we can represent the relationship between the 
cyberattacks and their knowledge model.
Critical System
Tag
Reverse
Engineering
Semantics
Relationship
Entities
Attack data and time
Each cube represents an Attack Data Knowledge Model
Attack Knowledge Base
Attack
This is an attack episode
represented as knowledge
model
Virus
Identity
Alert 
Cases
Attack
Documents
Glossary
Attack
Logistics
Routine
Vaccination
Vaccine
Identity
Attack
Cases
Causality
Reasoning
Attack index (grid, sytem, time, structure, vaccine, outcome)
Figure 12.6  The Attack Knowledge Base (AKB) stores the cubes that represent the cyberattack knowledge model 
(CKM). The meta-engine will store the location (index) of the cube in the attack knowledge base. To retrieve the whole 
knowledge model of an attack, we use the tag. It’s like the phone book, we use the index at the top to get the page of the 
desired number.

315
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
Reverse
engineering
Routine
vaccination
Vaccine
identity
Attack
cases
Causality
reasoning
Semantics
relationship
Virus
identity
Alert 
cases
Attack
documents
Attack
logistics
Glossary
Cyberattack Knowledge Model
(CKM)
The Attack Knowledge Base
CEWPS Master Knowledge Base
Reasoning
Engine
Figure 12.7  The CEWPS master knowledge engine stores four different types of knowledge instances: 1, the Attack KB; 2, the Virus KB; 3, the Vaccine KB; and 4, the History KB. A sample 
attack is referred to as (a knowledge model) which is developed with ontology techniques. The knowledge model will be used by the Reasoning Engine for prediction.

316
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Relationship between semantics and ontology: Finding simple definitions for the terms 
semantics and ontology is truly challenging. Most dictionaries copied the same 
definition over and over. Take, for example, the word semantics: everyone without 
exception copied the following explanation: is the study of meaning. As for ontology, 
everyone offered the same definition: An ontology is a formal specification of a shared 
conceptualization.
We have yet to find a down-to-earth explanation of these two terms. We have 
searched hundreds of presentations from seminars, academic textbooks, and research 
papers, but we could not find the straightforward and simple terms that made us com-
fortable. So, we decided to offer our own explanation.
Semantics and Ontology Relationship to CEWPS
There is a very attractive relationship between semantics and ontologies. Again, 
ontology is the technology to organize knowledge. Our main focus in ontology is to 
facilitate the construction of a model to represent cyberattacks, which can be used in 
our probabilistic reasoning to predict future malware events. To build this data model, 
we need to capture all the necessary components (ingredients) such as concepts and 
actual instances from the world of cybercrime.
Semantics engineering is the study of the relationship between words and their 
meanings. Words will always have several meanings. In the context of cybercrime and 
terrorism, the term cyberattack becomes highly critical, and we need to tie the term 
“cyberattack” to all its relative meanings.
CEWPS incorporates both ontology and semantics technologies in its knowledge 
engines.
Glossary: Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI): Although originally seen as a highly ambitious concept 
of computer programs that cannot be distinguished from human beings (as in 
the Turing test), AI is now used to describe computer programs that learn and 
adapt using the environment around them. The previous view of AI is now 
referred to as strong AI.
Assembly language: Assembler is a low-level language used to program microproces-
sors directly. It is essentially a human readable form of machine code and can 
therefore be very efficient, but very difficult, to program with.
Automated theorem proving: Automated theorem proving (ATP) is the autonomous 
proving of mathematical theorems by a computer program. Logic program-
ming was developed as a side effect of research into ATP, with lots of work 

317
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
being done in inference rules to simplify logical sentences. “E” and “Otter” are 
examples of high-performance theorem proofs, “E” using purely equational cal-
culus, while the latter makes use of the resolution principle in first-order logic.
Backtracking: Backtracking is a feature of many languages developed when com-
puters had highly limited memory size and were therefore unable to store 
previous computations or a large amount of state information about a running 
program. Backtracking means that the interpreter exhausts a possibility in the 
search tree and then backtracks to the last choice point, where it carries out its 
work along any unvisited paths so far. Algorithms featuring backtracking for 
traversing trees include depth-first search and breadth-first search.
Backward chaining: Backward chaining starts with a list of goals and works backward 
to see if there are data available that will support any of these goals. An infer-
ence engine using backward chaining would search the inference rules until it 
finds one that has a then clause that matches a desired goal. If the if clause of 
that inference rule is not known to be true, then it is added to the list of goals.
Boolean connectives: Boolean connectives are used to join atoms together to form a 
formula. The primary connectives are NOT (¬), AND (∧), OR (∨), IMPLIES 
(→), IF-AND-ONLY-IF (↔), T (truth), and ⊥ (falsity).
Clausal form: Clausal form is one of the normal forms in which a formula can be 
represented. A formula in clausal form can take up a lot more space than in 
a simplified form, but will ultimately contain no quantifiers and therefore be 
operable on by the resolution rule.
Clause: A clause is a disjunction of literals, interpreted as a conditional statement.
Compiler: A compiler is used in many languages to translate the source code written 
by the programmer into machine code, executable by the computer. There are 
often intermediate stages of compilation (e.g., assembler and Java bytecode), 
but most logic-programming languages are interpreted rather than compiled.
Concurrent programming: Concurrent programming involves one or more threads 
running simultaneously. The advantage of concurrent programming is in mul-
tiprocessor environments, which can be substantial when it increases in speed.
Constraint programming: Constraint programming is where relationships between 
data are described in terms of constraints. Instead of specifying steps to follow 
(i.e., an algorithm), only properties of solutions are specified.
Control structure: The control structure is the data structure used by a programming 
language to store the current state of the computation and how it is traversed.
De Morgan laws: The De Morgan laws (equivalences) expressed in logic are
	
Ø
Ù
= Ø
Ú Ø
(
)
(
)
(
)
P
Q
P
Q
	
Ø
Ú
= Ø
Ù Ø
(
)
(
)
(
)
P
Q
P
Q
These laws provide a simple way to push negations inside closed expressions 
and are required when reducing a formula to negation normal form.

318
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Declarative paradigm: Declarative programming has two different meanings:
	
1.	Programs that describe what something is, not how it is created, for example, 
webpage code that describes what the page should look like but not how to 
display it
	
2.	Programs that are written in a functional, logical, or constraint programming 
language
Depth-first search: Depth-first search (DFS) is an algorithm for traversing or search-
ing a tree, tree structure, or graph. The algorithm extends the current path as 
far as possible before backtracking to the last choice point and trying the next 
alternative path.
First-order logic: First-order logic is a powerful extension of propositional logic. This 
logic introduces quantifiers. The two quantifiers are the existential quantifier 
(∃) and the universal quantifier (∀). ∃x, ƒ(x) says that there exists an x, such 
that ƒ(x) is true. That is, ƒ is satisfiable. On the other hand, ∀x, ƒ(x) says that 
under no circumstances ƒ is false. That is, ƒ is valid.
Formula: A formula is essentially the if test in propositional calculus. Formulas are 
made up of atoms joined together by Boolean connectives. Formulas can be 
represented as formation trees, in which the nodes are atoms or connectives. 
Brackets are used to disambiguate the meaning of formulas, and binding con-
ventions apply to the relevant connectives. Formulas take on a Boolean value.
Recursively, a formula can be defined using the following rules:
	
1.	Letters of the alphabet are formulas.
	
2.	If ƒ is a formula, ¬ƒ is also a formula.
	
3.	If ƒ1 and ƒ2 are formulas, then ƒ1 ~ ƒ2 is a formula, where ~ is a Boolean 
connective.
	
4.	Nothing else is a formula.
Forward chaining: Forward chaining starts with the available data and uses infer-
ence rules to extract more data until an optimal goal is reached. An inference 
engine using forward chaining searches the inference rules until it finds one 
where the if clause is known to be true. When found, it can conclude, or infer, 
the then clause, resulting in the addition of new information to its dataset.
Functional paradigm: The functional programming paradigm treats computation as 
the evaluation of mathematical functions. No state information is held dur-
ing execution unlike procedural programming that relies on the execution of 
sequential instructions.
Fuzzy sets: Fuzzy sets form part of fuzzy logic and deal with the member of relation in set 
theory. Unlike classical set theory, fuzzy sets allow different degrees of member-
ship using a scale ranging from 0 to 1, that is, nonmember to full member.
Goal: A conclusion in a logic-programming query, which if made true allows the 
language interpreter to return success for the query. Goals are the same as 

319
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
subgoals, which are the “then” clauses of an “if… then…” query. If all the 
subgoals of a query can be proven true, then so can the antecedent.
Ground term: A ground term is a term that does not involve a variable.
Higher-order functions (metaprogramming): Higher-order functions are often 
added to programming languages to reduce coding for programmers and help 
prevent repetitious blocks of code occurring. They take one or more func-
tions as input and another function as output. In logic programming, these 
are referred to as metaprograms since they deal with programs rather than 
functions.
Horn clause: A Horn clause is a clause with at most one positive literal. If a Horn 
clause has exactly one positive literal, then it is known as a definite clause. 
Similarly, a Horn clause with no positive literals is referred to as goal.
Imperative paradigm: The imperative programming paradigm takes on the “Do this, 
do that” approach, forming a sequential statement list in the code. Unlike 
logic programming, imperative languages state how the computation is to take 
place, rather than what is to be computed.
Implementation constraint: An implementation constraint puts limits on coding or 
construction, for example, required standards, platform, or implementation 
language.
Indeterminacy: Indeterminacy means that in a sequence of events, it is down to chance 
which event will occur next. This occurs in the concurrency of mathematical 
logic–based logic programming where the concurrency is implemented using 
message passing systems. These messages arrive in random order, and there-
fore, indeterminacy results in the order of execution.
Inference engine: An inference engine is a computer program that controls how “if… 
then…” rules are applied to the Knowledge Base (facts and relationships) of a 
database in order to conclude (infer) new facts or relationships.
Inference rules: Inference rules are logical rules that allow new logical formulas to be 
derived from existing ones, usually in pursuit of a conclusion. There are many 
rules that can be replaced by the rule of resolution provided the formulas are 
in clausal form.
Interpreter: An interpreter is a program that itself runs other programs. Unlike a 
compiler, the interpreter will interpret the source code directly without first 
translating the source code into machine code.
Literal: A literal is either an atom or a negated atom.
Logical consequence: Logical consequence is the relation that holds between a set 
of sentences and a conclusion that can be drawn from them. If the set of sen-
tences A, …, An can be used to show R, then, we say A, …, An|R.
Logic-programming paradigm: Logical languages deal with the extraction of knowl-
edge from basic facts. Logic programming makes use of pattern-directed 
invocation of procedures from assertions and goals. They answer queries via 
searching. Searching is done via forward chaining and backward chaining.

320
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Logical sentence: A sentence is a formula with no free (i.e., unbound) variables. Since 
all the variables in a sentence must be bound, sentences always have a Boolean 
value in a given structure.
Modal logic: Modal logic is an extension to standard logic that allows modalities to 
be expressed in three ways. A sentence is either possible, necessary, or contingent. 
These classifications have much in common with propositional validity but are 
not used as a basis for logic programming.
Natural language processing: Natural language processing (NLP) is the study of 
computer understanding and generation of natural human languages.
Negation normal form: Negation normal form is a normalization for formulas where 
negation occurs only immediately above propositions. This can be brought 
about using equivalences and the De Morgan laws. Negation normal form is 
a step toward clausal form of disjunctive normal form.
Nondeterminism: Nondeterminism refers to a computational property that may have 
more than one result.
Object-oriented paradigm (OOP): OOP is a relatively new paradigm that empha-
sizes modular programming and data separation. The primary concept of 
OOP is breaking a large problem down into smaller problems, which are 
solved and then called by other methods within the program.
Perfect play: Perfect play is an idea of game theory, in which the behavior of a player 
is that which leads to the best possible outcome for that player.
Predicate calculus: See first-order logic.
Procedural paradigm: The procedural programming paradigm is where code is sepa-
rated up into functions or methods that can be called individually. This pre-
vents code duplication in moderately complex programs and makes layout easier, 
allowing for modular coding. Procedural programming is also used as a syn-
onym for imperative programming.
Propositional atom: A propositional atom is simply a variable, as in math, which can 
take on either true or false as its value. Atoms cannot be separated into sub-
atoms; they are atomic.
Propositional calculus: Propositional calculus (logic) is a subset of first-order logic. 
It can be referred to as “the study of if tests.” That is, we can express atomic 
statements in terms of if something is true, then do something else. Boolean 
connectives are used to expand on this, creating a final statement (formula) 
with a true or false value. The three ingredients in propositional calculus are 
atoms, Boolean connectives, and punctuation. Propositional calculus is a 
deduction system on objects (propositions) that can be used to prove proposi-
tional relations.
Prune: The act of removing parts of a search tree in order that they would not be 
computed.

321
CEWPS Knowledge Engines
Resolution: Resolution is an inference rule that can be used in place of the other infer-
ence rules provided the formulas in question are in clausal form. Resolution 
takes two clauses (a clause being a disjunction of literals) and produces a new 
one from them by eliminating atoms whose complement appears in one of the 
original formulas.
Scientific community metaphor: The scientific community metaphor is used as a 
metaphor to employ systems displaying certain traits mirrored in the scientific 
community.
Search tree: A search tree is a data structure used by many logic-programming inter-
preters to find solutions to a query. Since all data structures can be represented 
as a tree, this is a logical and efficient way to retrieve data.
Semantics: Semantics essentially means meaning. The semantics of a logic describes 
the meaning of it.
Skolem normal form: Skolem normal form applies to first-order logic in which all 
existential quantifiers (∃) are removed and replaced in some way by universal 
quantifiers (∀). To Skolemize a formula, the following second-order equiva-
lence is used as the main principle of converting to Skolem normal form:
	
" $
Û $ "
x yR x y
f
xR x f x
( , )
( ,
( ))
Stable model semantics: Stable model semantics is a tool used to add negation to 
many logic-programming languages. Rather than mirror the mathematical 
view of negation, it assumes that all atoms not held as true by a program 
are therefore false. Stable model semantics also goes on to define a family 
of models of a logic program.
Terms: Terms are constants or variables used to name objects. A special term, known 
as a ground term, is one that does not involve a variable.
The Turing test: The Turing test is a simple test to determine the effectiveness of the 
conversational ability of a machine with humans. If a human cannot tell the 
difference between a conversation with a machine and with another human, 
then the machine will pass the test.
Type system: A type system in a programming language is a way of classifying differ-
ent data structures or elements. This classification can then be used as a code 
check in order to ensure that various data types match where appropriate.
Unbound variable: A variable in a logic-programming language that is initially unde-
fined but that may get bound to a value or another logic variable during unifi-
cation of the containing clause with the current goal.
Validity: The validity of a formula gives some insight into when the formula is true. 
A valid formula is always true, A∨¬A, for example, A satisfactory formula is 
true in some, but not all, situations.

322
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
References
Allen, B.D., Think Bayes. O’Reilly, Sebastopol, CA, September 2013. Judea, P., Causality, 
Models, Reasoning and Inference, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 
2009.
Stephen, L. and Danny, K., Artificial Intelligence in the 21st Century. Mercury Leaning and 
Information, Dulles, VA, 2013.
Websites
http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r350.pdf
http://home.agh.edu.pl/~wojnicki/phd/node38.html.
http://methodology.psu.edu/ra/causal

323
13
The Next Cyber War: 
The Evil Fight with the Good!
The Different Scenarios of Massive Cyberattacks
One of the marvels of the Human Immune System is that no backdoor virus or Trojan 
can sneak into the body, from anywhere, without its knowledge. This is because the 
white blood cells (Leukocytes) are the cells of the immune system that are involved in 
protecting the body against both infectious disease and foreign invaders. These cells 
are the defending army and are running in the streams of blood like a nebulous grid 
watching over every cell on the body. Now you got the picture why grids are the best 
mechanism to protect systems.
Another hole in system security is when a system administrator is dismissed fired 
without changing the passwords on systems. This is a fatal mistake that companies 
often ignore. The National Security Agency, hit by disclosures of classified data 
by former contractor Edward Snowden, said it intends to eliminate about 90% 
of its system administrators to reduce the number of people with access to secret 
information. This computer security flaw does not work in the human immune 
environment because once cell becomes inactive (dead), it is kicked out of the 
body permanently and loses all its living privileges. It cannot masquerade into a 
living cell.
Another major hole in computer security is that computers are not capable of 
remembering any previous attacks, like the M cells of the human body. This is a 
fundamental feature in the Human Immune System caused by vaccination.
So, we have incorporated in the Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System 
(CEWPS/Smart Vaccine™) with similar functionalities to the Human Immune 
System. The result is that Digital Immunity offers an autonomic and cognitive pro-
tection to systems, all because of the superfast connectivity and response of the 
grid. We will demonstrate the versatility of CEWPS/Smart Vaccine with three 
high-profile cyberattacks.
The Pearl Harbor Attack
On Sunday, at 7 am on December 7, 1940, at Opana Radar Site, two privates, George 
E. Elliott Jr. and Joseph L. Lockard, detected what they called on CR-270B Radio 
Direction Finder, a primitive form of radar, “something completely out of the ordinary.” 

324
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
In fact, it was so out of the ordinary that the inexperienced watch officer assumed 
it must be friendly airplanes and told them to just forget about it. Then all hell broke 
loose. Within 2 hours, 5 battleships had been sunk, another 16 damaged, and 188 
aircraft destroyed. Only chance saved three U.S. aircraft carriers, usually stationed 
at Pearl Harbor but assigned elsewhere on the day. The attacks killed under 100 
Japanese but over 2400 Americans, with another 1178 injured. A date which will live 
in infamy.
George Santayana was right when he said “Those who cannot remember the past 
are condemned to repeat it.” It just happened again, but this time it was a different 
kind of attack at a different place.
We’re presenting three attack scenarios, plotted and executed by politically moti-
vated cyberterrorists. They are members of a reputable Crime Service Provider. The 
malware technologies are available on the market, which make these attacks easy to 
happen.
Scenario-1 The Electronic Pearl Harbor Attack
On August 24, 2005, the northeastern region of the United States was hit by an 
unusual type of a massive cyberattack that is called “The Virus Rain™.” The attack 
caught the region and the country by surprise, and hundreds of incident response 
teams scrambled to catch up with the attack (Figure 13.1).
Systematically with a progression of 1-minute interval, the heavy Virus Rain spread 
very rapidly and hit the whole region like a hurricane bringing down the electrical 
grid, followed by the metro rail system, the hospital systems, government systems, 
the ATMs and banking systems, the metropolitan traffic control systems, bridge 
tolls systems, and even airport control tower systems. The national Cyber Emergency 
A date that will live infamy
Data SIO, NOAA, U.S. Navy, NGA, GEBCO
Image © 2010 TerraMetrics
© 2010 Cnes/Spot Image
Image USDA Farm Service Agency
42''32'16.25'' N      72° 28'56.93''W      elev     0 ft
Strategic targets
Airport systems
Metro sytems
Hospital sytems
Power grids
CIA
Pentagon
Naval bases
Figure 13.1  The electronic Pearl Harbor exemplified by the Virus Rain massive attack, as envisioned by the author.

325
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
Response Team (CERT) estimates that over 500,000 different types of mutating 
viruses have been unleashed to paralyze the region. Later, the attack was referred to 
as “The Electronic Pearl Harbor 2™”!
The Virus Rain is a fictitious massive cyberattack, but it may become a real-
ity soon. All the technologies of the attack are present today, but more impor-
tantly, it will be fueled with anti-American sentiment. The Virus Rain was designed 
and launched from several remote stealth cyber launch pads. It hit the heart of 
New England with its payload of remote control viruses, mutating stealth-smart 
bombs, backdoor hemorrhoid zombies, and autonomic heart attack, and kami-
kaze agents. It was like the four horsemen of the apocalypse or the final battle of 
Armageddon. All this will be executed from the Internet, from anywhere in the 
world! Stuxnet was a tiny show.
It is a simulated scenario that could happen, but it is not probable but possible, simply 
because the new enabling technologies would let this calamity to happen. The Cognitive 
Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS/Smart Vaccine) will definitely be the best 
techno solution to stop the Virus Rain. Grid technology is the only way to offer the fast-
est response of the Smart Vaccine services.
All massive attacks are preplanned and rehearsed and have determined targets. 
There’s a new service on the block called Crime as a Service (CaaS) which is man-
aged by global franchised organized crime providers. Figure 13.2 shows a fraction of 
the malware network. By the way, we’re not counting the anonymous and invisible 
“Deep Web” which is another universe of malware. According to Fortune maga-
zine (September 14, 2014), the article “Fortune 5: The Biggest Organized Crime 
Figure 13.2  This is how the world runs today: Premeditated terrorism is shock and awe and is the most fearsome event 
but can be predicted and defeated. We simulated this scenario and how the Smart Vaccine provided Digital Immunity just 
in time.

326
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Groups in the World” uncovers the five most contagious cyber Mafia in the world 
(Figure 13.2):
	
1.	Yamaguchi Gumi—Revenue: 80 billion dollars, Japanese
	
2.	Solntsevskaya Bratva—Revenue: 8.5 billion dollars, Russian
	
3.	Camorra—Revenue: 4.9 billion dollars, Italian American
	
4.	‘Ndrangheta—Revenue: 4.5 billion dollars, Italian
	
5.	Sinaloa Cartel—Revenue: 3 billion dollars
But the world is heavily sprinkled with 3,000 organizations that hosts over 1,000,000 
servers with an awesome number of zombie botnets referenced in Cyber Warfare book 
from O’reilly. A study done at University of California, Berkeley in 2001 suggests that 
the Deep Web is 85% of the the surface Web.
The Magic Smart Grids
Let us talk about smart grids: Our body has two cognitive grids that help us to sur-
vive. The first one is the nervous system; we call it neurogrid. The second is called 
immunogrid. These two grids are tightly coupled and work together.
CEWPS is also geared with a cognitive immune system that we call the Smart 
Vaccine Grid. Now the only way to protect the northeastern region from attack ava-
lanches is to build a smart grid for the region to deliver the Smart Vaccine Services.
Scenario-2 The California Power Plant Attack
The target scene: The scenario belongs to California’s electric power and distribu-
tion grid that is managed by the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) 
company. There are 12 computerized consoles within the main CAISO control room 
in Folsom. In case of a natural disaster or other emergency, there is another control 
room and mapboard in Alhambra, in southern California, that serves as a backup for 
the Folsom facility (Figures 13.3 and 13.4).
Figure 13.3  The California ISO company manages the power generation and distribution of the three major electric 
companies in California: PG&E, SCE, and SDG&E. Operators who work 7 × 24 in this control room monitor and manage 
85% of California’s power needs and resources. The control room monitors 25,526 circuit miles with distributed computers.

327
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
Satellite communication between grids and CEWPS
CEWPS
cloud-1
SCADA-1
Grid-4
Grid-1
Honeypot farms
Smart Vaccine grids
Critical infrastructure systems
Malicious attack wave
CEWPS
cloud
Central control of the
Smart Vaccine grids
SCADA system
Grid-2
Grid-3
Grid-5
Grid-7
Grid-9
Virus Rain
wave-4
Virus Rain
wave-3
Virus Rain
wave-2
Virus Rain
wave-1
Grid-6
Grid-8
Grid-10
CEWPS
cloud-2
CEWPS
cloud-3
CEWPS
cloud-4
Figure 13.4  The 10 interlinked Smart Vaccine grids in New Jersey state will not allow any Virus Rain to attack the critical systems. The city smart grids are the nervous system and the vac-
cine smart grid is the immunity grid. We’re also assuming that some of the customers are on the cloud, and they will get prompt VaaS. All the grids will be communicating with each other and 
share information with the State Security Command. If any of the Virus Rains reaches the grids, the honeypots on the grids will catch the attacking virus and an antidote will be packaged and 
dispatched to all four Smart Vaccine Commanders. It works. Today, none of the cybersecurity and antivirus companies have a system with the sophistication described in this chart.

328
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Scenario-3 The Newark 4th of July Cyberattack
This is another scenario of not only how international terrorists can inflict damage 
to the critical infrastructures of a very busy city like Newark, New Jersey, but it also 
created trauma in peaceful citizens who learned to trust the government system. 
More than 100,000 people commute to and from Newark on weekdays, making 
it the state’s largest employment center with many white-collar jobs in insurance, 
finance, import–export, health care, and government. As a major courthouse venue 
including federal, state, and county facilities, it is home to more than 1000 law 
firms. The city is also a college town, with nearly 40,000 students attending the city’s 
universities and medical and law schools. Its airport, maritime port, rail facilities, 
and highway network make Newark the busiest transshipment hub on the East 
Coast in terms of volume.
The New York blackout of 2003 affected 50 million people and cost over 10 ­billion 
dollars (no one knows the true figures). It may cost 10 million dollars per mile to set 
up the cognitive Smart Vaccine grid, but it is worth the implementation. The next 
blackout will be even worse because the Virus Rain wave will be the worst cyber tsu-
nami the United States will encounter (Figure 13.5).
How the Attack Was Planned
The team rented for the duration of 2 months, an apartment close to the campus of 
New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). They had all the necessary equipment 
to do the attack which came from Albania. They visited the targeted sites and timed 
each dry run. The plan was to attack some of the critical infrastructures and hack the 
government computers and steal all the confidential data for a foreign government. 
They had a plan to go to the capital Washington, D.C. and attack the computers of 
the Pentagon and the State Department.
Cyberterrorists
They were five people who became good friends in college. There were all graduates 
of NJIT computer science department. They had excellent hands-on experience in 
programming and networks. In fact, two of them had been accepted at the CIA in 
Virginia and one was going to work in Trenton with the NJ government, the other 
two accepted overseas jobs in the Gulf.
The agency operates 711 trains aside from Amtrak, which is a federal agency. 
New Jersey Transit rail network has 161 stations, providing nearly 223 million pas-
senger trips each year, with more new technologies to improve the customer experi-
ence. Real-time information services became available for rail customers on their 
handheld devices and desktop computers. Google Wallet’s contactless payment sys-
tem allows rail and bus customers to use their smartphones to tap and pay for trans-
portation tickets at select ticket vending machines. 

329
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
CEWPS
cloud-5
SCADA-3
Grid-8
Grid-7
Grid-4
Grid-3
Grid-2
Grid-1
SCADA-2
SCADA-1
system
Virus Rain
wave-1
Virus Rain
wave-2
Virus Rain
wave-3
Virus Rain
wave-4
Virus Rain
wave-5
Virus Rain
wave-6
Virus Rain
wave-7
Virus Rain
wave-8
Virus Rain
wave-9
Grid-5
Grid-6
Grid-9
Grid-10
CEWPS
cloud-4
CEWPS
cloud-3
CEWPS
cloud
Central control of the
Smart Vaccine grids
Smart Vaccine grid
SCADA system
CEWPS
cloud-2
CEWPS
cloud-1
Honeypot farms
Critical infrastructure systems
Malicious attack wave
Figure 13.5  The 10 interlinked Smart Vaccine grids in New Jersey state will not allow any Virus Rain to attack the critical systems. The city smart grids are the nervous system and the Vaccine 
Smart Grid is the immunity grid. We’re also assuming that some of the customers are on the cloud, and they will get prompt VaaS. All the grids will be communicating with each other and share 
information with the State Security Command. If any of the Virus Rain reaches the grids, the honeypots on the grids will catch the attacking virus and an antidote will be packaged and dispatched 
to all four Smart Vaccine Commanders. It works. Today, none of the cybersecurity and antivirus companies have a system with the sophistication described in this chart.

330
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The Traction Power System
A traction substation or traction current converter plant is an electrical substation 
that converts electric power from public utility to an appropriate voltage, to supply 
railways, with traction current. New Jersey Transit 25 Hz Traction Power System is 
a traction power grid that allows the trains to operate along the Northeast Corridor 
(NEC) including 400 miles (362 km) between Washington, DC, New York City and 
all the way to Boston.
A typical substation includes two to four 138/12 kV transformers and 138 kV air 
switches that permit the isolation of individual transformers, shutdown one of the 
two 138 kV feeders, or cross-connection from one feeder to another. The output of the 
transformers is routed to track catenary via 12 kV circuit breakers and air disconnect 
switches. Cross-connect switches allow one transformer to feed all catenary lines. 
Today, about 55 substations are part of Amtrak’s network. Substations are spaced on 
average 8 miles apart and feed 12 kV catenary circuits in both directions along the 
line. Thus, the catenary is segmented (via section breaks, also called sectionalizations 
by the PRR) at each substation, and each substation feeds both sides of a catenary’s 
section break. A train traveling between two substations draws power through both 
transformers.
Train Movement Control
New Jersey Transit and Amtrak trains are controlled by the centralized traffic control 
(CTC) system that is located at the headquarter. All trains are governed by signal 
protocol that provides movement authority. The computer system will not allow for 
conflicting authorities between the train operator and the headquarter dispatcher. The 
dispatcher, who could see all the train movements from his or her screen or on the 
whiteboard (like traffic controller at the airport tower), will be responsible for issuing 
the control signals to train operators for train movement.
Figure 13.6 shows how computers interact with the trains. At the headquarter, 
there are three central systems that handle three distinct operations. The central traf-
fic system is responsible for overseeing the movement of all trains on the tracks. The 
CEWPS/Smart Vaccine system is responsible for keeping the whole network immu-
nized. SCADA system is responsible for the collection of data in the power lines, 
the tracks, and the trains. The three computers operate through a secure Ethernet 
network at the headquarters.
The hackers have lots of opportunities to vandalize the system from different 
locations:
The central transit location: In the city of Newark, electricity and gas are provided 
by Public Service Electric & Gas Company (PSEG). PSEG has been named 
America’s most reliable electric utility for the second year in a row. The central 
traffic center located in Newark has several servers that monitor and control 

331
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
the movement of the trains and the shifting of the rails. The network opera-
tions are running in normal mode, until the morning on Tuesday, October 8, 
2013, when the train signaling system went erratic and forced the operators 
to halt service.
	
	
New Jersey Transit trains started to run again following a signal problem 
that halted service on 11 of its 12 lines for about an at least 4 hours. The sig-
nals that direct the trains went out. The signal management servers showed 
on the operator console unexpected error messages indicating the transmitted 
signals to the trains got scrambled and forced the train operators to switch to 
emergency mode and stop the trains.
	
	
Service was suspended on all trains, and central operations started to receive 
a deluge of phone calls from the confused train operators. All trains were fully 
powered while they were not running and crews made regular announce-
ments to the commuters. New Jersey Transit is investigating what caused the 
computer problem.
Newark Penn Station: Commuters and other riders filled the platforms of the 
station, but there were no arriving or departing trains. Everyone thought that 
two locomotives had collided, and no one could explain this mishap.
The train movement: It is not an easy job but it shows that any unexpected action 
could take place. These terrorists will continue to attack the infrastructures 
of populated cities. The next one will definitely have casualties in addition to 
creating havoc in peaceful cities.
How the Attack Was Planned
The team worked for 2 weeks to plan the attack. They visited the targeted sites, and 
timed each dry run. Wireless public hot spots were used to communicate through 
obfuscated stealth public blogs. They also used an interactive simulation model to run 
different scenarios. They had three backup plans in case one of the attacks fails.
Secure
cloud
SCADA
system
CEWPS
systems
Central traffic
system
Power generating plant
Ethernet
Catenary
Tracking substation
Train movement
Central dispatcher office
Figure 13.6  The trains are driven by the tracking substation which is controlled by the central computer.

332
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The Terrorist Team
The four terrorists were Caucasians who lived in the United States under business or 
student visas. There was no immigration restriction on them and they had no criminal 
records. The FBI and CIA did not have any indication of such clandestine activity. 
They met in April in Beirut, Lebanon, and were advertised by an organized terror-
ist group from Eastern Europe for 1 million dollars to stop suddenly the trains from 
Newark Penn Station and cause a head-on crash. They planned the attack and learned 
how to communicate with one another. They learned the cryptic words that were used 
to communicate on the underground Internet. The ISP (Internet host server) was 
located in Sofia, Bulgaria.
The four terrorists arrived to the United States first week of June to New York to 
attend a technical conference in New York City—as indicated by the immigration offi-
cers. The conference was going to be held on June 21–26 in Javits Center. The INS did 
not verify the authenticity of this information right away. They stayed at the Sheraton 
in Stamford, Connecticut (away from Newark), as attendees of the conference.
Terrorist Communication Protocol
All the terrorists were university graduates and very experienced in 
Telecommunication systems. They used an uncensored USENET, which is the 
great grandfather of the Internet. ARPANET was used solely by DOD. It uses 
the powerful UNIX protocol UUCP for telecommunication. It requires encrypted 
access with a very high port (29112—as secret entry into the Internet). Line com-
mand was used instead of browser.
All four attackers connected as clients to the stealth server. All audio telecommu-
nications among the team is encrypted with the latest technology. Digital messages 
used were the new self-erase technique.
Mobiles
Four standard unlocked Samsung Galaxy mobiles were purchased from the inter-
national airport in Beirut. The mobiles were customized in China to be IP stealth 
and self-destructive and have self-erase history and detonation trigger. They were 
subscribed with fake names with the Kepler Telecom (main mobile company in 
Kazakhstan), which operates global satellite IP telephony named Thuraya.
Designated Target
The terrorist team selected the central train system because most of the trains were 
on 11 lines and were outside Newark Penn Station. All trains run with an electrifica-
tion system (third rail system) energized by electric power from a tracking substation. 
The plan was that two terrorists would be giving instructions to the other hackers 

333
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
through stealth wireless mobiles. Hacker-1 was able to intersect the train signals 
arriving from the central signal servers. Hacker-2 attacked the central servers to shut 
the system down. If one train stops, all the other trains on the same rail stops—an 
order from the headquarter dispatcher. The Vaccine Smart grid 3 recognized the 
virus that was designed to intercept the train movement signals before they reach 
the trains. The virus was captured and eliminated from the network. Hacker-3 and 
Hacker-4 were giving instructions to the other hackers in the field and also paved 
the way for the escape.
Figure 13.7 shows the scene of the crime, the Vaccine Smart Grids that protected 
the central systems as well as the clouds. This scenario could happen any time unless a 
cognitive system like CEWPS is in charge of the Digital Immune System.
The Stuxnet: The New Nightmare for Smart Cities
Good and Evil at the Crossroads
In ontological dualism, the world is divided into two overarching forces: the evil force 
and the good force. In the Abrahamic religious influence, evil is usually perceived as the 
dualistic antagonistic opposite of good, in which good should prevail and evil should be 
defeated. But ever since the creation of man, good and evil have been constantly arm-
wrestling and perpetually fighting to defeat each other and control the world.
One of the most haunting questions we face concerns the problem of evil. Why is 
there evil in the world if there is a God? However, the scriptures make it plain that 
God did not create the world in the state in which it is now, but evil came as a result 
of the selfishness of man. We interpret all this by saying that creativity is a two-edge 
sword. We created the Internet and we brought the good, the bad, and the ugly with it. 
The truth of the matter is that evil is what motivates us to defend ourselves and build 
secure defenses around us. Without evil, we do not need antivirus programs, intrusion 
detection, or penetration testing tools. Technology is purely democratic and is avail-
able to everyone. Hacking schizos are in fact the best security virtuosos your money 
can buy. We consider hacking is a satanic chess game of the highest order, between 
evil and good. The chess clock is ticking, and the score is still draw. They know the 
weak cracks and the wet patches of Windows. They use the most intricate tunnels to 
get to the processing vault. To these goons of cyberspace, hacking is the thrill of a 
bungy jump!
Stuxnet: The New Cyber War Missile
Sergy Ulasen, a programmer from Kaspersky Lab, was the pioneer who discovered the 
diabolocal worm Stuxnet in June 2010 (https://eugene.kaspersky.com/2011/11/02/
the-man-who-found-stuxnet-sergey-ulasen-in-thespotlight/). It was designed to 
attack industrial programmable logic controllers (PLCs). Sergey Ulasen said “the 
complexity of Stuxnet’s code and extremely sophisticated rootkit technologies led us 

334
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Secure
cloud
Central dispatcher office
SCADA
system
CEWPS
systems
Central traffic
system
Secure
cloud
Catenary
Train movement
Tracking substation
SCADA
system
Power generating
plant
Hacker remote
access
Vaccine
smart grid 1
Vaccine
smart grid 2
Vaccine
smart grid 3
Hacker remote
access
Figure 13.7  A railway electrification system supplies electric power to railway trains and trams without an onboard prime mover or local fuel supply. Hacker 1 was able to intersect the train 
signals arriving from the central signal servers. Hacker 2 attacked the central servers to shut the system down. If one train stops, all the other trains on the same rail stop—an order from 
the headquarter dispatcher. The Vaccine Smart Grid 3 recognized the virus that was designed to intercept the train movement signals before they reach the trains. The virus was captured and 
eliminated from the network. Hacker 3 and Hacker 4 were giving instructions to the other hackers in the field and also paved the way for the escape.

335
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
to conclude that this malware was a fearsome beast with nothing else like it in the 
world and that we needed to inform the infosec industry and community of the details 
ASAP.” It is the tip of the iceberg. Stuxnet was a politically motivated cyberattack 
aimed at the destruction of the nuclear program of Iran. Blessed by the westernized 
world, Stuxnet ushers the beginning of a new era of cyberterrorism. Stuxnet got its 
malevolent name from two files found inside it. The first part, “stu,” comes from the 
(.stub) file; and the second part, “xnet,” comes from the (MrxNet. sys) file. Stuxnet 
becomes an overnight celebrity due to its diabolical design and mysterious way to cross 
the borders of Iran’s Natanz nuclear plant critical systems. It is interesting to note that 
Sergey Ulasen traveled to Iran and helped the Iranians fish out the malware directly 
from the centrifuges.
Stuxnet Architecture
For the people who have never heard of Stuxnet, it is a worm written in Microsoft 
assembly language, C and C++. Also, part of the code was custom designed with 
undocumented language. Some people pointed the finger at Roel Schouwenberg, a 
senior researcher with Kaspersky’s Americas, who could have been involved in the cre-
ation of the STUXNET. Stuxnet has three components: a worm that executes all rou-
tines related to the main payload of the attack, a stub file that automatically executes 
the propagated copies of the worm, and a rootkit component responsible for hiding 
all malicious files and processes, preventing the detection of the presence of Stuxnet.
The worm (Stuxnet 0.5) was at first identified in mid-June of 2010 by the security 
company VirusBlokAda (antivirus software vendor established in 1997 in Belarus). 
Kaspersky Lab experts also confirmed that there were two versions of Stuxnet (0.5 and 
1.0) that were on the loose attacking SCADA systems from June 2009 to November 
2010. The attack was aimed at two operating systems: (1) the Windows operating 
system and (2) Siemens PCS 7, WinCC, and STEP7 industrial software for Siemens’ 
programmable logic controllers (PLC is a digital computer used to control industrial 
electromechanical processes).
In the United Kingdom on November 25, 2010, Sky News reported that it had 
received information from an anonymous source at an unidentified IT security orga-
nization that Stuxnet, or a variation of the worm, had been traded on the black mar-
ket. A new weapon has been unleashed upon the world, and Stuxnet cannot be stuffed 
back into Pandora’s box. 
Stuxnet Strategy of Attack
Stuxnet attacked Windows systems using an unprecedented four zero-day attacks. 
It is initially spread using infected USB flash drive and then uses other exploits and 
techniques such as peer-to-peer RPC to infect and update other computers inside 
private networks that are not directly connected to the Internet. Stuxnet is unusually 

336
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
large at half a megabyte in size and written in several different programming lan-
guages (including C and C++), which is also irregular for malware.
Two Attack Strategies
Increase the Rotor Speed
The virus worked by first causing an infected Iranian IR-1 centrifuge to increase from 
its normal operating speed of 1064–1410 Hz for 15 minutes before returning to its 
normal frequency. Twenty-seven days later, the virus went back into action, slowing 
the infected centrifuges down to a few 100 Hz for a full 50 minutes. The stresses from 
the excessive, then slower speeds, caused the aluminum centrifugal tubes to expand, 
often forcing parts of the centrifuges into sufficient contact with each other to destroy 
the machine.
Disturb the Gas Pressure
After painstaking analysis, we can now confirm that the 417 PLC device attack code 
modifies the state of the valves used to feed UF6 (uranium hexafluoride gas) into 
the uranium-enrichment centrifuges. The attack essentially closes the valves causing 
disruption to the flow and possibly destruction of the centrifuges and related systems. 
In addition, the code will take snapshots of the normal running state of the system 
and then replay normal operating values during an attack so that the operators are 
unaware that the system is not operating normally. It will also prevent modification 
to the valve states in case the operator tries to change any settings during the course 
of an attack cycle. Natural uranium consists of three isotopes; the majority (99.274%) 
is U-238, while approximately 0.72% is fissile U-235 and the remaining 0.0055% is 
U-234. If natural uranium is enriched to contain 3% U-235, it can be used as fuel for 
light water nuclear reactors. If it is enriched to contain 90% U-235, it can be used for 
nuclear weapons.
The virus then propagates across the network, scanning for Siemens Step7 soft-
ware on computers controlling a PLC. In the absence of both criteria, Stuxnet 
becomes dormant inside the computer. If both the conditions are fulfilled, Stuxnet 
introduces the infected rootkit onto the PLC and Step7 software, modifying the 
codes and giving unexpected commands to the PLC while returning a loop of nor-
mal operations system value feedback to the users. Here is a little more detail for our 
advanced readers.
Now that Stuxnet is running without the user’s knowledge, it can move on to 
its targets. The Windows machines in the SCADA system communicate with the 
PLCs by way of a program called WinCC/PS7, or Step 7. This program essentially 
translates user commands into useful commands for the PLCs using a set of librar-
ies. When Stuxnet is installed, it targets one of these libraries (s7otbxdx.dll), 

337
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
which contains the translations for reading and writing new processes for the PLC, 
among other things. It takes advantage of a zero-day exploit in the WinCC database 
(a backdoor password that ships with the software) to give itself access to the data-
base’s libraries. Stuxnet renames s7otbxdx.dll to s7otbxsx.dll and replaces 
the original library with a modified version. This modified library contains almost 
everything present in the original, but some commands are intentionally translated 
incorrectly (Figure 13.8).
Step7 function after s7otbxdx.dll is replaced by Stuxnet. The original file is 
renamed and bypassed in favor of Stuxnet’s modified version.
Now U-235 is the only variety or isotope of uranium that goes bang. In other 
words, only U-235 can be used in a nuclear weapon or nuclear reactor. But U-235 and 
U-238 are chemically identical.
How do you separate them? You combine uranium with the incredibly reactive gas 
fluorine to make a new gas, uranium hexafluoride. Then you pump this radioactive gas 
into a centrifuge and spin for week after week after week.
Ever so slowly, the gas with the heavier U-238 gradually gets thrown to the outside 
wall of the spinning centrifuge, while the gas with the not-so-heavy U-235 is left 
behind in the center.
But this central gas still has a lot of the heavier U-238 gas mixed in, so you take 
out that central gas and feed it into another centrifuge, spin it for a few more weeks or 
months, and repeat over and over.
S7otbxdx.dll
PLC
S7blk_read
S7otbxdx.dll
S7blk_read
STL code
block
STL code
block
Request
code block
from PLC
Show code
block from
PLC to user
Modified
STL code
block
Step7
Figure 13.8  Step 7 function after s7otbxdx.dll is replaced by Stuxnet. The original file is renamed and bypassed 
in favor of Stuxnet’s modified version.

338
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Of course, to be really efficient, a centrifuge has to spin very quickly, so quickly 
that it is only a few percent away from self-destruction. The underground uranium 
centrifuge plant at Natanz in Iran had some 6000 centrifuges up and spinning by 
April 2008.
The Crack in the Door
The Iranian Natanz centrifuge plant was not connected to the Interweb. So, the mak-
ers of Stuxnet instead sent their virus to five specific domains in Iran via the Internet. 
These domains were somehow associated with the Natanz centrifuge plant. We still 
do not know who or what these domains were, whether they supplied hardware or 
software or they were contractors such as electricians, plumbers, or network special-
ists. But we do know that the Stuxnet virus easily entered the computers at these 
domains with no trouble at all, because it had four zero-day vulnerabilities and two 
genuine, but stolen, digital certificates. One or more of the workers at one or more 
of these domains then broke the air-gap rule. He or she took a USB memory stick 
that they had used at the domain into the uranium centrifuge plant and used it in a 
computer there.
Stuxnet was now inside the computers that controlled the ultrahigh-speed centri-
fuges that, in turn, separated out the desirable U-235, the only isotope of uranium that 
is used in nuclear weapons or power plants. Once Stuxnet was inside the computers 
that controlled the spinning centrifuges, it made copies of itself and spread to all the 
computers on the internal network at the underground centrifuge plant. Then the 
Stuxnet virus went deeper and looked for motors spinning at 1064 rev/second (it is 
the normal RPM). It sped up the uranium centrifuges from their normal 1064 rev/
second to 1410 and kept them there for 15 minutes. This burst of overspeed created 
subtle damage in the bearings and structures of the centrifuges, which were already 
running at a speed close to critical. Over time, this damage would destroy the centri-
fuges. Then Stuxnet went to sleep for 27 days. This time, when it woke up, it slowed 
down the centrifuges to an incredibly slow 2 rev/second and kept them at this speed 
for 50 minutes.
The security of PLC has always been very low, because nobody thought they would 
be a target. But what if every traffic light, elevator, and water pump in your country 
suddenly stopped working? What if the tiny valves that let fuel into every petrol and 
diesel engine suddenly stopped working?
The United States and Israel execution of this plan was astounding. Although 
Stuxnet failed to satisfy its own standards of success in one regard, according to 
Sanger, the worm was never intended to travel outside Natanz’s isolated, air-gapped 
networks. But an error in the code caused the worm to replicate itself and spread 
when an Iranian technician connected an infected laptop computer to the Internet. 
Fortunately, the worm did not cause widespread damage because it was engineered to 
affect Iranian enrichment facilities only.

339
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
Stuxnet 0.5 tampered with the valves that fed uranium hexafluoride into centrifuge 
groupings. By triggering the valves to prematurely open and close, there was a change 
in pressure, which in turn caused the gas to solidify and thus destroy the centrifuges 
and the sensitive equipment used to develop them (Figure 13.9).
Stuxnet 1.0 was the later version, which took on a completely different strategy. 
This time, the virus interfered with the computerized frequency converts that con-
trolled the speed of the centrifuges during the enrichment process. By causing the 
centrifuges to spin at speeds from both extremes, there was permanent damage to key 
parts of the enrichment process.
Damages
Stuxnet 1.0 was reported to have infected an estimated 100,000 computers, many 
of which were not even involved with the uranium-enrichment program. Natanz 
uranium-enrichment plant had approximately 10,000 IR-1 (based on the Pakistani 
centrifuge called the P1); Stuxnet decommissioned 1,000 centrifuges.
Historical Background
On May 9, 1979, a prominent Iranian Jew, Habib Elghanian, was executed by the new 
Islamic government shortly after the revolution. He was known throughout Iran at one 
The SCADA system reads the
measured flow and level data and
sends the setpoints to the PLC
Pump
control
data
Flow
 data
PLC1
Pump
PLC2 compares the measured level 
 to the setpoint and adjusts the flow
through the valve as required
Level
data
PLC2
Valve
control
data
PLC1 compares the measured flow 
to the setpoint and controls the 
pump speed as required to match 
the flow to the setpoint
Figure 13.9  Simplified configuration showing the pump manipulated by Stuxnet program, which in turn affected the 
speed of centrifuges of the plant. The attack increased the rotational speed of the motor that drives the pump of the 
centrifuge, and all hell broke loose. However, the readings on the PLC did not change. That is where the damage was done. 
Operators did not see anything unusual.

340
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
time as the largest producer of plastic goods, was a successful importer and industrial-
ist with different manufacturing companies, the wealthiest Jew in Iran, and was their 
community’s leader as well as a generous philanthropist to Iranians of all religions. 
Menachem Begin, the then prime minister of Israel, who was the head of Zionist mili-
tant Irgun (which gave birth to the Mossad), took a solemn oath to avenge Elghanian’s 
blood. In May 2009, two representatives of the Mossad visited the Elghanian family 
in Glendale, California, and delivered document stating that the first Stuxnet will be 
in honor of Habib Elghanian. The number 19,790,509 in hexadecimal coding was the 
password that triggered the first step of the infection routine in Stuxnet. June 4, 2008, 
was the kickoff date of Stuxnet attack. It took 2 years to fabricate in Israel with the 
blessing of the CIA and the Institute of Terrorism in Israel. According to reliable news 
coming from the Institute of Terrorism in Philadelphia and Jerusalem, Stuxnet was 
designed by top-notch team of 4 Israeli cryptographers, 3 Iranian nuclear engineers, 
2 German process engineers, and 5 U.S. cyber experts, 3 U.S. and one Israeli experts 
in intelligence and antiterrorism (a total of 18).
According to the Jerusalem Post newspaper (November 20, 2010), the German secu-
rity expert Ralph Langner reported in his analysis that Stuxnet contained two dis-
tinct digital warheads, specifically designed to attack the uranium-enrichment plant at 
Natanz and the nuclear power plant in Bushehr. The Pakistan ­newspaper The Nation 
(September 25, 2010) also mentioned that “Stuxnet was assembled by a highly quali-
fied team of experts, involving some with specific control system expertise.”
The team managed to get detailed information about SCADA from Siemens. They 
approached Siemens as engineers from Libya (which was very friendly with Iran). Two 
members of the team claimed that they had permission to visit Bushehr plant. They 
also secretly got a complete set of the engineering drawings of the Bushehr plant. 
Three Iranian engineers were executed afterward as spies. Second, the team succeeded 
in getting reliable contact inside Iran on the uranium-enrichment plant. The team 
worked in Israel putting and testing Stuxnet for 18 months before they are able to load 
and hand the USB to the agent inside Iran.
The New Generation of Stuxnet
What lesson do we learn from Stuxnet? Our main concern is that the new generations 
of Stuxnet will be smarter and will be able to do more damage in smart cities. Like 
CEWPS, which is a quantum leap into cybersecurity, the next Stuxnet, let’s call it 
Stuxnet 4.0, will be a quantum leap into cybercrime as shown in Figure 13.10.
The diagram highlights the landscape of cybertechnology over 30 years.
	
1.	The trajectory of the Antivirus Technologies (AVT) covering all the work 
they have done including research. The profile is moderate with no sub-
stantial advances in AI or nanotechnologies. It showed progress especially 
after Microsoft Windows’ flaws and security holes. AVT vendors did a 

341
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
super job putting the pressure on the software giant to patch the holes and 
fix the bugs.
	
2.	Nonetheless, the Black Hat community outsmarted AVT vendors and took 
advantage zero-day response from Microsoft and created ingenious attacks to 
rob data, corporate secrets, and espionage research labs blueprints and stole 
public records, medical records, military engineering drawings, and even 
money from banks.
	
3.	Foreign country in collaboration with U.S. underground organizations 
took a quantum leap into cyberterrorism. They demonstrated that they can 
do real damage to the United States and western Europe without any fear 
or hesitation. They mastered all the security tools and tricks and turned the 
tables on all the security gurus of the industry. They continue to lead in 
international malware, which has become one of the most prosperous busi-
nesses in the world.
	
4.	Digital Immunity engineered by CEWPS/Smart Vaccine is more advanced 
than the state of the art of cyberterrorism. Smart cities will have to implement 
Digital Immunity technology in their grids to shield all the critical infra-
structures of computer systems from massive attacks (called the Virus Rain) 
launched by global organized cyberterrorists.
Stuxnet may have won the battle but not the war for sure. But cyber war is starting 
to become a reality. What is surprising beyond everyone’s expectations is that many 
Digital Immunity, expert systems,
autonomic systems, grid-centric 
systems, early warning systems
Technological
sophistication
4
Digital Immunity (CEWPS/Smart Vaccine)
Cyberterrorism
Cybercrime
Antivirus Technologies
1990
2000
2010
2020
2
3
1
Reactive, signature-based
systems
Robo-Stuxnet
Cloud Virus Rain
Grid lockers
Critical infrastructure
bombs
Industrial intelligence
Darth Vaders
Cyber heart attacks
Zombie salvation army
Figure 13.10  Cyberterrorism, although it started late, has surpassed Antivirus Technology in sophistication, but bring-
ing new technology such as Digital Immunity has become a pivotal importance. (From the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD.)

342
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
East European and Asian countries have undefeatable electronic armies (according to 
the New York Times (January 18, 2015), the North Korean Electronic Army is made 
of 6000 hackers) that could hijack any cyber command in the world. The U.S. Cyber 
Command is not immune from a massive stealth attack.
The migration to smart cities is picking up momentum, and many large metropoli-
tan areas with complex infrastructures will be implementing smart city technologies 
(SCT). These technologies will achieve smart governance, smart energy, smart build-
ing, smart mobility, smart infrastructure, smart technology, smart health care, and 
smart citizens. Smart cities will offer higher quality of life and, above all, sustainable 
economic development.
Along this accelerated urban modernization boom and migration to intelligent 
cities, cybercrime will also pick up the pace and keep up with the latest technolo-
gies and will be ready for some real earth-shattering cyberattacks. Figure 13.11 
shows a typical sequence of attack:
	
1.	Adversary headquarters, from somewhere in the cloud, decide to retaliate and 
drum up a malicious attack on a smart city and take them by surprise. The 
dashboard is already showing the location of the target and ready to kick it off.
	
2.	The dashboard executes a command to upload on the cloud-based Stuxnet 
type 1 missile, a package containing payload, link file, and rootkit.
Originating
adversary
headquarters
2
1
3
5
4
6
7
Remote dashboard
to monitor attack
Cyber missile
communicates with
intelligence 
headquarters
Guided by the
commander
Autonomic payload
Communicator
Performatives
Commander
Paramedics and
mutator
The virus attack comes
with navigational
instruction on where to go
and where to hide.
The commander is the pilot who
guides the virus attack. It
communicates back with
headquarters to confirm the
success of the attack
The missile may require
the to mutate and change
identity
Navigator
Downloaded from
armory headquarters
Figure 13.11  The cloud-based Stuxnet (type 1) is a self-contained executable software, guided autonomically from a 
remote dashboard located on the cloud. Its mission is to penetrate the Smart City power or informational grid. Thousands 
of these Stuxnets will make the Virus Rain.

343
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
	
3.	At the same time, the dashboard is in sync with the communicator, which is 
the component that will guide the attack. It got all the information needed to 
copilot with the commander.
	
4.	The commander (colonel) will make sure all components are working together 
according to the instructions dictated by the dashboard.
	
5.	The instructions are ready to be linked and assembled into performatives and 
will be under the command of the colonel that guides the missile.
	
6.	The navigator will decide on the best route of the attack. It has to decide the 
safest way to land into the target machine.
	
7.	In case of alarm, the missile will mutate and hide and wait until the navigator 
decides to take an alternative route.
In the next few years, cyberterrorism is going to turn to artificial intelligence (AI) 
and nanotechnology to develop ultrasmart systems that will trigger massive attacks in 
smart cities. We know that smart cities will be powered by a smart grid that manages 
energy, water, transportation, public health and safety, and other key services. Also 
smart cities will also be equipped with soft informational grids to facilitate informa-
tion ubiquity and links homes to offices, cars, and schools.
The industry of cybercrime has been flourishing and has become global and highly 
organized. Cloud technologies will pave the way for more sophisticated malware deliv-
ery. Let’s take, for example, the cloud-based cyber missiles that form the Virus Rain.
Cloud-Based Stuxnet: The Virus Rain Attack
This attack will be organized by an adversary country motivated by counter political 
incentives. The Virus Rain will originate from a cloud armory and will have 10,000 
Stuxnets with different structure and payload. The Virus Rain will hit the smart 
grid of the metropolitan city like a tsunami. It will create a massive performance 
slide in every server and network. The smart grid should have an early warning sys-
tem to handle preemptive attacks such as the Virus Rain. The city’s smart grids must 
have an emergency response mechanism to isolate critical systems from cascaded 
meltdowns.
Nanotechnology-Embedded Stuxnet (Epoch-5 Nanochip-Stuxnet)
According to Ray Kurzweil’s The Singularity Is Near book, he systematically explained 
the six technological evolution epochs. Here is what he said:
Evolution is a process of creating patterns of increasing order. I’ll discuss the concept 
of order in the next chapter; the emphasis in this section is on the concept of patterns. 
I believe that it’s the evolution of patterns that constitutes the ultimate story of our 
world. Evolution works through indirection: each stage or epoch uses the information-
processing methods of the previous epoch to create the next. I conceptualize the history 

34 4
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
of ­evolution—both biological and technological—as occurring in six epochs. As we will 
discuss, the Singularity will begin with Epoch Five and will spread from Earth to the rest 
of the universe in Epoch Six.
He went on to say the following:
So Singularity will begin with the fifth epoch. It will result from the merger of the vast 
knowledge embedded in our own brains with the vastly greater capacity, speed, and 
knowledge-sharing ability of our technology. The fifth epoch will enable our human-
machine civilization to transcend the human brain’s limitations of a mere hundred trillion 
extremely slow connections.
Cybercriminals and hell raisers will realize that nanotechnology and artificial intelli-
gence (AI) are two new fields that will be used to develop the new generation of smart 
cybercrime. Governments will also jump on the smart cybercrime bandwagon and will 
develop secret cyber weapons that will continue the saga of Stuxnet (Figure 13.12).
At present, we do not have human-carrying viruses (HCV) loaded with nanochip 
and implanted in the arm or shoulder of hackers. Disenchanted employees who would 
like to retaliate against management would be willing to have a Nanochip-Stuxnet 
implanted in their shoulder and be ready to smuggle the worm through the company 
network. At present, we do not have the technologies to detect nanomalware software 
stored on a chip.
Here is the sequential description of the nano-attack shown in the diagram:
	
1.	An adversary country, from an unknown location, decides to retaliate with a 
malicious attack on a smart city. This time, new technologies that have never 
been used before will be deployed for this surprise attack. A microscopic chip 
Autonomic
 payload
Storage
Communicator
Kernel
Reasoner and
mutator
This is a Nanochip-Stuxnet
1 mm
The nanochip
2
4
3
The capsule
1.2 mm
1 mm
RFID
WI-FI
BT
1
Figure 13.12  The Epoch-5 Implanted Nanochip-Stuxnet (type 2). (1) The structure of the Stuxnet with its RFID transmit-
ter. (2) The nanochip where the Stuxnet is stored. (3) The chip is mounted inside the capsule. (4) The capsule in implanted in 
the arm of the perpetrator who uses a local or remote computer. The capsule will transmit Stuxnet code into the computer. 
The rest will be history.

345
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
will be used to store the attack software. The chip will be implanted in the 
shoulder of the hacker. The components of the virus will be all programmed 
and tested in the lab.
	
2.	The components will be carefully assembled on the (1 mm × 1 mm) wafer 
of the chip.
	
3.	The chip will be inserted in the capsule and sealed.
	
4.	The chip will be activated by the master control server from the hackers’ 
lab. The chip will remain active during the attack. The hacker will use any PC 
in the company to upload the malware through Bluetooth or Wi-Fi. Once the 
worm gets into the network, it will start to execute the instructions that were 
stored in the storage. The attack is to steal the administrator’s password and 
have access to the central server. Since the worm is in stealth mode, it will not 
be noticed by the administrator. It will find its way to the system, files direc-
tory, and hide for a while to make sure it was not noticed. It will deactivate the 
antivirus program and hijack the keyboard and then replace few system files 
and reactivate the keyboard.
Epoch-5 Nanochip-Stuxnet will be the desired weapon for the next cyber war. The 
terrorist (who carries the implanted Nanochip-Stuxnet) host will allow the chip to 
start sending Bluetooth messages into target computers either on a network or con-
nected to the grid. Bluetooth technology is robust and reliable, and among other 
advantages, it is less prone to interference with other protocols.
Digital Immunity Grid Layer
Like the Internet, smart grids will consist of controls, computers, automation, and 
new technologies and equipment working together to guarantee normal delivery of 
energy and information. When we talk about grids, most of the time, we refer to 
power grids. However, there is a new breed of grids that goes beyond the power grid, 
which is used to deliver information from banks to bank, home to office, home to 
school, city hall to city hall, and hospital to hospital.
Like in the human body, there are many grids that deliver specific services, but all 
grids work together, support one another, and exchange information as well. Similarly, 
smart cities will require several grids functional to deliver specific services and collect 
service-oriented information.
The Digital Immunity layer will be responsible for providing early warning alerts, 
vaccination services, and the collection of attack data for better future response.
Smart cities most likely will be a giant crucible for organized cyberattacks. We 
believe that politically motivated cyberattacks will increase in numbers and in sophisti-
cation, and many attacks will be committed by insiders as well as crime service provid-
ers (CSPs). The Smart Vaccine grid will be installed in smart cities to shield the critical 
system from Virus Rain, and Robo-Stuxnets, and Nanochip-Stuxnets (Figure 13.13).

346
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
The Cognitive Early Warning Predictive System (CEWPS) is the AI system that 
administers the Smart Vaccine activities including all the vaccination missions. All 
the knowledge databases will be operating autonomically in real-time basis collecting 
attack episodes that get converted into knowledge models.
Nobel Laureate Horst Stormer said once: “Nanotechnology has given us the tools… 
to play with the ultimate toy box of nature—atoms and molecules. Everything is 
made from it…. The possibilities to create new things appear limitless.” The Digital 
Immunity grid (DIG) is the beginning of a chapter in cybersecurity. In fact, the term 
cybersecurity is an old term with no appeal to it. It should be replaced with the newer 
term Digital Immunity. Digital Immunology would be the new science that will assure 
healthier urban foundation for smarter economic development.
The Digital Immunity grid (DIG) will introduce two new components:
	
1.	The smart immunity meter (SIM): Conventionally speaking, the term smart 
meter often refers to an electricity meter, but it may also mean a device mea-
suring natural gas or water consumption. In general, a meter is a device to 
measure time of use. In CEWPS terms, SIM is an intelligent real-time device 
that monitors and determines if a critical system has missed any vaccination 
for a particular virus. Like the human body, which requires a dozen of vaccina-
tion to build its adaptive immunity, critical systems could become vulnerable 
to cyberattacks unless they have been regularly vaccinated. Smart immunity 
meters (SIMs) communicate directly with the Smart Vaccine grid dashboard 
that collects all the meter readings and correlates them with present metrics.
	
2.	The micro Vaccinebot: Evolutionary progress looks smooth, but that really is 
divided into paradigms, specific methods of solving problems. Each paradigm 
The Informational Grid
Smart
Immunity
Meter
Smart
Immunity
Meter
CEWPS
Knowledge
Engine
Collect attack episodes
create more vaccines
immunize other grids
Smart Vaccine
Dashboard
The Smart Vaccine Grid
Critical Infrastructure Systems Grid
Figure 13.13  The Smart Immunity Meter (SIM) is the new concept that collects real-time information on the immunity 
level of the grid. It is the barometer of security that sends signals to the Smart Vaccine dashboard that monitors the grids 
from massive Nanochip-Stuxnet-5 attacks.

347
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
starts with slow growth, builds to rapid growth, and then levels off. As one 
paradigm levels off, pressure builds to find or develop a new paradigm. The 
emergence of artificial intelligence and micro technologies constitutes the 
new paradigm that has reached cybersecurity. A Vaccinebot is a microscopic 
self-contained autonomic program that will be installed on a chip that will 
be programmed to trigger a vaccination service on a grid. It is not easy to 
comprehend the size of a micro Vaccinebot, but micro engineering is being 
used extensively in medicine and metallurgy and pharmaceutical industries. 
Taking the scale down to the nanolevel (1 billionth of a meter) is not unreal-
istic to have nanoprograms and tools in the cybersecurity domain.
There will be thousands of Vaccinebots that will reside on the grids and will com-
municate with one another like the human cells and will relay messages to the smart 
immunity meters. This may sound like a fresh futuristic concept, but it will be part of 
the new generation of the Smart Vaccine.
The S-Curve Evolution of the Digital Immunity System CEWPS
The Digital Immunity system CEWPS, like other emerging technologies, will fol-
low the “S” evolution curve as exhibited later. It is a major shift from the conventional 
Antivirus Technology (AVT). The S-curve evolution emerged as a mathemati-
cal model and was applied later to a variety of fields including physics, biology, and 
economics. It describes, for example, the development of the embryo, the diffusion 
of viruses, and the utility gained by people as the number of consumption choices 
increases. In the innovation management field, the S-curve illustrates the introduc-
tion, growth and maturation of innovations, and the technological cycles that most 
industries experience.
We have divided the CEWPS S-curve into four milestones to demonstrate some 
interesting phenomena on the accelerating returns and singularity:
	
1.	CEWPS-1: This is the original version that introduced the Digital Immunity 
concept and vaccination services through the Smart Vaccine. It will be par-
tially adopted by the smart cities.
	
2.	CEWPS-2: This is the next generation that will be around 2020. It will be an 
improved version covering Big Data, the Internet of Things, and the cloud. It 
will be fully adopted by the smart cities. It will also be accepted by the Antivirus 
Technology vendors.
	
3.	CEWPS-3: It will reach its full maturity, and its Digital Immunity becomes a 
utility that can be acquired for home and business places.
	
4.	CEWPS-4: This is going to be the most crucial version of the Digital Immunity 
systems. After a decade from the original version, which has brought a new 
paradigm to the cyber security industry, it will have a great technological impact 
on Antivirus Technology (AVT) and will go through the accelerating return 

348
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
syndrome. New cybersecurity companies will emerge with much more versatile 
DI platforms. The focus will be on smart cities and how to protect its complex 
infrastructures. On the other hand, the organized crime service providers and 
other adversary electronic armies will be very active developing new weapons 
and more potent attack vectors. It will be time for CEWPS-4 to jump to a new 
C-curve and shift into a new paradigm (Figure 13.14). Ray Kurzweil’s prediction 
on accelerating returns seems valid as we look at the progress of the Internet and 
its impact on our societal fabric and life: “An analysis of the history of technology 
shows that technological change is exponential, contrary to the common-sense 
‘intuitive linear’ view. So we won’t experience 100 years of progress in the twenty 
first century—it will be more like 20,000 years of progress (at today’s rate).”
A Closing Word to Open Your Eyes
Duqu 2: The Future Cyber-Espionage Tool
Duqu 2 is a sophisticated piece of malware discovered in 2011; this was used in a 
number of intelligence-gathering attacks against a range of industrial targets. It had a 
number of similarities to the infamous Stuxnet worm, leading many to believe it was 
developed by the United States and Israel. Many prominent security firms claim that 
the Israeli-linked malware Duqu 2.0 was used to hit very specific targets including the 
Singularity
Law of accelerated returns
Nano-
intelligence
Artificial
intelligence
CEWPS-1
CEWPS-2
CEWPS-3
CEWPS-4
CEWPS-?
Globalization of the Digital Immunity
will also trigger different cyber wars.
It will jump into a new S-curve and
initiate a new paradigm.
Digital Immunity will become mature and
will become pivotal for cybersecurity
The Smart Vaccine smart grid will be integrated in the 
structure of smart cities to protect the critical 
infrastructures
Digital Immunity will ride on the technology wave and will
show its technological benefits for smart cities
2015
2020
2025
2030
Figure 13.14  The evolution cycle of the Digital Immunity paradigm.

349
The Next Cyber War: The Evil Fight with the Good!
P5+1 (the six world powers which, in 2006, joined together in diplomatic efforts with 
Iran with regard to its nuclear program) nuclear talks and the events marking the 70th 
anniversary event of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau.
The creators of Duqu 2 were so confident that it would never be discovered they 
decided to attack one of the world’s best-known cybersecurity companies directly. The 
highly stealthy malware would have gone completely undetected while gathering a lot 
of highly sensitive information before uploading that data remotely to command-and-
control servers.
So, what is the anatomy of Duqu 2, who fabricated it, and how it was detected? 
The Moscow-based firm Kaspersky Lab said it discovered several of its own internal 
systems had been infected by highly sophisticated malicious malware earlier this year. 
Furthermore, the cybersecurity firm claims several venues for international negotia-
tions over Iran’s nuclear program have been targeted by a surveillance virus, reportedly 
linked to Israeli intelligence.
Deep forensic and reverse engineering work discovered that the same virus had 
been used to infiltrate a series of other targets in the West and the Middle East, 
including, most notably, hotels where the Iranian delegates met with the P5+1 group 
to discuss Tehran nuclear ambitions.
The investigation described Duqu 2 as “one of the most skilled, Mysterious, and 
powerful threat actors in the APT (advanced persistent threat World)”. The level of 
complexity of Duqu 2.0 was so high that they believe its use could only be part of “a 
nation-state-sponsored campaign.”
Costin Raiu, Director of Research, said that “The people behind Duqu are one of 
the most skilled and powerful APT groups and they did everything possible to try 
to stay under the radar.” He admitted that “This highly sophisticated attack used up 
to three zero-day exploits, which is very impressive – the costs must have been very 
high.”
Costin Raiu explained “To stay hidden, the malware resides only in kernel memory, 
so anti-malware solutions might have problems detecting it. It also doesn’t directly 
connect to a command-and-control server to receive instructions. Instead, the attack-
ers infect network gateways and firewalls by installing malicious drivers that proxy 
all traffic from the internal network to the attackers’ command and control servers.”
Kaspersky didn’t name Israel as a suspect, but the previous version of Duqu was 
very similar to the infamous Stuxnet worm, believed to have been developed by the 
United States and Israel. Israel all along refused to accept the nuclear talks, and con-
sider the outcome of the talks could have greatly increased Tehran’s threats to Israel’s 
security.
The United States decided to lend support to the talks, which upset the Israel–U.S. 
relations.
In March, Washington directly accused Israeli spies of having snooped on the talks 
to gather intelligence and used this to fuel opposition to the nuclear deal in the U.S. 

350
The CEWPS Using the Smart Vaccine
Congress. Kaspersky’s revelation that the locations where the “P5+1” group met their 
Iranian governments were targeted had the desired impact.
References
Carr, J., Inside Cyber Warfare. O’Reilly, Sebastopol, CA, 2010.
Disrupting 
uranium 
processing 
at 
natanz. 
http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/
stuxnet-05-disrupting-uranium-processing-Natanz.
Kaspersky Lab provides its insights on Stuxnet worm. http://www.kaspersky.com/about/news/
virus/2010/Kaspersky_Lab_provides_its_insights_on_Stuxnet_worm.
Kurzweil, R., The Singularity Is Near, When Humans Transcend Biology. Viking Penguin Books, 
New York, 2005.
Langner, R. http://www.langner.com/en/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/To-kill-a-centrifuge.
pdf.
Stuxnet: A breakthrough. http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/stuxnet-breakthrough
Symantec.com. http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/exploring-stuxnet-s-plc-infection-
process.
Symantec.com. 
http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/stuxnet-05-disrupting-uranium-
processing-​natanz.
Vulnerability summary for CVE-2010-2772. http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/vuln/detail?​vulnId=​
CVE-2010-2772.
Websites
http://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2012/09/19/10-amazing-human-body-facts.
aspx.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Singularity_Is_Near.
http://people.carleton.edu/~grossea/infection.html.
http://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet excellent.
http://www.njtransit.com/pdf/rail/Rail_System_Map.pdf.
http://w w w.symantec.com/security_response/def initions/rapidrelease/detail.
jsp?relid=2014–11–14 super.
http://www.zdnet.com/article/kaspersky-duqu-trojan-uses-unknown-programming-language/.

351
Epilogue
A public lecture was delivered on September 8, 2011, at the Global Security Seminars 
at UCLA Faculty Club. The topic of this lecture was “Jihadism and Terrorism, our 
National Security is at Stake.”
The goal of this presentation was twofold: first to explain that Jihadism is not Jihad, 
and second to offer a scientific and philosophical explanation of the anatomy of the 
multifaceted Jihadism, how it morphed to become terrorism. There is so much bewilder-
ment and emotional disillusion between Jihadism and terrorism mayhem that technol-
ogy alone cannot disentangle. It is not imperative to understand everything about Islam, 
but it is obligatory to understand the driving factors that created Jihadism and how it was 
ingenuously fabricated. Nonetheless, a little historical recital on Islam will be requisite 
and even enlightening. I did add some updated information relevant to the topic.
According to Islamic Finder (www.islamicfinder.org), a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to serving Islam on the Internet, the Prophet Muhammad was born on 
Monday, 12 Rabi Al Awwal, April 22, AD 570. Figure E.1 shows the main events 
since the birth of the Prophet Mohammed.
We can say Islam started in AD 610, when the Prophet was 40 and received his 
first revelation delivered by angel Gabriel. Then he started to openly preach the divine 
revelations. Those revelations were preserved by his close followers (Sahaba) and even-
tually that collection became the Holy Quran. The Prophet Muhammad received 
an innumerable number of revelations, most of which are encompassed within the 
Holy Quran. All we know is that the Holy Quran has 114 chapters that include 
all the revelations. The prophet would explain the revelations (which are the words 
of God) to his followers known as Sahaba. All verbal statements or actions of the 
Prophet Muhammad, his tacit approval or criticism of something said or done in his 
presence became what is called the Hadith. This was unlike the Holy Quran, which 
went through formal processes of collection and codification, centered around one 

352
Epilogue
overarching principle: God’s words must not in any way be distorted or sullied by human 
intervention. There are NO multiple versions of the Quran, only one.
We can say the Jihad-1 war started with the beginning of Islam, when the Prophet 
Muhammad started to condemn idol worship and the Meccan forefathers engaged in 
polytheism. It was the beginning of the armed conflict. The Prophet Muhammad led 
many successful battles and most of the tribes that initially opposed him converted to 
Islam. His wisdom and eloquence made him gain political power and magical leadership. 
Michael H. Hart, in his book “The 100 most influential people,” ranked the Prophet 
Mohammed as the number 1 most influential man in history. Islam, which started with 
a dozen of his close followers, has spread around the world, and in 2014 it reached 2.08 
billion (http://www.­muslimpopulation.com/World/).
In AD 632, the Prophet Muhammad passed away and was buried in Medina. With 
his death, the first Jihad came to an end.
I should mention at this point a crucial milestone in the history of Islam: There 
was a dispute among the Muslims on who is the rightful successor to the Prophet. 
The dispute triggered a spiteful split between Sunnis and Shiites. The Shiites were 
the followers of Ali, nephew of the Prophet, split from the main stream of Islam 
and currently account for 10%–15% of all Muslims. Shiites claimed that the Prophet 
Muhammad had anointed his son-in-law, Ali, as his rightful successor (Khalif). 
The Shiites believed that successorship Caliphat should stay within the family of the 
Prophet. Unfortunately, the split got wider and wider, even though the Shiites amount 
to 15% of the Muslim population. The Sunnis, who constituted 87%–90% of the 
world’s Muslim population, are the strict followers of the Prophet Muhammad and 
the consensus of the people. There has been so much blood between the two sects, and 
no compromise will be accepted by either sect. All the violence today is the result of 
that deep-rooted split.
AD 570
Prophet was born
Islam started
Prophet death
All assassinated
Shia sect started
North Africa and Europe
Iraq, Iran, and India
The Crusades
AD 610 AD 632
Jihad-1
Jihad-2
Jihadism
Sunni and Shiites split
AD 661 A 667
AD 1095
The irreconcilable split of Islam
and emergence of Jihadism as the new face of terrorism
AD 1450
AD 2000
The new millennium
Figure E.1  In Islam, there are three types of Jihad. The first one was during the Prophet Mohammed. The second one 
occurred after the Prophet Mohammed. The third one is the contemporary one and most troublesome.

353
Epilogue
The Jihad-2 started with the new successor after the death of the Prophet, and 
lasted almost 823 years, throughout the fifteenth century. During the period of sec-
ond Jihad, which is considered the golden era of Muslim conquest, Muslims had great 
armies led by great leaders that continued to spread from Europe through Africa all 
the way to India. Islam flourished during this period, and the Middle East became 
the bridge of commerce between the Far East and Europe. The period of second Jihad 
was the most successful period of Islam after the Prophet. There were many wars 
but they were fought under the banner of the Holy Quran and the teachings of the 
Prophet. Yes, there was a lot of violence during the wars, justified to spread Islam and 
nothing else. We cannot define the Jihad-2 as terrorism, although, during the period 
of Jihad-2, the power and the leadership struggle of the Islamic community continued 
for 1348 years until the present.
As shown in Figure E.2, the two sects of Islam were initially headed by the Prophet 
Muhammad. Then after the split, the Shiites selected Karbala in Iraq as their capi-
tal, while the Sunnis kept Mecca as their religious center. The Shiites were divided 
primarily among Iran, Iraq, and Lebanon, with Alawites (an off-shoot of Shia Islam) 
in Syria. This area has come to be known as the Shia crescent. The fight  still contin-
ues and no compromise is in sight. According to a poll by Pew Research, some 40% 
of Sunnis do not regard Shiites as real Muslims (http:// www.pewglobal.org/topics/
muslims-and-islam/).
This conflict planted the first seed of Islamic terrorism that I call “Jihadism.” 
But before we fast-forward into the topic of terrorism, I should say, being a native 
of Syria, I fully understand the culture of the land and how Islam plays a big role 
in the geopolitical arena. The West does not understand the genetics of the Middle 
East, and it never will. I would like to mention candidly that the Jihadism in the 
Prophet
Muhammad
Disciples
Sahabah
Shia Islam
Karbala
15%
85%
Sunni Islam
Mecca
The sacred face of Islam
Figure E.2  The two irreconcilable sects of Islam (the Sunnis and the Shiaas) started after the assassination of Ali in 661 
AD, and the Shii’a followers decided to relocate to a new capital Karbala in Iraq.

354
Epilogue
world, and in particular in the Middle East, got more aggressive due the hypocritical 
intervention of the great powers. The Middle East used to be one land, where all the 
divine religions coexisted. Look at what we have now, and how many fenced nations 
we have today.
Now, let’s define a very pivotal word in Islam, the Shari’a. Shari’a is the Islamic law 
(Figure E.3). It is the combination of the two major pillars of Islam Quran and the 
teachings and rulings of the Prophet which is called Hadith. Shari’a law itself cannot 
be altered, but its interpretation is given some leeway by the religious scholars. This is 
why not all roads lead to Rome, as the saying goes. Shari’a is a complete legal system 
with the core principle of good on Earth; it also covers the family, the society, crime 
and punishment, the government, and even the classic meaning of military Jihad.
The usual criticisms of Shari’a—that it is very cruel as regards execution, flog-
ging, and cutting off hands—totally ignore all the extenuating circumstances that not 
applying these penalties would lead to. Islamic terrorism today (e.g. ISIS) ardently 
practices this, which offends God.
The truth is Shari’a has been controversial. Many Muslim countries fully follow it, 
while the rest partially follow it. In the strict Muslim countries, Shari’a-prescribed 
punishments such as beheading, flogging, and stoning continue to be practiced judi-
cially or extrajudicially. Of all legal systems in the world today, Islam’s Shari’a law 
is the most intrusive and strict, especially against women. An interesting feature of 
Shari’a is that it does not incarcerate the guilty. Nothing like what we have here in the 
United States.
The word “Jihad” is one of the most troubling, controversial, and abused term in the 
religion of Islam. In the beginning, it meant a holy war against infidels. Today, Jihad 
Prophet
Muhammad
Quran
Hadith
Shari’a
Religious
scholars
Islamic law
Perpetuated
Muhammad
teachings
Revelations
Shari’a has been very controversial
Figure E.3  Shari’a is the Islamic Law, which is the product of Hadith, the Holy Quran, and the religious scholars. 
The Shari’a is partially applied in most Islamic countries, with the exception of some countries like Saudi Arabia, and ISIS 
where it is fully applied.

355
Epilogue
and Jihadism are not synonymous. These two terms take totally different meanings. The 
Western world refers to Jihadism as Islamic terrorism. Let me articulate on this subject.
Now here is the point, Jihadism followers believe that their holy war against all non-
Muslim societies is justified and their recompense will be the paradise. It is prodigious 
incentive for martyrdom. Don’t you think so? Interestingly enough, there is no interna-
tional consensus on the legal definition of terrorism. Also, there is neither an academic 
nor an accurate legal unanimity regarding the definition of that term. Various legal 
systems and government agencies use different definitions. Governments have been 
reluctant to formulate a systematic and legally binding definition. Jihadism is politi-
cally and emotionally charged, so is terrorism.
Now let’s talk about a couple of interesting points displayed in Figure E.4 the 
timeline slide. The Russian invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 gave birth to 
Al-Qaeda and Taliban. The American invasion of Iraq gave birth to ISIS. The civil 
war in Syria is in its 5th year. The Russian are pouring kerosene on the fire.
The Jihad-3 in Figure E.1, I call it Jihadism instead, started with Al-Qaeda, 
through 9/11 until now. Since we are addressing the subject of Jihadism, let’s talk 
about the genesis of its sibling cyber-Jihadism, its state of the art, and its plans. 
Of course there are other cyberarmies from China, North Korea, Israel, Iran, and 
Pakistan that have been launching massive politically driven cyberattacks. Jihadism 
morphed into terrorism. It is a huge mixed bag of human intimidation and disgrace. 
We would not discuss those armies in this presentation.
If we look at Figure E.5, we can see that terrorists realized that the Internet can be 
an effective and potent weapon to launch cyber-Jihadism. Of course, Jihadi organiza-
tions started to recruit professional Internet hackers for the job. Before and during the 
9/11 tragedy, there was a tremendous Internet activity, beyond belief. If there hadn’t 
been so much contention and mistrust between the two well-known government 
Hamas
AI-Qaeda
ISIS; Jabhat-al-nusra
Cyber-Jihadism
Russia invades
Afghanistan
12/1979
2/1989
9/11/2001
3/2014
Mujahideen
Russia withdraws from
Afghanistan
Taliban
The cause and effect of terrorism
AI-Qaeda
ISIS
U.S.–Iraq invasion
Figure E.4  Timetable of major contemporary events, and how Jihad-3 turned into Jihadism, which is synonymous to 
(terrorism). Jihadism is used by the radical followers of ISIS.

356
Epilogue
agencies, you know who, the attack could have been eliminated, and the attackers 
could have been caught before commandeering the planes.
The slide (Figure E.5) is very interesting. It shows the locations of the Islamic 
organizations and schools around the world that support Jihadism. These organiza-
tions are well funded and supported with military and computer science experts. 
Most of these organizations have websites and are also very active on all the social 
media sites.
Well, if the Institute of Terrorism and Research reports that there are 3500 Jihadi 
organizations and schools, then, most likely they have 3500 missile launch websites. 
Of course, not all of them are invisible. The thing is it is easy to hide or spoof the 
originating website. The Deep Web has hundreds of cyberarmies anonymously plan-
ning to hijack the whole world.
Take, for example, the Syrian Electronic Army (SEA), shown below in Figure 
E.6, with its website http://sea.sy/index/en, which is an interesting one (they have 
their own Black Hat Group). It uses the very latest technologies including SEANux, 
which is an Ubuntu-based Linux with a modified Gnome Shell interface, icons, and 
GTK theme. It is charged up with penetration testing and privacy tools and other 
potent missiles. The SEA (Figure E.6) is made up of a group of top-notch com-
puter geeks formed in 2011 to support the government of Syria’s president Bashar 
al-Assad, in collaboration with the Iranians, Chinese, and North Koreans. It uses 
spamming, website defacement, malware, phishing, and denial-of-service attacks; 
it has targeted Political opposition groups, western news organizations, human 
rights groups, and websites that are seemingly neutral to the Syrian conflict. On 
the outside it looks politically motivated, but in reality, it supports the Shii’a mili-
tants. Of course it is the façade of many stealth sites that spy on citizens and spread 
malware all over.
Figure E.5  International Islamic Jihadi organizations and schools exceeding (3500).

357
Epilogue
The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria also known as ISIS, or The Islamic State of 
Iraq and Levant (ISIL), with its own site shown in (Figure E.7), has raised the 
cyberterrorism bar much higher in the name of Sunni Islam. The New York Times in 
its issue of August 27, 2014(2) states “As fighters continue to seize territory, the Islamic 
State in Iraq and Syria was built. Officers mostly middle-aged Iraqis, including many 
military officers under Saddam Hussein, are at least 200,000. ISIS is loaded with cash 
from oil wells, looting and hostage ransoms, but the oil price has crashed, the rapid 
expansion that made looting so profitable.” The Independent magazine, Thursday, July 
2, 2015 also mentions that “American officials estimated that it was making $2 m a 
day from oil, and $2 million from ransoms.” Not to mention selling women. All the 
evil acts were carried out in the name of God.
Aside, from the horrific executions of the “infidels” shown on YouTube and 
BestGore.com, they skillfully managed to penetrate the most resilient sites. But here is 
Cyberactivity statistics of the SEA on the Web
Figure E.6  This is a screen produced by the Syrian Electronic Army (Pro Assad) showing all the hacking activities.

358
Epilogue
one final remark from The Guardian magazine(3), Sunday, April 12, 2015: “More dan-
gerous everyday items have become hackable too, including cars. Security researchers 
have proven it is entirely possible for criminals 1500 miles away to seize control of 
your car when you are driving 65 mph down the highway.” Wow, this belongs to the 
Stuxnet club.
The composite website in (Figure E.7) represents in fact several stealth command 
centers that are ready to launch cyber missiles. They have recruited the best profes-
sionals to design them, foolproof, with the latest technologies of cyber war. No more 
ISIS talk.
It is becoming a maxim of reality, that hackers (and I hate this term), cyber war-
riors, have meticulously and scrupulously learned all the kinks of cyber war. The truth 
is that hacking a system is more fun than securing a system. Hackers are more inno-
vative and creative than chief security officers. That is why these cyber warriors have 
been winning the game. Jihadi militants believe they are blessed by God and will be 
awarded the paradise.
Figure E.8 shows the overwhelming proliferation and globalization of Jihadism 
within short time. These charts were compiled in late 2010 and most likely, the num-
bers have exploded by orders of magnitude. I could generalize and say that every major 
city in the world (East, West, and Middle) has Jihadists who are cruising on the infor-
mation highway to get to their destination. There are no checkpoints, no highway 
patrol cruisers, no radar. Martyrdom is the ultimate award that lights the fire of all 
Jihadists. The fast lane to the paradise offers life as a token of loyalty to Islam. It is 
every Jihadist’s dream, whether Sunni or Shi’a. No Marine’s Semper Fidelis comes 
close to Jihadism.
Memri Cyber and Jihad lab
IS Internet defenders video: message to the
servants of the cross
Figure E.7  ISIS is at the top of the cyber-Jihadism iceberg. An example of one of the hacking screens attacking the 
Christians.

359
Epilogue
Oh, I deliberately left the United States from the charts and put it on another 
detailed chart (Figure E.9). An incredible number of Islamic/Arab organizations 
actively operate in the United States. Most of the communications with their global 
networks are done with highly complex cyphertext, using RSA public-key cryptosys-
tems with certificates signed by secret certificate authorities. Also, there is so much 
laundering of funds, whose illegality is very hard to prove.
Looking at Figures E.10 through E.13, we can see the devotion of the radical 
Muslims to Jihadism. Again, a small percentage of the Muslim population believe in 
Jihadi martyrdom. Most of the rest are peace loving and truly dedicated to the Quran 
and the Hadith.
Figure E.8  Islamic Jihadism is a global phenomenon.
Figure E.9  Islamic Jihadism network in the United States. (From U.S. Congress Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on 
Terrorism, 2009.)

360
Epilogue
Islam promises paradise to all faithful Muslims. It is the sublime reward and every 
devout Muslim dreams of the paradise. The Quran promotes fighting the infidels 
and killing them if they refuse to convert to Islam. In fact, the Quran states that 
Muslims may “Fight in the cause of God against those who fight against you, but 
do not transgress limits. Lo! God loves not aggressors…” (2:190). Jihadism took this 
verse and distorted it. This is considered blasphemy and against the teachings of the 
Prophet Muhammad and the Quran. Period.
Jihadi suicide bombing is a disgrace to the Holy Quran. The notion that Jihadi 
suicide bombers are martyrs and that the Almighty God conferred upon them a place 
The idea of martyrdom captivates their will to go to heaven
Figure E.10  Excerpts of the devotion of Islamic radicalism. Children are nurtured into violence.
Figure E.11  Every Jihadi suicide bomber is considered a martyr and receives a diploma for his achievement.

361
Epilogue
Figure E.12  Amazing devotion to Sayed Hassan, leader of Hezbollah, a political religious organization (Shii’a organiza-
tion loyal to Iran). The title “Sayed” is a religious rank, the highest is Ayatollah.
Figure E.13  Amazing devotion to Abu Baker AI-Baghdadi (Khalifa of ISIS), ex-officer of Saddam.

362
Epilogue
in Heaven is the most misunderstood interpretation of true Islamic scriptures. It is a 
derailed fantasy. And awarding every Jihadi suicide bomber a diplomat is definitely 
the most barbed sacrilege to humanity and the Muslim communities.
Now, the big question is how to prevent Jihadi terrorism. May be I should rephrase 
my question as follows: Can we extinguish the fire of Jihadi terrorism? Or even a more 
complex and enigmatic question: Can we predict any of the cyberattacks?
Let’s take for a moment the classic plagiarism in academia. Before we pretend that 
we can eliminate plagiarism, let’s focus on predicting it first. The traditional academic 
methods are unfortunately not working. Academia is adopting new technologies, but 
when it comes to plagiarism, academia hits the wall. I think if academia wants to 
eliminate exam plagiarism, they could eliminate the exam altogether and look for 
other metrics to evaluate the level of knowledge and aptitude of the student. Another 
method is to allow the student to select a legitimate and pre-approved exam. No school 
will do that. One way to eliminate plagiarism is to allow the student to select pre-
approved projects and earn a Certificate of Authenticity of Evidence of Work. Another 
solution is to scan the profile of each student and his academic history as a priori “pla-
giaristic” data and conduct probabilistic reasoning analyses to determine the causality 
of troubles for the student (criminals have a historical profile, why not students?). So 
every teacher will have the historical profile of students, and with the help of cameras 
in the classrooms, plagiarism can be controlled partially. Plagiarist students are either 
very dumb or very innovative. The latter category of students will resort to hi-tech to 
cheat. For example, Google Glasses (Figure E.14) can be a way to receive answers 
from the outside. Apple is another means to receive answers in the blink of an eye. 
Amazing!
Now let’s go back to the Jihadi terrorism issue. The world is plagued with Jihadism. 
It is exponentially problematic, simply because it is driven by politics, and most impor-
tantly by Islamic fundamentalism, which encroached all over the world—not just one 
country or region. Bombing can be executed by car, by self, remote control, or even 
with an electromagnetic device (Figures E.15 and E.16). But most Jihadists prefer to 
carry the bomb and detonate themselves. It is considered the ultimate martyrdom!
Figure E.14  Techno-cheating with Google Glass and Apple Watch, which will eventually lead to cyber-Jihadism.

363
Epilogue
Let’s go back now to cyber-Jihadism, which has morphed into a new paradigm. 
ISIS knows that cyber-Jihadism could be staged anywhere in the world without notice. 
Those ISIS militants who are definitely on the payroll of the Devil have the long end 
of the stick. This is the greatest advantage that Jihadi terrorists have. They can attack 
critical infrastructure systems such as computers that control power grids, steal per-
sonal information assets, and hack into strategic military intelligence, commandeer 
airplanes, and even nuclear plants (Stuxnet).
Figure E.15  Cell phones can be used as detonators in bombs of mass destruction as seen below, the ringer is hooked 
up to the ignition device so that when the phone is called, the bomb will detonate.
Figure E.16  Hacking the Pentagon has drawn amazement as well as embarrassment.

364
Epilogue
It is not rocket science to realize that cybercrime is now winning the battle and the 
war. Cyber-Jihadism is an active member of the Dark Web and can obtain cyber explo-
sives the moment they are available. In my estimations, there are four technologies 
that can be combined to build a robust defense against cyberterrorism.
I have highlighted this in my book six advanced technologies that were used to 
build the Digital Immune System using the CEWPS/Smart Vaccine: Autonomic 
Computing, Artificial Intelligence, Grid Computing, Honeypot Technology, 
Cognitive Reasoning, and Knowledge engines. Like the human body, all systems 
operate independently, concurrently, interoperatively, and all pipes end up in the brain.
Using these technologies, we can build a Digital Immune System for the criti-
cal systems per industry. For example, all health care systems will have their own 
health care grid. All the Government systems will have their own grid. The Power 
systems will be connected to a dedicated grid and so on. It might be prohibitively 
expensive, but we start with a candidate industry such as the power grid. Figure 
E-17 shows the configuration for a typical industry sector that combines the five 
technologies.
The honeypot moat will be like the medieval times, creating chaos among the 
attackers. It is the first line of defense and it does its job very well. For cyberterror-
ism, first, we need to build a smart grid that ties all the critical systems physically and 
logically together. If one system gets compromised, the other systems on the grid will 
be protected.
Figure E.18 shows the layered version of CEWPS. Each industry would have its 
own virtual grid with honeypots and the Smart Vaccine Grid. For illustration purpose, 
Alarm send
A damaged honeypot
Central Coordination
Center
Honeypot
moat
Protected company
server
The Smart Vaccine
grid
Figure E.17  Traditionally, a moat circling the city would be the safest way against preemptive attacks. If each industry 
(such as health care) could have its own grid, then we could surround it with a honeypot moat trapping malware. When one 
of the honeypots gets attacked, it will alarm the rest of the honeypots, and the critical systems of that industry will go on 
alert. This is where the Smart Vaccine comes in.

365
Epilogue
we’re showing three virtual grids for health care, military, and Government critical 
systems. The three grids are connected to the dashboard of the Central Coordination 
Center (CCC). Also each grid is connected to the Smart Vaccine Grid (SVG) for 
vaccination response. The honeynet will also be powered with the five technologies 
and be as smart as the Smart Vaccine. We can say that honeynets are deployed to fool 
the attacker and trap them and learn more about the attack. So our moat will have 
very crucial duties starting with trapping attackers and limiting their actions. Once 
the attack is apprehended, the CCC will be notified and an alert will be dispatched 
to all the systems on the grid. Most likely, the attacker will fire several cyber missiles 
to compromise the other systems. The moat will be ready for all subsequent attacks. 
At the same time, the CCC will notify the Smart Vaccine for response vaccination. 
A profile of the attack will be sent to the Cognitive Reasoning Engine (CRE) to be 
stored for the next attack. The Honeynet will perform trend analysis that will also be 
sent to the CRE for further digging into the origin of the attack and the expected 
damage.
Finally as I mention in the book, cybersecurity needs an overhaul because it has 
reached a midlife crisis. Gartner forecasts that the total cost of information security is 
expected to reach $76.9 billion! I have presented my views and time will tell if I will 
get credit when Digital Immune Systems become the de facto of the security industry.
The scenario that I described has a purpose to demonstrate the necessity of a smart 
grid to defend our critical systems with the new paradigm that we call vaccination. 
Three honeynet protected grids for three critical infrastructures
The honeynet moat
The Smart Vaccine
grid
Critical systems
Central Coordination Center
Top
: Health care
Middle
: Military
Bottom
: Government
Figure E.18  Each sector will be on a dedicated grid. All the grids will be connected to the Central Coordination 
Center (CCC).

366
Epilogue
We can say that a smart grid is a mesh of many information buses that work together, 
like an LA freeway interchange. Some avid computer folks prefer to use the term 
information bus, which is totally agreeable.
A couple of notes worth mentioning: First, when Stuxnet worm was launched, it 
infected 30,000 IP addresses in Iran due to mutation. Stuxnet designers know now how 
to package similar missiles and launch them upon requests. Flame and Duqu are even 
more potent that Stuxnet. Wow! Second, Kaspersky discovered that Stuxnet uses Flame 
as a lunching pad which means both worms can be remotely controlled. Together, all 
this sets a new record of Bob Beamon caliber* and definitely merits mentioning.
Thank you.
Websites
http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2015/01/economist-explains.
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/28/world/middleeast/army-know-how-seen-as-factor-in-
isis-successes.html.
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/12/isis-cyber-caliphate-hacking-technology-
arms-race.
*	 On October 18, Beamon set a world record for the long jump with a first jump of 8.90 m (29 ft. 2 1/2 in.), 
bettering the existing record by 55 cm (21 3/4 in.). For 40 years, the record was unreachable.

367
Appendix A: CEWPS Development Team
Grid Computing
Team-3
Cloud Computing
Team-4
Predictive
Analytics
Team-5
QA Advisors
Team-9
SCADA  Specialists
Team-8
CEWPS/Smart VaccineTM Team Members Organization
Security
Specialists
Team-7
Network
Specialists
Team-6
AI Specialists
Team-2
Autonomic
Computing
Team-1
Project
Chief
Technology
Providers Teams
Design
Studio

368
Appendix A: CEWPS Development Team
I want to put a ding in the universe.
Steve Jobs (1955–2011)
No more of the old organizational chart that glorifies the rusty bureaucratic high-rise 
of projects. CEWPS/Smart Vaccine engineering is an icon of innovation, creativity, 
and most importantly human productivity. CEWPS/Smart Vaccine will certainly 
put a ding in cybersecurity universe. Everyone on the project works for the whole and 
is accountable for the whole. All team members are active players in the design ring, 
and they all share equal authority and respect. They are proud to be chosen for the 
first system, like Armstrong walking on the moon. CEWPS/Smart Vaccine is the 
crucible of many technologies that interweave together to create a cohesive of a kind 
system.
CEWPS/Smart Vaccine is a thinking machine with tremendous computing mus-
cles and an infallible memory. Its knowledge engines store valuable historical attack 
episodes for future cyber raids. CEWPS/Smart Vaccine is an intelligent autonomic 
system with sophisticated reasoning rules to support the defense of the critical sys-
tems. The uniqueness of the system lies in the innovative approach to digital vaccina-
tion. No one has ever done it before. 
Throughout history, the human element is the most crucial success factor of any 
endeavor. Human brittleness resides in our behavior. CEWPS introduces a new 
approach in system design and fabrication. The team organization will produce maxi-
mum creativity and productivity. The innovation of CEWPS/Smart Vaccine ushers in 
a new dimension in intelligent cybersecurity. It combines singularity, which represents 
the culmination of the merger of our biological thinking and existence with our tech-
nology which will transcend human intelligence with accelerated mental superiority.
There will be a time when CEWPS/Smart Vaccine will be a hybrid thinking 
machine that will have an edge over the criminal mind and evil-minded meatbags. 
One day in the near future, we will be able to upload our knowledge and experience to 
a thinking machine “digital mind,” which will enhance our cognitive abilities to rea-
son and predict incoming offensive cyber storms. Maybe then we can outrun malware 
and bring peace to our smart cities.

369
Appendix B: The 10 Most Dangerous Botnets*
(roBOT NETwork) Also called a “zombie army,” a botnet is a large number of com-
promised “enslaved” computers that are networked together and used to generate 
spam, relay viruses or flood a network or Web server with excessive requests to cause 
it to fail (see denial-of-service attack). The computer, where the owner is not aware of 
the subtle attack, is compromised via a Trojan that often works by opening an Internet 
Relay Chat (IRC) channel that waits for commands from the person in control of the 
botnet. There is a thriving botnet business selling lists of compromised computers to 
cybercriminals, offensive spammers, and identity thieves.
Botnet attacks are increasing, as cybercrime gangs hijack and commandeer com-
puters for a wild ride. Bot herders use hostage computers to send spam, steal per-
sonal data, perpetrate click fraud, and clobber websites in denial-of-service attacks. 
Here is the list of  US 10 most wanted botnets, based on an estimate by security firm 
Damballa of botnet size and activity in the United States.
No. 1: Zeus
Compromised U.S. computers: 3.6 million
Main crime use: The Zeus Trojan uses keylogging techniques to steal sensitive data 
such as usernames, passwords, account numbers, and credit card numbers. It injects 
fake HTML forms into online banking login pages to steal user data.
*	 Courtesy of https://www.damballa.com/.

370
Appendix B: The 10 Most Dangerous Botnets
No. 2: Koobface
Compromised U.S. computers: 2.9 million
Main crime use: This malware spreads via social networking sites MySpace and 
Facebook with faked messages or comments from “friends.” When a user is enticed 
into clicking on a provided link to view a video, the user is prompted to obtain a 
necessary update, like a codec—but it is really malware that can take control over the 
computer.
No. 3: TidServ
Compromised U.S. computers: 1.5 million
Main crime use: This downloader Trojan spreads through spam e-mail, arriving as 
an attachment. It uses rootkit techniques to run inside common Windows services 
(sometimes bundled with fake antivirus software) or in Windows safe mode, and it 
can hide most of its files and registry entries.
No. 4: Trojan.Fakeavalert
Compromised U.S. computers: 1.4 million
Main crime use: Formerly used for spamming, this botnet has shifted to downloading 
other malware, with its main focus on fake alerts and rogue antivirus software.
No. 5: TR/Dldr.Agent.JKH
Compromised U.S. computers: 1.2 million
Main crime use: This remote Trojan posts encrypted data back to its command-and-
control domains and periodically receives instruction. Often loaded by other malware, 
TR/Dldr.Agent.JKH is currently used as a clickbot, generating ad revenue for the 
botmaster through constant ad-specific activity.
No. 6: Monkif
Compromised U.S. computers: 520,000
Main crime use: This crimeware’s current focus is downloading an adware BHO 
(browser helper object) onto a compromised system.
No. 7: Hamweq
Compromised U.S. computers: 480,000
Main crime use: Also known as IRCBrute, or an autorun worm, this backdoor worm 
makes copies of itself on the system and any removable drive it finds—and anytime 
the removable drives are accessed, it executes automatically. Hamweq, an effective 

371
Appendix B: The 10 Most Dangerous Botnets
spreading mechanism, creates registry entries to enable its automatic execution at 
every start-up and injects itself into Explorer.exe. The botmaster using it can execute 
commands on and receive information from the compromised system.
No. 8: Swizzor
Compromised U.S. computers: 370,000
Main crime use: A variant of the Lop malware, this Trojan dropper can download and 
launch files from the Internet on the victim’s machine without the user’s knowledge, 
installing an adware program and other Trojans.
No. 9: Gammima
Compromised U.S. computers: 230,000
Main crime use: Also known as Gamina, Gamania, Frethog, Vaklik, and Krap, this 
crimeware focuses on stealing online game logins, passwords, and account informa-
tion. It uses rootkit techniques to load into the address space of other common pro-
cesses, such as Explorer.exe, and will spread through removable media such as USB 
keys. It is also known as the worm that got into the International Space Station in the 
summer of 2008.
No. 10: Conficker
Compromised U.S. computers: 210,000
Main crime use: Also called Downadup, this downloader worm has spread signifi-
cantly throughout the world, though not so much in the United States. It is a complex 
downloader used to propagate other malware. Though it has been used to sell fake 
antivirus software, this crimeware currently seems to have no real purpose other than 
to spread. Industry watchers fear that a more dangerous purpose will emerge.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank


