

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET
An engaging and research-based book, The Psychology of the Internet
provides a balanced overview of the psychological aspects of cyber-
space. It explores crucial questions about the Internet’s effects on
human behavior, such as why we often act in uncharacteristic ways
in online environments and how social media influence the impres-
sions we form and our personal relationships. The book’s balanced
approach to the subject encourages readers to think critically about
the psychology of the Internet, and how and why their own online
behavior unfolds. Drawing on classic and contemporary research, this
second edition examines new trends in Internet technology, online
dating, online aggression, group dynamics, child development, proso-
cial behavior, online gaming, gender and sexuality, privacy and sur-
veillance, the Internet’s addictive properties, and strategies for shaping
the Internet’s future.
P A T R I C I A
W A L L A C E is the author of thirteen books, including The
Internet in the Workplace: How New Technology Is Transforming Work
(2004) and Introduction to Information Systems, 2nd Edition (2015). Her
work and educational background span psychology and technology,
and she has held varied positions in higher education, including pro-
fessor, chief information officer, and executive director of a research
center. She holds a PhD in psychology and a Master’s degree in com-
puter systems management. She currently teaches in the Graduate
School of the University of Maryland University College. Previously,
she was Senior Director for online programs and information technol-
ogy at the Center for Talented Youth at Johns Hopkins University.


THE PSYCHOLOGY
OF THE INTERNET
Second Edition
PATRICIA WALLACE

32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107437326
© Patricia Wallace 2016
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2016
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Wallace, Patricia M.
The psychology of the Internet / Patricia Wallace. – 2nd edition.
pages
cm
Earlier edition published in 1999.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-107-07913-7 (Hardback : alk. paper) –
ISBN 978-1-107-43732-6 (Paperback : alk. paper)
1. Communication–Psychological aspects.
2. Internet–Psychological aspects.
3. Computer networks–Psychological aspects.
I. Title.
BF637.C45W26 2016
025.0420109–dc23
2015017916
ISBN 978-1-107-07913-7 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-107-43732-6 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

To Julian, Callie, Eric, Marlene, Lili, Keiko, and my whole real
life family.


CONTENTS
Preface to the Second Edition
page xi
Acknowledgments
xiii
List of Figures
xiv
List of Tables
xv
1
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT
1
Defining the “Internet”
5
Language on the Net
17
Applying Theory to Online Behavior
19
Empowering Internet Users
21
2
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
IMPRESSION FORMATION
25
Online, Onstage
26
Forming Impressions Online and Offline
29
Looking Through a Lens
37
Impression Formation on Personal Websites and Social
Networks
39
Are We Becoming More Narcissistic?
47
Making the Keyboard Work Harder
53
3
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET
57
The Emergence of a Group, Offline and Online
57
Conformity
61
Group Norms
63
Group Polarization
72
Group Mobilization
80
Virtual Work Groups
83
vii

4
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION
96
Frustration and Aggression
97
Ambiguity in Online Communications
100
Anonymity
103
Retaliation
107
Catharsis: Is Letting Off Steam Good for You?
112
Cyberstalking
113
Aggression: Internet Style
116
Strategies to Reduce Aggressive Behavior Online
117
5
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION
124
The Basics of Interpersonal Attraction, Offline
124
Interpersonal Attraction Online
132
The Psychology of Online Dating
142
The Internet and the Magic of “Interpersonal” Attraction
154
6
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSOCIAL
BEHAVIOR
158
Random Acts of Kindness: Internet Style
158
Why Do People Help Each Other?
166
Prosocial Behavior Online
175
Online, Who Helps Whom?
183
Manipulation and Deception
185
How May We Help You?
189
7
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING
193
Taxonomy of Video Games
194
Who Plays, and Why?
198
Game Mechanics and Human Behavior
204
Psychological Effects of Video Games
210
The Benefits of Video Games
214
Serious Games: Gamification in Education, Training, and
Health
221
8
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE INTERNET: GROWING UP
ONLINE
228
The Ecology of Human Development
229
Cognitive Development
231
Physical Development
244
Social and Emotional Development
246
viii
CONTENTS

Sexual Development
254
Child Development and the Internet: Promoting the Good,
Avoiding the Bad
258
9
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE INTERNET
264
Male and Female: Not Opposite Sexes
264
Gender and Language
266
Language Online: Are We Typing in Pink and Blue?
271
The Internet and LGBT Issues
276
Sexual Harassment Online
278
Sexuality on the Internet
282
Internet Pornography
286
Gender Issues and Sexuality on the Frontier
289
10
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE
294
The History and Meaning of “Privacy”
295
Online Privacy
299
Business Models and “Big Data”
303
Surveillance
306
Strategies for Managing Privacy Online
311
The Future of Privacy
315
11
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK
321
The 24/7 Work Week
322
The Internet’s Addicting Properties
325
The Internet’s Addictive Neighborhoods
329
Causes and Treatments
335
Naming the Affliction: Addiction? Overuse?
Self-Indulgence?
339
12
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET
343
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
343
Technological Determinism Revisited
344
A Perfect Place for Conspiracies
347
Shaping the Online World
347
Psychology of the Internet: The Next Generation
359
Index
367
ix
CONTENTS


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
When the first edition of The Psychology of the Internet came out in
1999, brick and mortar bookstores still reigned. With eight employees,
Google had just outgrown its garage office, and Facebook founder
Mark Zuckerberg immersed himself in classics as a high school sopho-
more. The release of Apple’s iPhone and the torrent of mobile applica-
tions that followed were nearly a decade away. I would say “much has
happened since 1999” if it were not such a laughable understatement.
The Internet of the 1990s attracted pioneers who explored an
unchartered territory that took fortitude even to enter. Clunky dial-
up modems, buggy software, frustrating load times, and unreliable
connections dogged our efforts and blocked our work. At that time,
the psychological aspects of the different corners of cyberspace
received little attention from researchers, but anyone who spent time
online could see that those aspects were already having fundamental
effects on human behavior. To better understand how and why we
were behaving in sometimes surprising ways, I drew mainly on classic
research in the social sciences.
Those classic studies remain relevant, but this new edition adds a
wealth of contemporary research that examines the psychology of the
vastly expanded online world. Active research in psychology, commu-
nications, computer science, business, political science, and other dis-
ciplines is generating new insights about human behavior online,
especially on social media. Many academic journals specifically focus
on these topics, such as Computers in Human Behavior; Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication; Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
Social Networking; New Media and Society; CyberPsychology and Behav-
ior;
and
Cyberpsychology.
Universities
are
launching
academic
xi

programs, conferences, and institutes on Internet studies to explore the
broader issues that the net raises for human beings, bringing together
people with different backgrounds and perspectives.
As in the first edition, my goal is not to extol a utopian future built
on emerging digital technologies. Nor is it to paint a darker picture in
which the Internet leads to dire consequences for human behavior
and social relationships. Instead, I describe – in a balanced way – what
we actually know from research about the psychology of the Internet,
citing both positives and negatives and raising many new questions.
Some of the research zeroes in on specifics the reader should find quite
useful, such as how people form impressions from social media pro-
files, or why certain videos go viral. I also hope this book will help the
reader steer clear of the kinds of online blunders that can cause irrepar-
able damage. In any case, we are riding a fast-moving vehicle that is
picking up speed as it goes, and this book will help equip the reader
with knowledge about how to travel wisely and help guide it.
xii
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to thank the many people around the world who helped bring
this book to life with their suggestions, anecdotes, and insights. They
come from different fields and life experiences, and they span every
age group, from an elementary student showing off her Minecraft
creations to an entrepreneurial retiree starting an online business.
The reviewers offered excellent ideas about the topics for the second
edition and tips for exploring some tiny Internet corners that I would
not have otherwise stumbled on. Thanks also go to my colleagues at
Johns Hopkins University and our students at the Center for Talented
Youth, who participated in my research about the role that the Inter-
net and emerging technologies play in child development. I also want
to thank David Repetto, Rebecca Taylor, Jeethu Abraham, Stephanie
Sakson, Jim Diggins, and all the good people who work at or with
Cambridge University Press whose efforts contributed in countless
ways. It is always humbling to remember that Cambridge University
Press has published works by John Milton, Isaac Newton, and Stephen
Hawking. And finally, I owe all the thanks in the world to Julian, Callie,
Keiko, Marlene, and Lili.
Patricia Wallace
xiii

FIGURES
4.1. Anticipated and Actual Accuracy for Sarcastic and
Serious Messages Conveyed by Email or Voice
page 101
5.1 The “Long Tail” Phenomenon
143
7.1 Screenshot from Spacewar!, an Early Video Game
Developed by Steve Russell, Martin Graetz, and
Wayne Wiltanen at MIT in 1962
196
7.2 Action Game Players Perform Better on Tests of Visual
Attention, Such as Quickly Identifying the Shape of a
Black Target in a Field Cluttered with Distracters
215
8.1 Example of a Question That Assesses Mental Rotation Ability:
Choose the Shape That Is the Same as the One on the Left
but Rotated
238
xiv

TABLES
2.1 The Big Five Personality Traits
page 36
3.1 Examples of Twitter Shorthand
65
4.1 Reputation System Metrics
120
7.1 Examples of Video Game Genres
195
7.2 Entertainment Software Review Board (ESRB) Rating
System used in the United States
198
8.1 Assessing the Outcomes of an Adolescent’s Quest for an
Identity
249
10.1 Strategies to Authenticate Users
315
11.1 What Do Surveys That Attempt to Identify Internet
Addiction Actually Measure?
328
xv


1
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL
CONTEXT
Scrolling through Twitter’s trending topics, I came upon #Ilostsleepbe-
cause, one of those “fill in the blank” Internet memes that spreads
from person to person, nudging Twitter users around the world to
add witty or eye-catching endings. One response was, “There are still
people out there who haven’t watched Casablanca.” Another person
tweeted, “I don’t know how to put my phone down,” and that answer
resonates with many of us. The smartphone connects the Twitter
user to the Internet 24 hours a day, and it never sleeps, either.
At one time, the Internet was an arcane communication medium
for academics and researchers, but now it sustains almost any human
activity you can imagine, from shopping to sex, from research to rebel-
lion. We use it to keep in touch with friends and coworkers, search
for bargains, conduct research, exchange information, meet strangers,
hatch conspiracies, and even talk to animals. Koko, the mountain gorilla
who knows some American Sign Language, participated in a live
Internet chat. People from all over the world logged into the chat room
to ask questions and hear Koko’s views on motherhood, pets, food
preferences, friendship, love, and the future. She was not in the best
mood, having just had a tiff with her mate, Ndume, and she shared
her annoyance with the crowd by referring to him derisively as toilet,
which is her word for “bad.”1
The Internet explosion happened very rapidly, and online environ-
ments continue to change at a breathtaking pace. For researchers trying
to study how the net affects human behavior, it is a constantly moving
target, but we know that the Internet is a place where we humans
are acting and interacting rather strangely at times. Sometimes its
psychological effects seem to be quite positive, but sometimes, we do
1

things online that we might never do in any other environment and
that we regret later. At the same time, it is an environment that we can
affect and mold – for better or worse.
If you mainly read news online, but occasionally glance at the
comments, you might think that the Internet at large is overpopulated
by people with mental disorders, bizarre ideas, and questionable
motives and that normal folk had better tread very cautiously. Yet,
decades of research on human behavior in many different settings
show that minor tweaks in the environment can cause those “normal”
people to behave differently, and sometimes the effects are quite
striking. Although we might view ourselves as kind hearted, cool
headed, assertive, or generous, we routinely underestimate the power
of the situation on our behavior. People who rate themselves a “10” on
cool headedness can lose their cool in certain situations. Someone who
scores high on kindliness and who ordinarily behaves courteously
toward people in person might lash out aggressively in a heated Inter-
net flame war. Psychological research confirms that the environment
in which humans are behaving can and does affect the way they
behave. Under the right circumstances, almost anyone will do things
that they themselves consider quite uncharacteristic.
As human environments go, cyberspace is still relatively new, and
we can learn much about how it affects us by looking closely at what
is going on from a psychological perspective. Research about actual
online behavior is growing and attracting the attention of scientists
in the social and behavioral sciences, but also in computer science,
media studies, communications, law, business, and other fields. For
example, understanding how and why we behave in certain ways
when we go online is critical for businesses seeking to earn revenue,
and the “data scientist” is one of the fastest growing careers in the
business world. We can draw on all these sources, along with every-
thing we’ve learned about human behavior in face-to-face settings, to
gain insights about behavior online. When we watch a flame war
break out in an otherwise sedate discussion group, for example,
we can turn to a long history of psychological research on aggression
to better understand what is happening, and why. When we hear
that a happily married couple met online, we can turn to studies
of interpersonal attraction to comprehend why such relationships
might be intoxicating.
In this book we begin, in Chapter 2, with the online persona,
delving into classic research on impression formation and impression
2
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

management. These processes unfold differently in cyberspace because
the cues you use to form impressions of other people, and the tools you
use to create your own, are quite different compared with what we
use in real life. (In this book, I use real life to refer to anything and
everything that is not online.) Next, in Chapter 3, we take a closer
look at group dynamics on the Internet, and show how many psycho-
logical phenomena involving groups play out differently online.
Examples include conformity, group polarization, group mobilization,
brainstorming, group conflict, and group cooperation. These studies are
especially important as we move more and more work groups to
the online world and tacitly assume they will be at least as productive
as their real life counterparts.
One of the first surprises for researchers investigating online behav-
ior was how disinhibited people sometimes became and how their
tempers seemed to flare more easily as they interacted with others.
Chapter 4 looks at the psychology of aggression as it unfolds on the
net, searching for the roots of those harsh emails, acerbic flame wars,
and other forms of contentious online behavior. A second surprise
was that the Internet environment is also very supportive of friend-
ships and romances, perhaps for some of the same reasons. Chapter 5
examines the nature of interpersonal attraction in the online world,
especially in social media and in online dating.
Many corners of the Internet are filled with people who are willing
to invest considerable time to help others in need. Chapter 6 focuses
on altruism and how the net supports volunteerism, fundraising,
and support groups. From a psychological perspective, some Internet
neighborhoods are particularly welcoming to certain kinds of support
groups, such as those involving members who feel stigmatized by
society and who are reluctant to share their concerns with people in
their community, or even their own families. Online, they can talk
quite intimately with caring others who share their problem without
risking real-life censure.
Online games and their psychological effects – both positive and
negative – are the focus of Chapter 7. From the primitive Pacman,
online games emerge as a multibillion-dollar business with very high
stakes, attracting players from around the world in stunningly vivid
virtual worlds. Fundamental psychological principles underlie these
games, making them as compelling as possible so that players keep
coming back. Research shows that games can offer significant advan-
tages well beyond the fact that they are fun to play.
3
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

Chapter 8 explores child development and what it really means to
grow up steeped in digital technologies. Teens, for instance, choose
texting as their primary communication tool, exchanging dozens of
texts every day. Today’s youth are truly digital natives, and the Inter-
net plays a critical role in their identity development, their social
behavior, their cognitive development, and potentially their brain
development. Some studies, for example, suggest that certain types of
Internet use lead to positive consequences for cognitive development,
but others point to alarming levels of multitasking and distraction.
The Internet has certainly changed the way young people approach
learning, with facts, figures, and lively instructional videos just a few
keystrokes away. Socially, children are co-constructing online environ-
ments to suit themselves, as they develop new norms and communi-
cation patterns.
According to the Pew Research Center’s surveys, 87 percent of U.S.
adults use the Internet, and they are equally balanced in terms of
gender.2 But the environment began as overwhelmingly male, and
some neighborhoods still are. This feature has certainly left its legacy.
Chapter 9 examines how gender roles, stereotypes, and conflicts unfold
online; for women, certain corners of the Internet can be hostile places.
The chapter also examines sexuality on the Internet, including cybersex
and pornography.
Debates about online privacy captured center stage when revela-
tions about the National Security Agency’s massive surveillance pro-
grams came to light, and also whenever a social media giant tweaks
its privacy policies and outrages users. Chapter 10 covers the psycho-
logical aspects of privacy and surveillance and how we deal the
“privacy paradox.” We certainly say we care about online privacy,
but much of the time we don’t act as if we care, largely because of
the nature of many Internet environments. Intellectually, most people
realize – or should realize – that anything posted online could leak out
to some audience we didn’t intend to include, or even to the entire
world. But the characteristics of many online spaces lead people to
forget this and to behave in ways they would not if others were
physically nearby, watching their actions. This chapter also takes up
important issues in the privacy debate that touch on human behavior,
including so-called big data and the “right to be forgotten.”
In Chapter 11, we explore the Internet as a time sink, beginning with
the way 24/7 connectedness affects work–life balance. Managing
boundaries becomes extremely difficult, not just because of mobile
4
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

devices but because people expect you to be available and to reply
quickly to that email from the boss or the text from a coworker. The
chapter also delves into the controversial subject of “Internet addic-
tion” – how prevalent it is, what causes it, and what it should really be
called. Certain Internet environments, such as the online games and
social networks, are so compelling that some people are simply unable
to control their behavior, despite negative effects on their family lives,
social relationships, and careers.
Finally, in Chapter 12, we look toward the future, first exploring
ways in which we, as Internet users, can help mold and shape this
environment for the better. This is not television, a technology that
we mainly affect through our viewing habits and fan support. The
Internet is a work in progress, and we are doing much of that work
ourselves. Relying on knowledge of the many psychological phenom-
ena that influence our behavior online, we can develop strategies to
shape our own behavior and influence others with whom we interact
on the net. We also take out the crystal ball to predict how the Internet
might evolve and how changes will create new psychological effects.
DEFINING THE “INTERNET”
From a technical perspective, the term “Internet” has a specific mean-
ing. It is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use
the same communications protocol to connect with one another,
called Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). The
networks themselves transmit digital signals using wired or wireless
connections, and much research goes into expanding the capabilities
of those transmission media, especially welcome because of the explo-
sion in streamed video. The wired media might be optical fiber, coaxial
cables, ordinary twisted pair with copper inside, or anything else that
can transmit digital signals. Some jest that the Internet’s original
design was so flexible that two tin cans and a string would do the trick.
The wireless Internet connections rely on the electromagnetic
spectrum, which they share with radio signals, X-rays, gamma rays,
and visible light that our eyes can see, among others. The different
types of transmissions use different wavelengths along the spectrum;
the ones the Internet uses are longer than visible light and closer to the
ranges used by radio.
This book is not about the Internet strictly as a technology, how-
ever. It is about the psychological aspects of any kind of computer or
5
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

digitally mediated life, regardless how you get to it. In a coffee shop,
for instance, you might set your smartphone to use the free wifi
connection to access your favorite apps, so you don’t use up the data
allowance you pay your carrier for. There, your phone relies on TCP/
IP to communicate with the coffee shop’s wifi router, which typically
would have a wired connection to whichever Internet service pro-
vider (ISP) the shop uses. But in the car, out of the range of any wifi
signals, your smartphone would switch to your carrier’s cellular infra-
structure, relying on communication protocols such as GSM or
CDMA, depending on the carrier. Now, your phone’s antenna is
exchanging signals with one of the cell towers that then connects to
the Internet.
Psychologically, any of these environments, and all the others
I describe in the next section, can affect human behavior, and I use
the terms “Internet,” “cyberspace,” and “online” broadly and inclu-
sively. Research on online behavior has been complicated by the fact
that the environments themselves vary, but not necessarily because
they use different transmission media or communication protocols.
In this book, we are looking at their psychological characteristics, and
while their technological features sometimes affect behavior, those
features may not have much to do with the protocol. For example,
the screen size and mobility of a smartphone are more important for
human behavior than which communication protocol is used.
William H. Dutton, the founding director of the Oxford Institute for
Internet Studies, points out that from the perspective of social science,
a focus on the underlying technical infrastructure and its protocols
is too limited to define the Internet.3 For this book, a broader, more
inclusive definition is appropriate, and you will even learn about
some research studies that predate the Internet and rely on simple
networks that connect people sitting in separate rooms. Broadly
defined, cyberspace presents a wide range of experiences, and we need
a special kind of taxonomy – one that divides up the known virtual
world into better-defined spaces that share features from a psycho-
logical perspective.
A Taxonomy of Online Environments
When zoologists classify an animal into a particular phylum, class,
order, family, genus, and finally species, they rely on major character-
istics in order to group organisms that are similar to one another in
6
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

various dimensions. Does the animal have vertebrae? If so, it belongs in
the Chordate phylum. What does it eat? If the answer is “mainly
meat,” its order would be Carnivora.
Online environments shift and evolve far more rapidly than most
living things, so any classification scheme will be subjective and fluid.
Also, many environments have overlapping characteristics or they
are hybrids that combine elements from several. Nevertheless, looking
back over the Internet’s history, we can envision a kind of loose
taxonomy, albeit with much variation, overlap, and many blended
forms. It begins with the early “first generation” Internet environ-
ments, notably the World Wide Web, email, discussion forums, and
synchronous chat. Then it moves into the Web 2.0 environments that
provide strong support for collaboration, sharing, and user-generated
content (UGC). This classification scheme relies less on the techno-
logical roots of each environment and more on certain features that
can affect behavior, such as whether and how it supports communi-
cation with other people, and if it does, how interactive, synchronous,
and media-rich the environment is.
The Web
The first online environment is the World Wide Web, which is argu-
ably the one that catapulted the Internet into millions of people’s lives
once we could browse it with the early web browser called Mosaic.
Now, people can search for information, shop, pay bills, watch movies,
and much more. (Web browsers also make many of the other environ-
ments more easily accessible, so users don’t have to install separate
software.) Here, I emphasize the web’s role as an information repository,
shopping mall, self-service kiosk, theater, and as a place of other func-
tions that do not involve much communication with other people.
As an information resource, the web has no equal, and our ability to
find what we are looking for continually improves. Google developed
its search engine to turn up the most relevant and highest quality
results, and eventually became both a household word and a verb.
Google’s secret algorithms change often, partly to foil scammers who
use devious techniques to optimize their websites so that they turn up
on the first page of results, which is about as far as most people ever
look. For instance, a developer seeking to promote a website on cures
for baldness might stuff the home page with keywords people would
most likely use. To be less obvious, they could use a font color that
7
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

disappeared into the background. Visitors wouldn’t notice, but the
developer hopes Google’s bot will judge the site as highly relevant.
Search engines ignore scams like that, and the website might even get
penalized.
How do search engines judge quality? As a Stanford graduate student,
Google cofounder Larry Page came up with the idea that every link on
the web is like a vote, and those votes can be a kind of proxy for quality.
If a website has thousands or millions of votes in the form of inbound
links from other websites, especially if those website “voters” are reput-
able ones, its rank goes up. As Web 2.0 emerged and websites became
more and more interactive, additional proxies were added, such as the
ratings and “likes” that users provide. Scammers never stop trying, of
course, which is one reason you often see links to some questionable
website embedded in the comments on popular and reputable blogs.
Search engine companies play a never-ending cat and mouse game,
trying to turn up the most relevant and useful results for every search.
Efforts to make the web an even more valuable information resource
focus on adding more machine-readable meaning to the data, so instead
of being a “web of documents,” it becomes a semantic web of data.
Currently, for example, a link from one web page to another is just a
pointer, but in a semantic web, the link can carry a richer meaning by
showing the actual relationships among the links and data sources. If
the semantic web comes to fruition, software will be able to perform
far more sophisticated tasks online without human direction.
The net is also unparalleled as an information resource because we
ourselves contribute considerable user-generated content to it.. Cer-
tainly, many contributions are worthless or worse, but good intentions
sometimes produce very valuable information resources. Wikipedia is
a good example, with its all-volunteer army of writers and editors. But
many more are out there. For example, when I was learning how to
prune our overgrown plum tree, a quick Internet search turned up
amazingly useful videos that a farmer who grows his own organic
fruits and vegetables kindly uploaded.
Under the Surface: The Deep Web and Dark Web
The search engines that index web pages on the Internet do their work
by crawling from link to link, eventually traversing what is called the
entire surface web. But there is much more on the Internet, in the deep
web, that is orders of magnitude larger than the surface web, and far
8
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

more difficult for search engines to access with that link-crawling
strategy. Much of the material lies buried in databases that have front
end query forms for visitors to use.4 For instance, if you are looking for
government grants, a search engine would lead you www.grants.gov,
and from there, you can choose key words and set your own filters to
query the grants database yourself. Most of these databases are not
meant to be hidden and computer scientists are working out ways for
search engines to tap these immense repositories.5
A subsection of the deep web has come to be called the dark web.
This term refers to websites that are hosted on darknet networks that
are invisible to search engines crawling the surface web, and that
require special software or authorization to access. The alternate net-
works within the dark web are often created by communities seeking
anonymity, whether to cloak criminal activities, bypass censorship, or
protect dissidents, journalists, and whistleblowers. Many are publicly
accessible using specialized software, provided you know where to go.6
Silk Road was one of the best known websites located in the dark web,
operating as a black market for people buying and selling illicit goods
and services – even murder for hire. Before his arrest in 2013, the
founder made a fortune in bitcoins, one of the digital currencies used
in such environments.
As we will see, people feel more or less anonymous in many Internet
environments, but when on the dark web, they have somewhat more
assurance that anonymity is preserved. Nothing is foolproof, however,
given constantly advancing technologies.
Email
Email is a second environment for net users, and as we discuss in the
next chapter, your email address makes an impression. People react
differently to an email from fuzzybear342@yahoo.com compared
with one from h.k.whitley3@nasa.gov. You will see research on how
those impressions form, and why they are difficult to contradict.
Many people maintain multiple email accounts to present different
identities or to manage contexts. I maintain a couple for use when
I have to enter an email address to buy some product, for instance, but
don’t want my regular email address flooded with promotions. We
discuss privacy issues in Chapter 9, but suffice it to say that not all
companies adhere to their own privacy policies about not selling or
sharing email addresses.
9
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

Asynchronous Discussion Forums
Another distinctive space on the Internet is the asynchronous discussion
forum. These are the ongoing conferences in which participants start
topics, post replies to each other, and read what others have said. They
are asynchronous in the sense that you can catch up on the discussion
and contribute your thoughts at any time of day or night. Some
discussions, such as the ones in which people add their thoughts to
the comments that follow an article in an online newspaper, unfold
very quickly. But they die out just as quickly as readers move on to
other topics. In other discussions, the rhythms can be very slow.
A discussion of a single topic might go on for days or weeks. The forum
could also be very erratic, with several topics under discussion at the
same time and other topics completely ignored. In these groups, you
become part of a discussion among people with similar interests,
regardless of their geographic location; you may know the participants
in real life, or you may have never met any of them. Many groups
exist on the web, supported by Google Groups, Yahoo! Groups, or
others, and you can find a group on almost any conceivable topic.
Scanning groups created for hobbies, I ran across “Bird Photography
India,” a group devoted to sharing pictures of birds from the subcon-
tinent. The members of “Maine Birds” limit their sightings and discus-
sion just to that state.
Technically, asynchronous discussion forums can exist on several
different platforms. One of the earliest varieties is the mailing list,
or “listserv,” which is still widely used, especially for professional or
academic groups. This is a special kind of email address with an auto-
mated feature that resends all the messages it receives to everyone
subscribed to the forum. Once you subscribe, all messages posted to
the main email address will land in your inbox as well, and anything
you send will reach all the other subscribers. We will see research on
several of these in the upcoming chapters. Scouring through a mailing
list’s archives helps researchers study how norms unfold, how conflicts
are resolved, and how people use language in computer-mediated
environments.
Another type of asynchronous discussion forum is the collection
of conferences known as news groups on a distributed bulletin board
system called Usenet. This is one of the oldest Internet niches,
and the forums spanned every conceivable human interest – from
the scholarly to the salacious. A loose hierarchical naming structure
was established in a somewhat futile effort to stay organized.
10
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Some examples are sci.space in the science hierarchy, which focuses
on space research; soc.culture.british in the social issues hierarchy;
and rec.arts.tv.soaps under recreation. The “alt” (alternative) hier-
archy is wide open, and any net user can create a news group
under this heading. Examples include alt.backrubs, alt.conspiracies,
alt.evil, alt.flame, and alt.sex. Though many thoughtful discussions
occurred in the news groups, Usenet gained a reputation for being
a stronghold in the Internet’s “Wild West,” and Usenet is now
largely defunct. Researchers can still study the archives, however,
and former Usenet users are sometimes shocked to find their
decades-old postings still online.
Synchronous Chat and Instant Messages
Synchronous chats and instant messaging form separate psychological
environments on the Internet because they attempt to mimic a real-
time conversation with just typed words, as the people involved type
their messages back and forth. These, too, come in many different
types. Businesses offer online chat to help website visitors navigate
the site or to answer questions. When I have a question, I often prefer
the chat to a phone call with a long automated menu, and I can also
keep a record of whatever was typed. In offices, many employees
also prefer instant messaging to voice calls because they are quite
efficient and less time consuming. The social norms for voice calls,
such as “Hello, how are you?” do take more time.
Public chat rooms attract people for many different reasons. Chat
rooms, such as those that are part of the worldwide Internet Relay
Chat network, have a seedier reputation because of the way criminals
and Internet predators use them, but synchronous chat has many uses.
For example, Bill Gates likes to hold synchronous chats on Reddit’s
“Ask Me Anything” platform. Redditors, as the site’s users are called,
type in queries that Bill answers, and the chatters in the room join
in the discussion.
Blogs
Emerging with the Web 2.0 technologies, blogs are websites that
an individual or group is constantly updating with new material,
and they typically allow readers to add their own two cents in the
comments. In that sense, they are similar to asynchronous discussion
11
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

forums, except that a single individual’s thoughts are the main focus.
The material is mostly informal, often the blogger’s own reflections
and opinions, although the term “blog” is also applied to websites that
are more like commercial magazines or newspapers with multiple
authors contributing to the blog’s frantic update pace. Huffington Post,
Mashable, Gizmodo, and TMZ are examples.
Anyone can start a blog and free services offer sophisticated tools
to get started, adding images and videos along with text. A few lucky
bloggers gain enormous followings and can earn a decent living.
British blogger Andrew Sullivan, for instance, started a political blog
in 2000 called “The Dish,” and its popularity attracted the attention of
major publications, including The Atlantic. Blogging is exhausting
work, however, and Sullivan announced on his blog that he was
quitting: “I’m saturated in digital life and I want to return to the actual
world again.”7
Social Networks
Social networks are one of the most compelling environments on the
Internet, as people build their own profiles and connect to family,
friends, coworkers, and assorted others. These environments blend
many components of the other online environments into the plat-
form, with wall posts forming a kind of asynchronous discussion
forum, and messaging that is similar to texting. They also add many
novel features that have their own psychological effects. Facebook, for
example, offers endless opportunities for you to manage your impres-
sion with your profile, your photos and videos, your status updates,
and also the company you keep. The links to social games create
playgrounds for you and your network friends, and location-based
services help you meet up when you happen to be in the same
neighborhood.
Sites that feature content sharing such as YouTube, Flickr, and
Instagram, where users upload videos and slide shows, are also social
networks, but with a somewhat different focus. On YouTube, for
instance, a user might create a channel with a particular theme, such
as Excel tutorials or cat videos, and then incorporate links within their
main social network profile.
While Facebook is wildly popular, it has many competitors with
somewhat different features and audiences. LinkedIn, for example,
focuses more on business networking, and Dogster attracts people
12
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

who share a love of their pets. People outside the United States often
choose social networking platforms that match their needs and that
easily support their local languages. Orkut in Brazil, Renren in China,
VK in Russia, and StudiVZ in Germany are a few examples. As we
discuss in this book, people have difficulty managing their personas
when their social network includes different categories of “friends,”
such as parents and coworkers, so many people create profiles on more
than one social networking site.
Although the social networks started out as a way for individuals to
craft an online persona and keep in touch with friends and family
members, they are now homes for companies, nonprofit organiza-
tions, political campaigns, government agencies, activist groups, and
other entities that use them to shape a narrative and connect with
interested parties. It’s hard to miss the constant demands to “Connect
with us on [choose your social media]!” and the familiar buttons that
instantly transport you to the organization’s social media site.
Twitter and Texting
Twitter is a microblogging social network, on which users can tweet
messages limited to 140 characters of text, but they can also add other
media. They accumulate followers – largely friends – who see all their
text messages and might “retweet” the ones they especially like to their
followers. Unlike on more traditional social networks, however, users
can follow anyone they like – no friend requests or approvals are
needed. Celebrities work diligently to attract thousands or millions
of followers, for instance, and when they succeed, advertisers pay
princely sums to them to tweet nice things about their brands. Twit-
ter’s retweeting feature is a key ingredient in viral communications
online. In a matter of minutes, a tweet might jump from one network
of followers to thousands, and then thousands more. Twitter’s
“trending topics” track these by location, so users can easily keep up
with the buzz.
Twitter users themselves invented the hashtag convention in
which they add a keyword to the tweet preceded by the pound sign (#).
This makes it easy to search for tweets by keyword.
When Twitter first launched, few thought that the service would
catch on with adults because it seemed like so much pointless babble
about trivial topics. But it turned out that even babble can play an
important role in human interactions, and Twitter grew to be far more
13
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

than just that. Companies, celebrities, politicians, journalists, police
departments, and many more use the service, and news often breaks
on Twitter before it reaches traditional media.
Texting bears some similarity to Twitter with its short messages that
most recipients read as soon as the message arrives. It gained early
traction outside the United States as a favored means of communi-
cation, especially in countries where cell phones are extremely
common but where smartphones that support apps like Facebook
are rarer. In countries such as the Philippines, Indonesia, and South
Africa, cell phones are nearly ubiquitous, and over 90 percent of cell
phone owners regularly send text messages.8 It quickly caught on in
the United States, however, especially among teens and young adults –
many of whom send and receive dozens of texts every day and often
prefer texting to voice calls or email.
People use text messages to send alerts, stay in touch, or flirt – even
when all they type is “hi.” For youth, it is a less risky way of connecting
compared with the phone or email, because of its informality and the
fact that the recipient doesn’t have to answer. Texting also plays a key
role in coordinating events, as when we dash off a quick text to
say we’ll be ten minutes late.
Virtual Worlds and Virtual Reality
Virtual worlds, in which people take on avatars in three-dimensional
worlds and interact with one another synchronously, form another
environment for Internet users. Early versions, called MUDs, were
completely text-based, and players typed in commands to “go north”
or “go down” to move about. On entering a room in a mansion, for
example, the program would display a text description of the room
along with the names of the avatars present, and the player could
begin communicating with them. “MUD” originally stood for multiu-
ser dungeon because many were based on the game Dungeons and
Dragons. As they branched out, MUD came to mean multiuser dimen-
sion or domain.
Modern virtual worlds feature vivid graphics and sophisticated
controls that players can use to build their own characters, commu-
nicate with other inhabitants, and even set up businesses. Many
of these environments are multiuser gaming worlds, where players
team up to battle enemies or other teams. The massively multiplayer
online role-playing games (MMORPGs) attract millions of players,
14
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

and in Chapter 7, we discuss the psychological aspects of online
gaming, both positive and negative.
The term “virtual reality” is used in a number of ways, but in this
book I use it to describe a computer-generated simulation of a three-
dimensional environment that people can enter, not by using a key-
board or video controller, but with their physical selves. A virtual
reality environment typically involves a headset that displays images
and that appear to move as the wearer moves about. Gloves fitted with
sensors might further enhance the virtual reality experience. These
setups are often used for simulation training or research, and we
will discuss several examples in this book. Virtual reality gear is also
beginning to supplement virtual world experiences. For example,
Linden Labs, the company that owns the virtual world Second Life,
is linking the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset to that online virtual
world, so players can view the world from their avatar’s perspective
in three dimensions.
Interactive Video
Applications that offer interactive video and voice form a distinct
online environment because they support more nonverbal communi-
cation – facial expressions, gestures, and vocal tone and tempo, for
instance. These are key elements of human communication, and
research on the psychological aspects of computer-mediated video
interaction is not as extensive yet compared with research on text-
based interactions. But interactive video is not the same as a face-to-
face meeting, and it introduces some odd features that can have psy-
chological effects. One, for example, involves eye contact. You look at
the screen when you interact, not the camera lens, so you don’t quite
simulate eye contact with your partner.
In some settings live video may be very welcome. For example,
online work groups that conduct their kickoff meetings using inter-
active video tend to become more cohesive and productive. In other
settings, however, video might kill some of the magic that makes the
Internet so enchanting and liberating.
Mobile Apps
Finally, mobile apps are quickly replacing web browsing on smart-
phones and tablets because they work well on smaller screens and
15
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

keyboards. Whether you want to check sports scores, post a status
update, calculate a tip, or pay a bill, “there’s an app for that,” as Apple’s
ads announce. Just as the Internet itself triggered waves of creative
destruction that upended one industry after another, apps are doing
the same. The breathtaking rise of on-demand car services is one
example. City dwellers gravitated very quickly to the mobile apps
and services offered by companies such as Uber and Lyft that compete
with taxis.9
Apps, of course, overlap with and support all of the environments
described in this section, but they deserve special mention because
they add distinctive elements to those environments such as tiny
screen size. A video chat with a smartphone is quite a different experi-
ence compared with the same chat on a large, high-definition monitor.
Another element is that mobile apps confine the user to specific
applications, so the online experience is narrowed compared with
web browsing.
Because apps are on mobile devices that we hardly ever leave
behind, they have access to our current location, depending on set-
tings. That information opens up an entirely different set of possibil-
ities for location-aware apps that can map out nearby friends, services,
or coffee shops. Mobility also means that apps are always available,
and people can fill all the micro time-slots scattered throughout the
day, perhaps while waiting for an elevator or riding a bus. You might
install an app to learn a foreign language, practice math problems, or
help scientists collect data. An app called NoiseTube, for example,
measures noise levels and reports it back to scientists who use the
information to create “noise maps” and track noise pollution.10
More Psychological Dimensions of Online Environments
Weaving through all those general categories and mediating their psy-
chological effects are certain features that affect our behavior in any
setting, including online. One particularly important feature is the
degree of anonymity. Do the people you are communicating with
know your real name? Do they already know you from face-to-face
settings? Do they expect to meet you again? Within Twitter, for
example, perceptions of anonymity vary dramatically. Many people
exchange tweets just with family and friends, but others use the service
very differently, tweeting under pseudonyms to strangers around
the world. Asynchronous discussion forums for professional groups
16
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

would not likely feature anonymity, but on discussion sites such as
4chan, anonymity is highly prized and users cannot even register.
Levels of self-awareness also vary in different environments. In an
interactive video chat with several other people, you can see your own
image along with that of everyone else. That kind of environment
heightens self-awareness. But if the webcams are turned off so that you
all are looking at a slide show instead, the environment feels more like
being in a darkened conference room, with all eyes on the screen. In
that setting, your level of self-awareness is lower, and such differences
can affect your behavior.
Your perception about the size of your audience is also a feature that
can vary within online environments. In a face-to-face setting, you
can usually see how many people are in your audience, but online,
audience size is more elusive. Even on Facebook, where you know how
many friends you have, you don’t know how many are actually read-
ing your status updates, if any. And when you send an email to a single
individual, you don’t know whether the recipient will forward it or
even post it online in some public space for the world to see.
Another example of a mediating variable is the presence or absence
of some local authority, such as a group moderator, who has the power
to resolve disputes, enforce policies, and kick wrongdoers out. Adding
an armed sheriff to a lawless town had predictable effects on the
frontiers, and it isn’t that different on the Internet.
Perhaps the most important mediator of behavior in these different
Internet environments is the purpose of the people who visit or inhabit
them. Though I like the “global village” metaphor, the Internet is not
really like that most of the time. With respect to human interaction,
it is more like a huge collection of distinct neighborhoods where
people with common interests can share information, work together,
tell stories, joke around, debate politics, help each other out, or play
games. Geography has a bearing on the way some of these neighbor-
hoods form, but purpose is even more powerful, and it has a strong
influence on our behavior. People can enter multiple neighborhoods
and they change their behavior as they click from one to the next, just
as you would when you move from a business meeting to a beach.
LANGUAGE ON THE NET
Written language is the Internet’s bread and butter, so you will see
many examples throughout this book of how people online use
17
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

language deliberately, playfully, and sometimes intemperately to
express themselves. Just like any other behavior, the way we use
language is closely related to the social context and situation. The style
of speech – or language register – changes when you speak on the
phone, talk to a child, brief your boss, write in your diary, or compose
a political speech. Linguistic research into online language is growing
rapidly, and the particular medium is clearly an important variable.
For example, Christopher Werry analyzed logs from informal
synchronous chat sessions, trying to identify some of the properties
of this register. The following transcript was part of his study:11
<anya> catch you all in about 10 mins
<Keels> booooooo
<ariadne> keels !!! you in and out today?
<bubi> keels, don’t scare me !!!
<Keels> you mean youre
<Shaquille> ariadne – what the hell is your problem?
<Keels> who are you bubi
<Alvin> bubi: What does your friend want to do in Australia. . .work
<Alvin> Shaquile: You’re the problem.
If you have never been involved in an Internet chat, this log must look
rather ridiculous. On the surface, it seems as though communication
among people is barely occurring at all and that most of the utterances
are a jumbled mass of disconnected insults and meaningless grunts.
Yet experienced chatters learn how to follow the threads as though
they are in a room in which several conversations are going on at
the same time. They might participate fully in one and just eavesdrop
on the others. Dissecting out the threads is made a little easier by
the fact that the messages scroll slowly and remain on the screen for
a while.
The chat medium affects the register in several ways, pushing it
toward a highly economical use of language that is not just an attempt
to reproduce spoken conversations. Efficiency matters, and people
who chat use many abbreviations and shortcuts. In this sample of text,
the participants are evolving innovative linguistic strategies as they
create a register for conversation and adapt to the constraints of
the medium.
Linguistic analysis of a very large sample of text messages also finds
elements that distinguish this online environment. Phonetic respell-
ings are common, for instance, as in this sample:12
18
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Thnx dude. u guys out 2nite?
Hey! Congrats 2u2. id luv 2 but ive had 2 go home! Xxx
Again, texting is not just written speech. Compared with other lan-
guage forms, texting contains many more first- and second-person
pronouns (you, I, u), and also more words that refer to timing, such
as soon or just.
The asynchronous discussion forums have a different register, prob-
ably because participants can “talk” as much as they like.13 One intri-
guing finding is that many people use a style that is somewhat similar
to the public interview style of speech. We may be looking at the
effects of the Internet soap box, rather than just a discussion going on
inside a group. When people respond to a post and debate various
points, they appear to be talking to a single individual, but they know
they have a wider audience, as though they are sitting in front of a
camera with a television interviewer who is tossing out questions. Yet
unlike a TV interview, there is no one to interrupt them, so they can
express their opinions with some very long-winded and detailed
messages.
APPLYING THEORY TO ONLINE BEHAVIOR
To make sense of the way human behavior unfolds in online environ-
ments, we can draw on a number of theories that attempt to generalize
about how certain elements affect behavior in many different settings
involving technology. We will be discussing many of these through-
out the book, but several are particularly relevant.
One of the earliest was social presence theory, which John Short
and his colleagues proposed long before the Internet entered the
mainstream.14 “Social presence” refers to the degree to which an indi-
vidual is perceived as a “real person.” Technology-mediated commu-
nications can affect those perceptions and human interactions,
particularly because they differ in the ability to transmit nonverbal
information – facial expressions, eye contact, posture, dress, vocal
tone, and so on. They argued that media that can transmit more of
those cues, such as interactive video conferencing, will provide a
heightened sense of the others as “real,” and that will lead to warmer
and friendlier interactions.
Media richness theory emerged from research on leadership and
management that explores how executives might best communicate
19
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

different types of messages.15 At the time, the choices were face-to-face
meetings, telephone calls, letters and memos, impersonal written
documents, and numeric charts or tables, listed in decreasing order of
media richness. But you can easily see how email, texting, interactive
video, and other online environments can be added to that list.
In business settings, the theory predicts that managers make better
choices by using the richer media when uncertainty is high, and those
nonverbal cues will help people resolve issues. But for simple
exchanges, the leaner media are a better and more efficient choice.
This kind of thinking opened up a more optimistic view for the
possibilities of online communications, one that didn’t immediately
relegate them to second-class status compared with face-to-face
meetings.
Joseph B. Walther’s social information processing theory directly
addresses human behavior online, mainly in text-based environ-
ments such as email or synchronous chat.16 In such settings, people
are still motivated to manage their own impressions and to form
impressions of their communication partners, but they have to rely
on a leaner medium to do it. In a face-to-face meeting, multiple
nonverbal cues combine in real time with whatever words are
spoken, so people can form impressions very quickly. In computer-
mediated settings, they rely mainly on language, so people adapt to
that setting, choosing whichever tools are available to convey feel-
ings. For instance, we might smile and increase eye contact to convey
liking in a face-to-face setting. But without those nonverbal strategies,
we find the right words, and even might just type, “I like you.”
Despite the limitations, the partners can develop very strong relation-
ships without ever having met in person or talked by phone, but
it does take longer. Indeed, such environments can support “hyper-
personal” communications that are highly intimate, and we discuss
some of Walther’s work on how this happens in Chapter 5 on inter-
personal attraction.
Another theory called SIDE deals especially with the nature of
online groups and how group identity develops.17 The acronym
derives from “the social identity model of deindividuation effects,”
and the theory helps explain some of the nuances that make people
identify with an online group, conform to its norms, and overesti-
mate how similar the members are to one another. When personal
characteristics are subdued or even invisible, as they are in most
anonymous groups, but group members have reason to believe
20
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

they share a common social identity, those group members show
more attachment to the group’s identity rather than to their individ-
ual identity. The lack of nonverbal cues that might highlight
individual differences can lead to a very cohesive “ingroup” that
suppresses individuality and magnifies differences between the
ingroup and the outgroup. For example, gender stereotypes are
common in online, anonymous groups, which is one reason women
sometimes choose gender-neutral or male nicknames. This theory
helps clarify why some online environments increase stereotyping
and do little to empower the disempowered, because their features
promote depersonalization and group identity at the expense of
individual identity.
Finally, a theory that grew out of early studies of mass media deals
with how people actively seek out various types of media to satisfy
their particular needs. Called uses and gratifications, it emphasizes
how people make their own choices about which media to consume.
This approach departs from the more traditional studies in which
researchers investigate the effects of media on overall human behav-
ior, without considering the kinds of choices individuals are making.
Although the approach fell out of favor for decades, it gained new life
because of the Internet. We Internet users are highly active choosers
and contributors, not just passive media audiences.
All of these perspectives, and the others we discuss in later chapters,
take into account that human behavior is complex, and it involves
interactions among the characteristics of each person, the situation he
or she happens to be in, and the features of the technology in use.
EMPOWERING INTERNET USERS
In this book, we explore how different kinds of human behavior
unfold in many corners of cyberspace, and why online environments
can affect us in surprising ways. Given how much we can contribute
to the net, we can also use this knowledge to avoid the worst missteps
and improve our own outcomes. We might even improve the psycho-
logical climate in our favorite neighborhoods for all their inhabitants.
Although its ubiquitous presence makes it seem as though the net
has been around forever, it is still a young technology, and even its
regulatory status remains up in the air.
The Internet also changes very quickly. Even if – after many blun-
ders – we feel adept about using email, we can’t predict what norms
21
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

will evolve for the next new “thing,” and how that “thing” will affect
the way people behave. Not many predicted, for instance, that Snap-
chat, the service people use to text a photo that vanishes a few seconds
after the recipient opens it, would lead to sexting in teens, followed by
their arrests for transmitting child pornography – a felony that can
carry lengthy prison sentences.
The Internet is not simply a technology thrust on us, one that we
can choose to use as is or avoid altogether. We can do only that, but
we have more power to influence this environment than we had for
television or telephone because we are the creators, producers, and
users at the same time. We can even use it to influence the mature
broadcasting medium of television, where our activism was once
expressed mainly by whether we turn on the set and what we watch
if we do. Producers religiously monitor social media chatter about
their shows, and that can carry some weight. Fans of the TV show
Chuck came out in force on Twitter with a campaign called
“We Give a Chuck,” in hopes of getting the network to produce a fifth
season. They cleverly mentioned how much they support the show’s
advertisers in their tweets: “Just rewatched the last episode of #Chuck
while drinking my daily @drpepper! Thanks for the Chuck support
@pepsi!”18
Nevertheless, the Internet’s momentum is extremely powerful, and
some argue that there is little we can do to change the course of
this technology. Perhaps it is too late, for instance, to rescue privacy –
not just from the many companies and government agencies that
want our digital data and have the means to collect it, with or without
our knowledge and consent. Our own online behavior often puts
our privacy at risk.
Karl Marx provoked a debate about the power of technological
innovation to drive social change when he pointed out, “The hand-
mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society
with the industrial capitalist.” His point was that certain new tech-
nologies have immense power to shape human behavior and social
structures. Now, in a postindustrial age, we have what sociologist
Manuel Castells calls the “network society” that promises further
upheavals and dramatic change.
In 1967, economist-historian Robert L. Heilbroner revisited the issue
of technological determinism. It is, he wrote, “peculiarly a problem
of certain historical epochs . . . in which the forces of technical
22
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

change have been unleashed, but when the agencies for the control or
guidance of technology are still rudimentary.”19 We are in one of those
epochs now, and we need knowledge about how this technology
affects us and how we can, in turn, affect it.
NOTES
1 A transcript is available online: http://pubpages.unh.edu/~jel/kokotran
script.html.
2 Pew Research Center. (2014). Internet user demographics. Retrieved from
www.pewinternet.org/data-trend/internet-use/latest-stats/
3 Dutton, W. H. (2013). The foundations of a transformative field. In
W. H. Dutton (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of Internet studies. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
4 Wang, Y., Lu, J., Liang, J., Chen, J., & Liu, J. (2012). Selecting queries from
sample to crawl deep web data sources. Web Intelligence and Agent Systems,
10 (1), 75–88.
5 Zheng, Q., Wu, Z., Cheng, X., Jiang, L., & Liu, J. (2013). Learning to crawl deep
web. Information Systems, 38(6), 801–819. doi:10.1016/j.is.2013.02.001
6 Bradbury, D. (2014). Unveiling the dark web. Network Security, 2014 (4), 14–17.
doi:10.1016/S1353-4858(14)70042-X
7 Sullivan, A. (2015, January 28). A note to my readers. The Dish. Retrieved
from http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/2015/01/28/a-note-to-my-readers/
8 Pew
Research
Center.
(2014).
Emerging
nations
embrace
internet,
mobile
technology.
Retrieved
from
www.pewglobal.org/2014/02/13/
emerging-nations-embrace-internet-mobile-technology/
9 There’s an app for that. (2015, January 3). Economist, 414(8919), 17–20.
10 Malykhina, E. (2014). 8 apps that turn citizens into scientists. Scientific
American. Retrieved from www.scientificamerican.com/article/8-apps-that-
turn-citizens-into-scientists/
11 Werry, C. C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet relay
chat. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic,
social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47–63). Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
12 Tagg, C. (2009). A corpus linguistics study of SMS text messaging (Unpublished
dissertation). University of Birmingham. Retrieved from http://etheses.
bham.ac.uk/253/1/Tagg09PhD.pdf
13 Collot, M., & Belmore, N. (1996). Electronic language: A new variety of
English. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic,
social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 13–28). Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
14 Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecom-
munications. New York, NY: Wiley.
15 Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational information requirements,
media richness and structural design. Management Science, 32 (5), 554–571.
16 Walther,
J.
B.
(2008).
Social
information
processing
theory.
In
L. A. Baxter & D. O. Braithewaite (Eds.), Engaging theories in interpersonal
communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 391–404). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
23
THE INTERNET IN A PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTEXT

17 Spears, R., Lea, M., Postmes, T., & Wolbert, A. (2011). A SIDE look at computer-
mediated interaction: Power and the gender divide. In Z. Birchmeier,
B. Dietz-Uhler, & G. Stasser (Eds.), Strategic uses of social technology: An inter-
active perspective of social psychology (pp. 16–39). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
18 Watercutter, A. (2011, April 21). Twitter campaign tries to save chuck from
cancellation. Wired. Retrieved from www.wired.com/2011/04/chuck-fans-
take-to-twitter/
19 Heilbroner, R. L. (1967). Do machines make history? Technology and Culture,
8, 335–345.
24
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

2
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
IMPRESSION FORMATION
How do people manage their self-presentations online? How successful
are we at conveying the impression we hope to create? And what cues
do we use to form impressions of other people when we read their
emails or browse their social network profiles?
For face-to-face settings, there is no shortage of advice. Consultants
eager to help us create the right impression abound, whether the goal
is to impress a prospective boss, get elected to public office, make a
sale over the telephone, or get a date. For a face-to-face job interview,
they offer tips such as “show confidence with a strong handshake”
or “maintain eye contact to show interest.” Researchers have spent
considerable effort exploring how people present themselves in
person and how those strategies affect the impressions they make on
different audiences.
Online, different approaches work, and an especially clever self-
presentation might lead to instant celebrity status. Dave Carroll, a little
known Canadian musician, posted a music video called “United Breaks
Guitars.” The catchy folk song explains how clumsy airport baggage
handlers broke Carroll’s expensive guitar and how his attempts
to negotiate compensation met with failure. The video attracted
150,000 viewers in just one day, and many millions within a month.
Carroll’s lighthearted approach led to quasi-celebrity status and many
invitations to speak on customer service at corporate events, as well as
a new book.1 United eventually asked for permission to use the video
in its own training programs.
Embarrassing blunders are easy to make and difficult to retract.
A university administrator sent out an email to 40,000 students, encour-
aging them to opt in to paperless delivery of 1098-T tuition forms. The
25

students quickly discovered they could reply to all, and what became
known as “replyallcalypse” ensued. A suddenly empowered student
body shared jokes, friendly comments, cries for help, and complaints,
along with many calls to stop “replying to all” as their inboxes flooded.
The employee who made the mistake apologized but the floodgate
was already wide open.
Much online interaction, on social networks and email in particular,
is among people who already know each other in person, so their online
personas add to the impression we already have of them. But the online
persona plays an important role in first impressions as people rely
more on email or social network introductions, and employers check
out applicants’ profiles. For some Internet relationships, communica-
tion starts on the net and later develops in other environments. For
others, the entire relationship never strays away from the net, not
even with a phone call, so the online persona is the whole story.
I recall receiving an email many years ago from a distant colleague
I had never met in person that highlighted how clumsy we can be at
constructing an online persona. It was thirteen screen pages long and
closed with one of those automated signatures containing the sender’s
name, a string of letters announcing his many degrees and certifica-
tions, a list of academic affiliations, and a lofty quotation surrounded
by asterisks. I was tempted to click “delete” immediately, but then
I remembered that he is struggling with his online persona, and we all
have much less guidance to go on. I printed it out and read his missive.
ONLINE, ONSTAGE
Erving Goffman, the father of impression management theory, pro-
posed that everyone uses tactics to present themselves in whatever
light they think appropriate for the context. He thought of a social
event as theater, with people performing on the front stage as actors
who are conscious of their audience and who are trying to create a
certain impression. They might be following the social norms they
assume the audience expects, or they might be deliberately defying
them – to shock or amaze. The actor will behave differently on the
back stage, however, when there is no audience.
Much research has been conducted to understand how people pre-
sent themselves in face-to-face settings and how well their perform-
ances create the impression they intended. But how does this process
unfold on the Internet?
26
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Online Self-Presentation: A Challenging Stage
In some ways, crafting the online persona has unique advantages over
a face-to-face setting because people can take their time to get just the
right text, photo, or video for their network profile or personal home
page. They can edit and revise text, retouch photos, and make
thoughtful decisions about what to disclose.
In other ways, managing your own impression on the Internet is
like navigating white water with two-by-fours for oars. Your impres-
sion management toolkit is strangely devoid of the tools most familiar
to you – your real life smile, body language, and other nonverbal cues.
In many online environments, you can’t project your high status the
way you could in face-to-face settings. Your commanding voice is
silenced, and your subtly raised eyebrow is invisible. Posting photos
and videos of yourself and your friends adds richness to your online
self-presentation, but often, the main tool you have to manage the
impression others form about you is the keyboard. Compared with
cosmetics, clothing, hairstyles, and all the other accoutrements that
swallow our paychecks, the keyboard can be an unfamiliar and
awkward impression-making device.
The tools people use to manage impressions online run the gamut
in terms of media richness. An email, for example, is often nothing but
typed text, but the recipient will quickly form an impression of the
sender based on whatever cues are available. Facebook, LinkedIn and
other social networking sites offer more tools that create opportunities
for richness in self-presentation, with images, videos, links to favorite
sites, and many comments from friends.
Another way in which online impression management differs from
the face-to-face version is that new tools keep appearing that offer
enticing ways to tweak how you present yourself. Adobe’s Photoshop
software quickly became a verb as people began enhancing their
images to whiten teeth or erase blemishes. Some of these features are
difficult to use and error-prone, so that the first clumsy attempts can
easily create an impression you didn’t want to make. For example,
novice LinkedIn users might start by importing many associates into
their LinkedIn network from their contact lists, and then start to
tinker with their profiles and photos. What these newcomers might
not know is that the setting to send out activity updates to the
network could be on by default, so every tiny change is broadcast.
That is a bit like installing a live webcam in the dressing room of an
actor who is applying makeup to transform into a stage character.
27
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

The options for presenting oneself online also continue to expand.
With Snapchat, for instance, people can send an image to a recipient’s
mobile phone, and the image will disappear in a few seconds, or at
least it is supposed to. Using Vine, you can create a looping six-second
video using a smartphone to share with friends. In 3D virtual worlds
such as Second Life or Sims, inhabitants can create lifelike or fanciful
avatars to interact with one another.
A feature of online impression management that people often
forget about is that many of the services are free to the users, but the
companies earn revenue through advertising or other business arrang-
ements. The fine print (which few read) may contain elements that
make the online stage even more challenging. Facebook frequently
changes its privacy policies, but at this writing, the company claims
the right to use your image on advertising, a feature that will defin-
itely affect the impression you are trying to make. For instance, if you
click “like” to follow Budweiser Beer’s Facebook page, your friends
might see your profile photo next to an ad for that product. In a
face-to-face setting, you wouldn’t expect a Budweiser representative
to snap your photo because you attended a Clydesdale parade, and
then use it in an ad without asking you for permission.
A final example that we return to later in this chapter is the audi-
ence itself. On Twitter, for example, you might think you are tweeting
to a handful of followers, and you craft your presentation in a way
that you think will please or amuse them. But tweets can be retweeted,
and your tweet might start “trending” and reach the whole Twitter-
verse. The possibility of unintentional viral spread of a performance
intended for a particular audience is a very real one.
Self-Presentation Strategies
Goffman stressed that our motives are key to the strategies we choose.
You might want to be liked by your audience, to dominate them, to
throw yourself on their mercy, or to have them fear or respect you,
and you will choose tactics for your self-presentation that you hope
will accomplish your goal.2 Goffman calls it “an information game – a
potentially infinite cycle of concealment, discovery, false revelation,
and rediscovery.”3
A study of how people use these tactics online shows that the
context can affect which strategies they use, much as it does in a
face-to-face setting. The researchers chose three different social media
28
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

platforms to examine: Facebook, multiplayer first person shooter
games, and FatSecret, a social support community about weight loss.
Facebook users stressed ingratiation, which fits a social networking
theme. People on the first-person shooter game chose intimidation,
and those participating in the social support discussion forum were
more likely to use supplication compared with the other platforms,
as they asked for help and advice.4
Strategies also depend on each person’s own personality, in addition
to their motives and the context. For example, high self-monitors
carefully regulate their self-presentations to make themselves more
likable and socially desirable, sometimes including deception as part
of their performance. Imagine a politician adept at changing styles for
each speech, carefully responding to the audience’s preferences. Low
self-monitors present more authentic self-presentations, caring less
about what each audience might think. Online, high self-monitors
tend to portray themselves as more extraverted and sociable.
Although some self-presentations are completely fictitious, most
people recognize that authenticity is a key ingredient for effective
impression management, especially when the audience includes
people known in real life. They might enhance the profile image a
bit, or choose to feature their most positive traits online, but outright
deception is less common and may easily backfire. In a focus group
on impression management, participants brutally mocked someone
whose Facebook profile smacked of falseness:
D:
I have a person who I know was just a geek in high school,
and the next thing they’re doing, they’re on their
Facebook with guns . . .
E:
I’ve seen that too . . . I laugh at it.5
We spend a lot of time and effort managing and refining the impres-
sion we want to make, but we don’t want others to know how hard we
work at this. We also want to be very careful about being perceived as
a manipulative social chameleon who fakes impressions for social
gain. To better understand how well people are doing at this online,
let’s take a look at how we form impressions of other people.
FORMING IMPRESSIONS ONLINE AND OFFLINE
Psychologists have been studying impression formation in face-to-face
settings for decades, with many surprising results. People are not
29
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

always rational when they form an opinion of a newcomer, carefully
drawing on all the cues available and withholding judgments when
information is sparse. Instead, we draw conclusions on little evidence,
as classic research in psychology demonstrates.
Crafting a Warm and Likable Self-Presentation
Soon after World War II, Solomon Asch did a simple but provocative
study on first impressions and found that people tend to leap to
conclusions with blinding speed and few cues to guide them.6 He first
described a man as “intelligent, skillful, industrious, warm, determined,
practical, and cautious.” The people who heard this brief description
had no trouble painting in the rest of the personality. They assumed
he was also honest, good-natured, wise, popular, sociable, and imagina-
tive – an all-around likable fellow. In retrospect, I could imagine a
friendly cat burglar with the same traits that Asch listed, but the
subjects apparently did not.
Asch wondered how small changes in the list of traits might affect
the impression the man was making, so in variations of the same
experiment he read the list again to other groups, substituting “cold,”
“polite,” or “blunt” for the single word “warm.” Neither “polite” nor
“blunt” changed the impression very much, but when the man turned
“cold,” he was transformed into a very unlikable person. He became an
unpopular, disagreeable cheapskate. The change in his psychological
temperature was the step in the recipe that turned Dr. Jekyll into
Mr. Hyde.
“Warm” and “cold” say a great deal about our dispositions and
influence how others will react to us in social settings. They are
heavily weighted central traits when people are forming a first impres-
sion. You may be considered brilliant and industrious, but these will
pale next to your warmth or coldness.
The Chilly Internet
The cues people use to form some impression of your warmth are
mainly nonverbal. Your facial expressions can be a giveaway: a scowl
is all your observers need to take your measure. Your vocal patterns,
body posture, gestures, and eye contact will also tip the scales toward
one end of the warm/cold continuum. Folding your arms and looking
away will lead to a colder impression, while moving a little closer (but
30
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

not too close) when your partner speaks will make you seem warmer.
Research on nonverbal communication and its role in impression
formation is very extensive, and there is no question that your words –
what you actually say – take a back seat to other cues when observers
are drawing conclusions about warmth and coldness.
In the early days of the Internet, observers had little more than
typed text to judge temperature. Much of the original research on
socioemotional expression online, the kind that leads to impressions
of a person’s warmth or coldness, showed that we all seem cooler, more
task-oriented, and more irascible than we might in person. In the 1970s,
Starr Roxanne Hiltz and Murray Turoff conducted one of the first
studies to compare the way people express themselves in computer-
mediated and face-to-face meetings, and their results did not bode well
for this youthful medium.7 They analyzed utterances in the two set-
tings and found that the face-to-face groups expressed more agreement
with one another. The simple “uh-huhs” that a person uses to show
understanding and alignment with the speaker were far less common
in the online meeting. This isn’t too surprising – it would seem odd to
type an utterance like that, but perfectly natural to say it. What was
more surprising was that the computer-mediated groups made more
remarks to express disagreement and fewer remarks that might relieve a
tense situation. It sounds as if they were getting on each other’s nerves
and communicating in ways that made it worse rather than better.
Those differences would easily account for the chilly impressions.
The chilliness comes out in email, too. A study using a shorter
version of the Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) personality test
demonstrated that online, mistakes about warmth and coldness are
common. When the subjects took the test, they imagined that they
were answering it in the way one of their colleagues would – one with
whom they had communicated only via email. Those colleagues also
completed the test, but they answered for themselves.8 As a control,
people who knew one another face-to-face also completed the test,
with one member of each pair playing the role of the other.
How well could the role players guess how their colleagues would
answer the questions? The ones who had the advantage of face-to-face
contact did well, but the email-only partners showed some intriguing
misperceptions. They thought their partners preferred the logical
and analytical “thinking” approach far more than they actually did.
They also underestimated the possibility that many of them would
prefer a more people-oriented “feeling” approach. The targets’ need for
31
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

structure and order, at the expense of spontaneity, was also overesti-
mated by the role players who knew them only through the wires.
Studies such as these show that what we type is not quite what we
would say in person, and others react to this subtle alteration in our
behavior. We don’t just appear a little cooler, testier, and disagreeable
because of the limitations of the medium. Online, we appear to be less
inclined to perform those little civilities common to social interactions.
Predictably, people react to our cooler, more task-oriented impression
and respond in kind. Unless we realize what is happening, an escalating
cycle begins. The online group members could have typed simple
phrases to express more agreement and to release tension if they had
realized their importance. They could have softened their typed verbal
disagreements, with “Oh, not sure I quite agree with that,” as they
might have done in person. Though their emotional intelligence
might have been high in person, it was less acute online.
Emoticons and the Socioemotional Thaw
Even in a text-only environment, people find ways to shape their
personas with more emotional expression. Emoticons, those playful
combinations of punctuation marks designed to show some facial
expression, began appearing in the 1980s. Scott Fahlman at Carnegie
Mellon is widely credited with starting this innovation in 1982 with a
smiley face, and many more have taken hold. Using just the keys on
the QWERTY keyboard, we can smile :-), frown :-(, wink ;), express
frustration :/, or stick our tongues out :P.
With more sophisticated software, emoticons have become more
accessible and nuanced. Microsoft Word and other programs automatic-
ally convert the original smiley face to a graphic
, and many apps
offer tools to add far more graphical emotional expression to text-based
communication. Emoji, for instance, are the extremely varied emoti-
cons that started in Japan, and that include some emotions linked to
Japanese culture, such as bowing deeply as a way to express an apology.
Studies of various settings in which emoticons might be used
show quite different rates of use. For example, a longitudinal study
of smartphone users in France found that emoticons were not used
very often in text messages sent by mobile phones. Just 4 percent of
these private messages contained one or more emoticons.9 In another
setting, however, they might be used in nearly every message, espe-
cially by younger users.
32
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

How Do Emoticons Affect Impressions?
Whether emoticons are capable of tipping an impression in one direc-
tion or another depends on the situation, as many research studies
have uncovered.10 For example, take a look at this brief email:
Date: January 1
Subject: Question
Hi, can you send me the name and contact information of a tutor that can help me
with the accounting class? Thanks. :)
Students in a management course judged both this email and
another one just like it but without the smiley face. They did indeed
perceive the person who added a smiley face as more likable.11 The
emoticon softens the request, and makes it seem less abrupt. (In this
study, students also rated an email in which the sender used all caps.
Not surprisingly, subjects judged those senders as less likable.)
Another
study
demonstrated
that
emoticons
can
humanize
“experts” a bit. The researchers showed subjects the transcript of a chat
session in which an expert discussed a topic with a group of partici-
pants. For half the subjects the transcript contained comments from
the expert that included emoticons, and these subjects rated the
experts as friendlier as well as more competent.12
Emoticons can intensify the verbal content of the message, so that
we have a more favorable impression of the person who sends a verbal
compliment with a smiley face attached. The reverse is also true.
A verbal criticism will be seen as even more biting if the sender adds
a frown :-(.
In an experiment that illustrates the nuances of this kind of intensi-
fication, students read a series of emails that appeared to offer feedback
on the student’s class presentation. Some contained positive com-
ments, while others were more negative or neutral. Within those
categories, the messages contained a smiley face, frown, wink, or, for
controls, no emoticon. Finally, the messages appeared to be coming
from the student’s good friend or from a stranger. The subjects rated
each email on several measures that revealed how they interpreted the
contents.
The emoticons strengthened the intensity of the message, but only
as long as the emoticon’s emotion and the verbal contents were in the
same direction – positive or negative. When the message was neutral,
a smiley face led to a more positive interpretation, and a frown did
33
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

the reverse. The emails containing mixed messages in which the
emoticon and the verbal message didn’t match were more difficult
to interpret. Many subjects thought the sender might be subtly
conveying sarcasm.13
Context matters, and it pays to understand when emoticons might
offend or disturb the recipient. Business colleagues often find emoti-
cons immature and silly, and they certainly have no place in formal
correspondence. The nature of the recipient also affects how a smiley
face is perceived. In the study described earlier, involving the emails
with a request for an accounting tutor, the researchers also asked the
subjects themselves about their own personalities, including their self-
rating of emotional stability. Those who scored higher on that trait
were more affected by the use of emoticons and judged the senders of
those emails higher in likability. The less emotionally stable subjects
were unaffected.
Overuse also matters. One context in which overuse might be
souring some people and turning impressions in the wrong direction
is on dating sites. Analysts at the online dating company Zoosk found
that men with a smiley face in their profile receive 6 percent fewer
messages, and 12 percent fewer responses to the messages that they
send out to potential partners. Even worse, response rates from women
decreased by an astounding 66 percent for messages from men who
added a wink ;). Women, however, get 60 percent more messages from
men when they include smiley emoticons in their profile.14 Data such
as this make it clear why online impression management is not a
simple matter.
Impression Formation Shortcuts
How can just a couple of keystrokes influence impressions? When
little else is available, people are motivated to find something to go
on, and will form an impression from an emoticon, as those online
daters do.
We are also rather lazy in how we form impressions. Rushed for time,
we take shortcuts and are comfortable relying on just a few cues. Once we
have those, we think we have a reasonably accurate impression and can
move onto other matters. Social psychologists Susan Fiske and Shelley
Taylor coined the term cognitive miser to describe our interest in conserv-
ing energyand reducing cognitive load.15 It would be tootime consuming
to collect comprehensive information to form unique impressions of
34
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

everyonewemeet,soweoverusecertaincuesthatserveasheuristics–rules
ofthumb.Theimpressionofaperson’swarmthorcoldnessisoneexample.
It dominates the picture as soon as we know anything at all about it, and
our conclusions about other personal characteristics flow from it.
On the Internet, even your email address can also contribute to
your impression. Consider these examples:
tufdude888@aol2.com
jtravis@vq2.harvard.edu
thebigboss@lg.comcast.com
FoxyLady@fanbase1.tv
75664.8843a@gmail.com
rgoldman_6g@microsoft.com
honey.bunny66@hotmail.de
s.a.lopez@ncr.krg.com
You might question tufdude’s objectivity on women’s rights, for
example, and you might be inclined to listen more carefully to rgold-
man’s views on the future of the Internet than to FoxyLady’s. The
Harvard address of jtravis might carry some weight in the absence of
any other information about the sender.
What exactly is it about those email addresses that can convey such
impressions? Researchers at the University of Leipzig tried to find out
what cues observers were actually using to form an impression.16 They
first asked 600 young adults to provide their actual email addresses,
and then identified various objective characteristics, such as number
of characters, number of digits, name of provider (Yahoo!, AOL,
Hotmail, etc.), and top-level domain (.com, .net., .edu, etc.). To identify
more subjective aspects of the email address, coders sorted them into
groups with similar characteristics. The sorting process resulted in
general categories, such as “definitely a man,” “salacious,” “fantasy
character,” “creative,” or “funny.”
To learn which cues people were using to form impressions from
those email address, a hundred strangers were asked to rate the email
owners on the “Big Five” personality traits, widely used in psycho-
logical research (Table 2.1). The observers rated the people with funny
email addresses or fantasy characters in the address as more extra-
verted, and they thought the same about Yahoo! users. Gender stereo-
types also played a role: email addresses that seemed to have female
owners were rated as more neurotic, open to experience, agreeable,
35
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

and conscientious. Email addresses with more dots and more charac-
ters were thought to be tied to more conscientious owners.
The observers also rated the addresses on another trait – narcissism –
with items such as “Regards himself/herself as something special.”
Salacious and self-enhancing email addresses earned high marks on
that trait. If you create an email address such as tufdude or FoxyLady,
expect people to form a certain picture of your personality. If you
want to appear conscientious, try a few dots.
Most people with Internet accounts have not spent much time
considering the impression their email addresses make. The domain
name to the right of the @ is usually acquired by default. Those
connected with colleges and universities will end with the name of
the institution followed by the edu top-level domain name. That
ending instantly identifies you as a member of an academic commu-
nity, though your actual role is concealed (jtravis might be a freshman,
a professor, or a member of Harvard’s dining staff. Edu is a little tag that
separates its owner from the world of capitalism, where addresses end
in com (for commercial). Other endings announce your connection to
Table 2.1. The Big Five personality traitsa
TRAIT
ADJECTIVES
SAMPLE ITEMS
Extraversion
Active, assertive, energetic,
outgoing, enthusiastic,
talkative
I feel comfortable
around people.
I think a lot before
I speak or act (reversed).
Openness to
experience
Artistic, curious,
imaginative, insightful,
original, broad range of
interests
I have a vivid
imagination.
I have difficulty
understanding abstract
ideas (reversed).
Agreeableness
Appreciative, forgiving,
generous, kind,
sympathetic
I sympathize with
others’ feelings.
I feel little concern for
others (reversed).
Conscientiousness
Dependable, responsible,
productive, ethical, high
aspirations, not self-
indulgent
I am always prepared.
I often forget to put
things back in their
proper place (reversed).
Neuroticism
Anxious, self-pitying, tense,
touchy, unstable,
worrying
I worry about things.
I seldom feel blue
(reversed).
a Items identified as “reversed” were reverse scored, so that stronger agreement indicates
lower scores on the trait.
36
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

government (gov), nonprofit organizations (org), or particular countries.
As Internet usage exploded, the U.S.-dominated naming scheme based
on organizational affiliation gave way to nationalism. Honey.bunny’s
email address ends in “de,” which is Germany’s two-letter code.
To expand top-level domains even further, the organization that
manages domain naming, called the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN), accepts applications for new top-level
domains that suggest a type of business, a location, an industry, or
anything else the applicant wants to promote. Examples include
“sydney,” “furniture,” “singles,” “help,” and “tattoo.” (Expect to see
email addresses such as happyink75@mail.tattoo in the future.)
People who sign up for a free account with Google, Yahoo!, or other
commercial service also create a certain impression. Their email
address is the electronic equivalent of wearing a tee-shirt emblazoned
with a company brand name, day and night. Comcast and AOL users
also tend to be a little older than people who use the other services, so
the choice also leaves some cue about age.
LOOKING THROUGH A LENS
To sort out the complexities of online impression formation, particu-
larly as we start examining Facebook profiles, personal websites, You-
Tube channels, and venues in which there is much more latitude to
add richness to the self-presentation, we can draw on Egon Brunswik’s
lens model, which breaks down the process of human perception in an
attempt to understand how people use the cues available to form
judgments.17 This model asks three questions:
1. What cues are people using to form impressions?
2. Which available cues are actually valid predictors of someone’s
personality?
3. Are people using the right cues that lead to accurate impressions?
The cues that guide impressions are not just the obvious ones – gender
and age, for instance. Nor are they confined to cues we deliberately
manage to create a certain impression, such as a warm smile or a
fashionable outfit. They include behavioral residues that people leave
behind, even when they are not physically on the scene.
Some of these are intended to complement a person’s overall
impression management, such as a guitar hanging in a music lover’s
37
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

dorm room. Others might be less intentional, or even completely
unintended. That moldy sandwich left half eaten on the desk also says
something about the room’s inhabitant.
“Rooms with a Cue”
Samuel D. Gosling and his colleagues used the lens model in an innova-
tive way to learn how behavioral residues in office workspaces and
bedrooms influence impression formation.18 Without ever meeting
the occupant, or even seeing a photo, could observers accurately judge
personality using the residues lying about? And which residues would
they rely on to judge different facets of the person’s personality?
The researchers drew on the Big Five personality traits to answer
these questions, and found that observers were rather accurate in their
judgments, especially for certain characteristics. Noting a clean,
orderly, and uncluttered room, they judged the person to be conscien-
tious. When observers saw distinctive decorations with many maga-
zines, books, and CDs, they tended to think the inhabitant was more
open to experience. Colorful, cluttered, unconventional, and inviting
rooms led observers to correctly think the person was more extra-
verted and sociable.
Online Behavioral Residues
What cues are people leaving behind online? A great many, as it turns
out. The email addresses, for example, are just one very thin behavioral
residue, but remarkably, they do have some power to influence how
observers judge several aspects of personality. In the study described
earlier, the observers came to many similar conclusions, and the con-
sensus was strongest for extraversion, conscientious, and narcissism.
But were their impressions accurate? Did they actually match how the
email address owners described themselves?
To some degree, the impressions were surprisingly accurate. Relying
especially on how cute or creative an email address was, observers
correctly judged the owner to be high on “openness to experience.”
The researchers found significant correlations between the observers’
ratings and the email owners’ self-ratings for all the traits except extra-
version. If you judged thebigboss@comcast.com to be more narcissistic,
you would more than likely be correct. But honey.bunny66@yahoo.de
might not be as extraverted as his or her email address appears.
38
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Emoticons are another form of behavioral residue, one that is under
the control of the sender, who can decide whether to use one and
where to put it. The particulars of an email address are partly inten-
tional, as people choose which provider to use or what username to
create. When observers are forming an impression of your online
persona, they might take into account whether a behavioral residue
is something you can manipulate as part of your overall impression
management. If it is not under your control, observers might be wise
to ignore it, or they might decide that the cue is actually more valu-
able and believable because you could not manipulate it. That kind of
cue might warrant more attention.
Let’s turn now to the far richer worlds of social networks and
personal home pages, in which behavioral residues abound, both
intentional and unintentional.
IMPRESSION FORMATION ON PERSONAL WEBSITES
AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
A friend of a friend emails you to invite you to lunch. You haven’t met
this person but the email address didn’t give off any narcissistic vibes,
and the email itself didn’t contain any emoticon winks, either. You are
already starting to form an impression, but before replying, you enter
the name in a search engine and find that the person has a website and
profiles on Facebook and LinkedIn. What impressions will you form
from these and how accurate will they be?
The Personal Home Page Advantage
With the exception of a few European aristocrats in the first age of
self – the Italian Renaissance – people have not had such an opportun-
ity before. Without any of the costs of land, labor, artists, or architects,
we can make our digital billboards as simple as a brief description with
a photo, or as elaborate as a multimedia multipage spread, complete
with music, animations, and an album full of selfies. We can fill them
with as much autobiographical detail as we like, either true or recon-
structed, and add links to our previously unpublished poetry, novels,
and drawings.
Many people take the time to create a home page on the web,
often using free services. People create home pages for a variety of
reasons. They might want to launch a kind of digital brochure about
39
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

themselves, containing any information they think should be pub-
licly accessible: images, career interests, social network participation,
performances, and publications. Some create a personal website to
provide a community service. One man in the Netherlands put some
information on his home page about how to eliminate a particularly
aggressive virus that was penetrating computers, mainly in Europe.
Those who had been infected found his site through search engines
and encouraged him to keep adding to his store of information about
how to get rid of viruses. He did, and is very proud that his site has
become a solid and useful addition to the web.
These websites differ from social network profiles such as Facebook
or LinkedIn profiles, partly because they are publicly accessible and
serve as digital billboards. Their contents are essentially a collection of
identity claims made by the owner, carefully selected to create an
impression the owner hopes to make. Unless the owner allows com-
menting, all the behavioral residues are under the owner’s control.
A study of such publicly accessible home pages found that most of
the creators were not trying to create an alternate identity that differed
dramatically from their own selves. Rather than fragmenting identity,
these sites present an integrated one that is stable and shows what the
individual believes is important.19 The creators often blend aspects of
their public and private lives in surprising ways, partly because the
audience for their creation is not well understood. While the audience
for aprofessional resume provides a context that constrains the contents,
the audience for the home page is, quite literally, anyone on the planet
with Internet access. Friends and family might drop by, but so might
coworkers, employers, or strangers from another part of the world.
Thus, many people aim for an integrated and holistic self-presentation.
Drawing again on the Big Five personality traits, researchers recruited
89 people who had launched personal websites.20 These website creators
then completed self-ratings of their personalities and “ideal” self-ratings.
To better detect how accurate these ratings were, the researchers con-
tacted informants that the authors identified – people who knew them
well – and they completed the same surveys to assess the website
author. Eleven independent observers who didn’t know the author
then looked at the personal websites and rated them on the Big Five.
Based on the correlations, the observers were remarkably accurate
when they depended just on the personal website to judge the author’s
personality. Accuracy was especially high for “openness to experi-
ence,” likely because a personal website can include quite a range of
40
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

distinctive features to suggest the author is imaginative and creative.
People high in openness have more tools to express themselves online,
and it showed.
The website authors seemed to be projecting their real selves for
most of the personality traits, and not trying to tweak it too much
toward their ideals. The exceptions were on extraversion and agree-
ableness. On those, the observers interpreted the cues on the websites
in a way that matched what the authors hoped for, rather than as
descriptions of reality. You may recall Solomon Asch’s research show-
ing that “warmth” tends to dominate the impression. These website
authors appeared to tilt their self-presentations toward a warmer tem-
perature, leading to higher marks on extraversion and agreeableness.
Social Network Impressions
Whereas the personal website is a public billboard, the social network
profile is an online persona for which you have more control over
the audience and can limit access to family, friends, or colleagues. The
explosive growth of social networking, particularly Facebook, has
attracted quite a lot of research attention.21
The companies that provide these services strive for “stickiness,”
a characteristic that encourages visitors to stay longer and come back
often. Software features on the socially oriented Facebook network,
for example, invite elaborate self-presentations and frequent status
updates with prompts such as “What’s on your mind?”. The site reminds
you constantly if you haven’t added much personal information about
where you went to school, where you work, your relationship status,
your family, your favorite music and books, what your views are
about religion and politics, and your likes and dislikes. I will discuss
the privacy implications of this business model in Chapter 10, but
for now, what impressions do people form about you when they visit
your social networking site?
A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Words
The profile photo does indeed say a thousand words, and it shows
features that cognitive misers rely heavily on, such as age and gender.
If the profile photo shows a woman in her sixties, you form some
impression of her personality, even though nothing was ever said
about what she thinks or how she acts. Marilynn Brewer at UCLA
41
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

showed how powerful age and gender can be when people are forming
first impressions about personality.22 She collected 140 facial photo-
graphs of men and women of all ages and asked her subjects to sort the
photos into separate stacks that contained pictures of people they
thought were similar in character. The piles nearly always contained
people of the same gender and approximate age. Nevertheless, when
the subjects were asked to provide verbal labels for their stacks, they
rarely used age or gender as part of the description. Instead, they came
up with vivid personality labels:
“serious professionals with I-dare-you-to-challenge-my-opinion attitudes”
“white collar workers who are uptight about their jobs”
“Barbara Walters–types, gossipers, nosey, yet sly and slightly snobbish”
“people who are persistent talkers and don’t pay attention to their listeners”
The photo also shows physical attractiveness, another extremely
powerful cue that dominates impressions. Research shows clearly that
we tend to perceive attractive people as kinder, smarter, more successful,
more extraverted and confident, and of course, warmer, compared with
less attractive ones. This “attractiveness halo effect” also applies online.
Not surprisingly, visitors to a social network profile page are more likely
to want to meet someone of the opposite sex who shows an attractive
photo. In fact, they’d prefer to meet someone who shows no photo at all
compared with someone who shows an unattractive image.23
In one study, researchers used an eye tracking device to see how
observers actually view simulated Facebook profiles with attractive
and unattractive images of men and women on their profiles. The
subjects spent more time viewing the profile image of attractive
women, especially. For profiles of attractive men, the subjects took
more time to view some of the “About me” text, showing the profile
owners’ likes and interests. When the profile image was unattractive,
though, it was clear from the eye tracking measurements that the
subjects did not put very much effort into learning about the person
from the profile, either by viewing the photo or noting other cues on
the page. Instead, they focused on the irrelevant advertisements.24
Behavioral Residues and Number of Friends
While the photo is extremely important to your impression, social
network sites contain many more behavioral residues that could shape
42
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

the impression. Number of friends; the wording in the “About me”
section about the work you do; your favorite books, music, and TV
shows; your relationship status; wall posts; status updates; and more
are all visible at a glance. With a little more effort, the stranger can
look at your photo albums showing tagged friends, links to YouTube
videos, a resume, and whatever else you’ve made public. On the
professionally oriented LinkedIn site, visitors might see employment
history, experience, knowledge and skills, publications, and career
interests.
What can we learn about a person from these online residues?
We can often learn quite a lot, and at least some of it is on target. As
in the study of personal websites, Facebook profile owners completed
an inventory of the Big Five, and then independent observers rated
the profile owners on those traits based on their Facebook profiles.25
The researchers also asked well-acquainted peers to rate their personal-
ity characteristics, so they did not have to rely just on the profile
owners’ self-reports. The observers were especially accurate on their
judgments of extraversion, relying on number of friends, wall posts,
photos, and other behavioral residues.
The number of friends on Facebook affects impressions all on its
own. Joseph B. Walther at Michigan State University has been study-
ing computer-mediated communications from its earliest debut,
and he and his colleagues find that profiles showing a lot of friends
might have some drawbacks.26 Facebook statistics show an average of
about 130 friends per user, and even higher for people of college age,
particularly in the United States. That is quite a lot of “friends,” and the
sheer volume brings into question what people actually mean when
they talk about friendship on a site such as Facebook. “Friending” new
people is one of the most common activities on this site, and the result,
for many users, is a kind of popularity competition rather than a
meaningful network.
How do observers rate profiles with larger friendship networks? In
this study, observers viewed one of five Facebook mock-ups that
differed only in the number of friends, and then were asked to rate
the profile owners on social attractiveness, physical attractiveness,
and extraversion. The ratings on social and physical attractiveness
peaked for people who had about 300 friends, but then dropped off
as the number of friends increased. The observers thought people with
about 500 friends were the most extraverted but not the most physic-
ally attractive or likable.
43
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

The Company We Keep
The sheer volume of friends has its effects on the impression, but the
nature of social networking adds more residues from the company
we keep. One finding, for example, is that people tend to perceive
profile owners whose wall posts include very good-looking friends as
more attractive. Having attractive friends who post comments on
your wall will make you seem more attractive yourself.
What friends actually say on your wall can also add behavioral
residues, for good or bad. I recall receiving an email from someone
in Hong Kong that was rather formal and polite, so the impression
he made was conscientious and competent, if a bit aloof. When
I saw his social network profile, however, the impression changed.
Wall posts and images of his friends suggested an avid partier with
many young friends posting about late night revelry and morning
hangovers.
In some ways, behavioral residues that are not really under the
profile owner’s control could weigh more heavily for the impression
and carry more warrant value. Walther and his colleagues took a look
at this possibility in an experiment in which they once again used
mock-up Facebook profiles.27 Some of the profiles included negative or
positive comments in the wall posts that didn’t quite match what the
profile owner was attempting to project in the “About me” section. For
example, in one mock-up, the “About me” section includes: “Just
hangin out . . . getting better looking everyday.” But a wall post from
a friend that strikes a discordant note reads, “I’m so sorry things didn’t
work out with that blind date you went on, who knew he would turn
out to be so shallow.”
How do observers react to these two different behavioral residues,
one generated by the profile owner and the other generated by
a friend? It turns out the friends’ wall posts had a significant effect
on the impression when it seemed to contradict what the profile
owner was trying to project. Observers judged the profile owners
most attractive when the wall poster made some very positive com-
ment about the owner’s looks, even though the profile owner’s
“About me” statements suggested the owner didn’t think of him- or
herself as so good looking. In contrast, the profile owners who were
touting their good looks in the “About me” section, but had wall
postings that didn’t quite match that viewpoint, were judged least
attractive.
44
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Which Cues Are the Best Predictors?
We can see that people are very quickly forming impressions of you
from your social networking profile. Looking at the Big Five personal-
ity traits, it is clear that people are drawing on some cues that are
valid.28 To judge extraversion, for instance, observers tend to rely on
the number of friends and on photos that show the profile owner with
friends rather than alone. As we saw earlier, impressions based on the
number of friends become complicated when the network is huge, but
that residue is a valid one to predict extraversion for lower numbers.
A friendly smile in the profile photo is also a reasonably good diagnos-
tic that predicts agreeableness, and people are using that cue correctly.
For openness to experience, observers correctly rely on the person’s
broad interests in books, music, art, or other areas.
However, some cues that could be useful are overlooked, while
others are used too much but aren’t very accurate or helpful. One
example of an overlooked cue is a photo of the profile owner alone,
rather than in a social setting. That cue is associated with more open-
ness to experience, but observers tend to ignore it. Another is the way
the profile user talks about family, and includes more family photos.
That is correlated with conscientiousness, but again, observers don’t
pick up on those cues.
Some cues are misleading, though observers mistakenly rely on
them to come to inaccurate judgments. For example, that attractive-
ness halo effect and our cognitive miserliness lead us to judge someone
with an attractive photo as warmer and more agreeable. That is a
mistake. Observers also tend to judge a profile owner as more neurotic
simply because he or she doesn’t use Facebook that often and hasn’t
uploaded many photos. That cue can be misleading as well. Neuroti-
cism is actually hard to evaluate from any cues on these sites, so it’s
best to reserve judgment.
Managing Impressions for Multiple Audiences: The Collapsing Context
Most of the time, you can see your audience when you manage your
impression in a face-to-face setting. Knowing who is watching and
listening, you can tailor your self-presentation to just that individual
or group. You also get quick feedback from your audience, perhaps in
the form of an arched brow or approving nod. Online, however, the
audience is a shifty concept, sometimes only imagined, and much
more difficult to pin down.
45
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

Facebook was initially created as a social network for college stu-
dents who could connect with a network that included their friends –
mainly fellow students at the same college. But that limitation has
long since been abandoned in favor of more open access, and now
networks include family members, distant acquaintances, friends of
friends, work colleagues, high school classmates, or even strangers who
happen to share interests. A wall posting and photo from a friend who
attended a party with you last night might not be exactly what you’d
like your grandmother or employer to see. This phenomenon is called
context collapse as multiple audiences merge in ways that make it
much more difficult to manage an “authentic” impression.
The challenge escalates as more services link to the social network
frameworks
that
specifically
encourage
spontaneous
sharing
of
photos, updates, and location. For instance, someone with an account
on Foursquare might “check in” when she reaches the house where a
big party is underway and add a comment about the event. The host’s
next door neighbor follows the guest on Twitter and sees the post on
her Twitter account. But the neighbor wasn’t invited.
How do people navigate the collapsing audiences? Some create
separate accounts on different social networking sites and then try to
build more homogeneous audiences – just family, for example, or just
professional colleagues. Many people create one account on a socially
oriented network to present the social self, but then also create
another account on LinkedIn to present a more professional slant.
People are also opting for a “lowest common denominator”
approach in which the self-presentation is watered down to avoid
offending anyone in any of the overlapping audiences. This is espe-
cially true for those whose social network already includes a mixed
audience.
Some sites support fairly fine-grained segregation of the audience,
so that a user might designate different people as “close friends,”
“friends,” “family,” “aquaintances,” “colleagues,” or other categories.
A “restricted” category might be used for people you add as a friend
(perhaps they requested it), but with whom you don’t want to share
anything except information intended for the general public – a boss,
for example. Although people are notified when you add them to the
network, they would likely be unaware of the category you chose for
them. This kind of technological segregation of an audience can be
very awkward to manage. Imagine, for instance, enjoying lunch with a
“close friend” and a “friend.” Your close friend might remark on the
46
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

hilarious photo you posted, not realizing how you segregated your
audience and that the “friend” didn’t see it.
One might argue that if someone is truly presenting the real,
authentic self, it should not matter who the audience is or whether
the context is collapsing around us. Talking about the audience, some
Twitter users discount the notion, preferring to emphasize a more
consistent and honest self-presentation regardless of who is listening:29
As an individual (not org or corp) it’s worth it 2 me 2 lose followers
2 maintain the wholeness/integrity of who/ what/how I tweet.
when I tweet, I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately. Pure expression of
my heart
But human beings don’t have just one “self,” and what constitutes that
“self” changes depending on who we’re interacting with and the con-
text of the interaction. With some we are, and should be, more
reserved about self-disclosure, and with others, we might interact in
more personal ways. The strategies people use to manage these mul-
tiple online audiences on social networks are evolving; a few users,
perhaps in exhaustion, just call it quits and delete their accounts.
ARE WE BECOMING MORE NARCISSISTIC?
Managing an online persona usually means spending a fair amount of
time selecting and editing photos, crafting an online profile, adding
status updates, and commenting on other people’s posts. Is social net-
working and the very nature of the online world drawing out more
narcissistic tendencies?
Dimensions of Narcissism
Narcissism, a term coined by Sigmund Freud from the Greek legend of
Narcissus, describes the ultimate “about me” psychological trait.
People with high narcissism tend toward arrogance and a grandiose
sense of self-importance. Other characteristics include exhibitionism, a
preoccupation with success and power, a belief that they are special
and entitled to favorable treatment, and a need for frequent and
excessive admiration. Narcissism is also related to a lack of empathy.
Envy of others is not uncommon, nor is the belief that others must be
envious of him or her.
47
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

This narcissistic individual can also be high in self-monitoring,
constantly attuned to the way others are reacting in order to better
manage the self-presentation. An important goal is exploitation –
taking advantage of other people to achieve one’s own ends. This
particular characteristic can lead other people to like the narcissist on
first meeting, but the favorable impression can fade quickly. Narcissists
tend to have few close friends, and instead make many acquaintances
who add to the size of an admiring audience.
Narcissism becomes a personality disorder when these tendencies
become extreme and lead to significant impairment in personality
functioning or in interpersonal relationships. The disorder itself is
not very common, but most people show some dimensions of narcis-
sistic behavior on occasion.
The Narcissist’s Online Stage
The online stage offers many tempting opportunities for people with
narcissistic tendencies, ones that are not as easy to exploit in face-to-
face settings. For example, people have considerable control over the
way they present their online persona, and narcissists can use this
control for self-promotion and attention getting. In one study, profile
owners were assessed on their levels of narcissism and then asked
about their motivations for choosing the personal picture that
appeared on their Facebook profile. People high on the narcissism scale
were more likely to say they chose the picture because it emphasized
their attractiveness or their unique personality.30
Another attraction for narcissists in the online world is the ability
to collect a large audience of acquaintances and inundate them with
updates, on the assumption that people will be intensely interested in
whatever they have to say. In another study, subjects completed an
inventory to assess levels of narcissism and then reported on their
social networking activity. People high on the narcissism scale empha-
sized the importance of getting to know as many people as possible
online, and they reported having a larger friend count compared with
people with low narcissism scores.31 The narcissists were more likely to
believe that their online friends were interested in what they were
doing and wanted to hear updates.
Objective coding of what actually is happening on the social
networking sites of narcissists confirms that link. Researchers obtained
narcissism scores for 129 Facebook users and then asked some
48
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

independent observers to take a look at the site and obtain a rating of
the amount of social activity, derived from the number of friends and
wall posts. People with higher narcissism scores did indeed show
higher levels of social activity. The observers also rated the content
of the narcissists’ self-descriptions and photos to be more self-
promotional in nature.32
Interestingly, observers can pick up on some of the behavioral
residues that narcissists leave on their social networking sites, and
judge the owner’s personality at least somewhat accurately. In that
same study, observers judged the owners to be more narcissistic when
they spotted high levels of social activity, very attractive photos of the
owner, and more self-promotional content. But as we discussed earlier,
observers sometimes rely on cues that are not good predictors. Obser-
vers rated people who included provocative pictures and a lot of
information about themselves in their profile sections as more narcis-
sistic, but those factors weren’t actually related to the owner’s level of
narcissism.
The online world offers narcissists intriguing new venues, and the
research indicates they take good advantage of many of them. But are
these venues actually promoting more narcissism? Some argue that
the people who use these sites belong to a generation that already feels
quite self-important and entitled.
A Narcissism Epidemic?
Jean Twenge and her colleagues point to a drastic rise in narcissism
among the so-called millennial generation – people born after 1980.
Analysis of surveys of college students from 1979 to 2006 shows that
narcissism scores rise dramatically for the millennials compared with
previous generations, and they propose that parenting styles, a celeb-
rity culture, the self-esteem movement, and the Internet all contribute
to this trend.33
Twenge’s analysis is controversial, and some argue that the data she
draws on is flawed, partly because it comes mainly from students at
research universities rather than cross sections of the population. Her
findings also rely heavily on the Narcissistic Personality Inventory,
which includes some subscales that measure characteristics that are
actually desirable ones, such as assertiveness. Longitudinal studies
are often fraught with challenges when it comes to interpretation
because so many variables can influence the results. The student
49
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

samples surveyed in the 1970s and 2000s might differ in various ways,
such as in mean income or gender composition, in addition to their
exposure to different parenting styles and their Internet access.
Nevertheless, the hypothesis that generations differ with respect to
their sense of self-importance and entitlement is an intriguing one that
demands a closer look. If narcissism is especially high in the first
generation to grow up with the Internet, and the first that could snap
selfies and instantly share them on Instagram, could features of the
online environment have something to do with it?
Do Online Environments Promote Narcissism?
A key theme in this book is that online environments have the power
to affect and shape human behavior in both positive and negative
ways. Maintaining a social networking site or personal web page
strongly encourages a focus on the self. Just completing a profile is
an exercise in self-absorption. On joining Google+, for instance, you
confront endless calls to self-focused action, such as these:
▪Snap a photo (or upload an image)
▪Add people you know (with suggestions from contact lists)
▪Follow things you love (celebrities, photographers, automobile
companies, health sites, etc.)
▪Be awesome
▪Keep your image fresh
▪Where have you gone to school?
▪You might be lonely . . . Add more people
Facebook’s prompts are equally focused on self with sections called
About You, Favorite Quotes, and Places You’ve Lived. . Other sections
prompt users to identify movies they’ve watched, want to watch, or
like, and people can add the same information for TV shows, music,
books, and sports teams. The Places section offers an interactive map to
upload your vacation photos, and subtly brag about all your travel
adventures. And not least, every time you log into Facebook, the
prompt reads “What’s on your mind?,” suggesting that your audience
is eagerly awaiting the answer.
Just reading and responding to the prompts promotes self-absorption
and an inflated sense of uniqueness and importance, all characteristic of
narcissism. A series of experiments with undergraduates who had
50
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

already created profiles demonstrated this effect experimentally.34 In
the first experiment, Myspace users came to the lab and were then
randomly assigned to the treatment or control groups. Subjects in the
treatment group spent 15 minutes making edits to their Myspace page,
while the control group spent that time tracing routes on campus using
Google maps. After the 15 minutes were up, the Myspace page editors
answered some questions about their pages, such as how many friends
had viewed it and how well the images express who they are, while
the control group answered innocuous questions about map routes.
All the students then completed the Narcissistic Personality Inventory.
One finding from this study was that students with higher narcissism
scores were also more likely to report a higher number of Myspace
friends and to predict more page views by those friends. As one might
predict, narcissists strive for a large audience.
But the most intriguing finding involved the differences between
the students in the treatment and control groups on narcissism scores.
Fifteen minutes spent focusing on one’s online profile may not seem
like a lot of time, but those students showed significantly higher scores
on the narcissism scales compared with control students. For instance,
they were more likely to endorse statements such as “I like to be the
center of attention” and “Everybody likes to hear my stories.”
That just 15 minutes spent tinkering with one’s profile could affect
narcissism scores is remarkable. This is especially true given that
narcissism is considered a trait, one that is relatively stable and not
particularly malleable over short durations. One might conclude from
this study that we have our answer and it is yes, the online environ-
ment of social networking does promote narcissism. But the picture
becomes more complicated when we look at the second experiment,
which was an attempt to replicate the Myspace findings for Facebook
users.
Once again, undergraduates who already had a Facebook profile
came to the lab, and were randomly assigned to the treatment and
control groups. In the treatment group, the students edited their
page for 15 minutes, and the control group did the Google maps task.
This time, the subjects also completed a short inventory to assess self-
esteem, in addition to the narcissism inventory.
As before, students with higher narcissism scores who spent that
time editing their profile reported a larger number of Facebook friends
and more page views. But the effects of the 15 minute editing session
were rather different in this experiment compared with the one
51
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

involving Myspace users. Facebook page editors did not show an
increase in narcissism compared with the control group, but they did
show an increase in self-esteem. Compared with the control group, the
students who spent time editing their Facebook page were more likely
to agree with statements such as “I feel that I have a number of good
qualities” and “On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.”
What might account for the difference? One might argue that
heightened self-esteem is one characteristic of narcissism, so the two
social networking sites might be promoting different aspects of that
trait. Another possibility is that Myspace emphasizes self-promotion
as the central feature, and some users have even achieved fame
and celebrity status. But Facebook emphasizes a combination of self-
presentation and social connection, stressing ties with family and
friends rather than a broader public stage. Instead of tweaking their
About me section, the Facebook page editors might have been looking
around on their site to see what others were up to and thinking about
new comments to add to their friends’ posts.
In any case, the study suggests that subtle differences in online
environments can have varying effects on human behavior, and that
should come as no surprise. People also actively choose certain online
venues because they believe the environment better matches what
they hope to accomplish. For narcissists, different online environ-
ments can serve different purposes, and their features can be tapped
to express different aspects of narcissism. For instance, Twitter can
become a technologically augmented “megaphone” that people who
lean in the narcissistic direction can use to amplify their cries of
superiority, but that venue is not a great place to feature attractive,
self-enhancing, self-promoting photos. Facebook offers a better envir-
onment for that kind of preoccupation.
Another important element in interpreting studies such as this one
is the speed of change and the fickle nature of users – especially youth.
Social networking is a moving target, with shifting populations.
Myspace, for instance, lost many of its users to other social networking
sites many years ago, although it still maintains a sizable user base.
Facebook fatigue is also underway, as younger users drift away and
focus more on Twitter.35
In an online debate about social media and narcissism,36 Jean
Twenge thought it might be at least one of the causes of what she
and her colleagues call an “epidemic of narcissism.” Bruce McKinney,
whose own research initially suggested that frequent Facebook use
52
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

was not associated with narcissism, wrote that he didn’t think he’d get
the same result a year later. He writes, “Either the way of communi-
cating has changed significantly or we have evolved into a state of
narcissism that would shock any psychologist.” Keith Hampton at
Rutgers was more optimistic, pointing out that narcissism declines
with age, and that most people are using Facebook to connect rather
than promote themselves. Actor Joe Holt thinks that Facebook isn’t
the problem and that the real problem is “our need to validate our-
selves with outside approval.”
Although the actor makes a good point, from a psychological perspec-
tive, we have never had quite the stage we have now to seek that
validation or the tools to tweak our presentation. In addition, the incom-
ing stream of social feedback, from the positive reinforcement that
happens when someone retweets your tweet, to the numerical count
of “likes” under your post, offers quantitative metrics about the outside
approval that are hard to ignore. While these online environments con-
tinue to change, they will certainly attract narcissists who can take
advantage of their special features. They will also have potent effects
on our behavior, and promoting narcissism may be one of them.
MAKING THE KEYBOARD WORK HARDER
The desire to manage our impression is a fundamental human charac-
teristic that does not disappear just because we now do these things on
the Internet. The difference is that we are not expert at using the cues
at hand, nor are we sure how to manage our own self-presentations.
This keyboard, for example, can be a rascal when it comes to the
nuances of human communication. The caps lock key is, inexplicably,
much too large considering how rarely we use it. If I slip and press it by
mistake, my colleagues might think I AM SHOUTING AT THEM.
The colon and right parenthesis :) are far harder to locate, but even
this blunt socioemotional instrument can add a warmer and friendlier
tone to certain kinds of messages.
The smartphone’s tiny touchscreen introduces another communi-
cation tool that can bedevil. Apple helpfully adds “Sent from my
iPhone” to outgoing emails, perhaps as a way to end with an automat-
ically generated apology for blunders and bluntness. Not wanting
corporate ads tacked on to my messages, I looked up how to change
that. But then I decided to leave it alone because it does help explain
clumsiness.
53
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

On the Internet, we are struggling with an odd set of tools and
pushing them as hard as we can. We humans are both set in our ways
and amazingly adaptable, and even with more than two decades of
experience, we are still learning some painful and awkward lessons
about impression formation online. Perhaps the “interaction rituals”
that Goffman described will stabilize on the net and the business of
forming impressions will become more predictable, reliable, and famil-
iar, and less prone to misperceptions.
That online acquaintance I mentioned earlier sent me a few more
messages during the next two years, none of which did much to
improve the first impression he had made. But I did not want to make
the fundamental attribution error. We attribute other people’s rude
behavior to their basic natures, to their boorishness. When we, ourselves,
do something bad, we blame the situation. IfI SHOUT online, it is because
that caps lock key is so wretchedly misplaced by hardware manufactur-
ers. If a stranger does it, I conclude that the person is unnecessarily brash.
I finally ran into my email acquaintance at a conference and
learned how mistaken my initial impressions were. His contagious
smile instantly belied the cool and arrogant image he had projected
at first. Somehow, I was not surprised.
NOTES
1 Carroll, D. (2012). United breaks guitars: The power of one voice in the age of
social media. Carlsbad, CA: Hay House.
2 Jones, E. E., & Pittman, T. S. (1982). Toward a general theory of strategic self-
presentation. In J. M. Sulls (Ed.), Psychological perspectives on the self. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
3 Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
4 Kuznekoff, J. H. (2012). Comparing impression management strategies. In
C. Cunningham (Ed.), Social networking and impression management: Self-
presentation in the digital age. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
5 Rosenbaum, J. E., Johnson, B. K., Stepman, P. A., & Nuijten, K. C. M. (2012).
“Looking the part” and “staying true”: Balancing impression management on
Facebook. In C. Cunningham (Ed.), Social networking and impression manage-
ment: Self-presentation in the digital age. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
6 Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality. The Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 41 (3), 258–290. doi:10.1037/h0055756
7 Their extensive studies appear in one of the earliest books on computer-
mediated communication: Hiltz, S. R., & Turoff, M. (1978). The network nation:
Human communication via computer. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
These researchers used a standard system to analyze what people were
saying, or typing, developed earlier by Robert Bales. It included categories
such as “shows solidarity,” “releases tension,” “agrees,” “gives suggestion,”
54
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

“gives opinion,” “asks for orientation,” “disagrees,” and “shows antagonism.”
(R. F. Bales [1950]. A set of categories for the analysis of small group inter-
action. American Sociological Review, 15, 257–263.)
8 Fuller, R. (1996). Human–computer–human interaction: How computers
affect interpersonal communication. In D. L. Day & D. K. Kovacks (Eds.),
Computers, communication and mental models (pp. 11–14). Philadelphia, PA:
Taylor & Francis.
9 Tossell, C. C., Kortum, P., Shepard, C., Barg-Walkow, L. H., Rahmati, A., &
Zhong, L. (2012). A longitudinal study of emoticon use in text messaging
from
smartphones.
Computers
in
Human
Behavior,
28 (2),
659–663.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.11.012
10 Jibril, T. A., & Abdullah, M. H. (2013). Relevance of emoticons in computer-
mediated communication contexts: An overview. Asian Social Science, 9 (4),
201–207. doi:10.5539/ass.v9n4p201
11 Byron, K., & Baldridge, D. C. (2007). E-mail recipients’ impressions of senders’
likability. Journal of Business Communication, 44 (2), 137–160.
12 Kalyanaraman, S., & Ivory, J. (2006). The face of online information process-
ing: Effects of emoticons on impression formation, affect, and cognition in
chat transcripts. In Conference Papers – International Communication Associ-
ation (pp. 1–8). International Communication Association. Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=uf
h&AN=27204666&site=ehost-live&scope=site
13 Derks, D., Bos, A. E. R., & Grumbkow, J. von. (2008). Emoticons and online
message interpretation. Social Science Computer Review, 26 (3), 379–388.
doi:10.1177/0894439307311611
14 Stampler, L. (2014, January 3). Men, if this data proves women hate emoti-
cons, will you finally stop sending them? Time. Retrieved from http://news
feed.time.com/2014/01/03/men-if-this-data-proves-women-hate-emoticons-
will-you-finally-stop-sending-them/
15 Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
16 Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008). How extraverted is honey.
bunny77@hotmail.de? Inferring personality from e-mail addresses. Journal
of Research in Personality, 42 (4), 1116–1122. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.02.001
17 Brunswik, E. (1956). Perception and the representative design of psychological
experiments (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
18 Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a
cue: Personality judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 82 (3), 379–398.
19 Wynn, E., & Katz, J. E. (1997). Hyperbole over cyberspace: Self-presentation
and social boundaries in Internet home pages and discourse. Information
Society, 13 (4), 297–327.
20 Vazire, S., & Gosling, S. D. (2004). E-perception: Personality impressions
based on personal websites. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87 (1), 123–132. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.1.123
21 Wilson, R. E., Gosling, S. D., & Graham, L. T. (2012). A review of Facebook
research in the social sciences. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7 (3),
203–220. doi:10.1177/1745691612442904
22 Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual process model of impression formation. In
T. K. Srull & R. S. J. Wyer (Eds.), A dual process model of impression formation
(pp. 1–36). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
55
YOUR ONLINE PERSONA: IMPRESSION FORMATION

23 Wang, S., Moon, S., Kwon, K., Evans, C., & Stefanone, M. (2009). Better without
face? Gender difference in visual cue use when initiating friendship on
Facebook. Conference Papers – International Communication Association, 1–43.
24 Seidman, G., & Miller, O. S. (2013). Effects of gender and physical attractive-
ness on visual attention to Facebook profiles. CyberPsychology, Behavior and
Social Networking, 16 (1), 20–24. doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0305
25 Gosling, S. D., Augustine, A. A., Vazire, S., Holtzman, N., & Gaddis, S. (2011).
Manifestations of personality in online social networks: Self-reported Face-
book-related behaviors and observable profile information. CyberPsychol-
ogy, Behavior and Social Networking, 14 (9), 483–488. doi:10.1089/cyber.
2010.0087
26 Tong, S. T., Van Der Heide, B., Langwell, L., & Walther, J. B. (2008). Too much
of a good thing? The relationship between number of friends and interper-
sonal impressions on Facebook. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion, 13 (3), 531–549. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2008.00409.x
27 Walther, J. B., Heide, B. V. D., Hamel, L. M., & Shulman, H. C. (2009). Self-
generated versus other-generated statements and impressions in computer-
mediated communication: A test of warranting theory using Facebook.
Communication Research, 36(2), 229–253. doi:10.1177/0093650208330251
28 Hall, J. A., & Pennington, N. (2012). What you can really know about
someone from their Facebook profile (and where you should look to find
out). In C. Cunningham (Ed.), Social networking and impression management:
Self-presentation in the digital age. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
29 Marwick, A. E., & boyd, d. (2011). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately:
Twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience. New Media
and Society, 13 (1), 114–133. doi:10.1177/1461444810365313
30 Kapidzic, S. (2013). Narcissism as a predictor of motivations behind Face-
book profile picture selection. CyberPsychology, Behavior and Social Network-
ing, 16 (1), 14–19. doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0143
31 Bergman, S. M., Fearrington, M. E., Davenport, S. W., & Bergman, J. Z. (2011).
Millennials, narcissism, and social networking: What narcissists do on
social networking sites and why. Personality and Individual Differences,
50 (5), 706–711. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.12.022
32 Buffardi, L. E., & Campbell, W. K. (2008). Narcissism and social networking
web sites. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34 (10), 1303–1314.
doi:10.1177/0146167208320061
33 Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2009). The narcissism epidemic: Living in
the age of entitlement. New York, NY: Free Press.
34 Gentile, B., Twenge, J. M., Freeman, E. C., & Campbell, W. K. (2012). The effect
of social networking websites on positive self-views: An experimental
investigation. Computers in Human Behavior, 28 (5), 1929–1933. doi:10.1016/
j.chb.2012.05.012
35 Rainie, L., Smith, A., & Duggan, M. (2013). Coming and going on Facebook. Pew
Research Center. Retrieved from www.pewinternet.org/2013/02/05/com
ing-and-going-on-facebook/
36 Facebook and Narcissism – Room for Debate (September 23, 2013). The New
York Times. Retrieved February 13, 2014, from www.nytimes.com/roomfor
debate/2013/09/23/facebook-and-narcissism
56
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

3
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET
Homo sapiens is a social creature, and we seek the companionship and
support of others throughout life. Indeed, Aristotle opined that a
person who did not do that was either a beast or a god. But while
human groups have always existed, the Internet has not, and its
effects on group dynamics are profound. It seems trite to even point
this out, but the net is a social space that enables entirely new kinds of
groups.
Within social networks, we create our own groups with ourselves
in the center. On Twitter, we follow and are followed, fluidly joining
discussions on trending topics and adding our two cents in the form
of 140 characters or less. On Google Hangouts, we can join live,
impromptu, multimedia group discussions, with webcam images of
all the group members flashing across the screen, and text messages
scrolling on the smartphone.
But exchanging text messages or status updates, or even viewing
another’s webcam image, is not the same as being in the same physical
space with other people where you share the same sights, smells,
sounds, and surprises. How exactly are online environments different
for groups and how do the differences affect group dynamics?
THE EMERGENCE OF A GROUP, OFFLINE AND ONLINE
Defining the term “group” is difficult enough without prefacing it
with the even more elusive adjective “virtual.” One succinct definition
states that a group is a collection of two or more people who are
interacting with and influencing one another. The definition seems
clear and satisfying enough until you begin to think of humans on
57

elevators, in theaters, or in the same subway car. Though interaction
and influence are apparent in tightly knit work and social groups, they
may be less obvious in elevator passengers, at least until the car jerks to
a sudden stop between floors. The amount of interaction among
people
who
are
in
physical
proximity
can
vary
dramatically
depending on the circumstances, and one small change in the environ-
ment could quickly turn a collection of individuals into something
that fits neatly into the traditional definition for the word “group.”
Raising the bar somewhat leads us to groups in which members
identify with the group, show commitment and loyalty, and partici-
pate in group activities. Offline, group membership can have powerful
effects on human behavior. People not only clap for their groups and
cheer them on, they die for them, and sometimes kill for them. The
bond grows strongest when group demands are high, membership is
difficult to achieve, and group membership confers high status. The
pledging process for sororities and fraternities, for example, which can
include hazing, both weeds out people with low commitment and
promotes strong attachment to the group for those who persist, partly
through cognitive dissonance. If you go through the challenging pro-
cess, you must really want to be part of that group. The result is a
tightly knit, cohesive group that helps to shape the social identity of
its members.
Can Cohesive Groups Emerge Online?
In the Internet’s infancy, skeptics wondered whether such cohesive
groups could really emerge at all in a computer-mediated communi-
cation (CMC) environment. Some believed that the lack of the usual
social cues and the transitory nature of so many online interactions
would make it unlikely that genuine and satisfying groups could
develop.
Leaving aside the social networks in which groups arise mainly
from offline contacts, virtual groups can certainly come and go with
alarming speed. Scrolling through Yahoo! Groups, for example, you
will see many groups that appeared to capture the interest of quite a
few participants for a while, but then they die out. A Yahoo! group
for model railroad aficionados shows 219 members, and the logs
reveal lively conversations in the early 2000s. Although those
members were still subscribed, none of them posted any messages
for years.
58
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

If you do post a message to one of these fossils, you might receive a
response from some of the participants who say they forgot that they
were even subscribed, and there hasn’t been any activity in the group
for ages. Many never draw more than the occasional curious visitor
who looks around, finds nothing going on, and leaves. The long list
of abandoned groups suggests rows of cafes and clubs whose disap-
pointed owners naively believed would become vibrant watering
holes, but whose chairs and tables remain empty.
Social Identity and “Groupness”
Despite the ephemeral and fragile nature of so many groups on the
Internet, there is evidence that a very strong sense of group cohesion –
of “groupness” – does emerge regularly. Joan Korenman and Nancy
Wyatt attempted to untangle some of the underlying variables that
contribute to cohesive online groups by investigating the patterns of
participation and the attitudes of the participants on a mailing list
called WMST-L.1 The mailing list is an unmoderated forum for people
involved in women’s studies from an academic standpoint, and it
includes teachers, researchers, librarians, program administrators, and
others interested in the topic. As in most discussion forums, a few
people take center stage and hold the vehement discussions, while
others watch (or lurk), making only rare comments.
Participants responded to a survey designed to see how much
“groupness” was really present. In answer to a question about what
was satisfying and useful about the group, “information” was most
often mentioned, but many also mentioned a “sense of community”
and “discussion of personal experience.” Based on an analysis of the
messages themselves, this mailing list appears relatively free of
“flames” and other kinds of antagonistic posts, although disagreement
and discussion about sensitive issues were common. Apparently the
group members found this environment to be a worthwhile and
welcoming place to discuss personal issues, pointing to that elusive
but very real sense of “groupness.”
Another demonstration of emerging group identity comes from
a study on Reddit, a social news site where participants, called “Reddi-
tors,” can upload news stories and share comments about them
with one another. People also create subgroups that narrow down
the topic by location or by subject matter. In a subgroup called “Ask
Me Anything,” lively discussions with celebrities are not uncommon.
59
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

The late Robin Williams, for instance, seemed to very much enjoy his
time on a virtual chat session. Here is a brief sample of the more than
9,000 comments:2
Kakoose:
On a scale of 1–10, how scared are you
when you’re around [Jack] Nicholson?
RobinWilliamsHere:
It’s more fascinated than scared. He
says things that even Buddha goes
“. . . what did that mean?”
NoFap_Express:
This is amazing, your persona totally
comes through even on reddit.
Do Redditors feel like a community, with a shared group identity? On a
survey with questions such as “I feel a bond with this online group” and
“I have a lot in common with the average member of this online
group,” many subjects answered in the affirmative. Some indicated that
they felt extremely bonded with the Reddit community, reporting
very high levels of commitment and emotional attachment.3
Just as real-life groups vary a great deal, virtual groups can be of many
different types. Facebook and other social networks consist primarily
of people who already know each other and are using the net as a way
to keep in touch and share ideas between face-to-face meetings. Other
virtual groups might draw together people with common interests
who do not know each other in person. Time and circumstances
permitting, some of these people might eventually meet in real life at
professional meetings or social gatherings. The people on the WMST-L
mailing list might run into one another this way. Surprises are inevit-
able as the impression you formed from the individual’s online persona
is suddenly enriched by face-to-face contact.
On the far end of the spectrum are the zero-history virtual groups
whose members have never met in person when the group is formed.
Their members may also have no real expectation of ever meeting in
real life. These are the ones in which any sense of “groupness,” if it is to
emerge at all, must arise from the dynamics of online communication.
We know from decades of social science research that just the pres-
ence of other people affects the way we behave, for better or worse,
even when they are strangers and we might never see them again. Let’s
now see how some of these influences work in real life, and then
examine how they unfold online, beginning with some classic studies
on conformity.
60
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

CONFORMITY
That madcap producer Allen Funt once orchestrated a Candid Camera
segment called “Face the Rear,” in which he planted several confeder-
ates on an elevator. All of them faced the back of the car rather than
the front, and none cracked so much as a smirk. The unsuspecting
“star” of the video hopped on the car and looked about with a puzzled
expression. Confronted with a unanimous, silent, and serious-looking
group that seemed to be following a strict rule about which direction
to face, the subject turned and faced the rear as well. On a subtle cue,
the confederates turned to the left, and the “star” did the same. On
another cue, the group removed their hats, and again, the subject
followed suit. Though the naive Candid Camera subject looked anx-
ious and uncomfortable, he readily conformed rather than break rank
with the odd group choices.
The Asch Experiments
Social psychologist Solomon Asch wondered how deep the tendency to
conform actually goes. Would, for example, people under group pres-
sure disregard or at least question the information they receive through
their sensory systems? In a pioneering research program, he brought
subjects into the laboratory to sit with a group of four other people and
make perceptual judgments. The experimenter held up a card with one
vertical line on the left side and three other vertical lines labeled
A through C on the right. One by one, each person in the group was
asked which of the three lines is closest in length to the line on the left.
The correct answer on each of the cards was obvious to anyone not
legally blind, but the four other people in the room were not really
subjects at all. They were confederates of the experimenter, instructed
to give the same wrong answer on certain turns. Like the Candid
Camera star, the real subject of the experiment faced a troubling situ-
ation. His turn was always last, so one after another, he heard each
person insist that an obviously incorrect answer was the correct one.
Should he go with his own senses, even though everyone in the room
thought differently? To even Asch’s surprise, the real subjects went
along with the group more than one third of the time.4
A remarkable feature of this experiment was that there was no
particular punishment or consequence for disagreeing with the rest
of the subjects. The only pressure to conform came from within, and it
was even more startling than the conformity on the elevator because
61
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

the subjects had to deny their own sensory experience in order to go
along. Some probably began to doubt their own eyes because of this
subtle group pressure, while others may have remained privately
convinced that their senses were intact but chose to conform to the
group rather than risk group censure.
Conforming to an Online Group
More than thirty years later, a group of researchers tried to replicate
Asch’s original experiment using computers and an online environ-
ment.5 Five subjects were formed into a group, and each sat in front
of a microcomputer. The computers were arranged so that none of
the subjects could see the other screens, so they couldn’t tell what the
other subjects were typing. Subjects also couldn’t see one another
because the computer monitors were in the way.
Once the subjects were settled, the researchers went around to each
computer, saying that they were connecting it to a central network so
each person could see the judgments the others in the experiment
were making.
The network was a ruse and the computers were not actually
connected at all. After some more instructions about the length-
judging task, each subject was asked to enter a three-digit number that
would be used to “randomly assign” the order in which the subjects
would choose. This was another ruse; regardless of which number the
subjects chose, they all were assigned Station #5, the last in line.
Imagine watching the screen as all the other “subjects” enter the
same obviously wrong answer, one after another. When it is your turn,
you probably blink at the screen yourself, wondering what those
people are really looking at. In his face-to-face experiments, Asch
found that only 24 percent of his subjects made no errors at all and
just refused to conform to the group. But in this online version, 69 per-
cent of the subjects facing a computer screen made no errors. In the
CMC environment the tendency to conform was reduced.
Why Do People Conform?
People choose to conform to a group for a variety of reasons. They
may simply want to avoid rejection by other group members or to
earn their praise. This kind of conformity is called compliance because
it doesn’t involve any fundamental change in beliefs or attitudes.
62
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Research that extends the Asch findings, both online and offline,
shows that conformity drops to near zero if the subjects submit their
response in private rather than speaking (or typing) it publicly.
Another reason for conformity is that people rely on others for
information that could guide their behavior, especially in unclear or
confusing situations. In the quiz show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?,
contestants can choose to ask the audience for help if they are unsure
of the correct answer, and a graph displays the results. The contestant
often goes with the majority.
How does this kind of “audience” input affect behavior in online
communities? In a study of Swedish discussion groups, subjects com-
pleted a survey with multiple choice questions such as “What did
Alfred Nobel invent?” and “How far above sea level is Mount Everest?”
Half of the subjects also saw a graph showing how members of their
online community answered each question, but the graphs for several
questions were faked. For those, the researchers made it look as though
the majority of the online community was making a wrong choice.6
The subjects who saw these faked graphs were more likely to con-
form to what they believed was the group’s opinion, and this was
especially true for the more difficult questions. Like the contestant
on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, the subjects were crowdsourcing
the task in hopes that the crowd’s wisdom would shine through.
People also conform because they identify with the group and have
a desire to be similar to its members. As we saw earlier, people do
indeed identify with their online groups, defining themselves by their
social identities. In the study with the faked graphs, this identification
probably also contributed to the tendency to go along with the major-
ity of their online community members.
Cohesive groups also develop group norms, and online, this process
also unfolds somewhat differently.
GROUP NORMS
Groups need norms to function smoothly. Some might be very expli-
cit: “Let’s all get to every meeting on time.” Others will be much more
cryptic, and members may not even realize a norm exists until some-
one breaks it. It appears human beings develop norms even when
there is absolutely no need for them. Muzafer Sherif wondered if you
could watch group norms appear in a laboratory and conducted stud-
ies in the 1930s that showed how they emerge.7
63
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

The Sherif Experiments
Sitting in a dark room, a subject sees a tiny point of light some distance
away. The subject stares at it, and within a few moments, the light
seems to move erratically and then disappears. The subject is asked,
How far did the light move? The subject has no real way of knowing,
but might guess, “I think about 12 inches.”
For the next three days, the subject comes back to the lab, but
instead of sitting alone in the dark room, the subject is in the room
with two other subjects who made their own guesses the day before.
The first subject might report that the light jumped 4 inches. Now, the
subject who guessed 12 inches yesterday offers a lower number – 6
inches, perhaps. The third subject does the same – converging on a
value that is closer to the other estimates. By the third day, the subjects
in this group are all estimating about the same distance.
Clearly, a group norm emerged, though different groups converged
on different distances because there was no “correct” distance. In fact,
the light never moved at all. Sherif was cleverly relying on an optical
illusion called the autokinetic effect, in which we perceive movement
when a stationary point of light appears in a dark and featureless
room. The drive to converge on a group norm was strong, even though
there was no particular pressure to come to any consensus.
Online Norms
Online, norms also emerge, though the cues people use to establish
them are different. The norms that evolved for email, for instance, are
one example.
Linguistically, much email falls somewhere between a paper memo
and a phone call, even though it could have become something quite
different. We might have developed a much more formal style with
guidelines for placement of date, salutations, and closings, just as we
did for business letters and, for the most part, have adopted for faxes as
well. However, the original uses of email by the academic and research
community established the medium as less formal and more spontan-
eous. The rapid transmission of messages helped push it toward infor-
mality, and the informality led to the need for more socioemotional
content and lots of shortcuts in the form of abbreviations and simpli-
fied spellings. IMHO, BTW, ppl, and thx are all examples of email
conventions that are widely used and understood, but are almost
nonexistent in paper memos or letters. You might receive an email
64
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

with a more formal letter attached, but the email itself tends to follow
the informal style, showing how powerful the email convention
actually is.
An early study of email exchanged by college students showed how
their styles began conforming to a pattern regardless of the topic.8
Even those students who had never used email before learned the
norms quickly from one another and turned email into quasi-
conversation. Misspellings, punctuation errors and deviations, and
ungrammatical sentences were perfectly acceptable, even preferred.
Crude jokes, flirtations, puns, and sarcasm were all common. Any
student who might have chosen a more formal style would have
appeared rather out of step.
Norms for texting and platforms like Twitter continue to evolve.
For example, one study of 229,000,000 tweets from 2009 to 2012
found some intriguing changes. During that period, tweets began to
include fewer words, and the words that did appear became shorter.9
One possibility is a growing emphasis on efficiency, with more widely
understood abbreviations (Table 3.1). Although the tweets convey at
least as much actual content, they communicate more with less, or
at least with fewer keystrokes. The challenge of typing on smart-
phones may also have something to do with an efficiency norm.
Tweets often include shortened URLs to lengthy blog posts, images,
videos, or other material that wouldn’t fit in a tweet, so readers who
want more detail can find it.
Even though Twitter is a worldwide network, different groups
on Twitter are also adopting different norms.10 Not surprisingly, teens’
tweets differ from those of reporters and corporate public relations
managers, for example. Different social groups may use Twitter and
Table 3.1. Examples of Twitter shorthand
ABBREVIATION
SHORTHAND FOR:
b4
before
cld
could
idk
I don’t know
kk
kewl kewl (cool cool)
ab or abt
about
prt
please retweet
wtv
whatever
65
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

the hashtags in different ways as well, creating group norms that
contribute to group identity and cohesion.
Where Do Online Norms Come From?
Much like the norms that Sherif observed in his groups, online norms
can sometimes appear just because people are attending to one
another and converging on a behavioral pattern. The students’ email
norms, for example, seem to have emerged in this way. In many cases,
though, human beings simply attempt to adopt norms that closely
resemble what they would use in face-to-face settings, and translate
them as best they can in a way that works online.
For example, when journalists embrace new technologies, they
typically try to maintain journalistic norms that apply to print or
broadcast media. A study of journalists who began blogging found
that they tried to stick to their role as nonpartisan gatekeepers who
are supposed to draw public attention to important news, even
though the medium was dramatically different from a newspaper,
involving far more participation by regular readers.11 However, about
one quarter of the reporters strayed from the nonpartisan norm,
voicing their personal opinions on their blogs as they interacted with
the group.
Twitter has become the main social media platform for journalists
who consider it ideal for breaking news and for crowdsourcing infor-
mation gathering and fact checking. Here, they also try to maintain
traditional norms of objectivity and gatekeeping. But like the blogging
environment, Twitter appears to lead some journalists to editorialize,
which they are not supposed to do. One reporter commented:
We did have an instance of a reporter who frequently editorialized in his
tweets, which he would never do in his reporting. He was told to stop tweeting
until he got some additional training . . .12
Another example showing how norms transition from the offline
world to an online context comes from research on personal space
and the ways in which people manage interpersonal distance. In face-
to-face settings with strangers, Americans like to keep about four feet
of distance between themselves and another person. Arabic and
French people tend to prefer shorter distances compared with Scandi-
navians and the British. Gender also plays a role. Men tend to choose
66
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

larger distances when they interact with another person, particularly
if it is another man. Women tend to choose smaller distances when
interacting with other women.
Many classic studies in psychology show that people will work hard
to regulate psychological distance when crowded conditions make
their usual preferred distance impossible. They reduce eye contact,
for example, pointing their gaze well away from a nearby person.
On a crowded elevator, people stare intently at the floor numbers over
the door, or they look down at their smartphones.
Personal space has little meaning in many online environments,
but it is quite relevant in the three-dimensional virtual worlds such as
Second Life. Community members walk or fly their avatars around
the zones, and they can adjust their positions and the direction they
are gazing with the keyboard. Do people on Second Life adopt
the same kind of norms for personal space that they would use in
face-to-face settings? One study collected position information on
avatars in different zones who were interacting with one another over
a period of seven weeks. By taking snapshots of each interaction, the
researchers could also identify gender and whether or not the people
were talking to one another with the chat function or just standing
about.13
Just as in face-to-face settings, the personal distance between two
males who were interacting with one another was larger than it was
when the two avatars were both female. They also found that avatars
standing too close to one another tended to avoid eye contact – in the
sense that their avatars were facing at angles away from one another.
However, when the two people were holding a conversation, they
did show more “eye contact.” This conformity to the norms we bring
with us when we go online is especially intriguing because in Second
Life, you can’t just turn your head to look away. You have to use a
keyboard, mouse, or touchpad to turn your avatar.
Although norms clearly emerge in these online groups, the ability
of the group to pressure a wayward individual to conform is lessened.
Groups do find ways to encourage conformity to norms in online
environments, and enforce them when necessary.
The Sign on the Door
First timers in an elegant Michelin-starred French restaurant often
peer around the room, watching others to learn the acceptable
67
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

patterns of behavior. They observe how experienced patrons handle
the several forks, speak to the waiter, or hold their wine glasses.
Those undergraduates who had limited experience with email
learned the norms a different way, by engaging in the online version
of looking around to see what others are doing, much like Sherif’s
subjects did when they heard others estimating distances. Online
groups often go a step further, however, by posting a sign on
the door.
The sign for that mailing list on women’s studies called WMST-L,
for example, includes very explicit rules about what is appropriate
behavior, and what is not. Here are a few:
▪Do not send any attachments.
▪Do not send any warnings about viruses.
▪Do not send jokes.
▪Do not send petitions.
▪Put your name and email address at the end of every posting.
Guides that offer advice about netiquette are also widespread, and they
continue to evolve as the Internet develops. One early example is a
book first published in 1994 by Virginia Shea, sometimes called the
Miss Manners of the online world.14 She strongly encourages people
to adhere to the same standards of behavior that we would follow in
real life, although sometimes that is easier said than done.
Companies such as Pinterest or Twitter that offer online environ-
ments to support groups post their own signs on the door, often in
the form of the end-user license agreement, or terms of service. These
stretch to thousands of words, not just to convey community norms
but to establish the legal relationship between the company and
the user. Facebook, for instance, warns users that the company will
delete content that violates its standards and may suspend or cancel
accounts. Linden Labs, the corporate owner of the virtual world
Second Life, welcomes new users by setting out the “Big Six” behav-
iors that will lead to suspension or expulsion. These include some
that are common in many online environments, such as intolerant
speech and harassment. They also add some less obvious prohib-
itions, such as assault (pushing or shoving someone else’s avatar)
and disclosure (sharing personal information about your fellow
residents without their consent – including gender, religion, age,
marital status, race, sexual preference, alternate account names, and
real-world location).
68
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Apart from fairly standard and informative warnings such as “No
Parking,” “No Smoking,” or “Shoes and Shirt Required,” we rarely see
signs that so bluntly state the requirements for appropriate behavior
in real-life situations. Imagine going into a classroom and seeing a sign
that listed such explicit dos and don’ts:
▪No spitting or fighting.
▪Don’t sit on another person’s desk.
▪Don’t walk around the room during the lecture.
▪Don’t assault other students.
When you do see real-life signs that seem to grossly underestimate our
human ability to grasp social conventions appropriate to the group
setting, they are memorable. A tavern in rural Texas had conspicuous
signs posted that reminded patrons about acceptable behavior. Two
examples were “No Spitting” and “No Fighting.” In the men’s room, as
I learned from my husband on his return, there was another sign that
suggested the tavern owners had a sense of humor and were aware
they might be going a bit far with their written rules. The sign there
read: “Men: Do not eat the urinal cakes.”
The rules of behavior for face-to-face situations, from the board
room to the beach, are generally unwritten, but they are very exten-
sive. Our lifetime of experience within our own cultures gives each
of us ample time to build up knowledge about all these rules, and
the physical presence of others is generally enough to ensure conform-
ity when the rules seem to shift a bit or when we are in an unfamiliar
situation. We willingly watch what others do, note which fork they
use to pierce the shrimp, and face the rear of the elevator if we
determine that rearward positioning is the social convention.
The Internet, though, is a global environment with people from
many cultures, and not many ways to convey social rules. Stronger
measures are needed to get the job done, and the blunt sign on the
door is one example. Another example is the verbal reproach.
Handling Norm Violations: Arched Brows, Unfriending, and Trial by Twitter
If a group participant fails to read the sign or ignores the rules, group
members will escalate their pressure by simply raising a virtual eye-
brow, reminding the offender gently – or not so gently – that certain
behavior is not acceptable. In most cases, this arched brow is enough to
bring the person into line for cohesive groups.
69
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

In
an
early
study
of
these
conformity-inducing
reproaches,
researchers examined discussion groups on Usenet.15 Based on 300 of
these episodes, the researchers developed a taxonomy of the kinds of
conduct the group members objected to, and for which they would
issue reproaches to the offender. Flaming, harassment, or use of vulgar
language were high on the list. Others were peculiar to online settings.
One, for example, was a failure to type “spoiler alert!” if the message
contained details about a show’s ending. Group members who used
excessively long signatures or who forwarded any messages without
the sender’s consent all received reproaches.
The reproaches range from the mild correction to the truly vicious
attack on the offender. Some groups were particularly vocal about any
perceived violations, and all in all, reproach episodes made up about
15 percent of the network traffic during the period. Clearly, there are a
lot of mistakes to be made in online groups, and a lot of people eager to
tell you when you make them.
In a study of Facebook users, many implicitly understood and
widely shared norms emerged. For instance, they generally agreed that
updating your status too frequently is not appropriate and that overly
emotional or negative posts should be avoided. On Facebook and other
social networks, users have other options to deliver different kinds of
reproaches. One method is to unfollow norm violators so that their
posts don’t appear in the user’s News Feed. However, these “reproaches”
may go unnoticed by the violators, although they might begin to
suspect something is amiss. In extreme cases, the user can unfriend
the violator. One subject explained how he dealt with a violator who
really caused some damage:
One guy thought he was being funny and posted on my Wall. He was trying
to make some joke, but in it he was totally calling me out for being a racist . . .
so I deleted that, then deleted him.16
When the online group considers someone’s actions really egregious,
the group can wreak severe vengeance. A public relations executive at
a media company learned this lesson the hard way. Her Twitter
account had fewer than 500 followers when she tweeted about her
upcoming South Africa vacation. Just before boarding the plane from
London to Johannesburg, the executive sent a quick tweet to alert her
followers that she was on her way:
Going to Africa. Hope I don’t get AIDS. Just kidding. I’m white! 17
70
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

During the 12-hour flight, while the executive had no Internet access,
her comment became the tweet heard around the world as Twitter
users picked it up and harshly denounced it as racist and deeply
offensive. Once on the ground, she saw the avalanche of outrage and
found that her following had mushroomed into the thousands, and
they were combing through all her social media posts for more incrim-
inating evidence. She apologized profusely, although some people
interpreted the tweet differently, and not as a racist remark. One
suggested, “I think she was more mocking the aloofness white people
can have on this issue, not celebrating that aloofness.”18 But she still
lost her job as a result of what amounted to a trial by Twitter. She also
wisely deleted her Twitter account.
In Search of the Leviathan
Conforming to social conventions and adhering to laws that restrict
our freedoms are, from a philosophical perspective, things we do to
preserve our existence. We give up certain freedoms to earthly
authorities in order to live in a predictable and safe world, interacting
peaceably and fairly with our fellow humans. Thomas Hobbes pro-
posed the concept of the Leviathan, defined as “that mortal god,
to which we owe under the immortal God; our peace and defence.”
The Leviathan might simply be a system of government that we
empower to resolve disputes, justly we hope. It might also be the
head chieftain who has the power of life or death over tribe
members. That particular mortal god is elusive on the Internet. One
might wonder whether any Leviathan could exist at all in cyber-
space, given how sprawling and decentralized it is, but demigods are
certainly in evidence.
On your Facebook account, for example, you are the mortal god
who can delete posts or unfriend violators. But your authority extends
only so far. You can’t insist that someone else take down a post or
image on their account unless the item violates Facebook’s terms of
service. When an item violates Facebook’s community standards, then
the company takes over as Leviathan. Hate speech, threats of violence,
graphic content, bullying, harassment, and copyright violations might
lead Facebook or other services to remove the content or even termin-
ate the account.
With free services, account holders have little recourse if they think
a company treated them unfairly. One YouTube user complained
71
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

bitterly that his channel about amateur travel was deleted, along with
all his videos and user comments – with no warning and no explan-
ation. The automated email from YouTube offered little help:
Thanks for your email. Your . . . account has been found to have violated our
Community Guidelines. Your account has now been terminated. Please be
aware that you are prohibited from accessing, possessing or creating any other
YouTube accounts.
YouTube staff review flagged videos 24 hours a day, seven days a week to
determine whether they violate our Community Guidelines. When a video or
account is brought to our attention we investigate and take action if
necessary.
We are unable to provide specific detail regarding your account suspension or
your video’s removal.19
Arguably some of the most powerful demigods are the Internet service
providers (ISPs) that offer high-speed service, especially when the geo-
graphic area has only one such provider. Bill Machrone, writing for PC
Magazine, tells of an incident in which a writer became involved in
a flame war, and his opponent finally complained to the ISP. The
company simply canceled the writer’s account rather than spend time
listening to charges and countercharges. The abrupt cancellation left
the writer without high-speed access until some other service became
available in the region.20
More recently, a Leviathan that may have the most effect on
human behavior online is simply the realization that our online con-
tributions are not fleeting, even though it often feels that way, and
that corporations, governments, and other powerful entities can col-
lect and analyze them. Even Snapchat videos that are supposed to self-
destruct in seconds are easy to store, if the recipient chooses to do that.
The Library of Congress is archiving every Twitter post, and archives
of the early Usenet groups are readily accessible. Knowing that online
activity is so durable and that any of it could easily go viral years later
may turn out to be the Leviathan elephant in the room.
GROUP POLARIZATION
Off the net, people tend to split into ingroups and outgroups rather
easily. British psychologist Henri Tajfel demonstrated just how easily
in his classic studies of the minimal group, in which people are assigned
72
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

to a group based on the most trivial characteristics, a random choice of
hat color, for example, or a coin flip. Tajfel and his colleagues found
considerable ingroup bias, even though the group members were only
sharing meaningless labels. Subjects rated their ingroup members as
more similar to themselves compared with members of the outgroup,
as having more pleasant personalities, and as being generally more
competent. They also showed favoritism toward the ingroup when
they distributed rewards.21
Outside the lab, people join groups based on more meaningful iden-
tities, and these ingroup biases and favoritisms are even stronger. Also,
within a group, polarization can occur, as members’ preexisting tenden-
cies are enhanced as a result of their ingroup interactions. Many argue
that the Internet has actually increased polarization because it is easier
to pick and choose what to view, seeking out the opinion of others of
like mind rather than exposing yourself to divergent viewpoints.
Let’s first look at some classic research in social psychology that
uncovered this tendency that groups have to move toward extremes.
The “Risky Shift”
Most people intuitively suppose that groups would be more conserva-
tive and cautious in their thinking and decision making than individ-
uals and that it makes good sense to appoint a committee (or jury,
board, or task force) when important issues need to be resolved and
difficult decisions made. Democratic societies are not all that comfort-
able with an autocrat, and we routinely put groups in charge to
balance and restrain the potential extremism of an individual. But an
early study of group dynamics found something surprising. The study
involved dilemmas in which an imaginary character was faced with a
decision and subjects reading the dilemma offered advice about which
road to take. Each choice involved an element of risk. One dilemma,
for example, described a fictional writer of genre westerns who yearns
for a loftier literary goal:
Helen is a writer who is said to have considerable creative talent but who
so far has been earning a comfortable living by writing cheap westerns.
Recently, she has come up with an idea for a potentially significant novel. If it
could be written and accepted, it might have considerable literary impact and
be a big boost to her career. On the other hand, if she cannot work out her
idea or if the novel is a flop, she will have expended considerable time and
energy without remuneration.22
73
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

Subjects were invited to choose how much risk Helen should take,
based on estimates of the chances for success. After each person in
the group indicated his or her choice privately, the group discussed the
case and came to a consensus recommendation for Helen. To every-
one’s surprise, the group decision was actually riskier than the average
of the individuals’ decisions. After talking it through, the group
became less cautious, not more so, and the individuals did as well. This
intriguing bit of group dynamics became known as the risky shift.
Nothing piques the interest of psychologists more than a counter-
intuitive finding such as this one, and hundreds of studies followed.
It was important to nail down the underpinnings and complexities of
this risky shift, especially because we rely so heavily on groups to
make important decisions. It was alarming to find that whatever was
going on when people got together to talk led to more extremism,
not less.
Though the phenomenon was initially dubbed the “risky shift”
because the problems involved some decision about risk taking,
later studies demonstrated that group discussion does not necessarily
lead to riskier decisions. Instead, talking it over seems to intensify the
individual leanings of the group members further toward one of the
extremes, pulling them toward one or the other pole. If the individuals
are leaning toward caution in some kind of a dilemma, their group
decision will be even more cautious. Or if they tend to agree with a
particular opinion individually, their group will agree with it even
more strongly after they have a chance to discuss it.
A study of attitudes toward decriminalization of marijuana shows
how this move toward the fringe can work. The subjects first offered
their individual opinions on a scale from 1 to 9, with 1 being com-
pletely opposed, and 9 being completely supportive. Then the subjects
joined a three-person group to come to a consensus. The groups whose
members initially tended to support decriminalization came to a con-
sensus that was even more supportive, and the opposite happened
to the groups whose members initially leaned toward opposition.
Interestingly, it didn’t matter very much whether a particular group
contained someone whose initial opinions were already very extreme
before discussion started. Although those people talked more and
voiced strong arguments, they didn’t appear to affect polarization.23
The question of why people in groups shift toward one or the other
end of the attitudinal scale has been a difficult one to answer.
Certainly a discussion will allow group members to raise tidbits of
74
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

information that might not have occurred to each individual separ-
ately. Indeed, this is one reason why most people believe a group will
make better decisions than an individual. Nevertheless, if the group
members lean slightly toward one side to begin with, their tendency
to conform could continue to reinforce that same direction in one
another as they add their comments. One might say, “Well, Helen
really has little to lose,” and another might add, “She isn’t proud of
herself as a cheap western writer, anyway.” Each argument in favor
of “going for the gold” would tend to sway the individuals, and thus
the group, toward the extreme.
Another element that seems to make group decisions more extreme
than their individual counterparts is social comparison. When you
don’t know what the others think, you can’t compare your own
opinion to theirs or exhibit your own tendency to conform to the
group norm. You might suppose that most people would take a more
conservative viewpoint about Helen’s dilemma and that you would
be the adventurous risk taker in the group. When you learn that others
generally agree with you, you might want to not just conform, but
move even further out on the limb to maintain that initial view you
had of yourself – of being the adventurous one in the group. As others
do the same thing, the group moves perilously close to the ledge.
Group Polarization Online
Research in social psychology suggests that the phenomenon of group
polarization may be partly responsible for the extremism we so often
see on the Internet and the apparent absence of that moderate voice.
An individual People may hold relatively moderate views about an
issue initially, but after talking about it in a group setting with others
who lean in the same direction, they may move away from the middle
ground toward one of the fringes. And talking is what people do
online. Studies of group polarization in face-to-face settings suggest
that the factors that contribute to it are present in abundance on the
Internet, so we may not have far to look to understand why that
moderate voice is so rare.
Russell Spears and his colleagues demonstrated that group polariza-
tion can be quite high in Internet-like situations, especially when
the people who are working as group members think strongly of them-
selves in those terms.24 These researchers sent out questionnaires to their
subjects to find out their initial positions on four controversial subjects
75
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

that had clear “right-left” political overtones. One item, for example,
asked the students to state their agreement with the statement, “Nation-
alized industries should be sold off.” They assumed, rightly, that
the students would already be leaning toward the left on issues such as
this, and the experiment would detect whether their positions became
even more radical after various types of group discussion.
Groups of three arrived at the lab and learned the basics of a simple
CMC system they would use to discuss the issues in turn. For half
the groups, the subjects sat in the same room during their discussion
so they could see one another, even though they communicated by
means of the computers. For the other half, though, the subjects never
saw one another and stayed in separate offices. This latter condition is
closer to the Internet environment where people are not in the same
physical setting, and the perceived anonymity is high.
To investigate the extent to which each person’s feelings of group-
ness influenced their behavior, the researchers added one additional
twist. Half of the groups who would be sitting in the same room, and
half of the groups whose members would be lodged in separate offices,
were given special instructions that would make them feel closer to
their other group members and make group membership more salient
to them. In this case, the researchers encouraged group identity by a
carefully worded introduction to the experiment. They heard that
their group consisted entirely of first-year psychology students, and
they were being tested as members of a group – not as individuals. In
contrast, the other groups were encouraged to behave as individuals,
and group identity was downplayed. After the computer-mediated
discussions, the subjects in all groups answered the questionnaire
again and guessed which attitudes they thought their fellow group
members held about the same issues.
The results from this study are fascinating because they point to an
interaction between level of anonymity and feelings of group identity.
For those whose group membership was emphasized, sitting in separ-
ate rooms caused a sharp increase in polarization. But for those for
whom individuality was emphasized, sitting in separate rooms caused
a sharp decrease in the polarization phenomenon. In fact, these people
actually strayed in the opposite direction when they couldn’t see each
other, away from the group norm.
To help explain results such as this, Spears and his colleagues pro-
posed the social identity model of deindividuation effects, known as
the SIDE model, which I mentioned in Chapter 1. In this case, a
76
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

plausible hypothesis is that the Internet-like setting is most likely
to create a strong tendency toward group polarization when the
members of the group feel some sense of group identity. Group polar-
ization, after all, relies on group influence and the tendency to
conform and compare one’s own views to those of others around
you. But for people who don’t feel like they are a part of a cohesive
group, the isolation, deindividuation, and physical distance typical of
the Internet lead them to ignore the group’s views and go their own
way. They do this more easily than people who are in plain sight of
their loosely knit group members. They might even show a little
psychological reactance in the other direction to demonstrate their
own individuality, as they did in this study.
The Echo Chamber
Online environments may lead to even more group polarization
because it is so easy to find people who are already leaning the same
way as we do on any issue, regardless of how peculiar. Unlike the
people in many of the studies I described in this chapter, we are not
randomly assigned to groups and given a particular task to work on.
We can proactively choose which groups to join and find like-minded
others who are almost certain to reinforce our viewpoints and move
us a bit further out toward an extreme position. On the Internet, you
find your own groups and your choices are almost infinite.
You may know of no other people in your geographical vicinity
who happen to believe that Elvis sightings have been documented,
proven, and suppressed by government conspiracies. But on the Inter-
net, people who share your viewpoint are just a few keystrokes away,
regardless of the issue’s obscurity, social desirability, or bizarreness. As
people participate in online group discussions with the few others
who share their views from around the world, they may well hold
biased discussions, experience the influence of group polarization, and
move further and further toward extremism. When interacting with a
small subset of like-minded others spread around the globe, our frame-
work for social comparison could become rather warped. We could
quickly acquire an exaggerated perception of the rightness of our
views because we found others not only who agreed with us but
who are even further out on the attitudinal limb. Inch by inch, we
would join them – moving toward the polarized extreme – with the
support of those like-minded others. Goodbye, moderate voice.
77
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

The technology makes it quite easy not just to find people of like
mind, but to restrict our own access to just the sources that tend to agree
with us. As early as 1995, Nicholas Negroponte at MIT predicted that
people would gravitate toward “The Daily Me” for their news, carefully
choosing which news sources to include so that they could screen out
anything they might disagree with. That capability is certainly avail-
able now. You can pick and choose news sources, websites, and blogs
that confirm what you already believe, and rarely see any information
that might challenge your views.25 You can also accept friends and
follow Twitter users whose views agree with yours.
Yahoo! account holders, for instance, can manage their exposure to
different content very easily, by clicking “More like this” or “Fewer like
this” on any headline. Even if you don’t actively manage your content
preferences, Yahoo! chooses news stories for you based on your likes
and dislikes on a connected Facebook account. The company’s goal is
to provide a “personal and customized experience” to each user, but
the result can contribute to the online echo chamber.
Group Polarization on Twitter
Twitter users often voice very strong opinions, and the nature of the
medium offers opportunities to see how polarization unfolds. They
can @reply to individuals, but unless a message is specifically desig-
nated as private, others can find it using keywords or hashtags. Thus
Twitter tends to be more of a public forum in which anyone can join
the conversation, rather than a conversation just among people who
are in a friendship network.
To see how much exposure people are getting to different points of
view, a group of researchers gathered Twitter posts that contained one
of several keywords that were likely to reflect controversies. Examples
included global warming, healthcare reform, Tea Party, and Obama.26
Then they gathered the usernames of the most recent 500 Twitter
users who included one of the keywords, along with the usernames
of all those they followed and who was following them. What were
the political ideologies of all these people, what messages were they
sending, and who were they tweeting to? Were they in echo cham-
bers, or was some cross-ideological dialogue going on?
The thousands of tweets were grouped into a small number
of clusters, each with a relatively large number of Twitter users
78
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

who follow or are followed by one another. Then the messages
themselves and any web links were coded as liberal, conservative,
or neutral. Within each of the clusters, the conversations turned out
to be very polarized, particularly when most messages in the cluster
were tagged as liberal or conservative. In a cluster’s conversation on
global warming, for instance, almost 80 percent of the messages
were coded “liberal,” and the rest were unclear or had no particular
orientation. There was some cross talk, however, suggesting that the
echo chambers are not completely soundproof.
Another study of Twitter shows that conversations outside the
echo chambers or between people inhabiting different echo chambers
are more likely when the whole community is faced with a tragedy.
One of these involved a murder in 2009. George Tiller was a late-term
abortion doctor in Wichita, Kansas, who was shot and killed on
May 31, 2009, by an anti-abortion activist. He had been a controversial
figure for many years, and his murder triggered a huge volume of posts
with the hashtag #tiller.
A study of more than 30,000 such posts collected within the first
week after the shooting shows a wide range of interactions.27 In gen-
eral, people were more likely to reply to others who shared their view,
particularly so for pro-choice advocates. But cross talk was also evident.
Over one third of the replies were directed to someone with differing
views. The pro-choice tweeters often commented to pro-life advocates
about the disconnect between the shooter’s pro-life beliefs and
the murder he just committed. The replies from pro-life advocates to
pro-choice did not necessarily disagree, and most condemned the
shooting. Here are two examples.
Pro-Choice to Pro-Life
@DChi606: How can one preach about pro life but then turn
around and kill someone? Sad.
Pro-Life to Pro-Choice
savvyconsumer7: @michellew_I don’t know AnyOne who con-
dones the murder of Dr. Tiller. I’m pro-LIFE.
Twitter is hardly a likely platform for serious debate and thoughtful
discussion, but this study does suggest that strict polarization is not
necessarily inevitable on controversial topics.
79
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

GROUP MOBILIZATION
The Internet transformed the way people mobilize for action,
gathering together for some larger purpose or cause and persuading
others to join. Imagine, for instance, how a group would organize a
protest march in the pre-Internet days. They might use phone calls,
fax, radio, TV, letters, flyers, and newspaper ads, and they would also
need plenty of time to get the word around. Now, they need none of
that because they can use social media and cyberspace. They can send
mass emails, texts, and tweets to thousands or millions of followers
very inexpensively, with breathtaking speed.
Consider the key role that social media played in the Arab Spring
uprisings and how the online conversations swayed the narrative.
During the weeks before Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak resigned,
the total rate of tweets about the political situation in Egypt ballooned
from around 2,000 a day to 230,000. With mobile phones, ordinary
citizens could put a human face on oppression as they mobilized
very large protests and distributed commentary and videos to each
other and the outside world.28 Images of Mohamed Bouazizi’s self-
immolation in Tunisia spread rapidly through social media, drawing
worldwide attention and inspiring millions to protest. The efforts were
so effective that the Egyptian government attempted to shut down
Internet access in the country during the uprising.
Online Activism
Online environments offer many advantages to activist groups seek-
ing to express their views or protest against dominant elites. Social
media in particular can spread the word very quickly to sympathetic
others and help people make a case across geographic boundaries,
pushing back against top-down propaganda. The relative anonymity
can also help foster stronger group identity and a sense of “groupness,”
reducing the salience of differences in educational levels, social class,
national origin, or ethnicity.
While many are highly optimistic about the value of online envir-
onments for social movements, they also face significant challenges.
One, for instance, is that they often rely on citizen “microjournalism”
to report and document events before the news media and law
enforcement arrive. For instance, during the mass protests about the
alleged corruption during the 2009 election in Iran, Western reporters
had great difficulty getting first-hand information, and Iranian
80
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

authorities placed a ban on their reporting. But citizen reports and
images flooded the Internet, including the video in which philosophy
student Neda Agha-Soltan appears to have been shot dead by an
Iranian sniper, even though she was a bystander.29 Trained journalists
rely on sources they can identify, even if they do not reveal the name,
but the identity of citizens who post online is often unknown and
unverifiable. Reporters walk a fine line, not wanting to miss an import-
ant story, but unsure of its veracity.
Online activists also face the threat of censorship or worse. Many
countries block certain Internet sites from computers inside their
boundaries, although their efforts are typically only partially success-
ful. Some estimate that the “Great Chinese Firewall” blocks 18,000
different websites, although enterprising citizens find ways to bypass
the wall to gain access to the blocked sites.30 Google receives frequent
requests from governments around the world to take down content
for a variety of reasons, including its potential to stir unrest.31
Beyond censorship, online activists can face arrest, imprisonment,
or death, For example, Mohammed al-Qahtani maintained a blog in
which he criticized Saudi Arabia’s religious leaders, and in 2014 he was
sentenced to ten years in prison and 1,000 public lashes.32 Many
activists use Tor or other strategies to preserve their anonymity in
repressive countries, but with surveillance tools becoming so wide-
spread, efforts to remain anonymous can fail.
Another challenge for online social movements is sustainability.
One of the largest online activist communities protested the genocide
going on in Darfur. Founded in 2007, the Save Darfur page on Face-
book attracted more than one million members, and the group raised
more than $100,000. Kevin Lewis and his colleagues examined the
patterns of recruitment and donations and found rapid early growth
in both. But the growth slowed down by the end of that year, and by
2010, the group was no longer growing at all or raising funds. The vast
majority of those one million members never actually recruited
another person, nor did they actually make a contribution of any
kind. They supported the cause primarily by just joining that Face-
book cause, and were more “slacktivists” than activists. We discuss that
phenomenon in more detail in Chapter 6.
One way in which cyberspace makes a distinctive contribution to
group mobilization is by supporting coordinating efforts as group
members organize some activity for the network, using what might
be called “microcoordination.”33 Using Twitter, email, social media
81
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

posts, and text messages, people can quickly send out alerts and
updates to keep everyone apprised of rapidly changing conditions.
Flash mobs make particular use of microcoordination.
Flash Mobs
Flash mobs burst on the scene in 2003, at Macy’s department store in
New York. About 100 people arranged to visit the store at the same
time and asked for help in selecting a “love rug.” Ten minutes later,
they all abruptly disbanded and left the store. Many other such per-
formances followed, typically coordinated by email or text messages.
The participants might send text messages to mobilize and then sud-
denly gather in a mall or other public place to sing a lively song,
perform a dance, build a snowman, or just freeze in place before
disbanding on cue.
Flash mobs originally focused on innovative and spontaneous per-
formance art, but new varieties emerged with different purposes. The
ones directed toward social goals and activism rather than pranks or
artistic performances became known as “smart mobs.” Companies also
sometimes microcoordinate flash mobs to advertise new products
and garner attention. A newer and far more troubling version gathers
large numbers of people in a specific location to loot or commit acts of
violence or vandalism, and then they quickly disperse before police
can intervene. This version is sometimes called “flash robs” or
“wildings” to distinguish them from the more prosocial flash mobs.
What motives drive people to participate in these events? Focus
groups with teens – who are the main players in flash mobs – suggest
that many understand that different motives are in play.34 They cited
motives such as wanting to be cool, relieving boredom, and wanting to
exercise their rights to be in a public place. They also wanted to clarify
the meaning of “flash mob,” and not apply it to the prosocial versions.
In a violent flash mob event in Kansas City, for example, shootings
occurred and three people were injured. One student remarked about
the way the press handled that incident:
Flash mob is what they (called) it because they wanted to sound politically
correct and wanted to sound polite instead of saying a gang warfare or gang
brutality. Instead of saying something in a negative term they wanted to
keep it a positive light for Kansas City. It wasn’t positive; it wasn’t a flash
mob by definition.
82
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Alarmed by the violent incidents, some state legislatures are passing
laws to regulate flash mob violence and to penalize anyone who
mobilizes such events through social media. In the United Kingdom,
the Prime Minister advocated putting limits on the communication
channels the flash mob participants were using – in that case, Black-
berry messenger. In San Francisco, the Bay Area Rapid Transit system
shut off cellular signals at some stations, trying to prevent riders from
microcoordinating an event to protest police shootings. But these
draconian tactics are highly controversial because they come up
against constitutionally protected freedom of speech and the right to
gather in public places. As in so many areas, the Internet is changing
what it means to mobilize a group and how the technologies can
promote both positive and negative behavior.
Much of what I have been discussing in this chapter thus far
involves venues used especially for social or political purposes rather
than business. But companies depend heavily on virtual work groups
to cut down on expensive travel and tap talent from all corners of
the globe. Let’s turn now to the virtual work group and see how the
online environment is influencing group dynamics in that setting.
VIRTUAL WORK GROUPS
In The World Is Flat, Tom Friedman describes the “flat world platform”
that empowers people from all over the world to collaborate on tasks,
form communities, build new products, and create a new era of
globalization.35 The Internet’s infrastructure underpins this platform,
and it relies heavily on virtual work groups composed of people who
may never have met, who live in different parts of the globe, and
whose purpose is to get a job done.
How well do these groups actually function? Beyond the hype,
virtual work groups are proving extremely valuable, but research
demonstrates that group dynamics unfold rather differently online
compared with collocated groups, as we might expect.
Biased Discussions in Online Work Groups
In any work-group discussion, group members are unlikely to have
exactly the same information and expertise. As I mentioned, this is one
reason we believe groups will make better decisions than individuals.
They should, in principle, have the combined information and
83
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

expertise of all members at their disposal after they talk about it. Each
person can share what he or she knows with the others, making
the whole at least equal to the sum of the parts. Unfortunately, this is
often not what happens, and it is especially not what happens when
work groups get together online to make decisions.
One early experiment studied this phenomenon in the context of
management, exploring how online groups might collaborate to make
personnel decisions.36 The research involved hidden profiles, in which
group members reviewed resumes of three applicants for a marketing
manager position. The investigators rigged the candidates’ positive and
negative attributes so that one applicant was best suited for the job
because that person matched the criteria in the job description most
closely. Then they handed out packets of information to their subjects
containing a subset of the information from the resumes, so each
group member knew only part of the story. Some of the three-person
groups met face to face, while others discussed the candidates from
separate locations using CMC.
Polarization was common, and you may be dismayed but not
surprised to learn that almost none of the groups – face-to-face
or computer-mediated – chose the best candidate. They just were not
sharing the information in a way that would enable the group to
make an objective decision based on the whole picture. The amount
of bias in the discussions, though, was particularly high within the
online discussion groups. The researchers could assess how biased
the discussions were by examining the actual tidbits the group
members chose to share. In a very biased discussion, they would tend
to share positive information about the winning candidate and nega-
tive statements about the losing applicants, but they would avoid
bringing up negative information about the winner and positive items
for the losers. Each item they contributed would thus reinforce the
march toward group consensus rather than add complications and
fuel debate. This trend was very apparent in the online groups,
and more than twice as large compared with the face-to-face groups.
Online Ingroups and Outgroups
Another somewhat troubling feature of virtual work groups is the
tendency for subgroups to emerge, with an “us” versus “them”
dynamic. This is particularly the case for groups in which some elem-
ent is present that can divide the group, a kind of fault line that
84
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

members can use to separate the ingroup from the outgroup. Location
is one example. As I discussed earlier, people tend to identify with a
group rather easily, and location is a key factor that would underpin
a social identity. A virtual team with members in New York and
Chicago would certainly be susceptible to this location fault line. Even
if the Chicago team members never actually interacted with one
another face to face, they would still share a location identity, partly
because they might anticipate running into one another at some point.
The global virtual teams Friedman imagined confront even greater
challenges that can lead to ingroups and outgroups. Cultural differ-
ences, time zones, and language barriers can all lead to coordination
problems and misunderstandings. Differences in all the unwritten
norms will also arise. In some cultures, a “due date” is less strict
than in others, so submitting work late will be perceived negatively
by those whose cultural norms stress timeliness. Basic gaps in know-
ledge can also cause misperceptions. Americans who are unaware that
businesses in some Arab countries close on Friday may get the impres-
sion that the Arab team members are just not very responsive when
emails go unanswered. The Arab team will be working on Sunday and
may get the same impression.
One study investigated group dynamics in six-person teams
in which members came from two universities – one in the United
States and the other in Canada. The teams relied mainly on email to
tackle a research project together over a three-week period, eventually
producing a written report about how different companies handle
management challenges. After the project, team members completed
a variety of questionnaires that measured aspects of group dynamics
and team functioning.
Ingroups and outgroups based on location emerged clearly in this
study, to the detriment of team performance and cohesion. Those teams
whose members were geographically distributed showed more conflict
and coordination problems, and their members had weaker identifica-
tion with the whole team compared with teams whose members were
all collocated. Problems were especially pronounced when the six-
person team was unbalanced, with four members at one location and
just two at the other. The minority subgroups felt more alienated and
powerless against the majority at the other location. As one subject put it:
When we started [to] work with them, we were optimistic . . . but then
[our four teammates at the other site] threatened to “out-vote” us on
85
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

several key decisions. The two of us here had little we could do in response
and things devolved from there.37
A survey of professionals who work on distributed virtual teams in
various companies found similar “us” versus “them” problems arising.
Respondents pointed to uneven communication channels, cultural dif-
ferences, conflicting goals, and other issues that tended to widen the gulf
between team members already separated by physical distance. And not
surprisingly, those teams with the most pronounced “us” versus “them”
attitudes were generally less effective. Nevertheless, many of these real-
world teams were still effective, showing that experience with the
pitfalls of distributed teams helps people overcome them.38
Status Effects
In face-to-face settings, the members of a virtual team may differ in
terms of status – their position on the organizational chart, perhaps, or
their acknowledged expertise. People with more status tend to talk
more, dominating the discussion, and their views carry more weight
when the group makes decisions. In online environments, status can
be harder to detect, and some studies suggest that status effects are less
pronounced.
One early study, for instance, compared the relative contributions
of people in groups of three who were trying to reach consensus with
some groups interacting face to face and others using CMC. In all the
groups, one person tended to dominate the discussion, but the domin-
ance was less for the online groups.39 Some argued that the online
environment should be an equalizer in which status is less important
and good ideas can emerge regardless of their source.
More recent research suggests that dominance and status do unfold
differently online, but not quite the way people initially thought they
might. Researchers assigned undergraduates to three different types
of virtual teams to work on one of the hidden profile tasks in which
no group member has all the information to come to the correct
answer, but together, the information is there. Some groups included
members who were all collocated at the same university, while others
had members from all different universities. The third type was par-
tially distributed. After the task was completed using an online discus-
sion forum, the subjects rated themselves and their team members on
dominance, group cohesion, and other kinds of group dynamics.
86
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The results demonstrated that perceptions of dominance definitely
arose in these teams and that these perceptions were influenced by
physical location. Students tended to form more extreme perceptions
about dominance for team members who were not at the same
university. For instance, a student might rate herself at about the
midpoint for dominance, and would rate a collocated team member
about the same. But that same student would rate the distant team
members as either very dominant or very submissive.
One way to understand this finding is by drawing on Joseph B.
Walther’s hyperpersonal model of CMC, which I mention in
other chapters as well.40 It is not uncommon to find that interactions
in text-based online environment often lead to more extreme
impressions, ones in which stereotypes and cognitive shortcuts
play a larger role. In face-to-face settings, people have many cues to
draw on to form impressions – not just nonverbal cues but situational
ones as well. In the discussion forum that those students were using,
such cues were narrowed, particularly for students who were not
attending the same university. They jumped to more extreme
impressions.
Minority Opinions in Online Workgroups
When you find yourself on the side of the minority, it is time to switch
sides and stop being such a nonconformist.
– Oscar Wilde
In face-to-face settings, groups can exert considerable pressure to con-
form, and the majority can put the minority in a very uncomfortable
position. Yet research in social psychology shows that minority opin-
ions in face-to-face settings can indeed sway majority opinion, at least
under some circumstances. Consistency is important, though, and if
the minority opinion holder is wishy-washy, the majority may just
discount that person’s arguments.
One classic study that demonstrated this simply asked subjects
sitting in a group to report the color they saw on a slide in front of
them. In a group of six subjects, two were confederates of the experi-
menter who deliberately said “green” when the slides were obviously
blue. When the two “subjects” in the minority held steadfast, some of
the others were more inclined to also say the slide was green, at least
on some trials. But if the minority wavered occasionally and said a
slide was blue, they had no influence.41
87
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

Novel ideas and those minority opinions can be very valuable
to organizations seeking innovation. But can a minority voice in an
online group influence the majority? On one hand, we might suppose
that a person who holds a dissenting opinion from the rest of the
virtual work group would feel freer to express that opinion in the
online setting. In an email discussion, for instance, the dissenter would
not have to endure raised eyebrows or interruptions by members of
the majority, or be made to feel uncomfortable about the failure to
agree with the others. He or she could type away at the keyboard,
restating the position in a persistent way.
Early research initially focused on groups whose members were
actually in the same room but who were making their contributions
using a group decision support system (GDSS). This kind of software
facilitates a freer expression of ideas; participants each use a computer
to submit comments and suggestions, and these appear on a shared
screen in front of the room so all can see. The software can eliminate
names so people can’t see who contributed what.
In one study that compared groups using GDSS to face-to-face
groups, the subjects worked on a hidden profile task in which
members were each given somewhat different bits of information
about companies A, B, and C.42 Their job was to discuss which com-
pany would be best to invest in. The deck was stacked so that if
all pieces of information were on the table, company A was the best
choice. However, only one person in the group held the most revealing
pieces of information, ensuring that he or she would be the minority
opinion holder. These lone wolves were more vocal when their con-
tributions were online and anonymous, compared with the minority
opinion holders in the face-to-face groups. But they were also much
less effective at changing the majority opinion. As a result, the online
workgroups wound up making rather poor decisions and bad invest-
ments. It looked like it was just easier to ignore dissenting messages
on the screen, at least in a GDSS setting.
How does minority opinion play out in the more common virtual
groups that include some far-flung members – the kind that multi-
national companies rely on so heavily? Here the outcomes seem to be
more promising for that lone voice chiming in from a considerable
distance.
In a study in which online groups consisted of people from the
same or different locations, the most effective minority voice came
from people who were consistent in their opinions, similar to what
88
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

happens in face-to-face settings. But their influence also depended
partly on where they were. The person at a remote location who was
expressing consistent minority opinions was the most effective of
all.43 This situation is different from one with members in Chicago
and New York, where ingroup biases can lead to conflict and poor
decision making. Instead, a team with one geographically isolated
member may have a unique benefit – someone who can play the role
of devil’s advocate to get the attention of the majority. If you happen
to find yourself in that position on a virtual team, remember to be
consistent.
Work Groups and Electronic Brainstorming
Group brainstorming emerged on the business scene in the 1950s, after
an advertising executive published a how- to book on the technique.44
Intuitively, it seemed like a wonderful way to stimulate creativity and
generate many original ideas very quickly. People sitting in the same
room try to come up with as many wild ideas and solutions to some
problem as they can. Criticism is disallowed, but members should try
to improve on, combine, or build on the ideas of others during the
brainstorming session. The participants generally loved the technique,
and it took hold.
Unfortunately, it didn’t work. After more than two decades of
research on the subject, behavioral scientists concluded that individ-
ual brainstorming was simply more effective. In study after study,
groups whose members worked individually developed more ideas,
and more original ideas, compared with the same size group working
with the group brainstorming technique. One reason was production
blocking. In a group, only one person can talk at a time; if you are
listening to the discussion you have less time to come up with original
ideas of your own. Also, social loafing might be a factor; in a group,
people might not work as hard, assuming others will pick up the slack.
Conformity and concerns about how team members evaluate wild
ideas could come into play as well.
Software developers ignored that research and developed an elec-
tronic support tool for group brainstorming.45 Participants would
sit at their computers and enter their original ideas in one window.
Then that idea appears in a second window along with the contribu-
tions of the other participants. Researchers investigating the effective-
ness of this new version of group brainstorming found, to their
89
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

surprise, that the electronic support made quite a difference in
the results. When the group is large, the results from the computer-
mediated group brainstorming session were superior compared with
individual brainstorming.
One reason that electronic group brainstorming works reasonably
well when its face-to-face version does not is that the electronic ver-
sion bypasses the production-blocking problem. With the computer-
supported version of group discussion, you can glance at your group
members’ contributions at any time, but they need not interrupt your
train of thought. Also, the computer-mediated environment may trig-
ger disinhibition, so group members may feel freer to express their
wildest notions with less concern about negative reactions.
How useful are the findings about electronic brainstorming? One
intriguing application could be detecting fraud during company
audits. In the wake of many corporate scandals involving financial
statements, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
developed new guidelines for auditors, and one of them is a require-
ment for auditors to conduct a “fraud brainstorming session.” The goal
is to encourage auditors to have open and questioning minds when
they investigate a company’s finances, and to consider many different
ways in which fraud might happen in that particular company. Are
certain managers under special pressure to achieve glowing results?
Are internal controls lax because of cost cutting?
To test out this approach, researchers assigned accounting students
to four-person teams to conduct fraud brainstorming sessions, either
face-to-face or electronically. The company was a fictitious one, but
the case offered many opportunities to identify unusual fraud risks.
The results were clear. The electronic brainstormers came up with an
average of 29.5 relevant ideas, compared with just 17.3 for the face-to-
face groups.46
Interestingly, the question of why electronic brainstorming works
better than face-to-face sessions is still not fully answered. In the fraud
study, the researchers assigned some students to a third type of treat-
ment – a “nominal” electronic group brainstorming session – in which
group members could not actually see one another’s ideas on the
screen. The group members were essentially working alone, but using
the computer to input their ideas. These “nominal” groups did just as
well as the groups in which members were actually interacting and
viewing one another’s contributions online. The overriding factor that
made the electronic brainstorming sessions more effective appears to
90
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

involve the way people are able to focus on the task when they sit at
the computer, rather than any advantages from seeing what other
people came up with.47
Brainstorming still holds much appeal among managers, and des-
pite the dismal results for face-to-face groups, they still extoll its
virtues. Electronic brainstorming certainly works better, but it remains
unclear whether group brainstorming is really the most effective tech-
nique to generate the best and most innovative ideas.
Developing “Swift” Trust in Virtual Work Groups
For work groups to succeed, the individuals who participate must
develop some trust in one another. In face-to-face situations, this kind
of trust evolves as coworkers come to know one another and learn to
respect the contributions that each person can make to the team
effort. Over time, as they join task forces and working groups, col-
leagues learn they can rely on one another and trust that other team
members will perform as expected. This kind of trust has great advan-
tages for a work group. Individual members don’t have to worry about
freeloaders who miss deadlines or shirk their share of the work.
Corporations are finding many advantages to the kinds of fluid
teams the Internet makes possible, with members drawn from subsid-
iaries around the world and activities conducted in cyberspace. If a
team needs a certain combination of skills, the corporation is not
limited by geography when members are chosen. In fact, many com-
panies rely on expert systems that track each employee’s expertise
so they can find the best match for a particular team, regardless of
geography. But how do these far-flung virtual team members establish
a sense of trust so they can work together effectively?
One study examined how trust developed in seventy-five global
virtual teams, each of which had four to six members residing in
different countries.48 The groups worked together for eight weeks on
several tasks, including two trust-building exercises and a final project
in which the teams proposed content for a new website. Predictably,
some teams did extremely well while others did very poorly; a key
success factor was the development of trust among the members.
The members of one of the high-trust teams exchanged messages
frequently, and they all showed optimism, excitement, and a clear
orientation toward project goals. Members shared leadership duties,
and they proactively volunteered for specific roles without waiting for
91
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

assignments. They also recognized that as a virtual team they needed
to stay in close contact and meet their commitments, and even during
weekend trips the members found ways to communicate. In the early
part of the project, some members explained away short absences or
failure to meet deadlines because of strikes, sickness, or personal duties,
but one quickly pointed out, “Do you know what the devil’s grand-
mother died of? Bad excuses. So therefore, I will stop apologizing – and
start working.”
By contrast, a team that failed miserably had members who com-
municated infrequently and made few commitments. At one point,
eight days went by without a single message exchanged. When a
member did finally post some ideas for the project, she implored,
“Can we PLEASE try to respond?,” and rarely did any online discus-
sion emerge in which the members reacted to one another’s
contributions.
The most successful teams capitalized on “swift” trust. They lacked
time for the personal interactions that allow trust to develop grad-
ually,
the
way
a
long-term
face-to-face
group
might.
Instead,
the members jumped into the project acting as though trust existed
from the start, even though they had no evidence that their group-
mates would carry their share of the load. Their initial willingness
to show trusting actions led swiftly to actual trust. By interacting
frequently, emphasizing the positive tone, volunteering for assign-
ments, and then going that extra mile to meet their commitments,
these teams overcame the obstacles that led to poorer performance in
others.
Group norms are the key variable for the success of teams that
develop swift trust. In a follow-up study, global team members that
displayed the most trust early in the project developed explicit group
norms.49 These teams discussed performance goals, milestones, and
what the group considered acceptable conduct. Members of global
virtual teams come from very different backgrounds, and the teams
that recognize that their different norms could cause serious problems
are more likely to succeed.
Successful virtual teams also tap the power of synchronous commu-
nications, especially to introduce themselves to their new teammates
and kick off the project. Video conferencing works very well for this.
When added to the “signs on the door” that clarify group norms, these
video sessions give everyone a chance to look one another in the eye,
and that starts group dynamics off on good footing.
92
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

NOTES
1 Korenman, J., & Wyatt, N. (1996). Group dynamics in an e-mail forum. In
S. C. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and
cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 225–242). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publish-
ing Company.
2 Robin Williams. It’s time for a convoluted stream of consciousness. Ask Me
Anything! (2013, September 25). Reddit.com. Retrieved from http://redd.it/
1n41x1
3 Howard, M. C., & Magee, S. M. (2013). To boldly go where no group has gone
before: An analysis of online group identity and validation of a measure.
Computers in Human Behavior, 29(5), 2058–2071. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.04.009
4 Asch, S. E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193(5),
31–35. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1155-31
5 Smilowitz, M., Compton, D. C., & Flint, L. (1988). The effects of computer
mediated communication on an individual’s judgment: A study based on
the methods of Asch’s social influence experiment. Computers in Human
Behavior, 4(4), 311–321. doi:10.1016/0747-5632(88)90003-9
6 Rosander, M., & Eriksson, O. (2012). Conformity on the Internet – The role of
task difficulty and gender differences. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(5),
1587–1595. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.03.023
7 Sherif, M. (1935). A study of some social factors in perception. Archives of
Psychology (Columbia University), 27(187), 1–60.
8 McCormick, N. B., & McCormick, J. W. (1992). Computer friends and foes:
Content of undergraduates’ electronic mail. Computers in Human Behavior,
8(4), 379–405. doi:10.1016/0747-5632(92)90031-9
9 Alis, C. M., & Lim, M. T. (2013). Spatio-temporal variation of conversational
utterances on Twitter. PLoS ONE, 8(10), 1–9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077793
10 Morgan, M. (2014). Speech communities. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
11 Singer, J. B. (2005). The political j-blogger “normalizing” a new media form
to fit old norms and practices. Journalism, 6(2), 173–198. doi:10.1177/
1464884905051009
12 Parmelee, J. H. (2013). Political journalists and Twitter: Influences on norms
and practices. Journal of Media Practice, 14(4), 291–305. doi:10.1386/jmpr.
14.4.291_1
13 Yee, N., Bailenson, J. N., Urbanek, M., Chang, F., & Merget, D. (2007). The
unbearable likeness of being digital: The persistence of nonverbal social
norms in online virtual environments. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 10(1),
115–121. doi:10.1089/cpb.2006.9984
14 Shea, V. (1994). Netiquette. San Francisco, CA: Albion Books. The online
edition is found at http://www.albion.com/netiquette/index.html.
15 Smith, C. B., McLaughlin, M. L., & Osborne, K. K. (1997). Conduct control on
Usenet. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 2(4).
16 McLaughlin, C., & Vitak, J. (2012). Norm evolution and violation on Face-
book. New Media and Society, 14(2), 299–315. doi:10.1177/1461444811412712
17 Stelter, B. (2013, December 22). “Ashamed”: Ex-PR exec Justine Sacco apolo-
gizes for AIDS in Africa tweet. Retrieved March 2, 2014, from www.cnn.com/
2013/12/22/world/sacco-offensive-tweet/index.html
18 Justine Sacco and the self-inflicted perils of Twitter. (December 23, 2013).
Forbes. Retrieved February 8, 2014, from www.forbes.com/sites/jeffbercov
ici/2013/12/23/justine-sacco-and-the-self-inflicted-perils-of-twitter/
93
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

19 Christensen, C. (2010, March 4). Did this video get me banned from
YouTube . . . for life? Amateur Traveler. Retrieved from http://amateurtrave
ler.com/did-this-video-get-me-banned-from-youtube-for-life/
20 Machrone, B. (1998). Mind your manners. PC Magazine, October 20, 1998,
p. 85.
21 Tajfel, H. (1981). Human groups and social categories. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
22 Stoner, J. A. F. (1962). A comparison of individual and group decisions involving
risk (Master’s thesis). Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1961. Cited by
D. G. Marquis in Individual responsibility and group decisions involving
risk. Industrial Management Review, 3, 8–23 (p. 332).
23 Van Swol, L. M. (2009). Extreme members and group polarization. Social
Influence, 4(3), 185–199. doi:10.1080/15534510802584368
24 Spears, R., Lea, M., & Lee, S. (1990). De-individuation and group polarization
in computer-mediated communication. British Journal of Social Psychology,
29(2), 121–134. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8309.1990.tb00893.x
25 Negroponte, N. (1996). Being digital. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
26 Himelboim, I., McCreery, S., & Smith, M. (2013). Birds of a feather tweet
together: Integrating network and content analyses to examine cross-
ideology exposure on Twitter. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion, 18(2), 40–60. doi:10.1111/jcc4.12001
27 Yardi, S., & boyd, d. (2010). Dynamic debates: An analysis of group polariza-
tion over time on Twitter. Bulletin of Science, Technology and Society, 30(5),
316–327. doi:10.1177/0270467610380011
28 Howard, P. N., & Hussain, M. M. (2013). Democracy’s fourth wave?: Digital
media and the Arab Spring. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
29 Andersen, R. S. (2012). Remediating #iranelection. Journalism Practice, 6(3),
317–336. doi:10.1080/17512786.2012.663593
30 Yang, Q., & Liu, Y. (2014). What’s on the other side of the great firewall?
Chinese web users’ motivations for bypassing the Internet censorship. Com-
puters in Human Behavior, 37, 249–257. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.04.054
31 Government requests to remove content. (2015). Retrieved February 10,
2015, from www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/government/?
hl=en
32 Sullivan, K. (2015, January 20). Flogging case in Saudi Arabia is just one sign
of a new crackdown on rights activists. The Washington Post. Retrieved
from
www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/a-flogging-in-saudi-
arabia-is-just-one-sign-of-a-new-crackdown-on-rights-activists/2015/01/20/
e9c50f86-9da0-11e4-86a3-1b56f64925f6_story.html
33 Jones, C., & Wallace, P. (2007). Networks unleashed: Mobile communication
and the evolution of networked organizations. In S. Kleinman (Ed.). Dis-
placing place: Mobile communication in the twenty-first century. New York,
NY: Peter Lang Publishers.
34 Houston, J. B., Seo, H., Knight, L. A. T., Kennedy, E. J., Hawthorne, J., & Trask,
S. L. (2013). Urban youth’s perspectives on flash mobs. Journal of Applied
Communication Research, 41(3), 236–252. doi:10.1080/00909882.2013.825728
35 Friedman, T. L. (2005). The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first
century. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
36 Hightower, R., & Sayeed, L. (1995). The impact of computer-mediated com-
munication systems on biased group discussion. Computers in Human
Behavior, 11(1), 33–44. doi:10.1016/0747-5632(94)00019-E
94
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

37 O’Leary, M. B., & Mortensen, M. (2009). Go (con)figure: Subgroups, imbal-
ance, and isolates in geographically dispersed teams. Organization Science, 21
(1), 115–131. doi:10.1287/orsc.1090.0434
38 Privman, R., Hiltz, S. R., & Wang, Y. (2013). In-group (us) versus out-group
(them) dynamics and effectiveness in partially distributed teams. IEEE
Transactions
on
Professional
Communication,
56(1),
33–49.
doi:10.1109/
TPC.2012.2237253
39 Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T.W. (1984). Social psychological aspects of
computer-mediated communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123–1134.
40 Walther, J. B. (19960201). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal,
interpersonal, and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23
(1), 3–43.
41 Moscovici, S., Lage, E., & Naffrechoux, M. (1969). Influence of a consistent
minority on the responses of a majority in a color perception task. Sociom-
etry, 32(4), 365–380. doi:10.2307/2786541
42 McLeod, L. P., Baron, R. S., Weighner Marti, M., & Kuh Yoon, M. (1997). The
eyes have it: Minority influence in face-to-face and computer-mediated
group discussion. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(5), 706–718.
43 Bazarova, N. N., Walther, J. B., & McLeod, P. L. (2012). Minority influence in
virtual groups a comparison of four theories of minority influence. Com-
munication Research, 39(3), 295–316. doi:10.1177/0093650211399752
44 Osborn, A. (1953). Applied imagination. New York, NY: Scribner.
45 Connolly, T. (1997). Electronic brainstorming: Science meets technology
in the group meeting room. In S. Kiesler (Ed.), Culture of the Internet
(pp. 263–276). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
46 Lynch, A. L., Murthy, U. S., & Engle, T. J. (2009). Fraud brainstorming using
computer-mediated communication: The effects of brainstorming tech-
nique and facilitation. Accounting Review, 84(4), 1209–1232.
47 Smith, A. L., Murthy, U. S., & Engle, T. J. (2012). Why computer-mediated
communication improves the effectiveness of fraud brainstorming. Inter-
national
Journal
of
Accounting
Information
Systems,
13(4),
334–356.
doi:10.1016/j.accinf.2012.03.002
48 Jarvenpaa, S. L., Knoll, K., & Leidner, D. E. (1998). Is anybody out there?
Journal of Management Information Systems, 14(4), 29–64.
49 Crisp, C. B., & Jarvenpaa, S. L. (2013). Swift trust in global virtual teams:
Trusting beliefs and normative actions. Journal of Personnel Psychology, 12
(1), 45–56. doi:10.1027/1866-5888/a000075
95
GROUP DYNAMICS ON THE INTERNET

4
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE
AGGRESSION
Caroline Criado-Perez learned firsthand how aggression unfolds
online – on Twitter in her case. She was posting on social media to
advocate for a female figure to appear on a Bank of England note when
Internet trolls launched their attack. Two of the perpetrators used
more than 80 separate accounts to bombard Criado-Perez with vile
tweets that threatened rape, murder, and torture. The attacks were
life changing for the victim, who couldn’t sleep and doubted whether
the abuse would ever end.
Rarely, offenders are caught, and the two did prison time for their
actions. While savvy trolls work hard to cover their digital tracks,
these offenders were not very careful. An alert investigator tracked
down one down because he linked a Twitter account to a videogame
profile, where he used his real name.
The man and woman who committed this aggression are two
different kinds of trolls, and while their behavior was similar, the
underlying causes were not. The man’s lawyer described him as a
sad individual with little social life, no criminal record, and learning
difficulties. The woman, however, was socially active, with many
offline friendships. Initially, she defended her actions with tweets
like these:
You’re in the public eye, you’re on Twitter, then you should expect some sort
of abuse. People take it all the time. Why are you different?!
letters/words are never a threat. They’re hardly going to jump off the page
at you
96

But later, she seemed remorseful about her behavior:
Of course, I support woman’s rights, being one myself. I’m ashamed of my
behaviour and like I’ve previously stated I won’t be doing anything like this
again.1
What causes human aggression? Biological factors may play a role,
particularly higher testosterone levels. But environmental factors
may play a larger role. Many people believe that the Internet is loaded
with trolling, fighting, and flaming and that aggression in general is
higher online than offline because of the nature of the environment.
Certainly, some research confirms this, especially the early studies on
computer-mediated communication (CMC) that uncovered startling
levels of name calling, swearing, and insults – much higher than in
face-to-face groups. Indeed, the woman’s attorney claimed she was a
“victim of new technology as she did not understand the impact of
what she was doing.”
Her behavior illustrates that online aggression is a complex behav-
ior with many different roots. What factors might make people behave
more aggressively online than they would in other settings? Online
environments vary a great deal, but many feature characteristics
known to promote disinhibition in other settings – frustration, ano-
nymity, invisibility, and physical distance. Let’s start with frustration.
FRUSTRATION AND AGGRESSION
At a stoplight, the driver is engrossed in a phone call and doesn’t notice
when the light turns green. It takes no more than a second before
horns start honking. According to frustration-aggression theory, the
frustration that the other drivers feel can lead to anger, and anger
triggers a hostile action – not just a little beep to get that driver’s
attention, but a loud and prolonged blast.
Back in the 1940s, when war rumors began spreading worldwide
and social psychologists were becoming intensely interested in the
nature of human aggression, Roger Barker and Kurt Lewin conducted
an experiment to see just what happened when you produce frustra-
tion in young children.2 They showed a room filled with intriguing
toys to two separate groups of children, but the children couldn’t
reach the toys because they were behind a wire screen. For one group,
the researchers opened the screen right away and the children rushed
97
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

in to play. The other kids were told they had to wait. When the screen
finally opened, many of these frustrated children smashed the toys
and broke them.
Frustration is even more likely to bring out an aggressive response
when we are very close to the goal and something, or someone, blocks
us from achieving it. Snatching defeat out of the jaws of victory is
particularly frustrating in the final seconds of a game, and tensions run
very high at sporting events in which this occurs. An early study of
people waiting in line – for theater tickets or grocery store checkout,
for example – led to similar conclusions.3 A confederate cut into
the line, either in front of the second person in line or in front of the
twelfth person. People closer to the goal, who were number two in
line, reacted more aggressively to the line cutter.
Is the Internet environment a frustrating place, one that might
make us more likely to show anger when something happens to
bother us? It certainly can be. Consider the barrage of endless interrup-
tions that thwart people as they try to accomplish a task using a
computer. Alert messages remind you to update software and then
reboot your computer. Wifi signals mysteriously disappear. The screen
freezes, or the “blue screen of death” appears – before you saved your
work. And your inbox constantly fills up with irrelevant spam, all
those newsletters you never requested, or suspicious phishing messages.
The explosive growth in online commercial activity is another
major contributor, and research on strategies to attract customers
is flourishing. Revenue from advertising and targeted marketing is
the lifeblood for many websites, especially social media sites and
newspapers that are free to the public. But those advertisements
and promotions lead to frustration and annoyance, so people find
ways to ignore or delete them. Clickable banner ads, for example, once
attracted a respectable number of clicks, but “banner blindness” set
in some time ago. Click-through rates are extremely low – fewer than
than one in 100 visitors click on those ads. Eye tracking studies also
show that people don’t look at them much, and they remember little
about them.4 Companies eager for more attention began using richer
media in those ads, such as videos or animated graphics. But the
annoyance level grows and “ad blocking” software becomes wide-
spread, defeating the company’s purpose.
To bypass that banner blindness, some companies are creatively
embedding promotions inside the steps of a transaction, which just
increases frustration. You might, for example, be buying a train ticket
98
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

when a page appears offering discount coupons for restaurants in your
destination city. Confronted with a maze of choices, you become
confused about whether you can skip the page. One study that
explored this strategy asked subjects to try out one of several websites,
some of which contained that kind of embedded promotion. One was
a simulated airline reservation system, and subjects were asked to
imagine they were purchasing tickets to visit a friend in Chicago and
complete the transaction. Those whose transaction was interrupted by
a promotional message (to fill out some information to get a free
coupon) were significantly more confused, irritated, and frustrated,
compared with those who did not.
Embedded promotions are here to stay, however. That study also
showed that promotions embedded in those step-by-step transactions
really do work, partly because people – especially novice users – are not
certain whether that “optional” page is really optional, and they don’t
want to have to start over.5
Online customer service is another major source of frustration.
One survey found that 58 percent of consumers were unable to
resolve their issues on the web and that most of those consumers
eventually gave up after spending more than 30 minutes trying.6
People are also reluctant to phone a customer support line, knowing
they would likely struggle with a complicated phone menu and a
long wait.
Any kind of unpleasant event can lower our thresholds for an
aggressive response, and frustration is one of them. But the key ingredi-
ent is that aversive stimulation in general triggers a state of negative
affect. Once in this state, our ability to dispassionately reflect on
the events around us declines, and we become more likely to lean
toward a negative interpretation of stimuli that under other circum-
stances we might view as neutral.
If frustrating circumstances lower the threshold for an aggressive
response, what is the actual trigger? If we are sufficiently primed,
almost anything could set us off because our perceptions are distorted.
We might find an email from a colleague containing one sentence
that reads, “WE NEED YOUR INPUT BY TOMORROW! PLEASE!”
In a calmer state of mind, you might laugh and imagine the writer in
a begging mode, desperate for your invaluable help on this project.
However, if you are in a frustrated state, your perceptions are affected
and you interpret the email quite differently. You might feel anger
toward this coworker’s arrogant and pushy behavior.
99
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

That online communications can be quite ambiguous makes it
even easier for people experiencing aversive stimulation to interpret
it in certain ways.
AMBIGUITY IN ONLINE COMMUNICATIONS
Try this experiment. Think of a catchy song, one that most people
would know, and tap it out with your fingers on a table. How confi-
dent are you that a friend would be able to guess the song? Write
down your answer in terms of percentage. Now recruit someone
to listen to your tapping and ask him or her to guess what song it is.
Did your ‘”subject” guess correctly?
In a classic study of this phenomenon, subjects showed stark
overconfidence about how clear their tapping message would be to
listeners. The tappers thought half the listeners would guess the tune,
but in reality, those listeners guessed correctly only twice out of
150 tunes.7
We are typically overconfident about the clarity of our communi-
cations, when they are often rather ambiguous and easily misinter-
preted. To some extent, this overconfidence arises because we are
looking at things (or hearing things) in an egocentric way – from our
own perspective rather the perspective of the listener. The tappers
could hear the music in their own minds, possibly even all the words
and a full orchestration. The listeners just heard the tapping.
Sarcasm Misinterpreted
Text-based communication is plagued with ambiguity because of the
absence of all those nonverbal and paralinguistic cues that can clarify
and complement the message. And similar to those subjects in the
tapping experiment, senders are often quite overconfident that their
text messages are clearly understood, when in fact, they are not.
Attempts at sarcasm, for instance, often lead to misinterpretation, hurt
feelings, and retaliation. Even with a smiley face emoticon, a sarcastic
remark can easily fall flat, creating puzzlement for the overconfident
sender and annoyance or anger for the recipient.
A series of experiments on how sarcasm is interpreted when it is
conveyed either by email or voice showed clearly that sarcasm is a
danger area for miscommunication.8 In one experiment, for instance,
college students read statements that were either serious or sarcastic,
100
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

and then chose ten of them to communicate to a partner. For instance,
one sarcastic statement read, “I really enjoy dating because I like
feeling as self-conscious and inadequate as possible.”
One member of each pair read their chosen statements into a voice
recorder, while the other typed them into a computer. Then all the
participants rated how confident they were that their partner would
recognize whether each statement was sarcastic or serious. How did
the partners actually do? Figure 4.1 shows the results.
Regardless of whether senders were using email or voice, they were
quite confident that the recipient would detect the message tone
(solid line), predicting that the recipients would get it right almost
80 percent of the time. Their confidence was almost warranted when
they used voice to convey the message (73.1%). But when they used
email, their partners scored barely above chance accuracy (56%).
After they read or listened to the messages, all of those partners
rated how confident they were that they correctly detected the tone
of the message. Here again, overconfidence prevailed. Even though
those who read the typed messages were unable to separate sarcasm
Figure 4.1. Anticipated and actual accuracy for sarcastic and serious messages
conveyed by email or voice. (From Kruger, J., Epley, N., Parker, J., & Ng, Z.-W.
(2005). Egocentrism over e-mail: Can we communicate as well as we think? Journal
of Personality & Social Psychology, 89(6), 925–936. Published by the American Psycho-
logical Association and reprinted with permission.)
101
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

from seriousness, they certainly thought they were able to. They were
just as confident about their detection skills as the ones who listened
to the messages.
You can imagine what this overconfidence and egocentrism can
lead to when people are communicating online. Misinterpreted text
messages can turn what could be a useful discussion into hostile
and aggressive exchanges.
When Does a Flame Become a Flame?
A study that used a fictional series of posts between “Dr. Ski” and
“Snow Pro” attempted to nail down what makes a flame a flame,
at least in the eyes of the audience.9 The posts became progressively
more disagreeable and antagonistic, and volunteers rated each one
on a scale from 1 (not flaming) to 7 (flaming). The incident begins
when “A Total Novice” asks for some suggestions for a good ski school.
Message 2, from Snow Pro, in response to a question from A Total
Novice:
A Total Novice asks:
> Is there a good ski school or learn-to-ski package
> someone could recommend?
Brighton is a good place to learn to ski. That’s where I learned, and
I think they offer a special deal for beginners.
– Snow Pro
Message 3, from Dr. Ski, also in response to A Total Novice’s
question:
In response to A Total Novice who wrote. . .
> I want to learn how to ski.
Alta is the area I would suggest. Alta has really great slopes, and a
lot of them. I ski there almost every weekend.
– Dr. Ski
The tension between Snow Pro and Dr. Ski rises after a few messages in
which the two disagree:
Message 6, from Snow Pro, directed to Dr. Ski
If Alta has a reputation, it’s for crowded slopes. Learning to
ski at Alta is like learning to drive on a freeway! :-) For
those just learning to ski, Brighton offers the best combination
of great snow, comfortable surroundings, and relaxed pace.
– Snow Pro
102
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

By Message 9, the character attacks are well under way:
Message 9, from Dr. Ski in reply to a post from Snow Pro
Snow Pro made reference to
>the ski snobs like Dr. Ski who go to Alta
Snobs? What a joke! Real skiers like Alta because we take skiing
seriously. Skiing is more than just snow, slopes and lifts, which is
all Brighton offers, and barely that. Only nerds like Snow Pro would
admit to skiing at a pit like Brighton. :–)
– Dr. Ski
Message 10, from Snow Pro in reply to a post from Dr. Ski
It’s obvious that Dr. Ski doesn’t want to carry on a civil
conversation. It’s also obvious that Dr. Ski doesn’t know a
damn thing about skiing. Let me ask you, Dr. Ski, is your
diploma from a cereal box? :–)
– Snow Pro
The ratings showed that people gradually perceive a sequence that
begins with a disagreement and gets more heated as a flame war.
Observers’ perceptions jump over to the flame side when they detect
some tension – as in Message 6. When character attacks and foul
language appear, observers widely agree a flame war is in progress. It
is interesting that the little smileys helped to reduce the perception
that the messages were flames when they were just disagreements.
When the emoticons were added to really nasty messages, however,
the smileys just made them look even more sarcastic.
ANONYMITY
Anonymity, or the perception of it, is another potent ingredient that
can lead to aggression. When people believe their actions cannot be
attributed directly to them personally, they tend to become less
inhibited by social conventions and restraints. This can be very posi-
tive, particularly when people are offered the opportunity to discuss
difficult personal issues under conditions in which they feel safer. As
we will see in Chapter 6, the online support groups are flourishing,
partly because participants feel freer to voice sensitive issues in the
relatively anonymous Internet environment than they might in a
face-to-face support group within their communities. However,
anonymity can also unleash aggressive behavior under the right
103
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

circumstances. Depending on the situation, anonymity could lead
to what is called toxic disinhibition.
Philip Zimbardo’s classic study of how anonymity can negatively
affect human behavior involved students who were asked to adminis-
ter electric shocks to another person in a lab setting. Students
randomly assigned to a treatment group wore hoods and lab coats,
so their sense of anonymity was heightened. The other students in the
control group wore regular clothing and a name tag. The hooded
students chose to administer longer shocks.10
Obviously, most people on the Internet are not cloaking themselves
in anonymity, and they willingly add their names, affiliations, and
favorite quotes to their profiles, emails, or book reviews. Nevertheless,
considerable Internet communication does occur under conditions
in which the participants believe that they will not be personally
identified. And research demonstrates that aggression can result.
For example, in an online group decision-making task, team members
whose names did not appear before each of their messages made more
hostile and uninhibited remarks compared with other groups in
which names were linked to each comment. Just leaving off the names
affected how the participants behaved.11
The Components of Anonymity
Our understanding of “anonymous” is somewhat more complicated
than the actual meaning of the word, derived from the Greek, mean-
ing “without a name” or “nameless.” For example, people you pass in
the street may be nameless, but they might still be easily identifiable
because you recognize their faces. Identifiability, or lack thereof,
might be a more important contributor to toxic disinhibition online
compared with namelessness. Even if you add a name to your post,
and routinely post under that name, you might still feel relatively
unidentifiable. Readers would have little information about your
location, profession, gender, ethnicity, or age unless you voluntarily
offered these tidbits.
Another aspect of anonymity is visibility, or invisibility if there are
no webcams, videos, or photos involved. In a face-to-face setting,
invisibility created by darkness produces more disinhibition as
people feel more willing to abandon social constraints and norms.
Online, invisibility can have similar disinhibiting effects. In an online
classroom in which everyone is identifiable, the lack of visibility
104
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

may be an important factor for some students, who might be shy
or physically less attractive but who become more outgoing and
confident online. These students relish not having to worry about
how they look or whether classmates will snicker at their choice
of clothes.
Studies that compare outcomes from work groups that use text-
based communications, videoconference, or face-to-face interaction
also suggest that visibility plays a role in the disinhibiting effects of
anonymity. One such study created groups who used one of these
three communication environments to work out the “Moon Survival”
problem. Subjects imagined themselves crash landing on the moon far
from the base, and they only have fifteen pieces of usable equipment
left. Individually, subjects ranked the equipment in order of value
to survival, and then, working together, came to a group consensus.
(This kind of problem, which has a correct solution provided by NASA,
is more likely to elicit disagreement and disinhibition compared
with more open-ended tasks.) As expected, the groups using CMC
made more comments categorized as flames compared with those
using face-to-face communication – almost twelve times as many.
Videoconferencing, however, helped. Those groups made just twice
as many flames as the face-to-face group.12
The Eyes Have It
Videoconferencing eliminates the invisibility component of anonym-
ity, but there is more to a face-to-face setting than just visibility.
When people are in the same room, they can manage many aspects
of their interactions, such as the physical distance separating them and
their gestures. They also manage eye contact in subtle ways, maintain-
ing it to secure attention or glancing away to show disagreement or
boredom.
A videoconferencing system may simulate eye contact in some
ways, but it does not quite reproduce it. On a Skype video chat, for
example, the only time your partner would get the feeling of
“eye contact” is when you look directly at the camera itself. But most
people look at the screen where their partner’s image appears. Because
the camera may be some distance away, there is no “eye contact.”
The position of the camera can also contribute to the strangeness
of the interaction. If it is high up, the viewer mostly watches the
top of the other person’s head. If it is low or if the person is holding
105
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

the smartphone and looking down at it, the chin is more prominent
and the “vampire” effect emerges. Movie directors often use that low
angle camera shot to make a villain appear more threatening. In either
case, online “eye contact” is difficult to simulate.
An intriguing experiment attempted to separate out the eye contact
aspect of anonymity to see how that variable affects toxic disinhibi-
tion and flaming.13 Researchers randomly assigned partners to each
subject and gave them the “life-saving drug dilemma.” All participants
were told to imagine that a very close friend badly needed this scarce
drug, and they should try to convince the partner that their own
friend’s need was the greatest. All the pairs communicated using text
chat on an instant messaging service, but the experimenters manipu-
lated anonymity levels for the pairs.
Some pairs used randomly assigned aliases, to create the nameless-
ness type of anonymity. In contrast, nonanonymous pairs displayed
many personal identifiers – name, age, gender, and college major.
Pairs in another “visible” group were equipped with one camera that
showed their partners a side view of one another. Those in the “invis-
ible” condition did not use any cameras. Finally, eye contact was
manipulated by equipping some pairs with a camera at eye level,
and the partners were told to look directly into the camera during
the discussion. In all, there were eight sets of pairs, each with a differ-
ent combination of treatments.
The
dilemma
itself
was
intense,
and
the
typed
discussions
contained comments such as “You’re an a**hole,” “Shut up!,” and
“You’re talking like a typical woman.” Subjects also used symbols
and punctuation to convey aggression, such as “Wellllllllllllllll??” and
“@#!@#$$%@#%#&.”
Pairs that had all three types of anonymity – namelessness, invisi-
bility, and no eye contact – showed the most flaming overall. But the
variable that had the most effect was the presence or absence of eye
contact. The old expression “Look me in the eye and say that!” appar-
ently offers good advice.
That eye contact is more important than namelessness in deterring
toxic disinhibition helps explain why efforts to require commenters
to provide their names have not been very effective. Korea enacted
stiff laws to stem the tide of hostile commenting on popular websites,
by requiring commenters to provide their national ID numbers or to
use a credit card, but the laws had little effect. A study by the Korean
Communications Commission found that toxic comments dropped
106
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

by less than 1 percent. Worse, the sites were overrun by hackers,
attracted by the new opportunities for identity theft.14
RETALIATION
How do we determine what constitutes a “justified” response, and
what is the appropriate level of retaliation, in our judgment, in any
particular situation? According to some surveys, the most provocative
kinds of insults are the ones in which someone appears to be attacking
our character, competence, or physical appearance.15 This suggests that
certain kinds of events on the Internet are especially likely to trigger
retaliation.
The very human and ordinary response to a real or imagined insult
is to retaliate in kind. In a typical study on retaliation, two subjects
may be paired to compete against one another in a reaction time
experiment. After each round, the winner chooses the level of shock
to give to the loser. The experiment, however, is carefully programmed
and there is really only one subject; the other “subject” is a computer
program designed to manipulate the wins, losses, and shock levels in
predictable ways. As you might expect, the real subjects retaliate in
kind. If the computer is programmed as a vengeful villain who delivers
large shocks to the subject after every loss, the subject strikes back with
at least equal force.16
When we decide how to retaliate and how aggressive to be about it,
we pick a method and level that, in our minds, matches what the
offender did to us, but then ups the ante. In some Internet episodes,
it begins to sound like the children’s game of raising the stakes:
“You’re a jerk,” “You’re a double jerk,” “You’re a jerk times ten,”
“You and your whole family are jerks.” To the uninvolved, some flame
wars sound just as silly.
Others are more serious and loaded with detailed arguments for
or against an issue, with the verbal aggression and thinly veiled char-
acter attacks embedded more and more deeply as the controversy
escalates. They can go on for many weeks and the combatants may
insist that they are not in any flame war; they are just “discussing”
a subject and “debating” a point.
Flame wars that erupt inside long-standing, normally peaceful
groups can be extremely disruptive. Bystanders who attempt to defuse
the discussion might get drawn in instead. I know a few individuals
who can use extraordinary wit and the skill of a professional mediator
107
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

to help the combatants see the lighter side of their behavior, often
because they make fun of themselves as they gently chide the partici-
pants in the flame war. They avoid the substance of the debate
entirely and focus instead on an amusing side issue that could rebuild
group cohesiveness. If the war goes on, however, it could do serious
damage to relationships.
Reproaches
One way in which people attempt to control flamers and others
whose behavior in a discussion group is not in line with the group’s
norms is to use the reproach. A participant will gently or not so gently
remind group members, either publicly or with a private message,
about acceptable group behavior. One study that tracked reproach
episodes examined some posts on a discussion group for singles, in
which the norms prohibited personal ads. Here are excerpts from a
reproach episode that delves deeply into some creative sarcasm:17
The Offense
Hi, I’m a 23 year old graduate student and would like to
communicate with any females on this news net.
– (Posted for a non-net friend) –
The Reproach
Well, Howdy! Finally a request for a female that doesn’t
specify species – you wouldn’t believe how many people on this
net want a woman, which of course means a person. *giggle*
My name is Susa, and I’m a ﬁve-year-old Lemur in the Philly
Zoo. My measurements are 12–12–12, which is considered quite
sexy for a lemur *giggle* we all fail the pencil test *giggle*
My hobbies include running around, climbing trees, and picking
lice; I hope you have a nice thick head of hair!
I only write to stupid people who post personals on soc.
singles; the other ones are too smart for me – we lemurs may be
very_cuddly *giggle but we tend to be on the low end of the
smarts scale. I know that with that post, you’ll be really_dumb
for a human, and perfect for me! *giggle*
The Accounting
In reference to my posting a few hours ago.. I have just
discovered that this is the wrong news group! Thanks to so many
108
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

people, among others, so if you’ll all quit sending me more
messages, I move on.
OK? But those who seem to have nothing better to do feel free
to do whatever you want!
Reproachers themselves are often taken to task by participants other
than the offender for a variety of reasons. If the offense arose from a
lack of knowledge, a sarcastic reproacher might be accused of bullying
newcomers. Episodes like this one can sometimes engage the whole
community in a meta-discussion of the group’s norms and appropriate
responses to honest mistakes.
Overretaliation
When you believe that someone did you harm, your most likely
response is to retaliate, to strike back, with words or actions.
But suppose your retaliation is more than just an “eye for an eye”?
What happens when you thrash someone for merely stepping on your
toe? Rationally, you might assume that an apology would be in order,
especially if the misstep was not intentional. Unfortunately, humans
are not always this rational, particularly because most of us have a
strong desire to think we are decent and fair human beings. Ironically,
our desire to cling to a belief in our own rationality can lead us to some
very strange perceptual contortions.
Leon Festinger’s widely known theory of cognitive dissonance pre-
dicts that we will feel uncomfortable when we do something that does
not jibe with our own attitudes, beliefs, or perceptions. This tension
motivates us to find some way to bring our actions and thoughts
in line again, and while we can’t erase what we did, it is not all that
difficult to modify our perceptions. We revise our views of the
offender and the offending incident and begin to think of them as
worse than they actually were. This mental revisionism can occur
whenever we behave aggressively toward someone who didn’t really
deserve such harsh treatment. Even more alarming is that it also occurs
when the person never deserved any retaliation at all.
In an early study on overretaliation, subjects watched an interview
with someone they thought was another student but who was really a
confederate of the experimenters.18 These researchers instructed
each real subject to provide negative feedback to the interviewee/
confederate – to state clearly that the subject thought the interviewee
109
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

was shallow, untrustworthy, and a generally dull and boring person.
Before the subjects made these brutal comments, they generally
found their interviewees to be reasonably attractive. But after the
interview, the subjects lowered their opinion of the interviewee/
confederate and rated that individual as less attractive. As cognitive
dissonance theory predicts, the subjects tended to bring their actions
and thoughts into line. Aware that they were verbally cruel to
the interviewee, they revised their opinions downward so that their
actions would seem justified. This change occurred even though the
cruelty was not the subjects’ own choice; they were just following the
researcher’s instructions.
Given how eager we are to justify our aggressive acts, it isn’t difficult
to guess that we would paint a negative picture of a target we just
reproached. The post directed to the participant who submitted a
brief personal ad struck me as this kind of overretaliation, filled with
other-directed humor, sarcasm, and personal criticism. That reproacher
might engage in some dissonance-reducing maneuvers to justify the
harsher-than-necessary correction, perhaps coming to believe that
the offender was an unattractive and unsavory character who
deserved the rebuke.
Don’t Feed the Trolls
People who deliberately try to start arguments or sow discord with
deceptive, aggressive, inflammatory, insulting or vile comments are
the trolls of the Internet. They deluge sites on which public comment-
ing is allowed. Reproaches or any kind of retaliation on such sites is
unlikely to have any effect other than to reward trolling behavior
with attention and keep things going far longer.
Erin Buckels and her colleagues surveyed a sample of Internet users
and found that 5.6 percent reported that they enjoyed trolling.19 The
researchers developed a new survey instrument, called the Global
Assessment of Internet Trolling, that contained items such as these:
I consider myself to be a troll.
Do you enjoy trolling memorial pages of people who died (RIP trolling)?
The more beautiful and pure a thing is, the more satisfying it is to corrupt.
People who agreed with these sentiments also tended to earn high
scores
on
the
measures
designed
to
assess
psychopathy
and
110
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Machiavellianism. For example, those high on psychopathy tended to
agree with statements such as “Payback needs to be quick and nasty.”
The Machiavelllianism scale includes items such as “It’s not wise to tell
your secrets” and “There’s a sucker born every minute.”
The scores of people who enjoyed trolling were also especially high
on the items designed to assess both direct and vicarious sadism, such
as “I enjoy hurting people,” “I enjoy making jokes at the expense of
others,” and “In video games, I like the realistic blood spurts.” As the
researchers put it, “Both trolls and sadists feel sadistic glee at the
distress of others. Sadists just want to have fun . . . and the Internet is
their playground!”
The lack of accountability, relative anonymity, and other features of
so many online environments can indeed add up to a playground for
sadists. The more people who respond to those with that kind of
psychological makeup, the more fun they have. As we discuss later
in this chapter, many websites have taken measures to combat
trolling, although without much success.
Anonymity on the Internet, however, is a moving target. The tools
for identifying Internet users keep improving, as do the techniques
available to remain anonymous. The success of any tracking effort
rests partly on the determination and skill of the tracker and trackee.
However, even though an individual’s identity might be traceable,
simply the heightened feeling of anonymity promotes disinhibited
behavior.
Pre-Internet, people could certainly drop angry, unsigned letters
into the mailbox that would be difficult to trace. Now, we can use a
public computer to send emails from a hastily created free email
account, and reach far more recipients compared with the letter-
writer, at much lower cost. In other words, one angry person could
create considerable havoc with little expense or effort.
Another characteristic of the online world that probably makes it
easier to let our tempers loose is simply that we are hurling the flames
from quite a distance. Internet users span the globe, and any virtual
community of people, or conversational partners, could be right
next door to one another or half a planet away. They are not in the
same room, however, so the physical distance measurement is already
several notches larger than it would be in a face-to-face meeting. It is
easier to attack someone if they are out of sight and far away. We can’t
see the injured and pained expression on their faces, and we feel safer
and more immune to a counterattack.
111
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

CATHARSIS: IS LETTING OFF STEAM GOOD FOR YOU?
While features of the online environment tend to draw out more
verbal aggression, we can also ask whether that is a good or bad thing.
If we have a tendency to react more negatively to minor slights,
and vent our anger with language that we would rarely use in any
real life setting, are we letting off some steam that might be released
somewhere else? Psychoanalysts suggest that we all have aggressive
impulses, and it does us good to vent them once in a while. If we don’t,
they build up, and we may explode against our loved ones or turn
our Thanatos drive inward to self-destruction. Perhaps the Internet
gives us a safe playground for catharsis, and when we use it that way
we become much happier, kinder, and mentally healthier in real life.
The notion that a cathartic release of aggressive impulses turns
down the pressure, lets us “blow off steam,” and keeps us from
erupting violently sounds attractive and plausible on the surface.
Unfortunately, psychological research shows it does not work that
way most of the time. Instead, behaving aggressively tends to increase
our aggressive tendencies, not reduce them.
One early study that demonstrated this phenomenon involved
people who were laid off from a company and felt some anger about
it.20 When such terminated employees were interviewed just after
they received their pink slips, the researcher gave some of them a
chance to vent their anger at their employers by asking leading ques-
tions. One was, “What instances can you think of where the company
has not been fair to you?” Many of the laid-off workers seized the
chance to air their angry feelings. Later, when all of them completed
questionnaires that asked about their attitudes toward the company
and their supervisors, the ones who had vented their anger showed
the most hostility. Their catharsis did not release pressure from the
steam valve at all; instead, it intensified their anger.
The widespread belief that catharsis is good for you led to the
launch of “rant” websites, where people can vent their anger online.
On one site, for instance, a retiree ranted about family and friends who
constantly ask her to do something for them: “NO, I don’t want to
babysit! NO, I don’t want to fix your computer! NO! I don’t want
to take care of your dog . . .”21 This rant was quite mild compared with
others, but you get the idea.
A survey of people who frequent that particular rant site dis-
covered many different motives, such as curiosity, entertainment,
and a sense of community.22 Over one third said the site made
112
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

them feel better about their own lives by comparison, and a few
reported enjoying other people’s misery. All of them said they felt
“calm and relaxed” after they posted a rant. That doesn’t match
what other studies find, but these people chose to visit the site, and
that might explain the results.
In a follow-up laboratory study, college students first read through a
series of authentic rants from the site, and then added one of their
own. These students reported feeling sadder and angrier after reading
rants, and especially after writing a rant, with one exception. The
researchers asked each student whether to post the rant they created
in the lab onto the live site. Most said “No,” but those who said
“Go ahead!” did not feel sad at all.
For most people, ranting has immediate negative consequences and
increases anger. But a few people – such as those who hang out on such
sites and are more prone to anger in the first place – feel a short-term
lift that keeps them coming back. The negative consequences,
however, may unfold over a longer time period.
CYBERSTALKING
American opera singer Leandra Ramm found herself the victim in a
case of international cyberstalking that lasted more than six years.
In 2005, a Singaporean man who attended one of her performances
starting sending her death threats and intimidating voice messages.
He posted pictures of the singer plastered with foul threats on a blog,
and he obtained email addresses of her family members, friends, and
potential employers. Ramm sought the help of law enforcement for
years with little success, partly because the man was outside the reach
of U.S. agencies. The man was finally brought to justice by Singaporean
authorities in 2013, and sentenced to three years in prison. Yet, despite
expanded legislation that addresses electronic harassment, many more
cyberstalkers go undiscovered and unpunished.
What exactly is cyberstalking? Legal definitions vary considerably,
although many emphasize the use of telecommunications and the
Internet to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass the person who receives
the communications. Some laws include language about fear, such as
victims must fear death or serious bodily harm; other laws address
emotional distress. As is true for many aspects of the online environ-
ment, laws often fail to capture changing technologies and the creative
ways in which people can tap them to achieve some end. For instance,
113
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

a legal requirement that the victim must receive the communication
disregards the stalker who sends malicious emails to a victim’s
employer. And of course, some countries have no laws at all, which is
why international cyberstalkers can be so difficult to stop.
Cyberstalking overlaps with cyberbullying, which I discuss in
Chapter 9 on child development and the online world. Cyberbullying
includes many of the same kinds of behaviors discussed in the next
section, but the term is closely linked to school-age youth, and the
characteristics of the phenomenon are somewhat different compared
with stalking in adults.
Stalking Behaviors
Stalking, whether in person or online, is not typically a single, unmis-
takable act that everyone can agree is a crime. It is much more often a
series of events that, when added together, go beyond harassment and
cause the victim considerable distress. The following are some
examples of stalking and cyberstalking behaviors.
Stalking
▪Following or spying on the victim
▪Showing up at places where the victim is likely to appear with-
out a legitimate reason
▪Leaving unwanted items and presents at the victim’s home
▪Waiting at places for the victim to appear
Cyberstalking
▪Sending unwanted and unsolicited messages to the victim
▪Making unwanted phone calls to the victim
▪Posting unfavorable or untrue information about the victim
online
▪Sending defaced images of the victim to others
▪Hacking the victim’s social media or email accounts
▪Creating fake websites or social media accounts to impersonate
the victim
▪Sending unwanted messages to the victim’s family, friends, or
colleagues
Stalkers often combine cyberstalking and physical stalking to ramp up
their harassment. A California businessman who was stalking an
114
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

ex-girlfriend secretly attached a cell phone equipped with GPS to her
car, and added a motion detector that turned it on when the car
moved. The phone transmitted her location every minute, and the
stalker used that information to show up unexpectedly at the victim’s
destination – a bookstore, an airport, and many other places. The
victim was not only very distressed by the endless “coincidences”
but confounded by how the man knew where she would be. She got
her answer when she saw him working under her car, trying to change
the phone’s battery. The man was charged with stalking and sentenced
to sixteen months in state prison.
Another example of how stalking and cyberstalking blend into one
another involves a former Library of Congress film preservationist,
who posted fake ads on Craigslist that invited strange men to come
to his ex-girlfriend’s home for free sex. Over a three-month period, the
man posted 165 ads that lured 100 men to the woman’s Virginia farm.
Victims and Offenders
Estimating the actual prevalence of cyberstalking is challenging
because definitions vary. U.S. government surveys indicate that about
3.3 million people are stalking victims each year, and many of those
cases involve cyberstalking. A survey of more than 6,000 participants
on StudiVZ, a German social network, was used to estimate prevalence
rates based on different definitions, and as you might expect, rates
varied dramatically. More than 40 percent reported that they had
experienced online harassment at least once in their lives, but when
stricter definitions were used that align more closely with legal defin-
itions of cyberstalking, the rates dropped. Fewer than 7 percent of the
sample reported harassment that lasted more than two weeks and
that provoked fear.23
Victims and nonvictims in that study differed in several ways. For
example, over 80 percent of the victims were women. Compared
with nonvictims, victims tended to have lower income, fewer years
of education, and were more likely to be single. The most common
forms of cyberstalking included sending unwanted personal messages,
contacting other people to defame the victim, posting messages
on social media that were also visible to other users, and spreading
falsehoods on the net. Other methods included making purchases
in the victim’s name, sending viruses, and stealing the victim’s login
credentials.
115
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

Who are the offenders? Most of the victims knew who the stalker
was, and as you might expect, most of the stalkers had some relation-
ship with the victim. In a few cases, the stalker was actually a family
member.
Whether stalking is increasing because the online environment
offers new opportunities is not clear. But there are many reasons to
think that certain features of online environments contribute to the
prevalence and the impact of many kinds of online aggression.
AGGRESSION: INTERNET STYLE
In face-to-face settings, people have an almost limitless array of behav-
iors they can use to express aggression. They can glare at their victim
or shout verbal insults. They can use physical violence in many forms,
from a poke on the arm to a gunshot in the head. Aggression is
commonly defined as any form of behavior directed toward the goal
of harming or injuring another living being, and it leaves open an
enormous expanse of possibilities by which to do it.
On the Internet, this definition serves equally well, though the
range of choices is rather different. From a psychological perspective,
online environments have quite a few features that not only encour-
age aggressive behavior but amplify and prolong its impact. Here are
the major ones:
1. Anonymity. Even though aggressors’ IP addresses or ISP
accounts may be discoverable, the heightened perception that
they are wearing that “white hood” can be disinhibiting. As we
discussed, anonymity is complex, with many different compon-
ents. Some components – such as the lack of eye contact – may be
particularly important in unleashing more aggressive acts.
2. Physical distance. For the aggressor, physical distance itself
can also lead to disinhibition. When the victim can’t retaliate, at
least not immediately or with any physical action, the aggressor
can be emboldened. The distance that separates aggressor from
victim can change the character of the aggressor’s behavior. For
example, imminent physical threat can be communicated in a
face-to-face setting, but not as easily in online communications.
Instead, the aggressor can communicate threats that involve the
future, which prolongs the impact of the aggression on the
victim.
116
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

3. Amplification. In face-to-face settings, the aggressor and victim
can see one another and can also usually see who the bystanders
are and how many of them are present. The audience for online
aggression is not as clear-cut, but it can be vast. A hurtful post to a
social network site could certainly be seen by all of that person’s
network connections; worse still, some of those connections
might retweet or repost the message, resulting in a viral explosion
in audience size. One person can reach thousands or millions
of others via social media with hurtful comments about the
target. Anyone who wants to spread vicious and untrue rumors
can also start mobilizing thousands or millions of others to join
in, leading to a social media version of a shark feeding frenzy.
4. Permanence. Events occurring in a face-to-face setting happen
once, and memories fade. Dialogue may be forgotten or recon-
structed over time, and images may be reinterpreted. Online,
however, aggressive acts are permanent, so the victim will experi-
ence them again and again. Certainly he or she can delete harass-
ing emails or voice messages, but much of what goes on online
can’t be deleted so easily. Social media posts, fake websites, tweets,
and Instagram images are persistent, and search tools easily locate
harmful images that would have faded long ago in people’s
memories. The result can be frequent refreshing of the aggressor’s
harassment and the victim’s emotional response.
5. Use of multimedia. If a picture says a thousand words, an
audio recording probably says a million, and a video far more
than that. Mulitmedia presentations are game-changers in terms
of their impact on a target. Disinhibition also impacts the kinds
of things people actually post online about themselves, so it is
often not that difficult to find embarrassing or incriminating
multimedia material that an aggressor can use to victimize some-
one. And the widespread use of cell phone cameras, audio record-
ers, and camcorders means that almost any person’s actions could
be recorded, at almost any time. According to one survey, most
people have few ethical qualms about shooting a video of people
in embarrassing or compromising situations.24
STRATEGIES TO REDUCE AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR ONLINE
Some of the strategies discussed in this chapter will help lower the
temperature and reduce the overall level of hostility in online
117
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

environments. By now, everyone should know that ALL CAPS signals
shouting and anger, even when the typist’s finger just slipped and
accidentally pressed the caps lock key. The research on emoticons
should also make us all more cautious about using them, particularly
in any tense situation in which they might suggest sarcasm. They can
escalate the tension, rather than defuse it. The discussion of catharsis
also touches on ways to avoid exacerbating your own angry feelings,
which – combined with the disinhibiting features of the Internet –
could lead you to behave in ways that are uncharacteristically hostile,
abrupt, or aggressive.
In a public forum, the recommendation about not “feeding the
trolls” will help avoid rewarding people with attention when they
behave in a hostile or abusive manner. Even if your response to a
troll is negative and critical, the fact that someone responded at all
acts like a reward and perpetuates the exchange. The research on eye
contact in online environments may also offer an intriguing tip that
might reduce toxic disinhibition. When you add a profile picture,
pick one in which you are looking straight into the camera so it
simulates eye contact.
If someone in your own social network is misbehaving, you have
other options.
Unfriending, Unfollowing, Unlinking
On social networking sites, profile owners can choose to unfriend,
unfollow, or otherwise disconnect troublesome people from their net-
works. A survey of Facebook users found that old high school friends
were most likely to be unfriended, especially because they might be
expressing political or religious beliefs that cause polarization and
discord.25 When the friends were together in high school, those beliefs
might not have been as firmly established, but over time, the two
might have drifted further and further apart. People unfriended
former friends also because they found their posts to be boring and
too frequent or because they objected to the person’s offline behavior
in some way.
Those who are “unfriended” on a site such as Facebook often experi-
ence some emotional impact that could be severe. Many are surprised
and didn’t see it coming, and quite a few feel bothered or saddened by
the event. The marginal cost of leaving someone as a “friend” on a
social network is really very low, especially if you have a lot of friends.
118
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

But unfriending takes more work and serious thought about the
possible consequences. In a real-life setting, most relationships don’t
end so abruptly, with a single mouse click. Instead, they dwindle over
time as one or both parties drift away.
The context collapse phenomenon (see Chapter 2) contributes to the
desire to sort out the friend lists. Over time, a profile owner might
friend, follow, or connect to quite an assortment of people – high
school buddies, college friends, colleagues at work, bosses, family
members, fellow football fans, political associations, and many more.
Managing communications with multiple audiences is no simple chal-
lenge. Given the diversity, any member of the owner’s network could
post a message or add a link that offends at least some other people.
In any case, terminating a person’s presence in your social network
certainly sends offenders a message. It may cause them to be more
thoughtful and sensitive with posts. It could also just make them
very
mad.
Besides
unfriending,
Facebook’s
software
developers
created quite a few options for profile owners to turn down the
volume from particular friends, short of unfriending. For example, a
profile owner can choose to hide some of the person’s questionable
posts from the newsfeed so others can’t comment on them, or mute
them entirely with the “unfollow” command. Comments from other
people could exacerbate and prolong the problem, by rewarding
the commenter with attention. These intermediate steps align with
classic research in psychology about the power of reinforcement –
and the lack of it – to shape behavior. Behavioral patterns that are
rewarded will be repeated, while those that are ignored are more
likely to extinguish.
Online Reputation Systems
Technological approaches that attempt to promote prosocial behavior
online and reduce aggression are multiplying, particularly in large
communities in which the volume is very high and human moder-
ators could not handle it. A common strategy is to deploy a reputation
system in which the community members participate, using metrics
such as those in Table 4.1. These systems do much more than help
weed out abusive content. Some are actually an ingredient critical to
the site’s success, or even the reason for the site’s existence.
Yelp.com, for instance, features user reviews of retail businesses.
Visitors can consult the site to find out what others say about local
119
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

restaurants, hair salons, or car dealerships, and they can write reviews of
their own. The user-contributed reviews, and Yelp’s reputation system
that recommends certain reviews based on a variety of computer-
calculated factors, are key reasons people visit. Yelp staff work very
hard to configure the software so that it rejects fake or abusive reviews
and shows people the ones that will be most meaningful.
Reputation systems are very efficient at calculating variables such as
number of contributions, average ratings by others, thumbs up or
down, likes, shares, and related variables. These help reward people
who make a positive contribution to the community, but ignore those
whose contributions are less than welcome. For example, most websites
that permit readers to add content in the form of comments, videos, or
other material also include a link to “Report Abuse.” Due to high
volume, some systems automatically delete any content that someone
reports in that way, rather than take time to review it with human eyes.
This “shoot first and ask questions later” approach has notable
disadvantages, however. Some users will “report abuse” simply because
they disagree with the contributor’s point of view, not because the
content itself is abusive. The person whose content was reported
unfairly and automatically deleted might retaliate and click that
“report abuse” link on another poster with an opposite viewpoint.
You can imagine this escalating quickly, causing disgusted bystanders
to leave the community. Ideally, human reviewers would check the
reported content before deleting it or banning the contributor.
Table 4.1. Reputation system metrics
TYPE OF REPUTATION
SAMPLE METRICS
Reputation of the poster
(karma)
Number of contributions
Ratings of reviews by readers
Number of posts that other readers reported
as abuse
Number of contributions from the poster that
other
users have shared (e.g., retweeted)
Reputation of the content
Number of likes, dislikes, thumbs up/down
Number of replies
Number of readers who reported the content
as abusive or otherwise unacceptable
Total number of words
Average word length
Number of times viewed
Number of times shared
120
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Another challenge to reputation systems comes from trolls, who
can pollute a fast-moving community and step around any software
filters that attempt to quarantine abusive or offensive content before
other users see it.26 Yahoo! Answers had this problem because an
attractive feature of the website is timeliness. When someone posts a
question, it rises to the top of the page so community members can
answer right away, without any intervention or approval by human
beings. The software could easily filter messages containing foul lan-
guage or all caps, but it could not identify abusive questions or answers
from trolls. The engineers at Yahoo! knew they needed a solution
when an especially offensive question about cannibalism rose to the
top and stayed there for hours.
Yahoo! didn’t want to use the “shoot first” method by deleting any
content that any user reported as abusive, because there would be too
many false positives. Instead, their engineers designed a way to crowd-
source the task, granting community members the authority to cause
certain content to “hide,” through the abuse reports and voting.
This drastically reduced the amount of time it took to remove abusive
messages from the display, and likely discouraged trollers from gaming
Yahoo! Answers.
Yahoo! added one more ingenious step to this system, by sending
an automated email to the contributor whose content was hidden
to explain the appeal process. Trolls don’t often provide a real
email address, so – unlike legitimate community members whose
content was hidden in error – trolls would not learn of the appeal
process.
Strategies that tap technology advances to reduce online aggression
are likely to spread even more widely as the software improves. While
online environments may often possess characteristics that can pro-
mote anger and aggression, even in relatively peaceful human beings,
they may eventually also include elements that help to reduce or
block it. And as we learn more about what it is exactly about online
environments that affects our behavior, those strategies will improve
even more.
NOTES
1 Two guilty over abusive tweets. (2014, January 7). BBC News. Retrieved from
www.bbc.com/news/uk-25641941
2 Barker, R., Dembo, T., & Lewin, K. (1941). Frustration and regression: An experi-
ment with young children (Vol. 2). Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
121
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

3 Harris, M. B. (1974). Mediators between frustration and aggression in a field
experiment.
Journal
of
Experimental
Social
Psychology,
10(6),
561–571.
doi:10.1016/0022-1031(74)90079-1
4 Drèze, X., & Hussherr, F.-X. (2003). Internet advertising: Is anybody watch-
ing? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 17(4), 8–23. doi:10.1002/dir.10063
5 Brasel, S. A. (2010). Embedded promotions in online services: How goal-
relevance ambiguity shapes response and affect. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 16(3), 263–280. doi:10.1037/a0020831
6 Survey shows: Majority of consumers frustrated with web self-service, want
a “human” touch. (2013, December 16). Nuance Communications. Retrieved
April 19, 2014, from http://www.nuance.com/company/news-room/press-
releases/NinaWebSurvey.docx
7 Newton, E. L. (1990). The rocky road from actions to intentions. (Doctoral
dissertation). Stanford University, California. Retrieved from http://search.
proquest.com/pqdtft/docview/303855973/abstract/722E7EA3451B4915PQ/
4?accountid=11752
8 Kruger, J., Epley, N., Parker, J., & Ng, Z.-W. (2005). Egocentrism over e-mail:
Can we communicate as well as we think? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 89(6), 925–936. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.925
9 Thompsen, P. A., & Foulger, D. A. (1996). Effects of pictographs and quoting
on flaming in electronic mail. Computers in Human Behavior, 12(2), 225–243.
doi:10.1016/0747-5632(96)00004-0
10 Zimbardo, P. G. (1969). The human choice: Individuation, reason, and order
versus deindividuation, impulse, and chaos. Nebraska Symposium on Motiv-
ation, 17, 237–307.
11 Siegel, J., Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & McGuire, T. W. (1986). Group processes
in computer-mediated communication. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 37(2), 157.
12 Orengo Castellá, V., Zornoza Abad, A. M., Prieto Alonso, F., & Peiró Silla, J. M.
(2000). The influence of familiarity among group members, group atmos-
phere and assertiveness on uninhibited behavior through three different
communication media. Computers in Human Behavior, 16(2), 141–159.
doi:10.1016/S0747-5632(00)00012-1
13 Lapidot-Lefler, N., & Barak, A. (2012). Effects of anonymity, invisibility, and
lack of eye-contact on toxic online disinhibition. Computers in Human
Behavior, 28(2), 434–443. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.10.014
14 Ferenstein, G. (2012, July 29). Surprisingly good evidence that real name
policies fail to improve comments. TechCrunch. Retrieved from http://tech
crunch.com/2012/07/29/surprisingly-good-evidence-that-real-name-policies-
fail-to-improve-comments/
15 Martin, M. M., Anderson, C. M., & Horvath, C. L. (1996). Feelings about verbal
aggression: Justifications for sending and hurt from receiving verbally
aggressive messages. Communication Research Reports, 13(1), 19–26.
16 Dengerink, H. A., & Myers, J. D. (1977). Effects of failure and depression on
subsequent aggression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 88–96.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.2.88; Taylor, S. P., & Pisano, R. (1971). Physical aggres-
sion as a function of frustration and physical attack. The Journal of Social
Psychology, 84(2), 261–267. doi:10.1080/00224545.1971.9922494; Ohbuchi, K.,
& Kambara, T. (1985). Attacker’s intent and awareness of outcome, impres-
sion management, and retaliation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
21(4), 321–330. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(85)90033-2
122
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

17 Smith, C. B., McLaughlin, M. L., & Osborne, K. K. (1997). Conduct control on
Usenet. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 2(4).
18 Davis, K. E., & Jones, E. E. (1960). Changes in interpersonal perception as a
means of reducing cognitive dissonance. The Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 61(3), 402–410. doi:10.1037/h0044214
19 Buckels, E. E., Trapnell, P. D., & Paulhus, D. L. (2014). Trolls just want to
have fun. Personality and Individual Differences. 67, 97–102. doi:10.1016/j.
paid.2014.01.016
20 Ebbesen, E. B., Duncan, B., & Konecni, V. J. (1975). Effects of content of verbal
aggression on future verbal aggression: A field experiment. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 11(2), 192–204. doi:10.1016/S0022-1031(75)80021-7
21 Arenaria. (2014). NO I DON’T WANT. Just Rage. Retrieved from www.just
rage.com/story.php?id=10346
22 Martin, R. C., Coyier, K. R., VanSistine, L. M., & Schroeder, K. L. (2013). Anger
on the Internet: The perceived value of rant-sites. CyberPsychology, Behavior
and Social Networking, 16(2), 119–122. doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0130
23 Dreßing, H., Bailer, J., Anders, A., Wagner, H., & Gallas, C. (2014). Cyberstalk-
ing in a large sample of social network users: Prevalence, characteristics, and
impact upon victims. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 17(2),
61–67. doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0231
24 Survey: 50% of Americans are cell phone video spies. (2011, October 11).
CNET. Retrieved May 5, 2014, from www.cnet.com/news/survey-50-of-
americans-are-cell-phone-video-spies/
25 Sibona, C., & Walczak, S. (2011). Unfriending on Facebook: Friend request
and online/offline behavior analysis (pp. 1–10). Presented at the 44th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, HI: IEEE. doi:10.1109/
HICSS.2011.467
26 Farmer, R., & Glass, B. (2010). Building web reputation systems. Sebastopol,
CA: Yahoo Press.
123
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE AGGRESSION

5
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION
Developing close friendships, finding romance, and nurturing these
relationships are lifelong pursuits that the Internet is fundamentally
transforming. Not only do people seek out companions online; many
rely heavily on their online tools to communicate and stay connected.
We have seen how online environments can escalate tension and
anger, thanks in part to features such as perceived anonymity, physical
distance, and the paucity of nonverbal cues. But how do these same
environments affect intimate friendships, romance, and love?
In many cases, social media and other online tools complement
existing relationships that already have a strong face-to-face compon-
ent. Certainly the majority of social network friends are also known
to most profile owners in person, so the online relationships are just
one facet of a richer context of hanging out, dates, family gatherings,
meetings, or phone calls. However, people also meet for the first time
through dating sites, in support groups, in massively multiplayer
online role-playing games (MMORPGs), and as virtual team members
at work.
Research on interpersonal attraction is voluminous, and it uncovers
a great deal about the reasons one person is attracted to another,
particularly on first meeting. Let’s look at the factors that affect
attraction in real-life settings first.
THE BASICS OF INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION, OFFLINE
When you meet another person, how do you decide that you like
that person and would like to explore a more intimate relationship?
What attracts you to certain people? Why would you be romantically
124

attracted to one person, but not another? When researchers ask people
what traits they look for in a potential partner, they often list charac-
teristics such as honesty, sense of humor, intelligence, warmth, and
confidence. Men tend to rate physical attractiveness in their ideal
mates higher than women do, and women are more likely to consider
a man’s earning potential.
But both insist that looks are not the most important factor. That
sounds promising, and suggests that people really try to look beyond
the superficial to understand the person’s character. But are those traits
really what attract others?
The Magnet of Physical Attractiveness
In a classic study at the University of Minnesota,1 researchers offered
incoming freshmen a chance to attend a “Computer Dance” staged
during Welcome Week, with the advertisement “Here’s your chance
to meet someone who has the same expressed interests as yourself.”
Interested students went to the Student Union where four bureau-
cratic types checked their IDs, led the students to a testing room,
and handed out questionnaires with stamped code numbers on them.
The four “bureaucrats” were actually confederates of the researchers
whose primary job was to rate each subject’s physical attractiveness on
a scale from 1 (extremely unattractive) to 8 (extremely attractive),
relying on just a couple of seconds of interaction. On the question-
naire, students rated themselves on popularity, self-esteem, how easy
it was for them to get a date, and how nervous they felt about blind
dates. The researchers also obtained some measures of academic ability,
such as their scores on a standardized test.
Although the subjects expected that their answers would be used
to match them with a blind date, they were actually randomly
assigned, with one exception. Men were never matched with a woman
who was taller than they were. Then the subjects went to the dance to
meet their dates. During an intermission, subjects completed another
questionnaire to evaluate their dates and the whole blind date experi-
ence, signing the form with just the coded number. The researchers
followed up with these students for a few months to see how the
relationships fared.
The one characteristic that mattered in this study, indeed the only
one that counted, was physical attractiveness. The more attractive the
woman was (according to the independent ratings the confederates
125
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

assigned) the more her date liked her and wanted to ask her out again.
The same was true for women, which was somewhat surprising, given
that they typically profess less interest in physical attractiveness. They,
too, liked the good-looking men more and wanted to go out again.
This tendency for people to profess that they value many charac-
teristics, but to really stress physical attractiveness in potential mates,
also dominates the speed-dating scene. In one study, participants
completed a questionnaire about political attitudes, values, personal
interests, personality traits, and other measures before attending a
one-hour event in which each speed date lasted 5 minutes.2 The phys-
ical attractiveness of each participant was rated independently by the
research team. Once again, the strongest predictor of attraction was the
physical attractiveness of the speed date.
In face-to-face settings, physical attractiveness is a very powerful
magnet. Though we profess that “beauty is only skin deep” or that
“beauty is as beauty does,” the truth is that physical attractiveness is
an enormous advantage if you want to be liked, particularly on first
meeting. Our stereotypes about good-looking people extend far beyond
mere appearance. We judge them as happier, more sociable, warmer,
kinder, more likable, more successful, and more intelligent, too.
The physical attractiveness stereotype is so pervasive and potent
that it affects our attitudes about others in almost every setting
researchers have examined. For example, teachers who are rating the
intelligence and potential success of students based on their written
descriptions and photographs tend to rate the attractive students
more favorably than the unattractive ones.3 Attractiveness also affects
the hiring decisions of personnel officers, the chances of a political
candidate, and even the salaries people earn. Should we be surprised
that cosmetic surgery is a booming business? One might hypothesize
that any surgical intervention that moves you up a notch or two on
the attractiveness scale could pay for itself.4
Because we view good-looking people more favorably, we tend
to treat them better and pay more attention to them. The positive
treatment often tends to bring out their best qualities and make them
more confident. An early experiment that demonstrated how this
spiral of positive treatment and positive response begins observed how
college men behaved in an experiment on “getting acquainted.”5
The men were paired with women students, but they were to get
acquainted over an intercom, not face-to-face. Each man received
a portfolio of information about his female partner that included her
126
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

snapshot, but as you might guess, the researchers rigged this picture.
Half the men thought they were talking to a very attractive woman
and the other half thought they were talking to someone far less
attractive.
To no one’s surprise, the men who thought they were talking to a
very beautiful woman judged her favorably on many qualities. She
was, they surmised, poised, humorous, sociable, and generally quite
wonderful. Those who thought they were talking to an unattractive
female were far less impressed with her attributes and behavior.
The type of photo affected the way the women behaved, as well,
although they didn’t know which photo their partner was looking at.
Independent observers listening to the recordings of the woman’s
part of the conversations afterward also judged her as more confident
and charming when the man believed she was good looking.
The positive treatment by a man who was staring at a beautiful
(but imaginary) photograph was enough to bring out the best in
the woman on the other end of the intercom, regardless of her actual
appearance.
Beyond Appearance: Proximity and Familiarity
Although physical attractiveness is the key ingredient to attraction,
other factors do come into play. Simple proximity, for example, deter-
mines who you actually meet in real-life settings. You become friends
with, and you tend to marry, people you see frequently – that girl
or boy next door. Often, they work in the same office, live on your
block, enroll in the same classes, or ride the same train every day.
One obvious explanation for the proximity effect is that it provides
the opportunity to meet and get to know another person. The other
person becomes familiar to you, predictable. The old adage about
familiarity breeding contempt is inaccurate. It often does not breed
contempt; it breeds liking instead.
Familiarity affects how much we like any kind of novel stimulus,
not just people. In a rather odd study, psychologist Robert Zajonc
presented many different polygons to subjects for a very brief
moment, just one one-thousandth of a second.6 Later, he showed them
the same polygons along with many new ones mixed in and asked
them how much they liked each shape and whether they remem-
bered seeing it before. The people couldn’t do better than guessing
on the recall test, but strangely, they “liked” the polygons they’d seen
127
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

before better than the ones they had not. At some level, the subjects
had formed a positive emotional attachment to the polygons from
mere exposure, even though consciously they were unaware that
the shapes were familiar to them.
Similarity
Assessing the truth of two mutually exclusive proverbs is a common
research agenda in psychology. For example, do “birds of a feather
flock together?” Or do “opposites attract?” The answer to this one is
in, and it is the feathers that count, not the magnetic forces. In study
after study, researchers demonstrated that people tend to like those
with similar attitudes and ideas. This finding became known as the
Law of Attraction. In a typical experiment, subjects check off their
opinions about a wide range of topics, such as how much they enjoy
classical music or what they think about disciplining children. Then
they look at the responses of others and guess whether they would
like each one. The findings show a direct linear relationship: the
greater the proportion of similar attitudes, the more attracted you
are to the person.
The law of attraction predicts liking from the proportion of shared
attitudes, not the total number, a mathematical quirk that has rele-
vance to interpersonal attraction online. For example, you might
know about Jane’s views on six issues, and you agree with her on
three of them (50%). Jack has spoken out more; you know his views
on ten issues, and you agree with four of them (40%). Even though
you agree with Jack on more issues, you will like Jane better because
the proportion of similarity is higher. Obviously, we’re not doing
these precision tallies with our digital calculators in real life,
but the trend is there.
Humor
When someone makes us laugh, do we like them more? That depends.
In a study of social attractiveness, Melissa Bekelja Wanzer and her
colleagues asked their subjects to complete some questionnaires about
their sense of humor and their social lives. They were also asked to give
a slightly different version of the questionnaires to two of their
acquaintances, one that assessed what they thought of the subject’s
humor and attractiveness.7
128
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The subjects were generally on target about their own sense of
humor, as their acquaintances confirmed. However, their ratings of
social attractiveness depended on the kind of humor they usually
expressed. If other people were usually the butt of their jokes, their social
attractiveness was not very high, but if they often targeted themselves,
it was. The funniest people in the group also expressed less loneliness,
another indication that people liked them and sought them out.
The “You Like Me, I Like You Too” Spiral
When someone likes you, you tend to like that person back. Partly
because you are flattered and the other person’s attraction to you raises
your self-esteem, you have warm, fuzzy, rewarding feelings when
you’re liked by someone else. Just learning that someone likes you
can be quite an ego-booster, and the next time you interact with that
person you’re apt to act a little differently – a little warmer and
friendlier, perhaps. The other person will detect the change and react
favorably, liking you more and treating you more kindly. Just as
physical attractiveness creates a spiral of positive treatment and
positive response, being liked by someone else does, too.
One experiment that demonstrated this reminds me of that
“anonymous note” teens sometimes use to stir up the social scene.
The pranksters send an unsigned note to a classmate targeted to be
the butt of the joke, confessing deep admiration and attraction. As the
conspirators spread misleading hints about who might have written
the note, the target’s behavior changes. Believing that someone likes
her, she likes the other person more, too, and her behavior changes.
In this study, subjects were led to believe that another subject either
liked them or did not like them, and were randomly assigned to those
conditions. When the two met again, the ones who were told their
partners liked them behaved in even more likable and friendly ways,
and they disclosed more information about themselves. The partners
reacted in their turn by developing a liking for the ones who thought
they were liked, and an aversion to the ones who thought they were
disliked. The spiral moved rapidly up, toward attraction between the
two, or rapidly down, into the pit of aversion. The initial “anonymous
note.” the one that misled the subjects into thinking their partner liked
or did not like them, was the catalyst that set off the chain reactions.
One led to an upward spiral of interpersonal attraction – a mutual
admiration society. The other led to repulsion between two people.8
129
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

An intriguing twist in the findings about interpersonal attraction is
that sometimes we work harder to gain someone’s approval when
they are not completely awed by us in the beginning. If we succeed
in converting them and they begin to like us later, we tend to like
them even more than if they had liked us all along.
Social psychologists Elliott Aronson and Darwyn Under developed
a creative way to test this phenomenon in the laboratory, one that
involved a “plot within a plot within a plot.” As each woman subject
arrived, she was told the study was about verbal conditioning and that
another volunteer would be along soon. This “other volunteer” was
actually a confederate. The experimenter explained that he needed
two people for each set of trials: one would be his “helper”; the other
would be the subject in the study. He went on to say that because
she arrived first, she would be the “helper.”
The real subject, who is now playing the role of “helper,” was told to
listen in on a brief discussion between the experimenter and the other
woman and record the number of times the woman used a plural
noun. The experimenter said he was going to try to condition her to
increase her use of plural nouns with a verbal reward (“mmmmmm”)
each time she used one. Then the “helper” would take over the con-
versation but offer no verbal rewards for plural nouns, and the experi-
menter would listen in to see if the “subject” continued to use plural
nouns more than usual. In other words, will the verbal conditioning
carry over to a new conversation with a different person? They would
switch back and forth talking to the “subject” until each had seven
separate conversations with the “subject.”
The researchers then deviously embedded the final plot within
a plot. They told the helper that it was important the subject
didn’t know the real purpose of the study, so the cover story was that
it was about interpersonal attraction (!). After each conversation
between the helper and the subject, the experimenter would be
asking the subject her impressions of the helper, and an assistant
would do the same for the helper. The catch was that the “helper”
was overhearing the “subject’s” evaluation of herself, painstakingly
counting plural nouns. Because the “subject” was really the confeder-
ate, the “helper” heard precisely what the experimenter wanted
her to hear – a sequence of scripts designed to make the subjects think
they were very much liked all along, disliked all along, or that
the subject’s evaluation of them changed over time. Some subjects
experienced a “gain” – that is, they started out overhearing negative
130
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

evaluations, but these became more positive with each of the seven
interviews. Others experienced a “loss” – the subject’s evaluation of
them got worse and worse.
This experiment should win the purloined letter award in the
annals of psychological research. Telling the real subjects that inter-
personal attraction was just a cover story needed to deceive, when that
was exactly the subject of the study, was very crafty. The ploy worked,
and the subjects never suspected that those evaluations they were
monitoring were staged.
How did the women react to these overheard evaluations? The ones
who experienced a psychological gain liked their partners the best,
followed by those who heard positive evaluations of themselves
all along. The women who suffered a loss, as their partners started
evaluating them negatively halfway through, disliked their partners
the most. One reason for our greater liking for people who change
their minds in our favor is that we believe we won them over. We
guess their initial negative view was mistaken and that as they grew
to know us better they learned the truth about how terrific we really
are. This is a great boost for our self-esteem, even greater than what
we feel when someone likes us all along. After all, the latter may be a
sycophant or may just have reacted to some superficial quality (such as
our good looks).
The dislike we feel toward someone whose evaluation of us drops
is also more extreme. We might dismiss the one who evaluated us
negatively from the beginning as someone who never got to know us
anyway. Yet what a blow to the ego it is to learn that someone started
out liking us, but as they got to know us better, changed their minds.
Finding the Right “Match”
Most people do have some self-knowledge about where they stand on
the physical attractiveness yardstick and on other qualities that might
be desirable. Rather than continually pine for the best-looking ideal
mate, people tend to pair off with someone who is a good match in
terms of social desirability. Married couples, for instance, tend to be
similar in terms of attractiveness and also in intelligence, self-worth,
and other traits.
The matching process seems to occur early, when people are decid-
ing whether to approach someone they haven’t met yet. In an early
study on a college campus, students viewed six photos of potential
131
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

blind dates who, ostensibly, had been computer matched to each of
them. Subjects then selected the one each would like for a blind date to
the upcoming dance. Attractive subjects tended to choose the most
attractive photos, while less attractive subjects chose photos that were
closer to them on the attractiveness meter.9 This experiment was
different from the one described earlier because here the students were
making a choice before meeting the date. Perhaps the less attractive
students did not want to be rejected or to suffer through an evening
with someone who felt short changed.
With this background about how interpersonal attraction unfolds
offline, let’s look at what happens online.
INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION ONLINE
In the Internet’s infancy, people were meeting online through a text-
based interface, in chat rooms, news groups, discussion boards, MUDs,
games, and by email. Although they may have shared photos or phone
calls later, their initial introduction was often with typed text. The
Internet took some wind out of the sails of physical attractiveness,
and many people reveled in the opportunity to get to know others on
a different level. At the time, many doubted whether lasting bonds
could be formed in that setting, but the actual participants clearly
disagreed.
One early study surveyed people who were posting to a sample
of news groups to learn more about who was making friends in
cyberspace, and what they thought about their relationships.10 The
news groups spanned the gamut from the computer-oriented comp
hierarchy to the zany rec (recreation) and alt (alternative) hierarchies.
The goal was to survey a wide range of people, not just the computer
gurus, though the sample was limited to people who participated
in news groups in the first place. This represented a relatively small
percentage of those early Internet users, of course.11
Nearly two thirds of the people who replied to the survey reported
that they had formed a personal relationship with someone they
met on a news group, and those who said “yes” were not all huddled
in the computer forums. The proportion was about the same
for the respondents who participated in any of the news groups.
Opposite-sex relationships were somewhat more common than
same-sex ones, and some of those became romantic attachments
(7.9%).
132
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

With physical attractiveness held at bay, what variables affect
attraction? Many of the other variables that operate within real-life
settings enter the picture, but they unfold in different ways.
Proximity and Familiarity: Who Is Next Door on the Net?
For instance, on the Internet, proximity and the familiarity that goes
with it translates into something that might be called intersection
frequency. This is obviously quite different from the geographical dis-
tance that defines proximity in real life. It reflects how often you run
into that other person on the net. Your online friendship candidate
might be on the other side of the planet, but as long as you intersect
frequently by participating in the same discussion forum, comment-
ing on the same articles, or playing the same online game at the same
time, the proximity effect will probably be there. In the comments
sections after news articles, for example, commenters often recognize
one another’s nicknames and greet warmly.
In fact, the proximity effect may be even stronger online than
offline because comings and goings happen so fast in some settings,
and participation can be quite volatile. Even one exposure to a
stranger on the sprawling Internet can trigger the proximity effect
the next time you run into that person.
The survey of news-group participants highlighted another feature
of the proximity effect important for online relationships. People who
formed such friendships and those who did not were no different from
one another in terms of how much they read the postings. They were
quite different, however, on their participation rate. The lurkers
who posted few messages were less likely to make friends. It appears
insufficient to just “be” there. You have to be visible to intersect with
others, and on the Internet that means speaking out (or typing a lot).
Of course, what you say will affect whether people are drawn to
you, but this survey demonstrated that Internet wallflowers are less
likely to establish personal relationships compared with those who
actively participate.
One reason real-life proximity promotes attraction is that the per-
son’s nearness makes you expect – and anticipate – future interaction.
If you know you’ll see that person again because they live on your
block, you are more likely to behave warmly toward them. In a study
with a twist ending, Joseph Walther demonstrated that anticipation of
future interaction is an important factor in the way people behave
133
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

toward one another online, as well.12 The subjects volunteered for an
experiment they thought would last many weeks. When they arrived,
Walther assigned them to work in small groups that would communi-
cate via an online chatting system, an asynchronous computer con-
ference, or face-to-face. Some groups were told that they would be
working with the same partners for the whole study, while others
learned they would be changing partners after each task. Then all
of them held their first “meeting” to complete the first task, using
whichever medium they’d been assigned to.
When their first “meeting” was over, Walther asked them to fill out
some questionnaires to rate their experiences and attitudes toward
their partners. When they were finished, he surprised them by saying
the experiment was over. The results showed that the people who
anticipated working with the same partners for a long time communi-
cated in friendlier, more affectionate, and generally warmer ways,
compared with people who thought they would work together once
and be gone. They also expressed more openness and rapport with
one another, regardless of which communication medium they were
using.
This simple ingredient could play out in many different ways on
the Internet. On a social network, you might anticipate eventually
running into the friends of your friends at parties, in class, or on the
golf course. On a collegial mailing list with a professional focus, you
could well expect to meet any of them in the future, at a conference
perhaps. Even gamers who meet online and join forces to slay enemies
may meet up at some point. One prominent player who was retired in
real life made it a point to stop by cities where his guildmates lived
as he traveled around the country. Those people are not just transient
passers-by. The anticipation of and possibility for extended interaction
affects how you behave online toward them.
Similarity: Birds of a Feather, Flocking Together
How does the Law of Attraction work online, with fewer visual and
nonverbal cues that people typically rely on to form impressions?
People have less to go on to determine how similar a partner might be
to them. The law of attraction may cause many “false starts” and mis-
perceptions. In a discussion forum, you might learn from Emily’s
posting that she shares your views about conservation. Knowing little
else about her, your proportion of shared attitudes is now a whopping
134
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

100 percent. If you had met her in real life, you – always the cognitive
miser – would have presumed many more of her attitudes from her
dress, her age, her appearance, her facial expressions, her speech pat-
terns, and her accent. Your presumptions may have been wrong, but
you would have formed an impression anyway – one that included
some guesses about Emily’s attitudes on many subjects. If she were
wearing motorcycle boots and leather jacket, for example, your stereo-
type of bikers and their attitudes would leap to mind. The total number
of Emily’s attitudes you know about, or think you know about, would
be much higher from a face-to-face meeting, so the proportion of shared
attitudes would probably drop from that 100 percent.
Research on the exchanges between two people in a discussion
forum illustrates how an attachment forms with very little to go on.13
“Rick” began the online acquaintance with “Janet” with the following:
Hi there! It’s rare to find Chinese people on boards like these. Tell some stuff
about yourself and I’ll tell you some stuff about me and don’t worry, I just
want to make friends . . . nothing to lead to a relationship. Hope to hear from
you soon.
His initial attraction to Janet as a friend was based on only two pieces of
information: Janet was Chinese (as was Rick) and a participant on the
same forum. So far, there was 100 percent similarity, and Janet
responded immediately. Over the months, they exchanged more infor-
mation, and the proportion of similar characteristics plummeted. Janet
reveals she is a bookworm, watches TV, teaches piano, and is a terrible
driver. Rick writes he is a car nut, kills his pet fish through neglect, and
doesn’t like reading. Not surprisingly, their messages got shorter and less
frequent, and eventually stopped altogether. The level of interpersonal
attraction slipped, right along with the proportion of shared attitudes.
Mutual Liking
The “you like me, I like you too” spiral plays out online with many
different ways to show liking that don’t require a warm smile or pat on
the back. When someone clicks “like” on your Facebook post or gives a
thumbs-up on an Instagram photo, you feel that sense of being valued
and liked, much as you would in any other social situation. Even
when you don’t know the person, you sense he or she likes you, and
that is powerful news.
135
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

The most important online tool to show liking is arguably simply
attention. Clicking “like,” “favorite,” “follow,” or “thumbs-up” are clear
metrics that indicate the level of positive attention. Responding to a
person’s message in a group discussion, agreeing with them and sup-
porting them, and referencing them by name, are also powerful cues
and very rewarding to the recipient, especially when some of the other
methods we usually use to convey liking are not available. You can’t
smile, move closer, or nod, but you can say, “As Jack said . . .,” “Jasmine
had the right idea . . .,” or “I like the way Juan explained things.”
The pattern I described earlier in connection with how face-to-face
interactions, in which people tend to like best those who started out
disliking them but then came to like them after getting to know them
better, may play out differently online. It is so easy to drop out of an
interaction and enter another that people may be less likely to give
themselves a chance to experience that gain in liking. If someone shows
dislike for you at the outset, you might feel little motivation to try a bit
harder to win that person’s respect, because you could just start over
somewhere else. The number of people “out there” with whom we can
interact is so enormous that a single communication expressing dislike
may be the abrupt end of the game. In real life, many of the new people
you meet are not so easily dismissed. You may intersect with them
because they live on your block or work in the next office, and you
can’t just click your mouse to avoid them. The power of the “gain”
online may have little chance to affect interpersonal attraction because
you never get past that initial contact. As you will see later in this
chapter, this is an important element in online dating.
The Proﬁle Photo
The overwhelming dominance of physical attractiveness burst forth
online once people could easily upload profile photos and videos to
their online personas. The so-called level playing field vanished, and
the impressions people make were once again dominated by physical
appearance.
In a study of Facebook users, for example, researchers prepared fake
profile pages and paired them with a photo of an unattractive person,
an attractive one, or no photo at all. Subjects viewed one of the profile
pages, and then answered whether they were willing to add the person
as a friend, accept a friendship invitation from the profile owner, write
on the profile owner’s wall, or “poke” the profile owner.14
136
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Both male and female evaluators were more willing to initiate a
friendship when the profile photo showed an attractive person, par-
ticularly if that person was the opposite sex. Showing no photo at all
was better than showing an unattractive photo, especially to male
evaluators viewing female profiles.
As in face-to-face settings, we also tend to think what is beautiful is
also good. An attractive photo on social media will lead viewers to
believe that the profile owner has many other positive traits – confi-
dence, warmth, intelligence, and popularity. And that positive treat-
ment effect may be affecting how people appear online as well. In one
study, researchers picked out a selection of 100 online profiles created
by men on a dating site, and rated the photos on attractiveness.15 Then
they separated the text descriptions in the profile from the photo, and
asked their female subjects to rate photos and text individually.
Even though none of the female evaluators judged both of the two
parts of any individual man’s profile, the ratings for photos and text
were highly correlated. That is, photos judged as highly attractive had
profile texts that were also thought to be appealing. The men with
attractive profile photos seemed to exude confidence and other posi-
tive traits when they crafted the text for their profiles, perhaps because
they were accustomed to others responding positively to them.
Popularity
Popularity is related to physical attractiveness, but it may not be so
obvious when you meet someone for the first time in person. At a
party, you might notice that one especially attractive individual is
getting a lot of attention, suggesting high popularity. But at work, in
class, at sporting events, and many other venues at which you might
meet someone, a person’s popularity may be unclear.
On social media, however, the number of friends or followers leaps
out. In Chapter 2, we discussed how the number of friends affects the
impression you make, and that number provides some indication of
extraversion and social attractiveness. But the relationship is not
linear; a very large number of friends may make you seem somewhat
narcissistic.
How do the measures of popularity that people can detect from
your online profile affect interpersonal attraction? Researchers in
Scotland put together fake Facebook profile pages that manipulated
the level of popularity by altering some of those online behavioral
137
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

residues I described in Chapter 2: the number of friends, the number of
wall posts by other people, and the number of thumbnail photos of
friends. The “popular” profile owners showed between 330 and 340
friends, and they were tagged in many of the photos on the site. For
wall posts, the “popular” profiles included two posts written by the
owner, and five added by others. In contrast, the profiles intended
to portray unpopularity had 90–99 friends, were tagged in fewer
photos, and had more self-authored wall posts. The profile photos for
both “popular” and “unpopular” profiles were all moderately (and
equally) attractive.
The subjects who judged these fake profiles clearly picked up on the
popularity cues. Besides being judged as more popular, the “popular”
profile owners were also thought to be more socially and physically
attractive, more approachable, and more extraverted. The effects
on the ratings of physical attractiveness are especially relevant. Instead
of a person’s looks influencing our judgment of many other traits the
person might have, we see online measures of popularity influencing
our judgment about looks.
Self-Disclosure
Developing a close relationship with another person requires a certain
level of intimacy, of self-disclosure. Gradually, you begin to feel com-
fortable enough with the other person to trust him or her with your
feelings, your dreams, and your self-doubts, and to be confident that
the other will not reject or blame you. Normally, to achieve this kind
of intimacy, we rely on reciprocity. If you tell me something about
yourself, I’ll tell you something about me. Over time, the exchange
deepens and the two people disclose more and more information to
one another. The dance of self-disclosure is a delicate one, however,
and fraught with potential problems. If you pour out your deepest
feelings to someone you just met too early or in a setting that seems
inappropriate, the other person may think you’re unstable.
Computer-mediated environments promote disinhibition, a freeing
of the usual constraints on human behavior. For instance, when clin-
ical psychologists first began using computers in their offices, one of
the applications, besides patient records and billing, was the computer-
ized interview. Clients would sit at a terminal and answer questions
about themselves, their problems, and their beliefs about their own
behavior, and the computer would dutifully record the responses. The
138
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

computerized interview was controversial at first, though it was cer-
tainly a time saver. Many practitioners thought the client should be
talking to a human being and developing a rapport, so even now, few
use it. However, a strange thing started happening. Clients seemed to
be more forthcoming when they were answering questions posed
by computer compared with settings in which they were talking to a
person who was jotting notes.
Do people disclose more about themselves online than they do face-
to-face? The evidence is mixed, partly because on many surveys,
people say they share more intimate conversations offline, with close
friends.16 But several experimental studies confirm that people are
more inclined toward self-disclosure in certain online environments
compared with face-to-face settings. In one study, for example,
students who had never met were assigned to work together in pairs
to come to an agreement to the following dilemma:17
There is room for five people in the world’s only 100% safe nuclear shelter.
Excluding yourself and your family and friends, which five people in the
world do you think should be given a place in the shelter in the event of
nuclear war?
Pairs that discussed the problem through online chat disclosed more
personal information about themselves compared with those who
met face to face. This was especially true for pairs that were visually
anonymous and unable to see one another through webcams.
A feeling of anonymity, as we have seen in other contexts, can unleash
more disinhibition.
In a follow-up experiment, those researchers manipulated the levels
of private and public self-awareness in pairs communicating online.
They made some pairs feel more privately self-aware during their typed
chat by adding a video-conferencing picture of each participant on his
or her own computer screen, but each was told it wouldn’t be transmit-
ted anywhere else. Watching your own image live onscreen certainly
draws attention to yourself and your appearance. To manipulate public
self-awareness, they mounted video cameras that pointed at each par-
ticipant, letting them know that their partner could see the live feed
and that they would meet their partner after the discussion was over.
Which condition resulted in the most self-disclosure? It was
between the pairs whose private self-awareness was made very high,
but whose public self-awareness was low.
139
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

The tendency for people to disclose more when they are typing on
a keyboard – even when they know someone will be reading what
they say – is an important ingredient in interpersonal attraction
online. Yes, it can be an impersonal, cold-blooded medium at times.
But it can also be what Joseph Walther describes as hyperpersonal.18
You sit at a computer screen feeling relatively anonymous, distant,
and physically safe, and you feel disinhibited. Sometimes that feeling
unleashes uncharacteristically aggressive behavior, as I discussed in the
last chapter. But in certain contexts, you will begin to feel closer to
the people on the other side of your screen whom you have never
seen, more so even than to the people in the next room. You may
reveal more about yourself to them, feel more attraction to them, and
express more emotions. At the keyboard you can concentrate only on
yourself, your words, and the feelings you want to convey. You don’t
have to worry about how you look, what you’re wearing, or those
extra pounds you meant to shed. “The waist is a terrible thing to
mind,” as Walther suggests, and online you can reallocate your ener-
gies to the message.
This hyperpersonal nature of certain online interactions can also be
especially relevant because you can endlessly idealize those personas
with whom you are interacting. Someone you know only as “Moon-
light” who has told you many intimate details of her life – but not
her name, address, or phone number – is like a canvas with just a few
iridescent brush strokes. You can fill in the rest of that minimalist
artwork with your imagination.
Jealousy, Surveillance, and Internet “Creeping”
Yet another way in which online environments affect relationships is
simply by providing much more access to information about what
your partner is doing and thinking. For heavy social media users, this
information can be very extensive and personal, ranging from photos
of friends at the ball park to intimate posts on the relationship itself.
Imagine a pair – Greg and Stella – who recently met at a party and are
thinking about meeting again for a date. Both will almost certainly
check one another’s social media profiles first. And if their relationship
starts to blossom, both will very likely do some monitoring of the
other’s activities as they appear on Facebook or other social media sites.
Research confirms that using Facebook actually contributes to
feelings of jealousy and suspicion, in a kind of feedback loop.
140
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The more monitoring Greg and Stella do, the more they will see
ambivalent information that can cause concern and that then leads
to more monitoring. Stella might add a photo of herself with a man
Greg doesn’t know, and he then tries to track down the man’s identity.
Or Marcy might comment on Greg’s video, driving Stella to hunt for
Marcy and learn more about her involvement with Greg.
A survey study of college students found a strong association
between the amount of time spent on Facebook, feelings of jealousy,
and jealous behavior19. Many participants in this study seemed to
recognize the problem, with statements like this:
I have enough confidence in her to know my partner is faithful, yet I can’t
help but second guess myself when someone posts on her wall – it can
contribute to feelings of you not really “knowing” your partner.
I was already a bit jealous and insecure, but I think that Facebook has
definitely made me much much much worse.
Certainly, partners can become jealous without Facebook, but the
social media site exposes them to many more “triggers” that provoke
jealousy, and they can linger over them without the partner even
knowing. If the partners are already insecure, those triggers add up to
more surveillance and exposure to ambivalent cues that make things
worse. Compare this with a face-to-face setting in which Marcy
approaches Greg with a warm smile in Stella’s presence. Greg would
immediately introduce them – as his sister, perhaps – eliminating that
ambivalence that causes so much anxiety.
Social media can also interfere with emotional recovery after a
breakup. After a split, people often check the ex-partner’s profile,
looking for signs of new relationships. In one study of this kind of
post-breakup Facebook surveillance, researchers asked subjects how
they were handling offline and online relationships with the ex-
partner and how much distress they were feeling.20 About 57 percent
said they remained Facebook friends, and over 90 percent of those
people said they could still see all their ex-partner’s photos, wall posts,
comments, and status updates. Even if they unfriended the ex-partner,
or if the ex-partner unfriended them, they could still see the public
content of the ex-partner’s profile.
To assess surveillance, subjects were asked how often they looked at
their ex-partner’s profile and friend list. The results showed that those
who engaged in more surveillance were the ones who also had the
141
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

most trouble getting over the ex-partner, particularly for those who
were no longer Facebook friends.
Terms such as “Facebook creeping” and “Facebook stalking” have
entered the lexicon to describe that kind of surveillance of partners,
ex-partners, ex-partner’s new love interests, and anyone else. Blogger
Emma Golden describes how she caught her ex-boyfriend’s latest girl-
friend creeping on her own Instagram site.21 The girlfriend clicked
“like” on one of Emma’s photos, quickly deleting it within a few
minutes, but not until after Emma was able to take a screenshot for
evidence. Emma confesses to creeping her rival’s social media sites
“a bazillion times,” but knows better than to make such a foolish
mistake by leaving behind any digital tracks. She even offers tips for
stalkers, to make sure they tiptoe carefully.
Given the many differences between the way people approach,
nurture, and end relationships online and off, we would expect that
the online worlds in which finding Mr. or Ms. Right is the main purpose
would hold some fascinating surprises. We turn now to online dating.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE DATING
“We use math to get you dates,” proclaims the fast-growing dating site
called OKCupid. That site and hundreds of others like it attract people
from around the world who want to meet someone special – for just
a casual date, a quick fling, or a lifelong partner. Many specialize in
certain tastes or populations, such as OurTime for people over 50,
Intellectual Passions for intellectual types, Ruby Radar for business
owners and professionals, or Fitness Singles for sports enthusiasts with
active lifestyles.
Matchmaking is hardly new, as anyone who has seen Fiddler on the
Roof knows. Engaging a third party to bring two compatible people
together is also quite common in many cultures around the world. But
the Internet introduces a fundamental transformation in the way
matchmaking unfolds.
Who Uses Online Dating Services?
Attitudes toward online dating have changed a great deal over the
years, and recent research shows that it is now definitely mainstream.
Surveys by the Pew Research Center’s Internet and American Life
Project find that one in ten Americans has used an online dating
142
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

site or mobile dating app, and that two thirds of those have gone on a
date with someone they found on the site.22 For the “single and
looking” population, online dating sites are even more popular, with
38 percent reporting having used this kind of service.
Although men entered the online dating world in larger numbers
early on, as the services became more mainstream, the gender ratio
became more equal.23 Dating sites are most popular with people aged
twenty-five to thirty-four, who have attended college, and whose
income is between $50,000 and $75,000. But all age groups, ethnicities,
and socioeconomic levels are participating. While still relatively small,
the fastest growing demographic is the fifty-five-plus age group, com-
prised of both men and women who might be widowed or divorced.
Numerous online dating sites attempt to attract that growing popula-
tion of more mature daters.
The “Long Tail” Phenomenon
Dating sites attempt to appeal to potential customers in many differ-
ent ways, leading to the proliferation of niche sites and what market-
ers call the “long tail” phenomenon (Figure 5.1). The cost of launching
yet another dating site is low, so companies find that they can earn
profits with niche products customized for even very small audiences.
The big mass-market products no longer dominate as much and have
given way to many specialty products with tiny audiences.
SugarSugar, for example, boasts that it is “where romance meets
finance” and that the site is a discreet place to find Sugar Daddy and
Figure 5.1. The “long tail” phenomenon.
143
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

Sugar Baby relationships. Cindy is a nursing student who needs help
with tuition, and Jonathan’s profile claims he is a “generous banker”
who needs downtime with someone special and doesn’t have time
to go to bars. Not to be outdone, CougarLife caters to successful
older women who are “looking for a young stud!” Ashley Madison
blatantly promotes services to married people who are looking for
something on the side, with the tagline, “Life is short. Have an
affair.”
Another way dating sites specialize is by focusing on bringing
people together by virtue of their shared interests. Green Singles, for
example, helps progressive singles in the environmental, vegetarian,
and animal rights communities find one another. Trek Passions (“Live
Long & Prosper”) brings sci-fi aficionados together, and Tastebuds.fm
matches people with similar musical tastes.
Why Is Online Dating Different?
It is true that matchmaking has been around for quite a long time, and
people have used personal ads in newspapers to find potential mates
for centuries. Particularly when circumstances create situations in
which men and women are very unequal in number, or when they
have little chance to meet, personal ads flourish. In the nineteenth
century, for example, the San Francisco–based “Matrimonial News”
published personal ads for men seeking mail-order brides, most of
whom were back east. One read: “Lonesome miner wants wife to share
stake and prospects. Please respond to Louis Drelbelbis in Grass Valley,
California.”24
Yet online dating represents a fundamental change in the way
people seeking love, romance, or marriage find one another, get to
know each other, and develop relationships that may last a few min-
utes or a lifetime. Online dating involves a series of steps that differ
significantly from what would happen in an offline situation:25
1. Seek information about various online dating sites.
2. Register for one or more sites.
3. Create profile on the online dating site, and complete the
“matching” questionnaire (if there is one).
4. Browse the profiles of other users.
5. Initiate contact with someone through the site’s messaging service.
6. Receive contact from someone on the site.
144
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

7. Engage in computer-mediated communication.
8. Meet face-to-face.
9. Develop a relationship offline.
At almost every step, the psychological aspects of the process differ
from traditional dating, sometimes dramatically so. Exploring the
various options, for example, and choosing to register at one or more
of them, introduces a shopping mentality that isn’t easily replicated
offline. Certainly, people can pick and choose particular offline venues
where they are more likely to meet potential partners – clubs, for
example. But the Internet dating sites offer far more choice and thus
call for more research and decision making. While many sites are free
and supported through ads, others charge substantial sums, so a deci-
sion to join carries financial implications.
Step 3 – creating a profile – is a bit like decorating your own specialty
shop window that potential partners can view at any time. Unlike a
social network profile, the online dating profile targets potential dates
only, so the context doesn’t “collapse” with all the different audiences –
family, friends, coworkers, distant acquaintances, high school buddies,
and professional contacts. Chapter 2 explored the psychology of online
impression management, and those findings are critically important
to the online dating profile. As you might expect, physical attractive-
ness carries the most weight, and photos are essential. Research shows
that people are unlikely to contact someone who doesn’t post a photo.
Once registered, users browse the site for potential matches using
keywords and categories, such as “men, 25–34, athletic, nonsmoker.”
For sites that use a matching algorithm, the choices would be narrowed
to those that are theoretically compatible. Browsing takes considerable
time and has no real equivalent in face-to-face settings. One study found
that online daters spend more than five hours a week browsing profiles,
and many don’t enjoy it very much.26 The process again involves a
shopping mentality, and the choices are endless. One man said, “I tried
looking for someone really specific – red hair, my age and location,
green eyes, etc etc – turned up hundreds of matches. How am
I supposed to choose? And why would I care about red hair anyway?”
Too Many Fish in the Sea?
The sheer volume of potential partners is a key ingredient that makes
online dating so different from traditional dating. Access is exploding,
145
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

and online daters have opportunities to meet people they would never
have met in real life. This is certainly an advantage, especially for
people who work long hours, live in rural areas, or find themselves
in situations in which the pool of potential mates is small. In college,
for example, men and women have many opportunities to meet other
singles face-to-face. But after graduating, those opportunities usually
decline a great deal.
Online dating sites present people in a kind of catalog, in which
participants are making side-by-side comparisons of hundreds or even
thousands of profiles. On the mobile dating app Tinder, users just
swipe through one profile after another on their smartphones, focus-
ing mainly on the photo to decide who to message.
While such comparisons are useful when buying a laptop, they may
not be as helpful for dating because people tend to prioritize characteris-
tics that don’t matter very much, simply because the dating site offers the
tools to do it. The man who wondered why he was looking for redheads
was using a strategy that at least narrowed down the pool to something
more manageable, but the criterion was irrelevant. It’s very difficult
to construct search terms that will uncover, in a potential mate’s profile,
whatever it is that makes a relationship blossom into romantic magic.
Endless choices can also overwhelm people, so they experience
choice overload and withdraw from the process. A classic study at an
upscale grocery store in California showed that too much choice can
baffle consumers. At a tasting booth in the store, customers stopped at
tables to try some exotic jams. For some of the customers, the display
offered a choice of six jam flavors, but for others, the choice was much
larger – twenty-four different flavors. More people stopped at the
display with twenty-four choices, so the large array attracted more
attention. But just 3 percent of those customers actually purchased a
jar. In contrast, 30 percent of the customers who visited the booth that
offered just six choices went on to purchase.27
For online dating, the huge volume of potential dates can also lead
to inefficient searching and sloppy choices. Researchers in Taiwan
asked subjects to describe the characteristics they thought they were
looking for in a date, and then they were assigned to browse a small
choice set (30 profiles), a medium-sized set (60 profiles), or a large set
(90 profiles). The subjects who explored the large set tended to do more
overall searching but were distracted by information that wasn’t rele-
vant. They also did a poorer job at screening out inferior choices that
didn’t match their initial preferences.28
146
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The sheer volume can also make people lazier when it comes to
devoting effort to getting to know a potential partner. Armed with the
knowledge that there appear to be so many alternatives out there,
online daters may be more likely to abandon the relationship early
rather than patiently get acquainted, one step at a time. They may also
reject a partner for minor “infractions” early. One dater said, “He
mentioned his mother in an email. That was enough for me to move
on.” As I mentioned earlier, online daters may rarely get the opportun-
ity for that psychological gain that comes with changing a partner’s
impression from negative to positive.
A twenty-year-old student conducting a social “experiment” on an
online dating site uncovered another cause for quick rejection.29 She
received lots of compliments from men, most of which she never
answered, but then decided to see what would happen if she agreed
with the compliment. When one man typed, “Your beautiful,” she
replied, “thank you!! I know aha how are you?” He responded by telling
her how vain she was, as did many other men in her experiment.
Initiating Computer-Mediated Contact
The dating sites offer people different methods to express interest in
one another. Tinder features a chat application for the smartphone so
users can engage in a synchronous chat session with a profile owner
who attracts them and who agrees to communicate. On other sites,
users send an email through the site to try to initiate contact with
someone they find intriguing.
Creative site developers also offer more subtle ways to express
interest. On Match.com, for example, users can “wink” at a profile,
much as they could click “like” on other sites. Some users say they
appreciate this lower risk way to initiate contact. One woman said, “I
love winks. I like checking my profile to see who’s noticed me. It’s an
ego boost, even if not all of them lead to dates.” Others have less
favorable views: “Winking is wimpy . . . Online dating is already imper-
sonal so the least you can do is send me an email expressing interest,
intrigue, or curiosity.”30
Avatars offer opportunities for “virtual dates,” in which the two
partners create three-dimensional personas and interact with one
another on screen. One study of this kind of virtual dating compared
partners who communicated using a simple text-based chat applica-
tion, with a small photo, with pairs who used “static,” “responsive,” or
147
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

“active” avatars.31 For the static version, the partners saw a large still
image of two photorealistic characters sitting at a table, as though on a
date. The “responsive” avatars were similar, except that they displayed
subtle motions and gestures that made them appear as if they were
actually listening or speaking. Eye blinks, nods of the head, and lip
movements all added richer nonverbal cues to the interaction. The
“active” avatars displayed those motions as well, but they also offered
the partners opportunities to signal their own nonverbal cues by
clicking on one of the buttons labeled “flirt,” “blow kiss,” or “touch
hand.” After the virtual date, the subjects completed questionnaires to
assess their perceptions about the partner.
How did these simulated nonverbal cues affect perceptions? Overall,
the more the partners could exchange nonverbal cues, the better they
liked each other and the more they disclosed about themselves. The
pairs using active avatars were the most likely to say they wanted to
develop the relationship further. Clearly, the nonverbal cues enriched
the virtual date for these partners, just as they do in real-life settings.
This study also found an intriguing gender difference. The men
tended to respond very favorably to the static avatar images, but the
women did not. Instead, women were most affected by the simulated
motion, facial expressions, and body language. Are men less sensitive
to body language in face-to-face settings compared with women?
Some research suggests that this is the case, and it seems the difference
carries over to the virtual world.
Why not just use video chat services such as Skype for a virtual
date? Some online dating sites offer this option, in a speed-dating
format, for example. SpeedDate boasts that there are “3,360 Singles
Online Now!” and the site will support several speed dates per
hour, each 5 minutes long. People who connect using the other
computer-mediated communication tools will sometimes arrange a
video chat date before they meet in person. Actual research is sparse,
but daters have decidedly mixed views. Webcam images are often
unflattering at best, with dreadful lighting, messy backdrops, awkward
camera angles, and annoying lags. Laptop and smartphone users, for
example, will unthinkingly project the worst possible camera angle
that showcases the double chin. Although nonverbal cues will enrich
the interaction, they may still be a little “off” because of the computer
setup. For example, the partners will be looking at the image of one
another on the screen, not the camera lens, so eye contact is not the
same as in a face-to-face setting.
148
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

One dater on PlentyofFish said, “If anyone insisted on Skype before
meeting I’d tell them to shove it.” But others, especially women, are
concerned about possible deception:
For me, Skype is very important. Anyone could hide behind a profile or phone
call, but it’s near impossible to hide behind a video chat . . . Another reason
I like Skype is that it weeds out scammers. – zendy32
As I discuss throughout this book, computer-mediated communica-
tion differs from face-to-face communication, particularly when it is
mainly via the keyboard. In the context of online dating, it allows
people to be very strategic about the way they present themselves, as
they craft their profiles and compose messages to initiate contact.
Skype takes away some of those advantages, which may explain
why it has not caught on as the preferred method to communicate
with potential dates, at least initially.
The disinhibiting effects of online environments are also likely
to lead people to make more intimate disclosures in this early phase
of the relationship than they might have made if they first met face to
face. All in all, the hyperpersonal nature of computer-mediated com-
munication can be beneficial, with each partner idealizing the other to
some extent and shaping messages in a way that will seem most
attractive.
Deception and “Catﬁshing”
Zendy, the woman who wanted to use Skype for a virtual date, was
concerned about exaggerations and outright lies. Are most profiles on
the online dating sites reasonably accurate? Their owners should cer-
tainly attempt to craft a pleasing persona, but when does cosmetic
retouching become deception?
Surveys of online daters show that the majority believe that others
are misrepresenting themselves and that deception is the largest disad-
vantage for these services. In actual studies, however, most of the
deception appears to be modest and not exactly outrageous lies. In
New York City, subjects who already had created online dating profiles
on one of the major sites replied to a Craigslist ad calling for their
participation in a study of online dating.33 When they arrived at the
lab, they answered questions about how accurate they thought their
own profiles were, and what they thought about deception in online
149
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

dating. Before they left, researchers took actual measurements of each
subject’s height and weight, and retrieved their true age from their
driver’s license.
Comparing their actual height, weight, and age to what was
on each subject’s profile, these researchers found that 81 percent
were untruthful on at least one of those characteristics. People –
especially women – were most likely to lie about weight, subtracting
a few pounds when they posted it online. Men were more likely to
lie about height – presenting themselves as a bit taller than they
actually were. Not many lied about age, although one outlier turned
out to be eleven years older than his profile indicated. In most cases,
the lies about height and weight were rather small, and the partici-
pants were aware that they did some creative exaggeration on the
profile.
Online daters could also use deception in their profile photos – not
necessarily by posting a photo of someone else, but by using software
tools to enhance the image. Photoshop’s “spot healing brush tool”
quickly removes any blemishes, and more advanced users can slim a
waist, remove gray hairs, whiten teeth, and perform all kinds of magic.
A study of this kind of enhancement demonstrated that less attractive
people are most likely to fix up their photos to make them look more
attractive, particularly women and people interested in a long-term
relationship. The less attractive daters also posted fewer photos of
themselves in their profiles.34
Online deception does sometimes capture headlines, especially the
major cases of wild masquerades. The documentary Catfish, about Nev
Shulman’s experiences with online deception, brought the term “cat-
fishing” into the Internet lexicon. According to one of the characters,
shipping live cod fish over long distances causes them to become lazy
and inactive, so they became mushy and tasteless. Shippers found that
putting a catfish into the tank would keep the cod lively, so they
arrived in better condition. Now, “catfishing” refers to the behavior
of Internet predators who post false information online for the pur-
pose of reeling someone in, tricking them into a lengthy online
romance or convincing the target to lend a financial hand. Just like
the legend about catfish in the tank, the online catfish certainly
reminds us to stay on our toes.35 As online dating sites grow into big
businesses, catfishing grows right along with it. Although most online
daters keep their deception to a minimum, some do use the platform
in devious ways.
150
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Romance and Math: Do Matching Algorithms Work?
While many online dating sites rely on the users to search profiles
using keywords or other filters, others boast that their own matching
techniques will identify potential soulmates. Chemistry.com offers its
“world-famous personality test” that helps you discover your own
personality type and identify the best partners from the data.
eHarmony patented its “Compatibility Matching System” and claims
that it:
narrows the field from thousands of single men or single women to
match with a highly select group of compatible singles – singles
who have been prescreened on 29 Dimensions® of Compatibility.
(http://www.eharmony.com/why/)
These tests typically assess attitudes, beliefs, personality traits, relation-
ship intent (casual dating, lifelong partner), relationship styles and
skills, family background, expectations about an ideal partner, and
other aspects that the dating site developers think might be helpful.
Chemistry.com’s test asks about the length of the index finger relative
to the ring finger, drawing on research suggesting that prenatal expos-
ure to testosterone leads to a “masculinized” ratio, with the index
finger clearly shorter compared with the ring finger.36 As its name
suggests, the founder of Chemistry.com argues that certain biological
factors can help predict compatibility, including levels of male and
female sex hormones.
Whether the matching algorithms successfully predict romantic
attraction and successful long-term relationships is difficult to answer,
partly because the companies keep their algorithms secret. Most rely
heavily on similarity to identify potential partners, choosing ones that
are similar demographically and in terms of certain attitudes and
behavioral choices. For example, someone who loves mountain biking
and athletic pursuits would be paired with others with similar prefer-
ences, not stay-at-home movie lovers. Similarity would seem an obvi-
ous choice as a matching factor because research on attraction
consistently finds that people who are more similar to one another
do tend to like one another more, as we discussed earlier in this
chapter.
In terms of personality traits, research on 191 couples found that
actual similarity is associated with higher satisfaction about the rela-
tionship, but only for women, not men.37 That is the kind of evidence
151
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

the dating sites use to argue that similarity is important, but the
conclusions are shaky. For instance, those happily married couples
could have become more similar to one another over time, as an
extraverted wife persuades an introverted husband to step out a bit
more. The evidence that we can predict who will form long and happy
relationships based on detailed questionnaires about attitudes and
personality traits is weak at best.
Matching is also more complicated than just comparing scores. For
example, the algorithm might comfortably pair people who were high
on agreeableness, one of the Big Five personality traits, and those pairs
might agreeably meet and be attracted to one another. But how would
that algorithm find matches for people who score low on that trait?
Would two disagreeable people make a happy couple? How about
people who score high on neuroticism or narcissism?
Some sites apparently use complementarity for certain traits, rather
than similarity. At PerfectMatch, for example, Allan turns out to be
“SCTE” based on the results from the site’s matching system, which
according to the site, stands for “Structured, Compromising, Temper-
ate, Extrovert.” The algorithm matches him with Jane, an “FDHE,”
which stands for “Flexible, Dominant, Hot, Extrovert.” In this case,
the theory proposes that a “structured” type will be attracted to some-
one who is “flexible.” Evidence that complementarity can be used to
predict successful relationships is lacking, however, even though intui-
tively it might seem to be a promising approach for certain traits.
Whether or not a dating site uses the results from questionnaires
and surveys for matching, all sites have access to a wealth of infor-
mation on registered users from their own behavior on the site and the
information they provide. Many use a recommender system that
attempts to predict whom you might find attractive from your own
past behavior. Just as Pandora continually refines the music selections
it plays for your personal radio channel based on your thumbs-up or
thumbs-down, the dating sites can easily draw on their own “big data”
to offer selections you also might like. Similarity to your previous
choices is the most common approach, but the dataset is so huge that
the software can also draw on a treasure trove of data that you supply.
The online dating sites offer a service that brings together people
who, at the very least, share an interest in meeting a potential roman-
tic partner and are geographically close, and those similarities in
themselves are helpful. Some also screen out people whose test
results indicate they may be unsuited to any partner, so the remaining
152
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

pool – however large – contains at least minimally acceptable partners.
The most reliable predictors for whether an enduring and satisfying
relationship will take hold between two people can be observed only
after they meet, not before, in their interactions and mutual attraction.
Perhaps it is not that surprising that matching algorithms may not be
very useful to find that one “soulmate” in the enormous universe of
online dating profiles.
One type of matching that may yet make an intriguing contribu-
tion to online dating comes from research in evolutionary biology.
The biological basis of mate selection is drawing considerable interest,
and some findings may shed light on why some people are attracted to
one another, and others are not. For example, the reason that men tend
to stress physical attractiveness in their choice of women, and women
put more emphasis on social status and earning potential, may be
partly rooted in evolution. Physical attractiveness generally signals
good health and reproductive fitness, a promising sign for a man
looking to reproduce. Social status and earning potential signal the
ability to protect and provide for a family, something a woman would
want in a man who fathers her children.
Some preliminary research also suggests that human beings, like
most mammals, may be influenced by olfactory cues that signal
a promising mate. One candidate cue involves genes that control
major histocompatibility complex (MHC), a portion of the immune
system that also happens to affect a person’s scent. In one study,
women preferred the odor of T-shirts that had been worn by men
whose MHC was most different from their own.38 That would make
evolutionary sense because the children of two people with very
different
genes
involved in
immunity would inherit
stronger
immune systems.
In another investigation, women’s sexual responsiveness to the man
with whom they were romantically involved was partly dependent
on how similar their genes for MHC were. The more similar, the less
sexually responsive the women felt to the partner. Those women also
reported more attraction to other men, especially when they were
ovulating.39 Here, an evolutionary explanation is that it deters
inbreeding, so that people who are too similar to one another on this
particular genetic trait are less likely to find each other attractive.
Olfactory cues, of course, are not transmitted on the Internet, so if
they play any role in interpersonal attraction, their effects would
emerge only in a face-to-face setting.
153
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

THE INTERNET AND THE MAGIC OF “INTERPERSONAL”
ATTRACTION
Science still has a long way to go to dissect the magic of interpersonal
attraction and to predict when, where, and with whom it will happen.
The “with whom” might even be “with what,” as the movie Her
explored. A lonely writer, played by Joaquin Phoenix, works as a letter
writer, composing artful and poignant missives for people who have
little time or inclination to write themselves. He purchases a new
computer with an extremely advanced operating system that commu-
nicates with him via text messages and with a sexy female voice
(Scarlett Johanssen). The man falls deeply in love with “her,” even
though their only communications are computer mediated.
The movie is fiction, of course, but some people are also becoming
quite attached to their “invisible” boyfriend or girlfriend, with whom
they communicate only through texting or voice mail. Launched in
2013, the InvisibleGirlfriend and InvisibleBoyfriend services offer, for a
monthly fee, realistic communications with an imaginary person, one
whose characteristics subscribers themselves make up. You can choose
any name for your online significant other, and describe the person’s
appearance and personality traits.
Once texting begins, things can get quite personal very quickly. On
first glance, one might suppose the “person” at the other end is com-
puter generated, but the thoughtfulness and detail in them shows they
are not. In fact, real people are on the other end. Codeveloper Matt
Homan said, “When we first started this product, we were playing
around with the idea of using chatbox artificial intelligence, but it just
wasn’t real enough.”40 Instead, the service crowdsources those text
responses to workers around the world who answer each text with
their own words. Your invisible boyfriend or girlfriend is actually
more than one person.
Homan asks subscribers to review the “product,” but for many, the
interactions feel a bit too real to be called that. Time will tell how
attraction plays out in this new space, but judging from the psycho-
logical research on the hyperpersonal nature of text-based environ-
ments, some people will find such relationships very satisfying.
NOTES
1 Walster, E., Aronson, V., Abrahams, D., & Rottman, L. (1966). Importance of
physical attractiveness in dating behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4(5), 508–516. doi:10.1037/h0021188
154
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

2 Luo, S., & Zhang, G. (2009). What leads to romantic attraction: Similarity,
reciprocity, security, or beauty? Evidence from a speed-dating study. Journal
of Personality, 77(4), 933–964. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2009.00570.x
3 Clifford, M. M., & Walster, E. H. (Hatfield) (1973). The effect of physical
attractiveness on teacher expectation. Sociology of Education, 46, 248–258.
4 Frieze, I. H., Olson, J. E., & Russell, J. (1991). Attractiveness and income for men
and women in management. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21(13),
1039–1057. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1991.tb00458.x
5 Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception and inter-
personal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 656–666. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.
35.9.656
6 Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.
American Psychologist, 35(2), 151–175. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.35.2.151
7 Wanzer, M. B., & Booth-Butterfield, M. (1996). Are funny people popular?
An examination of humor orientation, loneliness, and social attraction.
Communication Quarterly, 44(1), 42–52.
8 Curtis, R. C., & Miller, K. (1986). Believing another likes or dislikes you:
Behaviors making the beliefs come true. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51(2), 284–290. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.51.2.284
9 Berscheid, E., Dion, K., Walster, E., & Walster, G. W. (1971). Physical attractive-
ness and dating choice: A test of the matching hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 7(2), 173–189. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(71)90065-5
10 Parks, M. R., & Floyd, K. (1996). Making friends in cyberspace. Journal of
Communication, 46(1), 80–97. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1996.tb01462.x
11 A 1997 poll by Business Week/Harris found that 20% of the respondents who
were online participated in conferences or forums.
12 Walther, J. B. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects
on relational communication in computer-mediated interaction. Human
Communication Research, 20(4), 473–501. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.1994.tb00332.x
13 Hultin, G. A. (1993). Mediating the social face: Self-presentation in computer
communication (Master’s thesis). Department of Communication, Simon
Fraser University.
14 Wang, S. S., Moon, S.-I., Kwon, K. H., Evans, C. A., & Stefanone, M. A. (2010).
Face off: Implications of visual cues on initiating friendship on Facebook.
Computers in Human Behavior, 26(2), 226–234. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2009.10.001
15 Brand, R. J., Bonatsos, A., D’Orazio, R., & DeShong, H. (2012). What is beautiful
is good, even online: Correlations between photo attractiveness and text
attractiveness in men’s online dating profiles. Computers in Human Behavior,
28(1), 166–170. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.023
16 Nguyen, M., Bin, Y. S., & Campbell, A. (2012). Comparing online and offline
self-disclosure: A systematic review. CyberPsychology, Behavior and Social
Networking, 15(2), 103–111. doi:10.1089/cyber.2011.0277
17 Joinson, A. N. (2001). Self-disclosure in computer-mediated communication:
The role of self-awareness and visual anonymity. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 31(2), 177–192.
18 Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, inter-
personal, and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 23(1),
3–43. doi:10.1177/009365096023001001
19 Muise, A., Christofides, E., & Desmarais, S. (2009). More information than
you ever wanted: Does Facebook bring out the green-eyed monster of
155
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

jealousy? CyberPsychology and Behavior, 12(4), 441–444. doi:10.1089/
cpb.2008.0263
20 Marshall, T. C. (2012). Facebook surveillance of former romantic partners:
Associations with postbreakup recovery and personal growth. Cyberpsy-
chology,
Behavior,
and
Social
Networking,
15(10),
521–526.
doi:10.1089/
cyber.2012.0125
21 Golden, E. (2014, February 10). Internet stalking 101: The dos and don’ts
of Internet creeping. Thought Catalog. Retrieved from http://thoughtcata
log.com/emma-golden/2014/02/the-dos-and-donts-of-internet-creeping/
22 Smith, A., & Duggan, M. (2013). Online dating and relationships. Pew
Research Center’s Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from www.
pewinternet.org/2013/10/21/online-dating-relationships/
23 Gunter, B. (2013). The study of online relationships and dating. In W. H.
Dutton (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Internet Studies. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
24 Enss, C. (2005). Hearts west: True stories of mail-order brides on the frontier.
Guilford, CT: Globe Pequot Press.
25 Finkel, E. J., Eastwick, P. W., Karney, B. R., Reis, H. T., & Sprecher, S. (2012).
Online dating: A critical analysis from the perspective of psychological
science. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 13(1), 3–66. doi:10.1177/
1529100612436522
26 Frost, J. H., Chance, Z., Norton, M. I., & Ariely, D. (2008). People are experience
goods: Improving online dating with virtual dates. Journal of Interactive
Marketing, 22(1), 51–61. doi:10.1002/dir.20106
27 Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one
desire too much of a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
79(6), 995–1006. doi:10.1037//0022-3514.79.6.995
28 Wu, P.-L., & Chiou, W.-B. (2009). More options lead to more searching
and worse choices in finding partners for romantic relationships online:
An experimental study. CyberPsychology and Behavior, 12(3), 315–318.
doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0182
29 Vagianos,
A.
(2015,
January
14).
Men
couldn’t
handle
it
when
a
woman agreed with compliments they gave her online. The Huffington
Post. Retrieved from www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/14/women-com
pliments-online-dating-experiment-gweneth-bateman_n_6456016.html
30 Singleton, D. (n.d.). Do winks and favorites really work? Happen.
Retrieved
from
www.match.com/cp.aspx?cpp=/cppp/magazine/art
icle0.html&articleid=12960
31 Kotlyar, I., & Ariely, D. (2013). The effect of nonverbal cues on relationship
formation. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 544–551.
32 Zendy. (2012, April 20). Skype or video chat before you meet? So polite.
Retrieved
from
http://forums.plentyoffish.com/datingPosts15209799.
aspx
33 Toma, C. L., Hancock, J. T., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Separating fact from
fiction: An examination of deceptive self-presentation in online dating
profiles.
Personality
and
Social
Psychology
Bulletin,
34(8),
1023–1036.
doi:10.1177/0146167208318067
34 Toma, C. L., & Hancock, J. T. (2010). Looks and lies: The role of physical
attractiveness in online dating self-presentation and deception. Communi-
cation Research, 37(3), 335–351. doi:10.1177/0093650209356437
156
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

35 Scientists dispute the whole “catfish in the codfish tank” legend, partly
because catfish are bottom feeders, not fierce predators. That name stuck
for Internet predators, however.
36 Fink, B., Neave, N., & Manning, J. t. (2003). Second to fourth digit ratio, body
mass index, waist-to-hip ratio, and waist-to-chest ratio: Their relationships
in heterosexual men and women. Annals of Human Biology, 30(6), 728–738.
37 Decuyper, M., De Bolle, M., & De Fruyt, F. (2012). Personality similarity,
perceptual accuracy, and relationship satisfaction in dating and married
couples. Personal Relationships, 19(1), 128–145.
38 Wedekind, C., & Füri, S. (1997). Body odour preferences in men and women:
Do they aim for specific MHC combinations or simply heterozygosity?
Proceedings. Biological Sciences/The Royal Society, 264(1387), 1471–1479.
39 Garver-Apgar, C. E., Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., Miller, R. D., & Olp, J. J.
(2006). Major histocompatibility complex alleles, sexual responsivity, and
unfaithfulness in romantic couples. Psychological Science (Wiley-Blackwell),
17(10), 830–835. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01789.x
40 Ohm, S. (2015, February 5). No girlfriend? No problem: New site will
build your dream girl for $24.99. Yahoo Finance. Retrieved February 12,
2015, from http://finance.yahoo.com/news/no-girlfriend-no-problem-new-
site-will-build-your-dream-girl-for-24-99-144052950.html
157
LIKING AND LOVING ON THE NET: INTERPERSONAL ATTRACTION

6
ALTRUISM ON THE NET
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Struggling to build a new sanctuary for sick or injured farm animals
in Australia, Pam Ahern turned to the Internet for help. She launched
her campaign on the online crowdfunding platform Chuffed.org,
and within just three days, she reached her initial goal of $50,000.
After two months, the campaign attracted support from people in
fourteen countries, and donations topped $162,000. Ahern said, “I was
absolutely blown away with the kindness, generosity, and belief
people have shown for our work.”1
RANDOM ACTS OF KINDNESS: INTERNET STYLE
The news rarely carries stories of how humans behave kindly, even
nobly toward one another on- or offline. While stalking, cybercrime,
mass protests, or pornography grab the attention of journalists,
the less-sensational human interest stories might be treated more as
filler for the back of the magazines. Yet behind the scenes, random
acts of kindness occur regularly, and people might be surprised to
learn how altruistic people can be when they enter certain online
neighborhoods.
As we discussed in Chapter 4, on aggression, some online environ-
ments unleash an alarming level of toxic disinhibition, flaming, and
hate speech. But we also find a considerable amount of prosocial
behavior, which – in contrast to antisocial behavior – describes actions
that benefit people other than oneself.2 Motives range from the
purely altruistic to calculated self-interest, or a combination of both.
But the positive contribution such behavior makes to the online
world is very welcome. Three areas in which the Internet has been
158

especially prominent are volunteerism, fundraising and crowdfund-
ing, and online support groups.
Volunteerism
The net has a long history of volunteerism, and people freely give their
time to answer random questions, maintain servers, tutor kids, edit
Wikipedia entries, offer cooking tips, and write reviews. People send
speedy replies to calls for help – right alongside the seedier and meaner
bit streams.
People on the net are willing to help one another in small and
sometimes very large ways. Helpful replies to requests for information
are extremely common, and the willingness of so many to provide
assistance is one of the main reasons people participate in discussion
forums. For example, on Yahoo! Answers’ Homework Help topic some-
one asked, “What is the national costume or traditional clothes in
Indonesia?” Within minutes, an answer appeared, citing “Batik and
Kebaya. They are usually bright and colorful. Also, I think that they
wear a sari. I hope that helped a bit!”
Technological advances have taken the Internet’s role in volunteer-
ing to a whole new level, and one transformational change involves
global databases, which resemble online dating sites. On these sites,
nonprofits can post their needs, and volunteers can easily locate
opportunities to contribute in meaningful ways. The objective of
Volunteermatch.org, for example, is to “bring good people and good
causes together.” Visitors can browse entries under headings such as
human rights, animals, children, or arts and culture, looking for some-
thing that might match their particular skills and passions. The Believe
in Tomorrow Children’s Foundation has a posting to attract talented
bakers who can help make cookies for families in the local area. Or
volunteers with teaching experience might be interested in the many
organizations that offer mentoring and tutoring to students. The net
gives these charitable organizations entirely new ways to vastly
improve their volunteer outreach and recruitment efforts.
Volunteering is also at the heart of projects in which the focus is
on user-generated content where people create valuable information
goods that can then be widely and freely distributed online. Wikipedia
depends on unpaid editors to write and update the millions of articles
in its encyclopedia collection, and many of them spend a considerable
amount of time doing just that. YouTube is awash with helpful videos
159
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

contributed by amateurs who volunteer to show you how to
trim your bangs or locate studs behind drywall.
iFixit is another kind of encyclopedia, one that collects repair
manuals written by technicians who also answer questions. These
volunteers promote conservation and urge people to “ditch the throw-
away economy,” reduce e-waste, and repair your gadgets yourself.
Another growing volunteer activity involves citizen science, in
which amateurs can contribute to many different kinds of research
projects and data collection.3 For example, the Berkeley Open Infra-
structure for Network Computing (BOINC) project at the University of
California at Berkeley offers scientists a means to tap the unused
processing power of home computers that sit idle much of the day.
SETI@Home is one example, and scientists need the extra power
to analyze radio telescope data in the search for extraterrestrial intelli-
gence (SETI). Evidence is mounting that the conditions needed for
life may be quite common in the universe, but the computing
resources needed to analyze data from telescopes is enormous. Millions
of volunteers from more than 200 countries participate in the
SETI@Home project, creating one of the most powerful supercom-
puters on the planet.4
Scientists also draw on volunteers around the globe to contribute
their time and skills to solve puzzles that computers can’t solve. These
efforts are called crowd science and they are earning a great deal of
attention from scientists who need help tagging images, translating
documents, or performing other work that is still best done by human
beings.5 Zooniverse.org is one of the largest platforms for crowd sci-
ence projects, where hundreds of thousands of volunteers contribute
their time to help researchers with projects that could not be con-
ducted without them. One project, for example, asks volunteers to get
to know individual humpback whales by viewing images and identi-
fying features such as the markings on the underside of their tails,
which is the kind of task humans can do quite efficiently.
Fundraising and Crowdfunding
The Internet marries technology and philanthropy to dramatically
change the landscape of charitable giving. Simple email, for instance,
drastically reduced the cost of reaching out to potential donors who
might contribute to a good cause. Once secure online payment
systems were developed, people could make donations with just a
160
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

few clicks on a computer or by sending a text. Websites, blogs, and
poignant videos that charities distribute through social networking
sites attract even more attention.
The crowdfunding trend opens another new avenue for the Inter-
net’s role in prosocial behavior. The practice is exploding, along with
the websites that support it and the fundraisers who use it. Firstgiving.
org is one of the earliest crowdfunding platforms, working with non-
profits to help them plan and execute their campaigns. Actor Edward
Norton promotes the site called Crowdrise.com, which takes an off-
beat and often humorous approach to crowdfunding for good causes.
It adds contests, social networking, and a community feel designed to
appeal to younger donors. Fundraisers earn points for each dollar they
raise or votes they receive from community members. Norton earned
quite a few for running in the New York City Marathon to raise funds
for the Maasai Wilderness Conservation Trust in Kenya.6
Kickstarter.com focuses on crowdfunding for creative projects in
art, film, music, and design, drawing donations from millions of people
around the world. Filmmaker Jeremy Saulnier received more than
$35,000 to make Blue Ruin, a film that won an award at the Cannes
Film Festival. Rob Thomas launched a campaign on Kickstarter to
crowdfund “Veronica Mars,” the detective series that was cancelled.
Adoring fans contributed over $5 million.
Perhaps most surprising is the success of many crowdfunding
efforts to raise money for individuals who are not famous but who
can use the Internet to make a compelling case. When Kelli Space
graduated from college, she struggled to repay many thousands in
student loans. Panicked, she decided to start a crowdfund and received
$13,000 from total strangers around the globe. In some ways, these
personal crowdfunding efforts resemble the barn-raising events of
yesteryear, in which neighbors helped out a family by supplying the
labor to build the barn. A major difference, however, is that these
virtual barn raisers tap the enormous power of the Internet and its
worldwide reach.
Small loans also help struggling entrepreneurs build a profitable
company, and the trend to crowdfund start-up funds is growing, espe-
cially for underdeveloped countries. These investors typically receive
little or no interest, and defaults are common, so their “investment” is
closer to altruism. Researchers find that appeals are especially effective
if they stress the prosocial side of the new business. A study of Kiva.org,
one of the largest crowdfunding platforms for microloans, found that
161
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

investors were drawn to those that included more human interest
language, with words such as family, cousin, friend, or baby, but less
so to appeals using language that emphasized the profit motive.7
Despite its early successes, the future for crowdfunding is unclear.
With so many websites and projects to choose from, donors might
begin turning away rather than try to sort through the volume. A few
high-profile “bad apples” with deceptive projects might also sour
donors on the concept. For this moment in time, however, crowdfund-
ing is an amazing phenomenon that drives charitable giving toward
the very long tail.
Internet Support Groups
You need visit only one of the many online support groups to see how
often people will share even very serious and stressful problems with
an unknown and unseen audience, reaching out for caring and com-
fort. A man on one of the first such forums shared his anguish about a
woman who rejected him because he had cancer8:
What she said hurt me very much. She asked questions like “Is it
contagious?”, “Don’t all cancer’s reocurr [sic]?”, “You can’t have children if
you have cancer can you?” and “I don’t want my children to have cancer.”
I was upset. I know that partners have to go through some grieving but
I could tell by her questions that this was a major concern for her. Soon after
that the relationship ended. She wanted to be “just friends” What hurt me so
much is that she made the decision solely on one thing. My health history.
Several replies followed, including this one:
How lucky for you that this woman is no longer in your life. You said she was
intelligent, but any intelligent person knows that cancer is not contagious
and often does not recur . . . You will find the right woman, but it will help if
you have the confidence that you have so many good qualities to offer – you
will shine! Someone will grab you up – you’ll see!
Online support groups are flourishing on the Internet in Facebook
groups, discussion forums, Google Hangouts, and many other online
environments. They spring up to support people who share any
conceivable disease, personal problem, or other stressor, and their
members come together to exchange information and provide emo-
tional support.
162
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The phenomenon of online disinhibition, particularly in asyn-
chronous text-based forums, make these support groups a natural fit
for people to communicate in a hyperpersonal way. They can join
anonymously to protect their identities, using pseudonyms or initials.
They can take time to craft the messages they send to group members,
and the tone of those messages matters. One study of messages posted
in a forum for cancer survivors found that longer messages with
fewer second-person pronouns (you, yours, yourself) were more likely
to receive a reply. And group members were less likely to respond to
messages dripping with positive emotional words such as “love,”
“nice,” and “sweet.”9
The status-equalizing effects also contribute to disinhibition. The
man with cancer might be a portly CEO or a plumber, and the person
responding might be a retired grandmother or college professor.
The group members are invisible to one another, so physical appear-
ance doesn’t enter the equation.
How effective are these online support groups? Testimonials
abound, and just being able to find other people with similar problems
may be an important factor, especially if the problem is an obscure
one. One example is Tourette syndrome, with symptoms that include
excessive nervousness, hyperactivity, tics, quick reflexes, impulsive-
ness, and explosive cursing. Not very much is known about the dis-
order, and some people with mild cases are ambivalent about taking
any medication for it because it slows them down. One man, for
example, experienced violent tics since childhood and had difficulty
holding down a job. His condition, however, actually helped him
become a jazz drummer of some repute because of his wild improvisa-
tions and musical creativity. People who suffer from an unusual dis-
order, such as Tourette syndrome, or who have relatives who do, can
easily find a supportive online community.
Research on the effectiveness of online support groups yields mixed
results, but some controlled studies do confirm their value in certain
situations. For example, patients suffering from depression were ran-
domly assigned to an online support group, an online support group
supplemented
with
an
online
training
program,
or
a
control
group that did not participate in either one. Over time, the patients
who engaged in the online support groups showed fewer depressive
symptoms compared with controls.10
Another study compared cancer patients who participated in an
online support group, a face-to-face group, or both. In terms of how
163
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

they valued their experiences, the patients who participated in both
the online and offline groups benefited most, suggesting they were
drawing on the best of both worlds. Comparing just the other two
groups, the face-to-face group valued the emotional support and
insights they received from their group members more than the
online-only patients. Those in the online-only group tended to rate
their experience higher in terms of the advice they were able to get
and in their ability to express their emotions.11
One important drawback of online support groups is that people
can’t see nonverbal cues and, as a result, may misjudge the level of
distress members are feeling. In one study, breast cancer patients were
randomly assigned to either an online or face-to-face support group
led by a therapist for a sixteen-week period.12 The face-to-face sessions
were videotaped and the conversations transcribed, so that the text
could be coded separately for emotional expression and compared
with
how
observers
coded
the
video.
The
researchers
found
that the human coders looking just at the transcribed text from the
face-to-face groups overestimated the amount of positive emotional
expression compared with what the coders saw when they viewed
the tapes. They also detected less defensiveness and hostility com-
pared with the video coders. Clearly, nonverbal cues such as a
raised voice or a tear in the eye can dramatically change the emo-
tional meaning of a typed sentence. The disinhibiting effect of a
text-based online environment may help compensate for the lack
of nonverbal cues, however, so that people in online support
groups may become more adept at expressing emotion through their
typed words.
The act of writing out their problems and posting them to a group
could be an important factor in the positive experiences that so many
participants report.13 We know, for example, that people who write
diaries describing traumatic events in their lives show lower levels of
stress and anxiety and better physical health. The exercise seems to
help people work through their own thoughts and put troubling
experiences behind them.
The online support group often plays a special role for people who
can’t or prefer not to discuss issues with family or friends, perhaps
because their feelings would cause distress to their loved ones. For
instance, a study of online support groups for new mothers found that
many expressed anxieties caused by uninvited visits from in-laws who
they thought were too critical or picky.14
164
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

One study of online and face-to-face groups for parents of children
with special needs found that the people who sought each of
those environments out were rather different.15 The parents who
turned to the online world for help reported more stress and believed
that having a special needs child – such as a baby with Down
syndrome – was more stigmatizing. They were either not seeking or
not getting much support from their real-life friends and families,
and they found much comfort through the Internet’s support net-
works. Men, in particular, seem attracted to this anonymous environ-
ment. Almost half the people in the electronic groups were fathers,
but almost no fathers participated in the face-to-face counterpart.
Perhaps men find it easier to break out of traditional gender roles
online.
Support groups within the anonymous Internet environment are
especially well suited for people with concealable stigmas that are easy
to hide and that the individual prefers not to disclose to family or
friends. Examples include hidden eating disorders, drug addictions,
unusual sexual preferences, or even diseases like lung cancer that are
associated with behavioral choices. These are somewhat different from
noticeable stigmas like obesity or stuttering, because people can hide
them, even from close family members.
In Here Comes Everybody, Clay Shirky explains how the magazine
YM, which appeals to young girls, had to drop its health and beauty
discussion forum because anorexic girls were using it as an online
support group.16 In this case, the girls weren’t trying to help each
other recover or offering emotional support for backsliders. Instead,
the “Pro-Ana” teens were swapping tips about how to succeed
at losing even more weight. One wrote, “You’ve made a decision –
you won’t stop . . . The pain is necessary, especially the pain of hunger.
It reassures you that you are strong – can withstand anything – and
that you are NOT a slave to your body; you don’t give into its
whining.” Unfortunately, online support groups aren’t only about
recovery.
Although the online support groups may not reliably lead to
therapeutic improvements, they do empower participants with
information, self-confidence, and a greater sense of control. How-
ever, they are not immune to negative effects, as the Pro-Ana group
demonstrated. For example, group members can pass around very
bad advice and misinformation as easily as correct information,
and some people might put off seeking treatment because of their
165
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

participation. They might also reduce their contact with family
and friends as they become more involved in an online support
group,
even
shutting
off
their
real-world
connections.
People
seeking help through an online support group should weigh
the pros and cons and take their time finding the group that fits
them best.17
WHY DO PEOPLE HELP EACH OTHER?
Debates about why people help each other are common, and many
revolve around whether “altruistic” behavior is truly driven by selfless
altruism or just self-interest. For example, one explanation argues that
helping behavior arises out of social norms that tell us we ought to
help when someone is in need, especially because some day, we may
need help ourselves. The norm of reciprocity is a strong one that
defines social obligations, sometimes very precisely, and it benefits
society as a whole.
Another explanation for prosocial behavior has to do with
maximizing benefits and minimizing costs. If you gallantly volun-
teer to donate blood, the costs would be a needle prick, time,
and possibly fatigue. Benefits might include feeling good about
yourself, impressing friends and colleagues with your selflessness,
raising your own self-esteem, and, of course, actually helping some-
one else. Most of those benefits might involve self-interest, but
not all.
Evolutionary biology contributes a third explanation for prosocial
behavior: genetics. In the interest of ensuring the survival of our genes,
we sacrifice for our children and the people with whom we share the
most genes – our relations. We are also likely to have more genes in
common with friends and neighbors in the geographic area compared
with foreigners. Ethnicity, eye color, body type, or other subtle cues
that might signal more shared genes may also play a role. Evolutionary
biologists propose the concept of kin selection, which means that
genes that tend to predispose people to behave altruistically toward
their own kin will be selected for because they help shared genes
survive.
To some extent, research supports all of these explanations, and
they overlap more than they conflict. But people also differ with
respect to their willingness to behave in prosocial ways and in when
they are willing. Let’s start with personality differences.
166
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Helping Behavior and Personality
Some people seem more disposed toward helping than others, based
on studies that assess personality. In particular, people who score high
on empathy – the ability to share another person’s emotions – are
often the ones who generously offer to help others in face-to-face
settings. Empathy turns out to be at least somewhat correlated with
several of the “Big Five” personality traits, especially agreeableness.
People who agree with statements such as “I sympathize with others’
feelings” or “I make people feel at ease” seem to find it easier to
empathize with people in need, and even take a few risks in doing so.
Empathy is also positively correlated with extraversion, perhaps
because outgoing extraverts have more success in socializing when
they can see things from another person’s perspective.
As you might expect, empathy is negatively related to neuroticism.
People who are very anxious and easily stressed out are less likely to be
able to put themselves into another person’s shoes. Narcissism is also
negatively related to prosocial behavior. Narcissists are self-centered
and preoccupied with their own self-worth, so they, too, are unlikely
to empathize with the feelings of other people.
Online, the personality types that seem more disposed to helping
others in need are mostly similar. In one study, researchers invited
women to participate in a Facebook discussion about informal
topics with two other people in separate rooms. Those other two
were actually confederates, however, and they used the same scripts
for each real subject. The three women took turns posting a com-
ment, and if they had nothing to say could just type “Pass.” During
the discussion, one confederate’s script mentioned that she would
like to get married but she wasn’t legally allowed in her state,
hinting that she was a lesbian. The other confederate’s script then
injected bullying comments, and they escalated to become quite
harsh.18
Which types of women tried to stop the bullying in this online
setting? More than 90 percent tried to intervene in some way, by
changing the subject, telling the bully to stop, attacking the bully in
turn, fostering discussion, or comforting the victim. The women who
scored high on empathy were most likely to intervene, particularly by
trying to change the subject. Extraverts were also more likely to try
to stop the attack, but many of them chose a different method:
launching an attack of their own against the bully.
167
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

How Does the Situation Affect Helping?
Relatively stable personality traits such as agreeableness or narcissism
actually play a smaller role in helping than you might expect. It is the
actual situation that matters most, and this is a key ingredient to
how online environments affect prosocial behavior.
Research on the psychology of helping in face-to-face settings took
off in the 1960s because of the shocking case of Kitty Genovese, which
captured the news for many months in 1964. According to press reports
at the time, she was returning to her New York apartment building
when an assailant attacked her with a knife. As she screamed for help,
dozens of people heard her and came to their apartment windows to
watch, but none assisted her. No one even called the police for more
than half an hour as she pleaded for help, slowly bleeding to death
from stab wounds. The event haunted the entire country, and many
blamed the New Yorkers’ callousness. A recent investigation into the
actual facts of the case suggest that misinformation and conjecture
dominated those press reports,19 but its effects on social psychology
research were profound nonetheless.
At the time, it was far easier to believe that normal people, like you
and me, would have rushed to her aid and that there must have been
some dreadful character flaw in all those heartless people who just
watched from their windows. As the research progressed, however, it
became clear that the actual situation at that apartment building
contained many of the elements that reduce our willingness to offer
help. It is true that some people are more altruistic than others in
almost any situation, but all of us are affected by the environmental
conditions. Under some circumstances, we will behave quite altruistic-
ally, and in others, we are far less likely to assist.
The Bystander Effect
One key feature of the situation that influences whether a bystander
will offer assistance to a stranger is simply the number of people
around. When many people are present, the chance that any one of
them will help drops dramatically. In a classic study, Bibb Latané and
James Dabbs demonstrated this by taking hundreds of trips in an
elevator. When the researcher dropped a pencil or coin, the odds that
someone would retrieve it for them were much higher when only one
or two other people were present, compared with when the elevator
was packed.20 In other words, you are more likely to receive assistance
168
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

when there are fewer people around, not more. There may be safety
in numbers, but not if you need help.
One reason for this bystander effect is that in a real-life situation,
many of the bystanders in a large group may not even notice that
someone needs help if they don’t speak up or attract attention. On
that elevator, you might be standing on the other side and not see that
the person dropped a pencil. On a crowded urban street, a pedestrian
falling into a faint might be overlooked by most of the bystanders
hurrying by. In fact, some research suggests that helping may be less
likely to occur in cities compared with less densely populated areas
simply because of this “noticing” factor. Just the noise and commotion
in crowded areas may make it more difficult for anyone in distress to
attract attention. One study, for example, showed how the noise from
a power lawn mower could decrease the tendency to help a person
with a broken arm who drops a book.21 Apparently, the bystanders
didn’t even notice the cast when their senses were bombarded by the
lawn mower’s clamor.
Assuming a bystander does notice an event, the next step is to
interpret it. You might see a person stumble and fall on a sidewalk,
but your interpretation of that sight will affect whether you provide
any assistance. If you see a whiskey bottle in the person’s hand,
you would interpret it one way. If you see a white cane you would
draw quite a different conclusion.
Humans are highly social creatures, and another reason your
chances of receiving help are lower when large numbers of bystanders
are present is that people tend to rely on one another to interpret
events around them. We take our cues about the relative seriousness
of any situation from the others around us. In another experiment,
Bibb Latané and Judith Rodin staged an accident involving a female
researcher at Columbia University to find out whether the male sub-
jects in the next room, who were filling out questionnaires, would
rush to help. The woman handed the men some forms to fill out and
then departed to her office next door. After a few minutes, she played a
recording that clearly signaled an emergency, as though she had
been standing on a chair to reach a high shelf and fell off, injuring
her ankle. On the recording, she screamed, then moaned, “Oh, my God,
my foot . . . I . . . I . . . can’t move it.”22
When there was only one man in the next room hearing this
simulated emergency, the chances that he would rush to help were
high. Seventy percent of these men left their seats and raced to assist.
169
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

But when there were two men in the next room who were strangers to
one another, the chances that either of them helped her dropped
dramatically – to only 40 percent. The men were looking to one
another to interpret the seriousness of the situation and, seeing few
signs of alarm in the other, decided it was not very serious.
The same kind of thing happened in another experiment in which
the researchers rigged a room vent so it would start pouring out smoke
on demand. When a man sitting alone in the room filling out ques-
tionnaires saw the smoke, the chances that he would stop what he was
doing, investigate it, sniff it a bit, and then report it were about 75 per-
cent. When a couple of other men in the room were with him, though,
the bystander effect becomes evident. As each one tried to stay cool
and watch for signs of alarm in the others, the room fills up with
smoke. Under these circumstances, the noxious cloud was reported
far less frequently. Taking their cues from one another, they built a
shared illusion that nothing was amiss even when the smoke started
to make them rub their eyes, cough, and choke. These men elaborated
on their interpretation by offering what they thought might be plaus-
ible explanations to one another. “Chemistry lab in the building,”
said one. “Truth gas,” said another. No one suggested that it might be
a fire.23
Reduced Responsibility in Larger Groups
The sheer number of bystanders also affects the chance that a person
in need will receive help because as group size increases, each individ-
ual feels less responsibility for offering to assist. Even if you notice the
event, and interpret it as a possible call for aid, you still might ignore it
because you assume someone else will step in. Of course, everyone will
be thinking the same thing, so no one acts.
John Darley and Bibb Latané demonstrated this by manipulating
the assumptions people were making about the presence of others
during a simulated emergency. They invited students to participate
in a group discussion on problems of urban life in which each person
would sit alone in a separate cubicle, talking to the others over an
intercom system, rather than in a face-to-face group. In fact, there was
only one real subject in each “group,” and one confederate who,
unbeknownst to the subject, would soon have an emergency in his
cubicle. Each subject was led to believe different things about the
size of the group. Some thought it was just the two of them. Others
170
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

were told there were three people in the group, and still others
thought they were in a group of six. They couldn’t see the others, of
course, but this was how Darley and Latané planted a sense of group
size in their heads.
During the early part of the discussion the confederate casually
mentioned over the intercom that he had epilepsy and city life seemed
to be making him more prone to seizures. This set the stage for the
sounds that came later: choking, gasping, crying, and then total silence.
When that critical moment came, every person who thought he or
she was the only one around to render aid came to the rescue. But
that willingness to assist faded when the subjects thought someone
else was around, and more than a third just ignored the incident
when they thought there were several others who could take care
of it.24
The subjects who failed to help were not misinterpreting the ser-
iousness of the event because they were taking misleading cues from
others; there were no cues to take, no facial expressions to see. Instead,
the bystander effect was due to the way responsibility for action gets
spread a little thin when more people are around. Just as people feel
less personally responsible for destructive acts when they are in a large
group, they also feel less responsible to help another person. It seems
we are almost calculating the amount of responsibility and dividing
it by the number of people present.
Beyond Group Size: Time Pressures
Beyond the size of the crowd, several other aspects of the situation
affect our willingness to help. One is simply time. People in a hurry,
who are “late for an important date,” are less likely to stop to help
someone in need.
In a classic study illustrating this phenomenon, John Darley and
C. Daniel Batson turned to the parable of the Good Samaritan, which is
about a man on a journey who fell among robbers, who left him half
dead. A priest walking on the road saw the man, and crossed to the
other side. By and by a Levite came along as well, and also passed the
man without offering help. Finally, a Samaritan approached the man
and offered compassionate help, binding his wounds and then taking
him to an inn. The Samaritan, whose social standing was far lower
than either the priest or the Levite, paid the innkeeper to care for
the man.
171
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

One might jump to personality differences in arrogance or elitism
to explain the vast difference in prosocial behavior, but Darley
and Batson thought it might also have to do with time pressures.25
Compared with Samaritans, priests and Levites played important
roles in their societies, with many pressing responsibilities. To test this
hypothesis experimentally, they invited students at the Princeton
Theological Seminary to prepare a short speech that would later be
videotaped in another building on campus. Some were randomly
assigned to talk about career paths for seminary students, while others
were assigned to speak on the Good Samaritan parable.
To instill a feeling of being rushed for time, some students heard
that the filmmakers “were expecting you a few minutes ago . . . you’d
better hurry.” Others heard “It will be a few minutes before they’re
ready for you,” to reduce time pressure. An “intermediate hurry” group
was just told to “go right over.” In an alley on the way to the videotap-
ing, a “victim” was slumped on the floor, coughing and groaning.
Which students do you think stopped to help?
Only 10 percent of the students who thought they were late
stopped to assist, compared with 63 percent, who thought they had
extra time on their hands. The ones in the intermediate hurry group
fell in the middle – 45 percent of those students offered help. Clearly,
life in the fast lane is not very conducive to helping others.
Priming
Although the students working on the Good Samaritan speech helped
a bit more than those crafting a speech about careers, the difference
wasn’t significant. Later studies, however, show that priming people
with prosocial themes does tend to increase their willingness to help,
just as priming affects many other behaviors. The effect might even be
unconscious.
For example, in one study subjects were asked to complete a
“scrambled sentence test,” in which they saw a set of words arranged
in random order and then had to try to make a sentence out of them.26
For some subjects, the words included prosocial themes such as
“to give,” “aid,” or “to lend.” For the others, the words were neutral
(“piano,” “to read,” “landscape”).
After the test, and in a seemingly unrelated way, a confederate
approached each subject to ask for a donation to help purchase text-
books for disadvantaged students. More than 80 percent of the
172
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

students who worked on sentences with prosocial words made a
contribution, compared with 63 percent of the control group. In a
follow-up study, this “prosocial priming” also led subjects to offer more
help to someone passing in the hallway who dropped a load of books.
Mood
Are you more helpful to others when you’re in a really good mood?
Or do you make yourself try to feel better when you’re down by doing
some good in the world? Research on this is mixed, and both factors
may be operating.
Experimental studies often find that when people experience
events that make them feel good – finding some money, succeeding
on a task, receiving a free gift – they do tend to be more helpful. In one
classic study conducted when pay phone booths were still common
on city sidewalks, the researchers induced a good mood in some
people who entered the booth by leaving a dime in the coin slot
for them to find. Others did not find any coins. They measured help-
fulness by the “lost letter” technique, in which researchers plant an
envelope that a stranger apparently left behind by accident. The sub-
ject can choose either to take the trouble to put it in a mailbox, ignore
it, or perhaps toss it out. One handy feature of this technique is that
it can be used in very natural settings – such as phone booths – and
the letters that subjects mail will come back to the researchers, so they
can analyze which conditions created more helpfulness.
In this study, the people who found the dime were far more likely to
mail the letter, even if they had to buy a stamp to do it (eight cents,
at the time). Studies such as this one, in which the researchers create a
good mood in some way, often lead to more helpfulness.27
Yet, people who are likely in a bad mood are also sometimes more
helpful in certain settings. In another “lost letter” study, researchers put
100 letters under the windshield wipers of cars at the grand final game
between two rugby teams from different towns in Australia, with a
handwritten note that said, “Found near your car.”28 The researchers
identified which cars belonged to each team’s supporters by the
streamers, posters, and stickers on the car. It was a hotly contested
game, and more than 40,000 fans attended. Surprisingly, 58 percent
of the letters placed on the losing team’s cars were returned, compared
with just 38 percent from the winning team’s supporters. Perhaps
the people who were rooting for the team that lost sought to put the
173
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

gloom behind them by doing something helpful. The winning
team’s fans may have been so excited that they paid less attention to
the lost letters.
Who Helps Whom?
Who is most likely to receive help when they need it, and who will
provide it? Gender, for example, matters, but in complex ways. Much
of the early research on this topic showed that men helped more often
than women did, particularly in the kinds of situations that involved
bystander intervention in an emergency. For example, men are more
likely than women to help a person who falls on subway stairs or
who has a flat tire by the side of the road. Inspired by the Kitty
Genovese incident, this line of research investigated many similar
kinds of situations in which a bystander is offered the opportunity
to render aid to a stranger in distress. Often, helping the stranger might
involve some danger to the bystander. The majority of the research
showed that men would help more often in cases like these.
But women are more likely to help in other kinds of situations,
especially those that require emotional assistance or nurturance.29
It seems that the willingness to help is partly dependent on culturally
established gender roles, so men tend to leap into the fray in an
emergency in which physical action and superior strength are a plus,
but women tend to help more when nurturing and emotional support
are called for.
In a study at a laundromat, for example, different helping patterns
emerged. The researcher’s confederates approached customers and
asked them to help with either carrying a laundry basket or folding
clothes. The male customers were more likely to volunteer their assist-
ance to carry the basket, but the women customers helped fold more
than the men did.30 There are many subtleties to this gender phenom-
enon, of course, and people who do not adhere to traditional gender
roles – more androgynous people – behave somewhat differently.
More androgynous women, for instance, are less likely to provide
assistance on traditionally female helping tasks but are more likely
to help in ways that men do. The gender of the person who needs
help also influences whether someone will help them. Men are more
likely to help women, particularly attractive ones, while women tend
to help men and other women about equally. Women also ask for
more help than men do.
174
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Another consistent finding is that people are more willing to help
people who are similar to themselves in terms of age, race, culture,
attitudes, or other characteristics. As we discussed in an earlier chapter,
similarity leads to more liking, and we are more helpful toward people
we like.
Lisa DeBruine conducted a study in which she manipulated similar-
ity in facial resemblance by digitally blending, or “morphing,” each
subject’s photo with that of a stranger of the same sex, so that the
photo showed someone who looked somewhat like the subject.31
Then she asked subjects to play the “trust game” in which they could
choose to trust or not trust another player to split a sum of money.
The subjects sat alone at a computer and played the game with several
different partners, none of whom was actually real. But they appeared
either as the morphed image that blended the features of the subject
and a stranger, or as one of a stranger that was left unblended.
The subjects behaved in more prosocial ways toward the images that
resembled their own faces, trusting them more on each turn.
We’re also more helpful to people we identify as members of our
ingroup. A U.K. study of fans of football (or “soccer” in the United
States) shows how this plays out.32 The researchers invited Manchester
United fans to the lab, one at a time, to take part in a study about
football teams. The subjects answered questions about which team
they supported and why, how often they watch the team play, and
other questions that were sure to make their allegiance to Manchester
United very salient. Then the subject walked to another building to
view a short video about football teams. On the subject’s way over,
a confederate running by in shirt, shorts, and running shoes pretended
to slip and fall, wincing in pain. Just as in the Good Samaritan experi-
ment described earlier, the subjects could choose to help or not.
Did these Manchester United fans stop to help? That depended on
the shirt the confederate was wearing. If he was wearing a team shirt
for Manchester United, 80 percent of the subjects offered assistance.
But if the confederate wore a plain shirt or one from a rival team
(Liverpool), the subjects were far less likely to help.
PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR ONLINE
As you can see, we know quite a lot about when and why people
behave in altruistic ways in face-to-face settings. But how do these
factors play out online? Some aspects of the online environment
175
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

appear to promote kindness and helping, while others may detract
from it. Let’s begin with the bystander effect.
Bystander Effects Online
Some of the early studies in which researchers put the subjects in a
separate room to communicate with other group members by inter-
com hinted that the bystander effect will unfold online, just as it
does in face-to-face settings. In some environments, it certainly appears
to do just that. In 2008, a nineteen-year-old Florida boy told people on
an online body building forum he frequented that he intended
to commit suicide, and he posted a link to the live feed from his
webcam in the forum, so they could watch. More than 1500 people
viewed the scene, but none intervened until a seventeen-year-old
forum member in India finally was able to alert the Miami police.
By then, however, it was too late and the boy was dead. This incident
is alarmingly similar to the Kitty Genovese case, except that the
bystanders were all over the world – not watching the live scene from
their apartments.
Many of those viewers might have just clicked the camera for a
few minutes, then moved on, never really noticing that something
was amiss. For those who did notice, many were convinced the boy
was putting on an act, so they didn’t interpret the situation as one
that needed any intervention. They also were communicating
with one another via chat as they watched, adding mocking com-
ments. Although the bystanders could not see one another, they
could draw conclusions about the severity of the situation from the
behavior of others, much as the subjects did when they saw smoke
pouring out of a vent and took their cues from one another about
what to do.33
Unlike the bystanders in the Kitty Genovese case who heard
screaming, many of the online bystanders probably never interpreted
the situation as a clear cry for help. This is one way in which bystander
effects
play
out
rather
differently
online,
where
ambiguity
is
heightened.
Bystander effects also play out in less dramatic online environ-
ments, such as the knowledge-sharing forums on topics such as
finance, entertainment, or music. Researchers examined the sharing
patterns
in
333
different
Yahoo!
groups
with
almost
200,000
members34 by posting a simple query to each group that read:
176
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

I’m so happy that I found this group. However, I have one question: Does
anyone know how I can upload more than one picture at once. Thanks, Sam
The number of members in each group varied from just a handful to
more than 10,000 members. As the bystander effect predicts, the
researchers were most likely to receive a reply from someone in the
small groups, with fewer than 100 members. Over one third of those
queries were answered, compared with less than 10 percent for queries
in groups with 100 to 250 members.
This study uncovered another intriguing feature of the bystander
effect in online environments, because it also included queries to
extremely large groups. The queries sent to those groups did not
receive answers as readily as the ones sent to the small groups,
but response rates were far higher than the medium-sized groups.
However, the responses themselves were rather low quality in terms
of how helpful they actually were.
Unlike face-to-face settings, the Internet easily supports groups
of this size and larger, so the finding that the characteristics of
helping might shift at this amplified scale is an important one, espe-
cially for businesses that depend on online communities for know-
ledge
sharing.
For
example,
managers
intuitively
assume
that
knowledge sharing works best when many employees are involved,
so the more the merrier. But this research suggests that people in
smaller groups, at least by online standards, may help one another
in more meaningful ways.
Reversing the Bystander Effect?
Online, bystanders experience a rather different environment from a
psychological perspective, in terms of physical distance, anonymity,
self-awareness, visibility, and many other features. An intriguing study
explored whether some of these differences could be tweaked in ways
that might actually reverse the bystander effect that is so consistently
found in face-to-face studies.35
Subjects were invited to participate in a research project about
“online communication.” When they arrived at the lab, they headed
into separate cubicles with a computer and learned that they would be
viewing posts from a real, ongoing discussion forum that had not yet
received any response. They could respond if they liked, or just click
“next message.”
177
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

The five messages were actually preprogrammed; the subjects were
not actually visiting a live forum with real people in it. The messages
simulated the personal stories of people who seemed rather distressed,
to see whether subjects would be moved to respond in a prosocial way.
For example, one simulated post mentioned thoughts of suicide, and
another explained how her partner just learned his cancer had
returned. One independent variable, as in most bystander studies,
was the size of the group. The subjects were told that the forum was
visited either by many people or by only a few. The subjects could
see their own name along with the names of each person who was
online in the “live” forum in the corner of the computer screen, along
with the number of people in the forum (one for the small group, and
thirty for the large one).
As the bystander effect predicts, the subjects who thought they
were the only bystander in the forum were much more likely to
respond to one or more of the messages, compared with subjects
who thought there were thirty other people online. But these
researchers added one other independent variable: public self-
awareness. In addition to manipulating apparent group size, they
also manipulated how noticeable to others in the forum each subject
would feel, using a very simple technique. To make the subject feel
more publicly self-aware, his or her name appeared in red on the
computer screen, while the other name(s) were in black. The goal
was to make the subject’s name more salient so the subject would feel
more noticeable.
With this small change in the experiment – coloring the subject’s
name red – the bystander effect was reversed. The subjects with red
names who thought they were in a forum with thirty other people
were more likely to respond to one of the messages, compared with
those who thought they were the only bystander. Their names in red
seemed to make them feel as if they stood out in the crowd and were
more accountable.
The researchers repeated this study, but instead of coloring the
subjects’ names red to induce public self-awareness in some subjects,
they used a webcam. Those subjects couldn’t see the camera’s
actual feed, just that it was pointed at them and its LED indicator
light was on. The results were the same. The bystander effect was
reversed when the subjects thought that the big audience in the
forum might be watching them. They felt more accountable, as if
their reputation were at stake. This fits the theory that people
178
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

sometimes decide to behave in a prosocial way after weighing the
relative costs and rewards.
Mood, Helping, and Facebook
Mood affects our willingness to help in complex ways, as I discussed
earlier. But how do online environments affect mood? Many of them
trigger a positive mood, attracting visitors just for that reason. You-
Tube’s funny pet videos draw millions of viewers, and online games
can certainly lead to a better mood.
In one study, for instance, subjects in the treatment group played a
popular casual game for twenty minutes, choosing among Bejeweled 2,
Bookworm Adventures, or Peggle. During the session, the researchers
took various physiological measures, and at the end, subjects com-
pleted a questionnaire to assess their mood states. Compared with
control subjects who just surfed the net for the same period of time,
the game players reported a better mood. They also showed changes in
brain-wave patterns, consistent with improved mood states, and
reductions in their heart rate variability – a sign of reduced stress.36
Although certain environments appear to improve mood, others
may do the opposite, and some research suggests that, overall, frequent
Internet use is a mixed picture. One of the first longitudinal studies, for
example, tracked people from the time they first started accessing the
net in the mid-1990s. As time went on, those who used the Internet
most often tended to show more depression, loneliness, and stress.37
These negative outcomes appeared related to the way some people
neglected their strong, face-to-face relationships as they spent more
time interacting with distant acquaintances online or people they had
never actually met in real life.
Much debate centers on Facebook and how that particular environ-
ment affects mood. Several studies suggest that heavy Facebook users
may experience more depression. One study used “experience sam-
pling,” in which researchers texted subjects five times a day for two
weeks, asking about their Facebook use since the last text message and
about their current feelings of well-being, stress, and loneliness. They
found that the more subjects used Facebook during one time period,
the worse they felt when they answered the next text message.38
One plausible explanation is that most people emphasize the upbeat
in their status updates, so it may become depressing if everyone seems
to be cheerier and more successful than you are.
179
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

A Facebook researcher along with two academic colleagues con-
ducted an experiment in which they manipulated the news feeds of
more than 600,000 Facebook users such that some saw more of the
posts from friends that contained positive words (love, happy, joy), and
others saw more posts that leaned negatively (sad, annoyed, worth-
less).39 The randomly assigned users who saw more positive news
about friends began adding more positive words to their own status
updates, and the opposite was true for those who saw more negative
posts. Their actual moods weren’t assessed, however, so they may have
been putting on a happy show for their happier audience or a sadder
one for a sadder audience. (This study triggered ethical concerns and
outrage among many Facebook users because they did not volunteer
or consent to be subjects in such an experiment.)
While the way mood might affect prosocial behavior online is not
clear yet, Facebook does encourage self-interest and a general egocen-
tric outlook. Status updates and wall posts create mostly a one-to-
many monologue, and that itself can promote a focus on self that is
not very conducive to helping others. A study in Taiwan tested this
out by inviting Facebook users to the lab.40 For the first part of the
experiment, some subjects were asked to log into their accounts and
submit a wall post, but others were told the Internet was out so they
couldn’t log in. Then all subjects participated in an ostensibly separate
study on decision making using the “dictator” game:
Imagine you are told that there is another, unknown person, in a separate
room. The experimenter says that each of you have been randomly assigned
to be the “initiator” in game, or the “recipient.” You get the initiator role, and
the experimenter hands you NT$200 [~USD$30]. The experimenter says you
can keep as much as you want, and the recipient gets the rest. The recipient
can reject the offer, but you will keep yours regardless. No one will know how
much you kept for yourself or gave away. How much will you offer to this
unknown recipient?
Generally, people in the dictator game don’t offer an even split. But
those who had just posted to Facebook were even stingier than usual.
Their mean offer was more than 22 percent lower than that of the
control group, who had not had that opportunity.
Findings such as this suggest that Facebook use does not bode
particularly well for helping behavior, at least not for strangers.
But other features of the site may be more promising for prosocial
180
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

behavior. For example, the people you identify as friends are not
strangers. Presumably you already like them and they are similar
to you in various ways, as I discuss in a later section. For instance,
Facebook friends routinely respond to calls to help find housing, move
furniture, or take care of pets. Wall posts may also promote some
measure of public self-awareness, so you may be more likely to offer
help. Posting a picture of that orphaned baby elephant you just
“adopted” in Kenya is bound to generate quite a few likes.
Online Time Pressures and Microvolunteering
People in a rush for time are less likely to stop to assist in face-to-face
settings, but what happens online? It is likely the same is true, with
some intriguing differences. First, most Internet environments are
asynchronous, which means that we can do something prosocial well
after we hear of someone in need – at a time of our own choosing.
Those students who hurried past the confederate coughing and
wheezing on the sidewalk while on their way to make a videotaped
speech about the Good Samaritan might have behaved differently
if the event happened online. Then, after hearing about someone
who needed help, they could first make the videotape, then log on
with their smartphones to offer assistance. (Of course, they might be
too late, depending on the circumstances.)
Another possible difference concerns the micro time slots we use
to access the Internet, thanks to smartphones, tablets, and virtually
ubiquitous mobile access. People are always filling short periods of
spare time between their regular activities – waiting for a bus to arrive,
a class to start, or a car wash to finish, for example. Some organizations
find ways to tap the motive to fill these slots with something more
worthwhile than a game or video by offering microvolunteering oppor-
tunities. For example, the BOINC platform includes many apps for
smartphones so people with a few spare minutes can engage in one
of those projects. Websites are springing up to help organizations offer
very short-term projects – 30 minutes or less. On HelpFromHome.org,
for example, the Open Elm Project encourages people to take a
moment to record the sighting of Dutch elm trees on the Isle of Man
in the United Kingdom, to help conservationists monitoring Dutch
elm disease try to save that endangered species.
The Institute for Volunteering Research surveyed people who had
downloaded the “Do Some Good” app offered through the Orange
181
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

telecom service in the United Kingdom to learn more about motives
for microvolunteering.41 The findings suggest that compared with
traditional volunteers, the microvolunteers are motivated more by
the convenience and enjoyment of an activity that fills a chunk of
spare time, rather than the altruistic desire to help a particular charity.
Those charities hope that microvolunteering opportunities will attract
more people to worthwhile causes, who might then go on to volun-
teer in more traditional ways. But it isn’t yet clear that it works that
way, as you will see in the next section.
Slacktivism
The Internet makes it very easy for people to support favorite
causes, with as little effort as clicking a “like” button on the organiza-
tion’s social media site. But does offering this kind of token support
make it more or less likely that people will offer more meaningful
support?
Research on the foot-in-the-door phenomenon shows that people are
more likely to agree to a large request if a smaller one precedes it.
In a classic study, the researchers pretended to be volunteers for a
safe-driving campaign in California, and they approached some home-
owners to ask if they would be willing to put a tiny “Be a safe driver”
sign in their windows. Two weeks later, they came back to ask if they
could put a large and ugly sign in the front yard. Seventy-six percent
agreed, compared with just 17 percent of the homeowners who had
not been approached with the small request earlier.42
Many charities are convinced that clicking “like” is the online
equivalent of that foot in the door. But others think it leads to slackti-
vism, in which people think they’ve done their part with a small effort
and earned a kind of moral license to stop contributing. In a Saturday
Night Live skit, Seth Meyers quipped:
Look, if you make a Facebook page we will “like” it—it’s the least we can do.
But it’s also the most we can do.43
Some research that sheds light on how online token support affects
our willingness to offer more meaningful support later suggests that a
key ingredient is whether the token support is public or private.
If your small support action is observable and your friends know
you did it, you may be less likely to go the extra mile later because
182
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

you have already created the impression you wanted to create. How-
ever, if your action is private, impression management is not an issue.
Instead, you may be more willing to do something meaningful
because of cognitive dissonance and the desire to be consistent in
terms of beliefs and behavior.
In one study that tested that hypothesis, subjects who signed a
petition for a charity in front of other people were stingier with their
time when asked later to do something more meaningful compared
with subjects who signed the petition privately. The more meaningful
support involved stuffing envelopes for the charity’s mail campaign,
and the subjects whose initial token was made privately offered
almost twice as much of their time.44 This finding might mean that
charities can encourage more meaningful support if a person’s token
support – clicking “like,” for example – is not broadcast to friends and
family in a newsfeed or tweet.
ONLINE, WHO HELPS WHOM?
How do online environments affect who you are most willing to help?
Just as in face-to-face settings, gender and similarity play a role.
Gender Effects
On the Internet, gender differences in helping style seem to parallel the
results from the research on real-life helping. As I described, men help
more than women do in situations that involve traditional male
behaviors. One example is technical expertise, something people on
the net need in abundance. Men are more likely to provide this kind of
assistance, and many formalize it by staffing the help channels and
discussion groups in their free time. Requests for technical assistance
are some of the most common kinds of help calls on the net, and most
are answered by males.
This gender gap is also present in another online environment:
Wikipedia. One study found that more than 80 percent of the editors
are men, a fact that is of some concern to the organization because it
tilts the encyclopedia’s content toward subjects that mostly interest
men. However, women were far from silent. Although there are far
fewer of them, the most active women on the site made larger revi-
sions in the articles they edited compared with the most active
men.45
183
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

The situations in which women may be more likely to help
on the Internet may be in the support groups in which people
are sharing personal problems. A shining example was the late
Glenna Tallman, who founded several online self-help support
groups. As she herself was dying of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS), she participated in these groups very actively,
sharing her own fears and experiences and trying to help others
with theirs.
People like Us
While people are more willing to help others they think are like
themselves in terms of race, culture, attitudes, age, or other character-
istics, they may not have very accurate information about people
online whom they haven’t met in person. Many of the demographic
features of the person asking for assistance might be obscure, and
judgments about similarity might rely more on a convergence of
attitudes and interests.
But on a social network, you will know more about how similar
your friends are to you – how much you share political views,
for instance, or tastes in music. In a study of Facebook users in the
United Kingdom, subjects picked individuals in their network that
they contacted weekly, monthly, or yearly. For each of those friends,
subjects checked off the similarities in terms of shared religious
beliefs, shared politics, same friends, support of the same sports teams,
and other characteristics. They found that the more similar they
were, the closer they were emotionally and the more contact they
had. High similarity was also related to the subjects’ willingness to
donate a kidney.46
People can often ascertain something about your attitudes just by
the name of the Internet locale in which you meet. If you interact
with people on a discussion group about golf, for example, you already
know that you have something in common. The obscurity of some of
the Internet niches allows people with very arcane interests to find
one another, regardless of geographic distance – a fact that may further
promote prosocial behavior.
Online
environments
offer
some
intriguing
possibilities
to manipulate many of the variables that affect helping behavior,
either in very subtle ways or through outright deception, discussed
next.
184
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

MANIPULATION AND DECEPTION
Few of us are above tweaking details of our online personas to craft a
pleasing and likable impression, one that would garner more support
from both friends and strangers. But sometimes this drifts into some-
thing more sinister, especially when it involves manipulating others
into helping in large and small ways. Deceptive tactics and motives
vary considerably, as the following examples show.
The Strange Case of Alex and Joan
An early and widely publicized case of online deception involved the
Joan/Alex chimera, also known as the “case of the electronic lover.”47
Alex, a New York psychiatrist, used the nickname “Shrink, Inc.” to chat
on a discussion board. He began having online conversations with
women who assumed he was a female psychiatrist. Titillated by the
immediacy and intimacy of the conversations in which people
thought he was a woman, he began logging on as “Joan” and created
an elaborate and detailed persona to go with his new nickname. Joan
was handicapped and disfigured but emerged as a model of the deter-
mined female who overcomes all odds to establish relationships and
surmount her disabilities. Women chatted intimately with Joan and
offered her all kinds of help, but when the most determined insisted
on meeting her in person, Alex ended the charade. He first hinted at a
serious illness and then said “she” was going to the hospital, where
Alex would write her out of existence. Unfortunately, Alex embel-
lished his masquerade with some telling details of time and place.
Online friends wishing to send flowers discovered that the hospital
had no record of “Joan.”
The fury over Alex’s deception was immediate, but the feelings
of betrayal were complex and varied. He lied not only to solicit
sympathy but to experiment with a female persona. This particular
deception was an extreme case of a masquerade gone awry, but decep-
tion is not that difficult to achieve online. The Internet is an attractive
venue for people motivated to deceive, such as those with a medical
disorder called Munchausen syndrome.
Munchausen by Internet
Faking illness to avoid unpleasant chores or take a day off from work
has a time-honored history. Munchausen syndrome, however, is far
185
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

more extreme, and people with the disorder will feign, exaggerate, or
even induce physical or psychological injury to gain attention and
take on the “sick” role for months or years.48 In face-to-face settings,
people with Munchausen might get away with it for a while,
but absent obvious symptoms, family and friends may tire of the
complaints and suspect faking.
Online environments, however, offer unparalleled opportunities
for
people
with
Munchausen
to
extend
their
manipulations.
They can take time to craft and edit elaborate posts to online
support groups, adding gut-wrenching stories and meticulous med-
ical details drawn from online medical sources. They can also stage
crisis events, miraculous recoveries, and final battles that end in
death, when they disappear from the forum, at least under their
current nickname.
In one case, Andrea, a forty-year-old mother, joined a support group
for ovarian cancer victims, posting about her worsening abdominal
pain. As time went on and support group members responded to her
with a very sympathetic ear, Andrea announced that she had been
diagnosed with stage 4 cancer. To bolster her story, she created sock
puppet identities on the forum and posed as her own daughter “Brit-
tney” and her daughter’s boyfriend, “Chris.” “Brittney” eventually
posted that her mom had died and that she herself had now been
diagnosed with cancer. When “Brittney” died, “Chris” took over the
plot. The group finally became suspicious and confirmed it was all a
masterful deception.49
How can online support groups spot that kind of deception?
Research suggests that the pattern of posting might offer some clues.
For example, they may be very long and detailed even though the
individual is describing some condition that would make it nearly
impossible to sit at a keyboard for long. They may also alternate
between near-fatal events and dramatic recoveries. The asynchronous,
text-based, and relatively anonymous support groups are an inviting
and welcoming environment for people with Munchausen syndrome,
to the detriment of people who turn to online support groups with
real need.
Charity Scams
Unscrupulous scammers manipulate people’s empathy online, relying
on much of the psychological research described in this chapter
186
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

about why people willingly offer help. Major natural disasters are well
known to bring out tremendous generosity, and scammers often take
advantage of such events.
For example, when Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast in 2005,
more than 4,000 Katrina-related websites sprang into existence, many
of which, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), were
fraudulent. A common trick is to launch a website or social media
presence that looks very much like a legitimate charity, such as the
American Red Cross. The scammers then send out email appeals to
thousands of potential donors, with a link to the fake site.50 These
tactics not only drain donations away from the disaster’s victims, they
reduce trust, making it more difficult for nonprofits to raise money
through online donations.
Another tactic is to pose as a victim of a well-publicized disaster or
tragedy and share a heart-rending story through social media. After the
tragic shooting in the Newtown school in Connecticut, a scammer in
New York claimed to be the aunt of one of the victims to generate
sympathy and collect donations.
How can people avoid falling prey to one of these charity scams?
They are growing in number and sophistication, especially with the
trend toward crowdfunding. They are also difficult to stop, partly
because donors don’t expect anything more than an email thank-
you message, so may never know that they – and the charity they
meant to help – were scammed. Donors should certainly check out the
charity first, through sources that evaluate its financial health and
transparency. They should also be very wary of following links in
email, in which scammers use techniques described in this chapter.
For example, the email might start by thanking you for your previous
donation, tapping the foot-in-the-door technique. Knowing some of
the tricks that scammers use to solicit donations online will help
donors avoid the pitfalls.
Digital Manipulation
The online world is endlessly malleable in ways that face-to-face set-
tings are not, and this characteristic opens up completely new oppor-
tunities to affect prosocial behavior. We know, for example, that
people tend to like others who are similar to themselves and are more
willing to help those people. While similarity can be manipulated
in face-to-face settings in some ways – such as by wearing a shirt
187
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

emblazoned with the name of the sports team you are known to
support – there are many more possibilities online.
Digital facial morphing is one example. As demonstrated by the
experimental study of morphed images described earlier, people tend
to behave in more generous ways toward someone who looks like
them.
Immersive virtual reality offers even more opportunities for digital
manipulation,
especially
to
create
controlled
environments
for
research on human behavior. For example, researchers set up a virtual
reality environment in which subjects, wearing head-mounted dis-
plays, found themselves at a bus stop on a city sidewalk lined with
shops. While they explored the virtual neighborhood, they saw a car
hitting a blind man crossing the street. The man dropped his white
cane, fell to the ground, and said, “Help, I’m blind, can you please help
me find my cane?” While some subjects ignored or mocked this virtual
person, about 36 percent of the subjects offered some kind of assist-
ance. The ones who helped also scored higher on compassion, agreeing
with statements such as “When I see someone hurt or in need, I feel a
powerful urge to take care of them.”
In a follow-up study, subjects on the virtual sidewalk passed either a
beggar asking for money or a businessman on his cell phone. Again,
the subjects’ score on compassion was related to their behavior in this
immersive environment. The more compassionate subjects tended to
stand closer to the beggar and gaze in his direction.51
Another study involving immersive virtual reality demonstrated
that judgments of similarity are not just about appearance or attitudes.
They are also about body movement. A virtual person who is facially
similar to the subject and who mimics the subject’s head movements
(with a four-second delay) will be most persuasive. One might think
subjects would easily detect that kind of mimicry, but they don’t.52
It is not a far leap to imagine an online fundraising campaign that
taps the malleability of the digital world to incorporate features like
these, individually tailoring the messages so that the person seeking
help looks more like the potential donor, moves in a similar way, or
wears a T-shirt of a particular team. Through the analysis of big data,
combined with all the information you share with your apps and
online services, organizations know quite a lot about how to influence
your behavior. This chapter focuses on how online environments can
promote prosocial behavior, but you can see that this kind of power
can be applied in other ways that are far less appealing.
188
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

HOW MAY WE HELP YOU?
Psychologist John Grohol set up Psych Central on the web (psychcen-
tral.com) to provide a wide range of resources to people looking for
reliable information about psychological issues. He is not the only one
who created a web presence for altruistic reasons. Many people provide
some online service to others, not just show off their dog’s pictures or
their unpublished poems. Some of them spend hundreds of hours
creating an Internet spot they hope will help someone out there.
Psychologists debate over whether altruism is primarily selfish
behavior, in which the helper obtains rewards for helping, in the form
of higher self-esteem, praise from others, a warm glow inside, or simply
relief from the distress they feel as they watch someone else suffer.
Some argue that truly empathic altruism really does exist, although it
may not be the main reason people help one another. We know a great
deal about why people behave in prosocial ways in some settings and
much less so in others, and the Internet has features that affect us in both
positive and negative ways. Fortunately for all of us, the good seems
to outweigh the bad as a context for prosocial human interactions.
NOTES
1 Henderson, L. (2014, June 3). Small charity’s crowdfunding goes global,
breaks records. Fundraising and Philanthropy Magazine. Retrieved from
www.fpmagazine.com.au/small-charitys-crowdfunding-goes-global-breaks-
records-338891/
2 Batson, C. D. (2012). A history of prosocial behavior research. In A. W.
Kruglanski & W. Stroebe (Eds.), Handbook of the history of social psychology.
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
3 Sproull, L. (2011). Prosocial behavior on the net. Daedalus, 140 (4), 140–153.
4 Wertheimer, D. (2014). Statement of Dan Wertheimer, Director, Berkeley SETI
Research Center, University of California, Berkeley, to the House Committee on
Space, Science, and Technology. Retrieved from http://setiathome.berkeley.
edu/werthimer_house_testimony.pdf
5 Sauermann, H., & Franzoni, C. (2015). Crowd science user contribution
patterns and their implications. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 112(3), 679–684. http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1408907112
6 Wallace, A. (2010, September 4). Crowdrise and New York marathon work
on fund-raising. The New York Times. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/
2010/09/05/business/05proto.html
7 Allison, T. H., Davis, B. C., Short, J. C., & Webb, J. W. (2015). Crowdfunding in a
prosocial microlending environment: Examining the role of intrinsic versus
extrinsic cues. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 39(1), 53–73. doi:10.1111/
etap.12108
8 From a post to alt.support.cancer, Relationships and cancer (1998).
9 Lewallen, A. (2013). Linguistic predictors of peer responsiveness in an online
cancer support group (PhD dissertation). Loma Linda University, California.
189
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

Retrieved
from
http://search.proquest.com.proxy1.library.jhu.edu/doc
view/1418295197/abstract/EE7BDD2AF28B4F38PQ/1?accountid=11752
10 Griffiths, K. M., Mackinnon, A. J., Crisp, D. A., Christensen, H., Bennett, K., &
Farrer, L. (2012). The effectiveness of an online support group for members
of the community with depression: A randomised controlled trial.
PLoS ONE, 7(12), 1–9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053244
11 Setoyama, Y., Yamazaki, Y., & Nakayama, K. (2011). Comparing support to
breast cancer patients from online communities and face-to-face support
groups. Patient Education and Counseling, 85(2), e95–e100. doi:10.1016/j.
pec.2010.11.008
12 Liess, A., Simon, W., Yutsis, M., Owen, J. E., Piemme, K. A., Golant, M., & Giese-
Davis, J. (2008). Detecting emotional expression in face-to-face and online
breast cancer support groups. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
76(3), 517–523. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.76.3.517
13 Binik, Y. M., Cantor, J., Ochs, E., & Meana, M. (1997). From the couch to
the keyboard: Psychotherapy in cyberspace. In S. Kiesler (Ed.), Culture of
the Internet (pp. 71–100). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
14 Zheng, A. (2014). The dilemma of receiving support from in-laws: A study of
the discourse of online pregnancy and childbirth support groups. China
Media Research, 10(3), 32–42.
15 Mickelson, K. D. (1997). Seeking social support: Parents in electronic support
groups. In S. Kiesler (Ed.), Culture of the Internet (pp. 157–178). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
16 Shirky, C. (2008). Here comes everybody: The power of organizing without
organizations. New York, NY: Penguin.
17 Barak, A., Boniel-Nissim, M., & Suler, J. (2008). Fostering empowerment in
online support groups. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5), 1867–1883.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.004
18 Freis, S. D., & Gurung, R. A. R. (2013). A Facebook analysis of helping behavior
in online bullying. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 2(1), 11–19.
19 Pelonero, C. (2014). Kitty Genovese: A true account of a public murder and its
private consequences. New York, NY: Skyhorse Publishing.
20 Latané, B., & Dabbs, J. M. (1975). Sex, group size and helping in three cities.
Sociometry, 38(2), 180–194. doi:10.2307/2786599
21 Mathews, K. E., & Canon, L. K. (1975). Environmental noise level as a deter-
minant of helping behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
32(4), 571–577. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.32.4.571
22 Latané, B., & Rodin, J. (1969). A lady in distress: Inhibiting effects of friends
and strangers on bystander intervention. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 5(2), 189–202. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(69)90046-8
23 Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why doesn’t
he help? New York, NY: Prentice Hall.
24 Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies:
Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
8(4, Pt.1), 377–383. doi:10.1037/h0025589
25 Darley, J. M., & Batson, C. D. (1973). “From Jerusalem to Jericho”: A study
of situational and dispositional variables in helping behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 27(1), 100–108.
26 Abbate, C. S., Ruggieri, S., & Boca, S. (2013). Automatic influences of priming
on
prosocial
behavior.
Europe’s
Journal
of
Psychology,
9(3),
479–492.
doi:10.5964/ejop.v9i3.603
190
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

27 Levin, P. F., & Isen, A. M. (1975). Further studies on the effect of feeling good
on helping. Sociometry, 38(1), 141–147. doi:10.2307/2786238
28 Job, R. S. (1987). The effect of mood on helping behavior. The Journal of Social
Psychology, 127(4), 323–328.
29 Otten, C. A., Penner, L. A., & Waugh, G. (1988). That’s what friends are for:
The determinants of psychological helping. Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 7(1), 34–41. doi:10.1521/jscp.1988.7.1.34
30 Dovidio, J. F. (1993, October). Androgyny, sex roles, and helping. Paper pre-
sented at the convention of the Society of Experimental Social Psychology,
Santa Barbara, CA. Cited in Schroeder, D. A., Penner, L. A., Dovidio, J. R, &
Pilliavin, J. A. (1995). The psychology of helping and altruism. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
31 DeBruine, L. M. (2002). Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proceedings of the
Royal
Society
B:
Biological
Sciences,
269(1498),
1307–1312.
doi:10.1098/
rspb.2002.2034
32 Levine, M., Prosser, A., Evans, D., & Reicher, S. (2005). Identity and emer-
gency intervention: How social group membership and inclusiveness of
group boundaries shape helping behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 31(4), 443–453. doi:10.1177/0146167204271651
33 Polder-Verkiel, S. (2012). Online responsibility: Bad Samaritanism and the
influence of internet mediation. Science and Engineering Ethics, 18(1), 117–141.
doi:10.1007/s11948-010-9253-z
34 Voelpel, S. C., Eckhoff, R. A., & Förster, J. (2008). David against Goliath?
Group size and bystander effects in virtual knowledge sharing. Human
Relations, 61(2), 271–295. doi:10.1177/0018726707087787
35 Van Bommel, M., van Prooijen, J.-W., Elffers, H., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (2012). Be
aware to care: Public self-awareness leads to a reversal of the bystander effect.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(4), 926–930. doi:10.1016/j.
jesp.2012.02.011
36 Russoniello, C. V., O’Brien, K., & Parks, J. M. (2009). The effectiveness of
casual video games in improving mood and decreasing stress. Journal of
Cybertherapy and Rehabilitation, 2(1), 53–66.
37 Kraut, R., Patterson, M., Lundmark, V., Kiesler, S., Mukopadhyay, T., &
Scherlis, W. (1998). Internet paradox. A social technology that reduces social
involvement and psychological well-being? The American Psychologist,
53(9), 1017–1031.
38 Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Demiralp, E., Park, J., Lee, D. S., Lin, N., Shablack, H.,
Jonides, J, & Ybarra, O. (2013). Facebook use predicts declines in subjective
well-being in young adults. PLoS ONE, 8(8), e69841. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0069841
39 Kramer, A. D. I., Guillory, J. E., & Hancock, J. T. (2014). Experimental evidence
of massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks. Proceedings
of
the
National
Academy
of
Sciences,
111(24),
8788–8790.
doi:10.1073/
pnas.1320040111
40 Chiou, W.-B., Chen, S.-W., & Liao, D.-C. (2013). Does Facebook promote self-
interest? Enactment of indiscriminate one-to-many communication on
online social networking sites decreases prosocial behavior. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 17(2), 68–73. doi:10.1089/cyber.2013.0035
41 Paylor, J. (2012). Micro-volunteering: Doing some good through smartphones?
Institute
for
Volunteering
Research.
Retrieved
from
www.ivr.org.uk/
images/stories/Micro-volunteering_bulletin_final_version_June.pdf
191
ALTRUISM ON THE NET: PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR

42 Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance without pressure: The
foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
4(2), 195–202.
43 Weekend Update, Saturday Night Live. (2012, September 22).
44 Kristofferson, K., White, K., & Peloza, J. (2014). The nature of slacktivism:
How the social observability of an initial act of token support affects subse-
quent prosocial action. Journal of Consumer Research, 40(6), 1149–1166.
doi:10.1086/674137
45 Antin, J., Yee, R., Cheshire, C., & Nov, O. (2011, October 3). Gender differences in
Wikipedia editing. Presented at the Wikisym’11, Mountain View, CA. Retrieved
from
http://pensivepuffin.com/dwmcphd/syllabi/info447_wi14/readings/
03-GenderAndWikipedia/antin.et.al.GenderDiffInEditing.WikiSym11.pdf
46 Curry, O., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2013). Do birds of a feather flock together?: The
relationship between similarity and altruism in social networks. Human
Nature, 24(3), 336–347. doi:10.1007/s12110-013-9174-z
47 Van Gelder, L. (1985, October). The strange case of the electronic lover. Ms.
Magazine. Retrieved from http://lindsyvangelder.com/sites/default/files/
Plinkers.org%20-%20Electronic%20Lover.htm_.pdf
48 Feldman, M. D. (2004). Playing sick?: Untangling the web of Munchausen
syndrome,
Munchausen
by
proxy,
malingering
and
factitious
disorder.
New York, NY: Routledge.
49 Cunningham, J. M., & Feldman, M. D. (2011). Munchausen by Internet:
Current perspectives and three new cases. Psychosomatics, 52(2), 185–189.
doi:10.1016/j.psym.2010.11.005
50 Hall, H. (2005). After the hurricane, online charity scams grow in number
and sophistication. Chronicle of Philanthropy, 17(24), 12.
51 Gillath, O., McCall, C., Shaver, P. R., & Blascovich, J. (2008). What can virtual
reality teach us about prosocial tendencies in real and virtual environ-
ments? Media Psychology, 11(2), 259–282. doi:10.1080/15213260801906489
52 Ratan, R., & Bailenson, J. (2007). Mimicry, facial similarity, and persuasion in a
collaborativevirtual environment. In Conference Papers – International Commu-
nication Association Annual Meeting. Retrieved from http://search.ebscohost.
com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ufh&AN=26950524&site=ehost-
live&scope=site
192
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

7
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE
GAMING
My character is more “me” than me, or at least how I want to be. My elf
is tough, strong, a can-do sort of person.
– Female, age thirty-seven, World of Warcraft player
I started Candy Crush to relax, but then my friends got on and we
started a competition. Now it’s a race to the next level.
– Male, age twenty-two, Candy Crush Saga player
Games have been an essential part of human societies for thousands
of years, to teach skills, to earn rewards, to compete, or to escape
boredom. Archaeological evidence suggests that human beings in
some New World villages enjoyed dice games more than 5,000 years
ago. The Royal Game of Ur, a board game still played in some parts of
the world, dates back to 2600 BCE.
However, the computer, and later the Internet, transformed the
essence of gaming. Now, you can play dice – and thousands of other
games – with virtually anyone in the world, at any time of day or
night, on a computer, smartphone, tablet, or video console. You can
shoot enemy missiles, play cards, build cities, or team up with other
players to bring down powerful bosses.
The term video game encompasses any kind of computer-based
game, whether or not Internet access is required, and they share many
characteristics. The most important feature is interactivity, which sep-
arates the video game from more passive media such as television,
books, and web surfing. The player engages with the game, following
its rules and recognizing its constraints. Beyond that, however, video
games vary considerably, particularly from a psychological perspective.
193

TAXONOMY OF VIDEO GAMES
Just as it is not always clear how to categorize a book, movie, or song, it
is a challenge to sort out video games into meaningful categories.1 Is the
movie a drama or comedy? Is the song bluegrass or country? Sometimes,
media wind up in odd categories for unexpected reasons. Netflix cat-
egorized Orange Is the New Black as a comedy, despite its dark themes in
a women’s prison, because the company didn’t want the show compet-
ing for Emmy awards against its dramatic blockbuster House of Cards.
Video Game Genres
The game developers sort their products into “genres,” such as those
listed in Table 7.1. These categories generally combine judgments
about the game’s themes and the nature of game play. In fast-paced
action games, for example, players depend on quick reaction times to
succeed. Strategy games draw on critical thinking skills rather than
reaction time, and players can take time to make decisions.
Some games engage players for months or even years at a time, as
they develop a character, build up resources, and join well-organized
teams to explore and conquer the game world. Others test a player’s
accuracy and reaction time. Spacewar! was one of the first videogames,
developed at MIT in the early 1960s. Its primitive interface enchanted
players who competed to destroy each other’s cartoon-like starships
(Figure 7.1).
The casual game category has exploded thanks to the smartphones
and social networks on which many of these games are played. For
example, in Candy Crush Saga, players move candy pieces to match
three in a row or column, and as they reach new levels in the game,
achievements can appear in their Facebook status updates. The game
mechanics also encourage a social approach because players who per-
suade their Facebook friends to play can progress faster.
The categories are fluid, however, and many games contain elem-
ents from more than one genre. Inside an adventure game, for
instance, a player might encounter an activity that resembles one of
the casual games.
Psychological Dimensions of Video Games
From a psychological perspective, the games differ along several dimen-
sions. The companies that launch video games share two motives: to
194
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

make their games as “sticky” as possible so that players keep coming back
and to attract more players. To affect human behavior in those ways, the
designers must draw on fundamental psychological principles.
Table 7.1. Examples of video game genres
GENRE
DESCRIPTION AND EXAMPLES
EXAMPLES
Action games
Require quick action, fast reflexes,
and accuracy to overcome
obstacles; includes first-person
shooter, platform games, racing,
and fighting games
Super Mario
Brothers
Burnout Paradise
Halo
Adventure games
Slower paced, with game elements
that emphasize exploration,
problem solving, and a strong
storyline
Myst
Uncharted
Grim Fandango
Action-adventure
games
Hybrid that combines elements of
action and adventure games
Assassin’s Creed
Legends of
Zelda
God of War II
Role-playing
games
Players control one character and
develop that avatar over a period
of time; strong storylines
Final Fantasy
Skyrim
Diablo
Strategy games
Emphasize strategic thinking and
managing resources
Civilization
Starcraft
Age of Empires
Simulations
Replicate real-life experiences and
tend to follow real-life rules;
include vehicle games,
construction and management
scenarios, and sport games; often
used for training and education
The Sims
SimCity
Second Life
Madden NFL
FarmVille
Business Tycoon
Online
Massively
multiplayer
Thousands play simultaneously,
with team-based adventures,
social interaction, team
competitions, player vs. player
duels, and support for guild
structures. Most are massively
multiplayer online role-playing
games (MMORPGs)
World of
Warcraft
The Elder Scrolls
Online
EverQuest
Casual games
Short games with little or no
storylines, played by casual
gamers; include puzzles, casino
games, board games, and word
games
Candy Crush Saga
Bejeweled
Words with
Friends
Texas Hold’em
Poker
195
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

One important dimension, for example, is the sheer complexity of
the game and the cognitive effort required to achieve success. Some
players will lean toward the casual games to keep that effort low,
playing for a few minutes between classes or while watching TV.
The learning curve is short, although it might take greater effort to
actually succeed. In Angry Birds, for example, the instructions to play
are just simple images showing how to use a slingshot to launch birds
toward the pigs. But higher levels demand some knowledge of the laws
of physics and materials science, as the pigs dig into concrete bunkers
or ice shelters for protection.
Complexity raises the bar for newcomers, but it can maintain per-
sistence in a game for many years. Vast databases are available for
World of Warcraft players seeking highly detailed information about
quests, gear, player stats, auction values, and other features of the game.
Analyzing all this data absorbs the players, and the storylines create an
intricate and endlessly entertaining game world. Some authors publish
print novels that extend the dramas and build on the game’s plot.
Another important psychological dimension is the degree and
type of social interaction. While some games are single player, the
multiplayer games support interactions through text chat, avatar
body gestures, voice, or other means. On the massively multiplayer online
role-playing games (MMORPGs) players can meet new people, trade
items, and coordinate battle plans. On “life simulation” games such as
Figure
7.1. Screenshot
from
Spacewar!,
an
early
video
game
developed
by
Steve Russell, Martin Graetz, and Wayne Wiltanen at MIT in 1962.
(From http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spacewar1.png.)
196
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Second Life, inhabitants can dance, shake hands, and even create their
own gestures with programmed scripts, complete with animations,
sounds, and text chat. One script, for instance, mimics slipping on a
banana peel. It starts with a a squishing noise followed by an animation
in which the character falls flat on the floor and says, “Oops!”
Multiplayer games also support asynchronous social interaction
through social media messaging services. FarmVille players, for
example, can send their Facebook friends a virtual “gift” – a new
grapefruit tree or a small pond for their own farms. The social aspect
of the games is enhanced even further as players post their game
achievements in their status updates for others to admire.
A third psychological dimension is the level of competition among
players. Some single-player games are low on this dimension, and
the goal is mainly to achieve the next level. In others, players vie to
move up a notch on the “leader board.” In games that support teams,
players might be tackling game world challenges rather than other
teams, so competition among players is reduced. Games that support
player versus player (PvP) competition or combat are highest on the
competitive dimension.
The amount of adult-oriented action, imagery, and violence is
another important psychological dimension. The legal environment
in most countries relies on industry self-regulation to establish a tax-
onomy that helps parents and players assess game content and deter-
mine whether it is appropriate for different age ranges. In the United
States, game publishers use the Entertainment Software Rating Board
(ESRB) as the guideline for assigning a rating to games (Table 7.2).
Rating systems in Europe differ somewhat, though they all attempt
to protect minors from games that contain intense violence, blood
and gore, and sexual content.
The rating systems used in the United States and Europe show
some intriguing differences that reflect cultural attitudes. For example,
a game with almost any sexual content would be rated “M” for mature
in the United States but not in Europe. Judgments about violence also
can be very subjective, especially when it is displayed in a cartoonish
way. Angry Birds is rated “E” for everyone, with some versions also
described as containing “comic mischief” and “mild cartoon violence.”
Grand Theft Auto earns an “M” rating with content descriptors indi-
cating blood and gore, intense violence, use of drugs, and others.
Violence is common in television cartoons for children, and that
precedent is one reason Angry Birds gets a pass.
197
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

WHO PLAYS, AND WHY?
According to industry reports, 58 percent of Americans play video or
computer games, and their average age is about thirty years old.
Players are distributed rather evenly over the age ranges, with 32 per-
cent under eighteen, 36 percent between eighteen and thirty-five, and
32 percent age thirty-six or older. About 55 percent of game players are
males; 45 percent are women.2
The sector is experiencing explosive growth, partly due to the
popularity of mobile games for smartphones. Worldwide, there may
be half a billion or more people playing video games at least one hour
a day. That means that together, people on the planet are spending
3 billion hours a week playing video games.3
Motivations for Gaming
Why do people spend so much time playing video games? Their
motivations are as varied as the games themselves. The uses and grat-
ifications perspective described in Chapter 1 offers a valuable approach
Table 7.2. Entertainment Software Review Board (ESRB) rating system used in the
United States
ESRB
RATING
AGE RANGE
DESCRIPTION
C
Early
childhood
Intended for young children
E
Everyone
Generally suitable for people of all ages
E 10+
Everyone age
10 and up
May contain cartoon, fantasy, or mild violence;
mild language; and/or minimal suggestive
themes
T
Teen
Generally suitable for ages 13 and up. May
contain violence, suggestive themes, crude
humor, minimal blood, simulated gambling,
and/or infrequent use of strong language
M
Mature
Generally suitable for ages 17 and up. May
contain intense violence, blood and gore,
sexual content, and/or strong language
Adults
Only
Adults ages
18 and up
May included prolonged scenes of intense
violence, graphic sexual content, and/or
gambling with real currency
RP
Rating
pending
Game has not yet been assigned a rating
Source: Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB). (n.d.). ESRB Ratings Guide.
Retrieved from www.esrb.org/ratings/ratings_guide.jsp.
198
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

to understand why people use media of all kinds. This theory empha-
sizes the active choices people make when they watch the evening
news on TV or stay glued to a sports broadcast. The focus is not on
what media does to people; it is about what people do with media,
and why.
Applying this theory to game playing, researchers developed a scale
similar to the ones used to assess motivations to view television, and
then conducted focus group sessions and structured interviews of
game players.4 Six principal motivations emerged:
1. Challenge
2. Competition
3. Diversion
4. Arousal
5. Fantasy
6. Social interaction
One person motivated by competition said, “I love trying to beat the
guys next door or [my] brothers.” In contrast, someone who plays for
diversion said, “I like it because it’s a break from studying and it’s relax-
ing.” A socially oriented player remarked, “I like it because it’s just plain
fun, just being with your friends.” Challenge was the most common
reason these subjects cited for playing games, followed by competition,
diversion, arousal, fantasy, and social interaction, in that order.
Game developer Richard Bartle offered his own ideas about the
psychological variables that affect the multiplayer environment, based
largely on his own observations as an administrator of one of the MUDs,
the early text-based game worlds.5 Achievers emphasize game-related
goals such as building treasure or skill. A typical achiever would enter
the game intent on mastering some puzzle or the conquest of some
particularly difficult monster. The explorers enjoy mapping the topology
of the game, learning obscure secrets about it, and gathering esoteric
knowledge about how the game actually works. The third group is the
socializers, who join primarily to interact with others. The focus of their
interactions might be the game itself, but it could also include unrelated
personal topics as the players come to know each other on a social level.
Finally, a smaller number get much of their enjoyment by harassing
others, often using the tools provided by the game to do it. On a game
with player-killing enabled, these would be called, simply, killers.
Bartle freely admits he is no psychologist, but his analysis delves
insightfully into the motivations and interactions of people he has
199
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

observed. Intergroup tension, for example, develops routinely among
some player types because their motives for participating are quite
distinct. Socializers and killers have the most fractious relationship
because their motives for participating are, for all practical purposes,
mutually exclusive. Remarking on the way killers treat the social
types, Bartle points out, “They go out of their way to rid MUDs of
namby-pamby socializers who wouldn’t know a weapon if one came
up and hit them (an activity that killers are only too happy to demon-
strate), and they will generally hassle socializers at every opportunity
because it’s so easy to get them annoyed.”
Research on player motivations in modern MMORPGs generally
confirms what game wizards such as Bartle observed. In a study of
3,000 players, subjects rated the importance of forty different motiv-
ations, such as advancement, competition, socializing, relationship
building, teamwork, discovery, escapism, and role playing.6 Some
sample items were “Leveling up your character fast as possible,”
“Helping other players,” “Doing things that annoy other players,”
and “Exploring every map or zone in the world.”
Three main motives rose to the surface. The first was achievement
and the desire to advance quickly, accumulating power and status in
the game. People who played for this reason also tend to enjoy the
analytical aspects of the game they played. Socializing was another
major motive for playing, characterized by casual chatting, making
friends, helping others, and playing on teams. The third motive
involved immersion, in which people valued exploring the game
world, finding hidden things, role playing, and escape from real life.
These motives were not necessarily mutually exclusive, and people
might
play
for
multiple
reasons,
at
different
times.
After
an
achievement-driven raid, for example, players might enjoy socializing
with guildmates in a virtual tavern.
Gaming and Personality
As you might expect, given the many reasons people play games,
players’ personalities also differ. Measures of the Big Five personality
traits show relationships with player motives, game choices, and how
they behave inside the game.
In one study, more than 1,400 World of Warcraft players completed
the forty-four-item Big Five Inventory, measuring openness to experi-
ence, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism.7
200
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

They also completed an adapted version of the survey that was used
in the study I just described, to measure motives for playing. Players
who most valued socializing in the game showed higher scores on
extraversion, agreeableness, and openness. Those who emphasized
achievement in the game scored higher on extraversion and neuroti-
cism, but lower on agreeableness, openness, and conscientiousness.
And people motivated by immersion in the game world scored higher
on openness to new experiences.
Personality also affects the kind of character each person chooses to
play, and in many games the choices seem almost endless. To see how
those choices unfold for different personality types, undergraduate
subjects came to a lab to select the kind of character they would play.8
First they read descriptions of species common to many games, such
as elf, dwarf, human, or orc. The elf, for instance, excells at archery and
is comfortable with the natural world. Dwarves are sincere, gruff,
serious, and hard working. The subjects also rated the characteristics
of the character that would be most important to them, such as the
avatar’s appearance, mental abilities, or physical qualities. Before leav-
ing, the subjects completed the Big Five Inventory.
These students chose characters that resembled their real selves.
For instance, extraverts tended to choose gregarious species and said
they most valued “charisma” – an attribute that draws others to them.
People high on agreeableness often preferred characters that specialize
in helping and healing other players, such as cleric or druid. Although
some people chose a character with characteristics that deviated a
great deal from their true selves, most people seemed to stick closer
to home.
How does personality relate to the way gamers actually behave in
the game? Are some of the “killers” Bartle described actually conscien-
tious and agreeable introverts in real life? In general, no. As we have
seen in other kinds of online behavior, people don’t usually shed their
true selves and invent a totally new personality, even if they transform
into an evil elf, a bloodthirsty orc, or a powerful healer.
Another study examined how personality types relate to actual in-
game behavior. More than 1,000 World of Warcraft players completed
a survey to assess their Big Five personality traits.9 Then, researchers
downloaded a huge dataset on their activities inside the game over a
four-month period. As you might expect, people high in extraversion
preferred group activities in the game, while the more introverted
players leaned toward solo undertakings, such as questing, cooking,
201
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

or fishing. Those who had high scores on conscientiousness collected
more vanity pets, which don’t help in combat but take a certain
amount of self-discipline to maintain. Fishing and cooking were their
favorite pastimes, and these also require an organized and patient
approach. Players high on openness to experience tended to create
more characters and play on more servers for variety. They also did
more exploring than fighting.
How did the most agreeable players behave? They are the ones who
made good use of the game’s tools to display emotion, such as waving,
hugging, and cheering. They also preferred to explore rather than
engage in combat. The least agreeable players – those with low scores
on this trait – were the most competitive and aggressive, killing other
players and spending more time in combat. On group quests, they also
demanded more than their fair share of the loot, to the annoyance of
the rest of the group.
Gaming and Gender
The stereotype of the gamer as a lonely teenage boy is belied by the
statistics from the gaming industry, which indicate that women par-
ticipate in games almost as much as men do, at least in the United
States. However, men and women differ somewhat in the types of
games they enjoy and in how much they play. A survey of college
students, for example, found that women like online card games,
puzzles, trivia quizzes, board games, and arcade-style games more than
men. In contrast, the men prefer action games that feature sports,
fighting, shooting, or racing, and also action-adventure and strategy
games. The men also play games more hours per week compared with
women.10
What accounts for these gender differences in game play? One
reason may be that games are primarily designed by and for males,
so they contain themes and activities that appeal to them or that
they are especially good at. For example, men typically score higher
on competitiveness, and many games make competition a salient
component. Males also, on average, do somewhat better at mental
rotation tasks, maze navigation, and target-directed motor skills,
and these are the kinds of skills needed to succeed in many of the
games. Navigating through a 3D virtual world, driving a race car,
or shooting a mob that makes a sudden appearance are game activ-
ities that do tend to tap those abilities.
202
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

In the MMORPGs, males may make up as much as 80 percent of
the player community, and here the game design may also turn off
women. The male avatars – whether human, elf, or troll – appear
physically very strong. As the players progress, they gain new clothing
and armor, and these too emphasize strength. In contrast, the female
characters appear more sexualized, with large breasts, tiny waists, and
revealing clothing. One World of Warcraft player remarked that the
images are a constant reminder that “this game is made for 13 year
old boys, or men who still think like them.”11
In 2014, a particularly brutal battle about sexism in the video game
industry raged on sites such as 4chan and Reddit. “#Gamergate” began
when some members of the gaming community viciously attacked a
female game developer with death threats and harassment as she was
trying to publish her own game. The plot thickened with charges of
unethical journalism and other grievances mixed in, but misogyny
was a consistent theme. The women who were the targets had to leave
their homes in fear of their own safety.12
Gender Swapping in Role-Playing Games
For games in which people create an avatar and choose its gender,
gender swapping is not uncommon. Women play a male avatar, for
example, to avoid gender bias and the stereotypes associated with
female game players, such as a belief that they are not truly engaged
in the game or do not play well. Men may choose to play a female
avatar to get more help from other players. Both men and women
may choose to play the other gender with some of their characters
for variety, but most often choose their own gender for the main
character.
A study of people who played Final Fantasy as the opposite gender
found some intriguing relationships between their views of them-
selves and their gender choices.13 These subjects completed the Bem
Sex Role Inventory, which includes adjectives associated with trad-
itional male and female roles, such as sympathetic, affectionate, child-
like, assertive, analytical, and aggressive.
On the inventory, subjects
indicate to what extent they behave in that way. One female subject
who scored high on masculinity said, “I wasn’t looking to find out
who I was [by playing a male character], I wanted . . . people to look up
to me . . . I bet I could’ve done it as a female character, but it would
have been harder.” A male player rated as androgynous was interested
203
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

in the reactions of other people: “I wanted to see how people would
react [to a female character controlled by a male player], but then
I found out a lot of people did the same thing I did.”
Often, however, players who swap genders to see how others
respond are surprised by the reactions. When a man in the same study
disclosed in-game that he was a male playing a female avatar, the other
players reacted very negatively, accusing him of lying. The friendships
ended at that point.
Although more people are gender swapping in games and many
players see it as a nonissue, the choice of your gender’s character can
still be an important one. Pavel Curtis, a legendary figure in the early
MUD world and architect of the socially oriented MUD called
LambdaMOO, observes that a player’s gender is one of the most
important variables affecting the way other players interact with
you.14 Curtis notes that those who swap genders can be pressured to
reveal their true genders and sometimes even asked to “prove” they are
what they say they are. Like other Internet users in other online
environments, game players find it disorienting to interact with some-
one whose gender is unknown.
GAME MECHANICS AND HUMAN BEHAVIOR
All games have rules, but video games involve far more than the
simple rules of a board game. They rely on reams of program code
that determine what players are able to do in the game world and
what outcomes they can achieve. These underlying game mechanics
affect the psychological aspects of a game, and even tiny tweaks can
affect behavior.
Underlying Psychological Principles of Game Design
The game companies often hire behavioral scientists and data
crunchers to analyze how game mechanics affect people’s behavior
in the game, usually with the goal of enticing players to play more,
click on more ads, bring their friends, or purchase more virtual goods
(for real money). Social games such as FarmVille, for example, stress a
constant stream of gift giving, sharing, and farm expansion to accom-
plish those goals. One thirty-one-year-old woman in Pennsylvania
squeezes the game in between her responsibilities as a mother,
204
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

an accountant, and a college student: “It’s my little happy place to
achieve goals and socialize. I have Farmville friends across the country
and in China.”
Game developers rely on their own intuitions and experience,
but they also draw heavily from principles of human behavior
uncovered by decades of research that I discuss throughout this book.
One example is operant conditioning, which B.F. Skinner identified
in his classic studies of white rats.15 Organisms learn to associate
any action that they perform with its consequences, and they will
repeat behaviors that are followed by positive reinforcement. Skinner
tested out many variations of this simple principle in the Skinner
box – a cage equipped with a lever that an animal can press
to deliver a food pellet into a small cup. Rats learn to associate lever
pressing with the food reward and repeat that behavior over and over.
Skinner tested out many variations of this simple scheme, starting
with continuous reinforcement, in which the rat receives a reward every
time it presses the lever. This approach works best in the early stages
when the rat is first learning the behavior. But Skinner found that
later, once the lever pressing is well established, a partial reinforcement
schedule is more effective. Rats are no fools. If they get a reward every
time, they won’t bother to expend their energies on lever pressing if
they aren’t hungry.
Skinner tried different partial reinforcement schedules, and the
element that kept rats pressing the lever the most was unpredictabil-
ity. For instance, on a variable ratio schedule, the pellet shot down
the tube after the rat pressed the lever a few times, but the number
of presses required varied. Sometimes the reward appeared after
five presses, other times after eight or nine. You can probaby see the
similarity to a slot machine’s schedule of reinforcement. The variable
interval schedule, in which the amount of time between food rewards
was unpredictable, was also very effective.
Lever pressing is not something a rat would normally do, and
Skinner found that in the beginning, he needed to deliver a food pellet
when the rat just sniffed the lever, or put a paw on it. This process is
called shaping; the technique rewards successively closer approxima-
tions of the desired response, and it works well.
As time goes on and the association between lever pressing
and reward becomes established, much higher ratios will maintain
the behavior. If it is very high, say 100 to 1, the rat would go
205
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

quite a long time before a reward appeared, and the lever pressing
behavior would start to extinguish. However, once that food
pellet dropped again the rat would jump back into the old pattern –
patiently pressing, pressing, and pressing. Behaviors on these variable
schedules are in fact, extremely hard to extinguish.
How does operant conditioning work in a game? In World
of Warcraft, players start at Level 1 and quests are extremely easy –
virtually every one results in a nice reward or a jump to the next level.
The enemies barely fight back, as the player learns which keys to press
and which paths to follow. This is the period of shaping and continu-
ous reinforcement.
But as time passes, the game demands more work and skill to make
progress, and the variable ratio schedules come into play. Monsters
become a little more dangerous, and when a player vanquishes
one, the chances of finding valuable weaponry on the corpse varies
unpredictably. Those drop rates are tracked in the company’s data-
base of statistics, so players can even see what the variable ratio
schedule actually is. That ratio gets very high for extremely valuable
equipment that high-level players need. And of course, just as a
casino can change the variable ratio on slot machines, the game’s
programmers can change the drop rates and other features of game
mechanics.
Game mechanics encourage a high rate of “lever pressing” by using
negative reinforcements in addition to positive ones. Skinner also
found that rats easily learn to press the lever to turn off or avoid a
shock. FarmVille uses something similar – the game designers intro-
duced a feature in which the farmer who plants crops and doesn’t
come back soon enough to harvest them will find them withered in
the field.
Conducting experiments in the 1930s and 1940s, Skinner used a
cumulative recorder to track lever pressing. The device fed a roll of
paper at a constant speed under pens that marked a tick whenever the
rat pressed the lever or a food pellet dropped. Now, game developers
tap an immense store of big data that tracks just about everything in
the game. They know, for instance, that FarmVille players are more
willing to spend cash to buy a colorful cow rather than a normal one,
even though both cows deliver the same amount of milk. Armed with
this data, the developers can tweak the game mechanics in very subtle
ways to achieve their objectives.
206
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Superstitions
For operant conditioning to occur, the reward must follow the behav-
ior. But the behavior doesn’t necessarily have to cause the reward. The
reward might accidentally follow some behavior, and the organism
will associate the two anyway. A rat that was scratching its nose just
before the pellet arrived might start repeating that behavior in a
superstitious way.
In games, superstitions commonly arise because the actual mechan-
ics of the game are not well understood, and many accidental associ-
ations appear. A player might happen to don a wide-brimmed hat and
then catch a string of valuable fish. Based on an algorithm, the random
number generator determined whether each bite on the line was a fish
or some junk, but sometimes it will spin several “heads” in a row,
creating that accidental association. In real life, people are somewhat
better able to shake off a “wide-brimmed hat” superstition because it
has no rational basis. But in the game, who knows what the developers
are doing? They can easily add a few lines of code so that a wide-
brimmed hat does indeed bring a bit of “good luck” to the player.
Gamemakers can also squash superstitions if they interfere with
the game. In Dungeons and Dragons, for example, “diplomacy” is an
important skill that reduces the likelihood of monster attacks. But
thanks to some accidental associations, the superstition took hold that
the player with the highest diplomacy skill should use it on a treasure
chest before other players touched it. The superstition grew so strong
that some players would not even join a group unless it included
someone with high diplomacy. Developers put a stop to that by
writing code to make it impossible to use the diplomacy skill on
invalid targets, such as a treasure chest.16
What Are the Rewards in a Game?
Skinner used food pellets, but psychologists and game designers under-
stand that players have many different motivations for playing, as
I discussed earlier, and they are not just repeating behaviors that are
rewarded in the game. They are purposeful, and they have intrinsic
motivation to seek out ways to satisfy their needs. The principles of
operant conditioning alone do not necessarily lead to good game
mechanics.
207
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

For example, players often cite challenge as a key reason they play
games, and they pursue those challenges with considerable persistence.
For some, the intermittent reward of a magical weapon is not enough
to sustain this. Instead, they persist because of the sheer enjoyment of
the task and the positive feelings they obtain from mastering a chal-
lenge. The designers must carefully craft the levels of the game so that
each one is challenging, but not so difficult that the players who come
to the game seeking that element become discouraged.
In fact, players who are intrinsically motivated to play – because
they really enjoy the challenge, the teamwork, or the thrill of mas-
tery – may actually lose interest if there are too many extrinsic
rewards. In classic studies of extrinsic and intrinsic motivations,
subjects entered the lab to solve some chess problems, and half
received payment for their efforts. They all returned a week later,
and could now choose to solve a few more problems during a free
time period, without any payment. Compared with the subjects
who never received any payment, the subjects who were paid
on their first visit were less interested in the puzzles on the second
visit. The extrinsic reward apparently crowded out any intrinsic
motivation to tackle the chess challenges just for the enjoyment
and mastery.17
Designers add all kinds of features to satisfy such intrinsic motiv-
ations. In-game socializing tools, for instance, can be quite elaborate.
Special features for players who join guilds also support socializing,
teamwork, and the esprit de corps that draw players back.
Other game mechanics appeal to players’ interest in fantasy, excite-
ment, competition, or diversion. MMORPGs, for example, offer players
a choice of servers to play on, and the mechanics on the various
servers are tailored to different motivations. One server might allow
player versus player competitions in which duels to the death attract
players whose main motive is competition. Another server might be
designed especially for players who enjoy fantasy role playing; the
expectation on these game worlds is that players will stay “in charac-
ter” and adhere to the game’s storylines.
Unintended Consequences of Game Mechanics
Even with a solid knowledge of psychology and human behavior,
gamemakers embed mechanics that lead to unintended consequences
and spell trouble for the game and its players. For instance, in many
208
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

game worlds, players can easily walk right through one another,
as though everyone is made of air. They may look very substantial
onscreen, but players really don’t have to worry about blocking any-
one’s progress or bumping into them. In other games, a player’s avatar
blocks the space so that other characters must find another route. In an
early version of EverQuest, for example, some “killer” players could
use this feature of game mechanics to block other players who were
desperately trying to exit a dangerous zone filled with monsters, just to
watch them all massacred. An EverQuest poster described watching
that happen:
I remember when an ogre and troll did that and prevented people from
escaping a zone . . . with trains [monsters] a comin’ to zone. After everyone
was killed, the ogre and troll would step back and zone out safely, wait a litle
while and do it again. Very annoying. – NinjaFox18
Another example of how game mechanics create unintended behav-
ioral consequences involves the way gamemakers price death. When
players die in games, the cost can be extremely high – they might lose
their equipment or suffer other penalties. In games such as Super
Mario, death is almost a nonissue. The players come back to life for
another try with little or no penalty.
In its early versions, EverQuest placed a very high cost on death if
the players couldn’t get back to retrieve their corpses, but the game
designers changed that code in later versions. Many players lamented
the change because the high cost led to much more cooperation and
relationship building in the game, leading to more friendships and
prosocial behavior. One player writes,
Deaths are not a big deal now . . . you can summon [your] corpse in the lobby
[of a dungeon] and get rezed [resurrected] there pretty easy . . . i remember
many years ago . . . [our guild] wiped at zone fully equipped . . . after 16 hours
and many deaths, we asked another guild to help us get our corpses back . . .
ahhh those old days, we will never forget. –Augur19
Gamemakers strive for a balance when they tweak these mechanics,
trying to attract new players and retaining ones with different motiv-
ations. Each element can have intended and unintended consequences
on the psychological aspects of the game.
209
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF VIDEO GAMES
Video games offer many benefits, as we will see later in this chapter.
But much of the research in behavioral science targets their harmful
potential, particularly in two areas. One area is compulsive overuse,
sometimes called “Internet addiction disorder.” Tragic stories about
players becoming so immersed in a video game that they are unable
to care for themselves capture the headlines, with some cases actually
leading to death. A young Korean couple, for example, spent so much
time online nurturing a “virtual daughter” that their real-life daughter
starved to death. A girl in China played World of Warcraft for several
days straight, and when she died the online community held a virtual
funeral for her.
Such cases are rare, and the people involved may have had mental
disorders apart from their gaming. But video games are very engaging
and some people who may be prone to overuse may find that their
gaming is negatively affecting their lives in ways that resemble sub-
stance abuse or pathological gambling. I examine this aspect of games,
and problematic Internet use in general, in Chapter 11, so will not go
into detail here.
The effect that violence in video games has on human behavior is
the second major area of concern. Any glance at the top selling games
reveals a very heavy dose of blood, gore, and killing. Grand Theft Auto
V, rated M for mature, is a prime example. Players assume the role of a
criminal who steals cars and shoots people in a city resembling Los
Angeles, and the plot lines are replete with violence, drugs, sex, and
evil people. The game cost over $1 billion to make, but sales earned
that investment back within three days after release.20 Do games like
these cause people to behave more aggressively?
Violence in Video Games: Effects on Aggression
Researchers have studied the effects of violent media of all kinds on
human behavior for decades, and although debates still linger, the
general findings point to negative effects, particularly on aggressive-
ness. Many studies explore exposure to video game violence, and the
findings lead to the conclusion that heavy doses are associated with
somewhat higher levels of several types of aggression, such as feelings
of revenge and actual aggressive behavior toward other people. People
who play a lot of violent video games are also more likely to be
210
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

desensitized to violence, and they have less empathy for people in
need. The research runs the gamut from simple surveys to longitudinal
studies that assess longer term effects and experiments that randomly
assign subjects.21
In a correlational study, for example, undergraduates completed
a questionnaire that assessed various aspects of aggressiveness, such as
irritability, impulsiveness, hostility, anger, aggressive behavior, and delin-
quency, and asked about video game playing. The students who played
violent video games were more likely to report aggressive behavior,
such as having “hit or threatened to hit other students” or “attacked
someone with the idea of seriously hurting or killing him/her.”
Of course, people who already have an aggressive streak are likely to
choose more violent video games, so experiments are needed to separ-
ate out the actual effects of violence in video games. In a follow-up
experiment, college students were randomly assigned to play a violent
or nonviolent video game in the lab for 15 minutes. (The researchers
gave them a cover story that the study was about how people develop
the motor skills needed for tasks like video games.) After the 15 min-
utes were up, the students completed surveys similar to those in the
correlational study that assessed aggressive thoughts and behavior.
Then they played their assigned game for another fifteen minutes,
followed by a cognitive test that uses reaction time to assess aggressive
thinking.
A week later, the subjects returned to the lab and played for another
15 minutes. Afterward, they played another competitive game that
assessed their actual aggressive behavior toward another human being.
In this game, the subjects competed with another person on a reaction
time test, and the loser on each trial would receive a punishment – a
noise blast. The subjects thought the opponent was another person,
but in fact it was a computer, and the computerized opponent
behaved the same for all subjects, winning twelve trials, losing thir-
teen, and randomizing the level of punishment.
How did the students who played the violent game behave toward
their “opponents”? Before each trial, they selected the intensity and
duration for the noise blast that the opponent would receive, and the
students’ choices depended on whether they won or lost the last trial.
After their “win” trials, they chose noise levels that were about
the same as the subjects who played the nonviolent video game. But
after losing a trial, it seems their anger was provoked. They chose
significantly longer noise blasts that would be delivered to their
211
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

opponent on the next trial, should the subject win it.22 In this setting,
playing violent video games caused people who experienced a loss to
act more aggressively toward an opponent.
Is It Competition? Arousal? Or Violence?
What is it about violent video games that affects aggressive behavior?
These games differ from nonviolent ones in many ways, not just because
they contain violence. They may also be more arousing and competitive.
To sort out this question, we need games that offer the same levels
of arousal and competition but that differ only on the level of vio-
lence. Some of the sports games fit this bill, and in one experiment
subjects played violent or nonviolent sports games, all of which con-
tained about the same level of competition.23 The violent ones were
MLB Slugfest (Major League Baseball) and NFL Blitz (National Football
League); in these games, players can wreak havoc and cause harm. For
example, if batters get angry, they can burst into flames and attack the
pitcher. Runners can also punch a first baseman in the face to avoid
being called out. The nonviolent games – MVP Baseball (Most Valuable
Player) and Madden NFL – are played on the field, but players can’t
break the rules by attacking one another.
While the subjects were playing one of the games, their heart rates
and blood pressure were monitored to assess physiological arousal.
After 20 minutes of play, the subjects completed various surveys and
took tests to assess aggressiveness, such as the reaction time competi-
tion against an “opponent” described in the last section. One import-
ant finding was that all the subjects showed about the same level of
arousal, regardless of whether they were playing the violent or non-
violent sports. But subjects playing the violent game chose more
intense noise levels to punish the computerized opponent. This study
suggests that it really is the violence in the video games that affects
aggressive thoughts and actions, not competition or arousal.
Desensitization
Do violent video games reduce our ability to emphathize with people
who are suffering and in need? Do they desensitize us to human pain?
Research on violent TV shows and movies finds that repeated expos-
ure to blood, gore, and violence leads to desensitization. The same
appears to be true for video games.
212
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

In one study, college students were assigned to play a violent video
game, such as Mortal Kombat or Duke Nukem, or a nonviolent game,
such as Pinball or Tetra Madness.24 After 20 minutes, the subjects
watched a videotape containing scenes of real violence with shootings,
prison fights, and other episodes. The researchers also took baseline
heart rate and galvanic skin response (GSR) readings during the study.
All the subjects showed increases in heart rate and GSR after they
played the video game, regardless of its content, pointing to the way
these action games add to physical arousal. But the two groups
behaved very differently when they were watching the real-life vio-
lence afterward. Heart rate and GSR increased for the subjects who
played the nonviolent game, but these measures decreased for the
subjects playing the violent video games. Apparently, those students
had become desensitized to the troubling scenes that ordinarily would
have caused physiological arousal.
That kind of desensitization could easily lead people to feel less
empathy and exhibit more aggressive behavior. Another study con-
firmed that desensitization leads to not just reduced arousal but actual
aggressiveness. This time, the researchers deliberately chose subjects
for the experiment who were either heavy users of violent games or
who rarely played such games.25 Half of each group was then ran-
domly assigned to play violent or nonviolent video games, while
researchers monitored their brain waves with electrodes on the scalp.
After playing, all subjects viewed a series of images, some violent and
some neutral, and then they played the competitive reaction time
game against what they thought was a human opponent.
The subjects who rarely encountered violent video games in the
past but played them in the experiment showed a desensitized brain
response to the images, and they then gave their “opponent” stronger
noise blasts. For the heavy users of violent games, however, it didn’t
matter whether they played a violent or nonviolent game for a few
minutes in the experiment. They appeared to already be desensitized
to violent images.
Not everyone is convinced that playing violent video games leads
to a big increase in real-life aggression outside the lab, pointing to the
actual results – which are generally modest and sometimes difficult to
interpret – and to studies that fail to find any relationship.26 Also, some
countries where violent games are extremely popular and widespread
do not necessarily have higher crime rates – Japan is a key example. But
strong evidence continues to mount. Given how fast the video game
213
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

industry is developing new products, how vast the game worlds have
become, and how complex human behavior really is, this debate may
not end soon, despite the troubling research findings. In any case,
video games also have many positive effects, as we discuss next.
THE BENEFITS OF VIDEO GAMES
While much research on video games focuses on their potential for
harm, recent studies are finding a number of valuable benefits for
cognition, motivation, and other aspects of human behavior.27
Cognitive Beneﬁts
For players to advance, many games demand cognitive and perceptual
abilities, such as spatial perception, mental rotation, and visual atten-
tion. This is especially true for the fast-paced action games in which
players react quickly to unpredictable events – monsters jumping out
of the brush or enemy snipers peeking over the rooftop. People who
enjoy exercising these skills are more likely to play such video games.
But these games also provide training in those cognitive skills, and that
training leads to improvements.
For example, action video game players perform better than non-
players on a variety of visual attention tasks that involve identifying
objects in the field of vision, such as the one in Figure 7.2. In a series of
studies to demonstrate exactly how game players differ, subjects tried
to determine whether an object that appeared briefly on the edge of a
screen was a square or diamond.28 On different trials, the screen con-
tained more or less clutter. The game players continued to perform
well even when the distracting clutter made the task quite difficult. It
was as though they had a deeper reserve of attentional resources that
they could apply to the task. Compared with nonplayers, the action
game players see a larger useful field of view, so they can identify
targets farther from the central focal point.
Action games often involve surprise targets that jump out at irregu-
lar but closely spaced intervals, but it takes skill to stay alert for that
second target. People show what is called an attentional blink when
they try to identify a second target that appears a few hundred milli-
seconds after the first one appears, as though their visual attention
blinked out for a moment. As you might expect, action game players
show a shorter attentional blink.
214
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

It is possible that action game players choose those games because
they are inherently good at tasks such as these. But it is also possible
that playing such games leads to improvements. In a follow-up study,
subjects with no experience playing video games played either the
first-person shooter game Medal of Honor or the puzzle game Tetris for
an hour a day. Tetris requires spatial and motor skills, but players have
only one object at time to deal with. That is quite different from Medal
of Honor’s fast-paced action.
After ten days, the Medal of Honor players did much better than
the Tetris players on several cognitive tasks. They were able to spot
targets amid more clutter, identify targets in a wider visual field, and
recover from attentional blink faster.
Some research on spatial abilities focuses on gender differences. On
average, men tend to perform better at some tasks, such as the ability
to mentally rotate objects, although there is much overlap. Interest-
ingly, some studies of gaming also show that such abilities are more
malleable than many people thought and can be improved through
training. The training doesn’t have to be very long, and the results
are also durable, meaning that the improvement does not vanish
after a few days.29 Training might also reduce gender differences. In
one study, men and women with no video game experience took
pretests to assess useful field of vision and mental rotation ability. As
expected, mean scores for men were higher on both tasks. After the
pretests, half of each gender group spent the next ten days playing
Medal of Honor an hour or more a day, while the other half played
a 3D puzzle game.
Figure 7.2. Action game players perform better on tests of visual attention, such as
quickly identifying the shape of a black target in a field cluttered with distractors.
215
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

The women playing Medal of Honor improved considerably more
than the men did and much more than the subjects playing the 3D
puzzle game. The gender difference was essentially wiped out for the
useful field of vision measure and greatly reduced for mental rotation.
In a follow up after five months, these subjects scored at or above their
post-test levels, pointing to the durability of training effects.30
While action games are the genre implicated in most research on
cognitive benefits, the strategy games may help players become better
problem solvers. To succeed at strategy games, players need to think
through a problem, explore alternatives, weigh options, and then act.
Role-playing adventure games call on problem-solving skills as well, as
players study the characteristics and fighting style of a particular boss,
choose the best gear to wear, gather the best combination of players,
and develop an attack plan.
In one longitudinal study of problem solving, high school students
completed surveys in grade 9, then again in grades 10, 11, and 12. The
surveys assessed their game-playing activities and their problem-
solving strategies with statements such as “I think hard about what
steps to take” and “I think about the choices before I do anything.” The
students who played strategy games showed steeper increases in their
self-reported problem-solving abilities over the four years. Another
intriguing finding was that the students reporting higher problem-
solving skills had higher grades, suggesting an indirect relationship
between strategy game playing and academic achievement. This is a
rare finding, indeed, given that most research links game playing to
negative academic outcomes, particularly when it is excessive.31
Motivation and Persistence
Game developers are experts at motivating players, and the games
provide just enough challenge to maintain persistence in the face of
failure, matching the challenges to the player’s level. That kind of
persistence is a valuable human trait, whether it involves the desire
to achieve in school, in scientific innovation, in sports, or in any other
field. If players are learning to persist inside the game, do they learn to
persist in other areas? Do game players become more willing to work
hard and try again despite setbacks?
One way to measure how persistent someone will be in the face of
failure is the computer-based Anagram-Riddle Task, which presents a
series of hard and easy anagrams and riddles on a screen, one at a time.
216
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Feedback is immediate, and the subject can choose to skip a missed
anagram or try again. The computer records how long each subject
persists in trying to solve a difficult anagram or puzzle, or whether the
subject gave up after a wrong try and skipped to an easier one.
In one study, subjects completed a survey about their video game
usage; it also included some items that assessed how persistent the
subjects thought they were, such as “I have patience when it comes
to difficult problems.” The amount of video game play per week was
significantly correlated with subjects’ self-reported persistence and
with greater persistence on the difficult anagrams and puzzles. Subjects
who spend a lot of time playing games will spend more time on the
unsolved puzzles, that is, the ones they had the most difficulty with.32
This study did not attempt to promote persistence by asking non-
players to play a game for a week, and then giving them the anagram-
puzzle task, so it might be that game players are already more persist-
ent compared with nonplayers. But educators are certainly eager to
draw on some of the compelling features of games in the belief that
they will promote persistence when the going gets tough.
Emotional Beneﬁts and “Flow”
One emotional benefit is easily described with a three-letter word: fun.
Players play because they enjoy the game. Their motives might differ,
as I described earlier, but a more positive mood is a common finding.
People often play casual games with relatively simple interfaces
and short learning curves to relax, improve mood, and reduce stress.
For instance, playing Bejeweled II, in which players earn points by
creating matches of three elements in a row or column, is relaxing.
In one study, randomly assigned subjects either played the game for 20
minutes or surfed the net, while researchers monitored their heart rate
and brain wave patterns with electroencephalography (EEG). The
Bejeweled players did indeed show physiological signs of relaxation
and more positive moods, including a less variable heart rate and more
alpha waves. They also reported feeling more vigorous with less
fatigue.33
Players often report experiencing flow, a mental state in which the
person is completely absorbed in an activity and time just flies by.
Activities that have the potential to create flow have much in
common. For example, they create a delicate balance between the
person’s ability and the challenge of the task, and they require intense
217
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

concentration and focus. They also offer clear goals, timely feedback,
and a sense of control over what happens. While in the state of flow,
the person experiences a loss of self-consciousness and a distorted
sense of time.
A pianist might experience flow when attempting a new piece of
sheet music, just a little more difficult than any she had tried before.
A hobbyist carpenter might enter this mental state when focused on
the renovation of an antique chest. From the description of flow and
the kinds of activities that have the potential to generate it, you can
guess that video games would be outstanding candidates.
I couldn’t believe it when I finally went to bed and found I’d been playing for
over 6 hours. Seemed liked just an hour.
–Female, age twenty-eight
Flow is a highly positive and motivating mental state, and it is associ-
ated with certain changes in the brain. In a study using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), researchers recorded the brain
activity of men playing the fast-paced action game Tactical Ops:
Assault on Terror. Certain types of brain activity appeared when the
player was engaged in that balance of ability and challenge, such as
when the player conquered an enemy. Dying in the game or tackling
challenges beyond the player’s ability did not generate flow, and
during these moments, the subject’s brain activity was different.34
Studies such as this can lead to a better understanding of flow and
the elements that make it up.
Social Beneﬁts
Although early computer games were mostly single-player affairs, the
Internet makes gaming a truly social experience. You can play a bridge
game with friends in distant corners or meet new people who enjoy
the same role-playing game. On the huge MMORPGs, players from all
over the world and from every walk of life meet one another and find
ways to work together. Joi Ito, tech entrepreneur and director of MIT’s
Media Lab, has been a regular on World of Warcraft, a game he
especially values because of the social aspects. In one sense, it is like
the “new golf” where tech-oriented innovators can meet and make
business connections. But it also offers endless opportunities to learn
new leadership and teamwork skills within highly diverse groups.
218
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

On a raid, for instance, the raid leader must coordinate the actions
of dozens of people of all ages and backgrounds, making decisions on
the spot, encouraging cooperation, settling disputes, and resolving
conflict. Ito says, “Warcraft is like a really, really well designed UI [user
interface] for real-time, ad hoc group collaboration and management
of tons of people.”35
Some research points to a relationship between cooperative game
playing and prosocial behavior.36 A survey of Singaporean youth, for
example, asked students what their favorite games were and how
often people helped or harmed others in the game. Their prosocial
behavior was measured with items such as “I feel happy when I share
my things with others” and “When I see a student who is upset, it
really bothers me.” The students exposed to the prosocial games in
which players helped one another were more likely to say they
behave in more prosocial ways in real life.
The same researchers conducted a longitudinal study in Japan and
found that playing games cooperatively can boost prosocial behavior
over the longer term. Here, students completed surveys similar to the
ones used in the Singapore experiment, and then a few months later
completed them again. The researchers found an upward spiral for
prosocial behavior for the students who reported more cooperative
gaming in the first survey. However, those who played the more
antisocial games showed a downward spiral.
In the final study, to demonstrate cause and effect, randomly
assigned college students in the United States played a prosocial
game, a violent game, or a neutral game for 20 minutes. After the
game, the subjects worked with partners who would be completing
eleven tangram puzzles that the subjects could select for them. There
were thirty puzzles to choose from, some hard, some easy, and some
of medium difficulty. Subjects heard that if their partner could com-
plete ten of the eleven puzzles within 10 minutes, the partner would
win $10.
Which puzzles would subjects assign to the partner? They could
choose to help the partner in a prosocial way, by choosing easy ones, or
they could sabotage the partner by choosing hard ones, ensuring that
the partner earned nothing. The most helpful subjects were, as you
might expect, the ones who just finished playing a cooperative video
game. And, as you might also predict, the subjects who were most
hurtful toward their partner were the ones assigned to play the violent
video game for 20 minutes.
219
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

The Proteus Effect
An avatar is a curious thing. It is your virtual self, and in some games
you have considerable control over how it looks, what abilities it has,
and how it behaves. You can make it stunningly attractive, downright
ugly, or otherworldly. You might agonize over a dazzling number of
choices you must make for your hair style, skin color, dress, eye shape,
piercings, or tattoos. On one level, you are the master of your avatar,
but on another, the avatar you choose – or are assigned – affects your
own behavior.
Nick Yee and Jeremy Bailenson named this the Proteus effect, after
the sea god in Homer’s Odyssey who was able to change his shape into a
lion, boar, serpent, or tree.37 They first explored how an avatar’s attract-
iveness affects its owner’s behavior, drawing on a virtual reality setup
in the lab with a virtual mirror. As a cover story, the researchers said
the experiment was about social interactions in virtual environments.
Subjects then donned head gear that displayed the virtual room in
which they could see the avatar they were randomly assigned in the
virtual mirror. As they turned around in the virtual room, another
virtual person of the opposite sex appeared – a confederate of the
researchers. The confederate, who only saw a bland human face and
did not know which avatar the subject was actually using, then asked
subjects to move closer and introduce themselves. The subjects who
believed that the other virtual person was looking at an attractive
avatar did indeed behave differently. They walked almost one meter
closer to the confederate in the virtual room, and they also revealed
more information about themselves.
As I discussed in Chapter 2, looks matter. If someone thinks you are
good looking, they will treat you better, and then you, in turn, will
become more confident and friendly. But in this experiment, the
confederate never saw the actual avatars and didn’t know which
avatar each subject had. The only reason the subjects with attractive
avatars behaved differently was because they thought the virtual
person could see them.
In a follow up, these researchers tried manipulating height to see
how people behave when they believe the other person is seeing a
taller avatar. This time, the subjects played four rounds of a money-
sharing activity with the confederate, in which one person decides
how to split up a hypothetical pool of $100, and the other accepts or
rejects the offer. Virtual height made a difference; subjects with taller
avatars negotiated more boldly and confidently. They were more
220
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

willing to offer unfair splits to the confederate, compared with the
subjects who were assigned the short avatars.
In the games, players can usually choose their own avatars, so
they have more control over any Proteus effect. As it turns out, tall,
attractive avatars tend to reach higher levels in World of Warcraft,
suggesting that people who play the most, and most successfully, may
choose avatars that create a positive Proteus effect.38 One Human
Warrior said, “I’m just a short kid 13 old in rl but here I am a big
man! Its great.” Perhaps the Proteus effect will help that boy gain
confidence at school and later, if he doesn’t fall into the trap of playing
far too much.
SERIOUS GAMES: GAMIFICATION IN EDUCATION, TRAINING,
AND HEALTH
Given how engaging games can be, it’s a natural leap to try applying
them to more serious applications in areas such as education, training,
and health. Indeed, these serious games – intended to serve a useful
purpose for learning, skill development, rehabilitation, or other appli-
cations – are flooding the market as researchers and publishers attempt
to draw on the compelling features that games possess.
A serious game should have the same kinds of features that define
computer and video games in general, including interactivity, rules
and constraints, clear goals, challenges, and feedback. Many games
add competition, against a computerized or real opponent or against
oneself. And some add storylines and plots to immerse the player in
a gripping drama that unfolds as the game progresses.
Education and Training Applications
Games began entering the worlds of education and training very early,
with “edutainment” titles such as the still popular Where in the World
Is Carmen Sandiego?, with its mystery themes and bad guy chases. The
explosion in such games, including online versions that teachers can
use for free, testifies to the belief of many educators that games can
engage students in ways that enhance cognitive abilities, motivation,
and cooperation.
The traditional sequence in education is instruction, practice, and
assessment. In math, for instance, a teacher might present a lesson that
explains how to multiply fractions. Then the students would practice
221
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

a few problems, and finally take a test to assess their mastery of the
concept. Games do not follow that sequence and often include little
or no instruction – relying instead on players to figure things out
on their own, drawing on whatever resources they can find.
Corporations are also gamifying some of their training programs to
help employees acquire the knowledge and skills they need more
quickly and effectively. Gamification for this kind of training is one
of the top technology trends, and companies are embracing the
approach in innovative ways. At Sun Microsystems, for example,
new employees enter a 3D world called Rise of the Shadow Specters.
Playing as lost colonists, the newcomers begin settling the world with
the goal of building an information network and knowledge base so
they won’t lose their way again. During the game, the employees learn
Sun’s corporate culture, values, and structure.
The military has been developing and relying on simulation games
for decades to provide training out of harm’s way. In fact, the Pentagon
funded the development of the game Spacewar! mentioned earlier.
Flight simulators are an essential ingredient for pilot training, and an
immersive game interface that simulates city streets is a far safer way
to learn effective tactics for urban combat. The kind of fighting that
soldiers do today differs a great deal from the battles in World War II,
and games such as Virtual Battlespace 2 can simulate improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), ambushes, evacuations, and other fast-paced
action to help trainees improve the split-second decision making and
visual attention skills they will need.39
Health Applications
While still in its infancy, the use of games to help people improve
health outcomes is showing enormous promise and growing quickly.
As we saw, fast-paced action games can help patients improve some
cognitive skills, and casual games can reduce stress and anxiety. Games
that incorporate biofeedback can also help patients manage anxiety.
Just as they do for corporations and the military, simulation games are
also helping to train health professionals.
Tailor-made games are in development to address specific issues,
with remarkable success in some cases. For example, one thorny prob-
lem in health care is finding ways to encourage patients to comply
with their medication treatment program, even though it might cause
unpleasant side effects, such as nausea. A team of biologists, nurses,
222
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

oncologists, and psychologists worked with children who have cancer
to develop the game “Re-Mission,” which features a nanobot called
Roxxi. The 3D first-person shooter has twenty levels, and the children
pilot the bot through fictional cancer patients, completing missions to
knock out their cancer cells, build up their immunity, and deal with
side effects. To test this game’s effectiveness, cancer patients at medical
centers in several countries received small computers and then were
randomly assigned to play either Re-Mission or the commercial game
Indiana Jones and the Emperor’s Tomb.40 The results demonstrated
that Re-Mission did its work. The children who played that game were
more likely to adhere to their treatment programs. They also scored
higher on self-efficacy and cancer-related knowledge.
Evaluating Serious Games
Attempts to determine whether these serious games work must first
define what is meant by “work,” and how we frame the question,
“compared with what?” Many studies describe how the games
affect people, often in glowing terms, but they don’t use any control
or comparison groups. Other studies, such as the one that tested
Re-Mission, use more rigorous methods – randomly assigning subjects
to treatment and control groups and carefully selecting the activities
for each group so that the effects of the serious game can be compared
with more conventional approaches. With so many games and so
many alternative approaches, it’s not surprising that results are mixed.
One study, for example, explored whether a serious game could help
students improve their persuasive writing skills. Students assigned to
the game entered an interactive graphical world in which a town is
facing a plague.41 They meet and interact with the doctor and other
characters, and as they grapple with ethical dilemmas, they try to
persuade game characters to agree with their point of view, offering
convincing arguments and receiving positive or negative feedback
from different characters. The comparison group read a novel, and
for them, the teacher used lectures and assignments to reinforce the
mechanics of persuasive writing. Both groups showed improvements
in persuasive writing, but the ones playing the serious game improved
more. They were also far more engaged. When asked if they wished
they were doing something else, 71 percent of the game players said,
“Not at all.” But 70 percent of the comparison group answered that
question, “Definitely.”
223
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

Yet other studies find the opposite – either that there are few
differences or that traditional approaches are more effective. In
one review of thirty-nine studies that investigated the cognitive
and motivational effects of serious games compared with other
approaches, the conclusion was that although results are mixed, the
game players did appear to learn and retain more content. But evi-
dence that the games affected motivation was not convincing.42
My own work as head of a research project to develop a math
adventure game called Descartes’ Cove illustrates some of the chal-
lenges serious game developers encounter.43 As the game begins,
middle-school players find themselves marooned on an island once
inhabited by René Descartes, and they must solve math puzzles and
challenges as they work their way through underground tunnels,
jungles, volcanos, and caves. In the early prototype, based largely on
input from teachers, the game started with detailed verbal instruc-
tions, and included pop-ups to let players know what was expected
at each point in the game. The teachers seemed to be trying to repli-
cate the usual sequence – instruction, practice, and assessment – but
the students did not like this at all.
I rewrote the storyboards so they matched a strategy/role-playing
game environment, eliminated instructions and lectures, and added
quests, advanced levels, rewards, hints, and increasingly difficult
challenges to complete before the endgame – a final quest to construct
an escape vehicle. Players pick up a backpack, a map, some coins, and
a book with some of Descartes’ notes in it, so they can look up things
themselves if they get stuck. When students played the version
we finally released, they had no trouble figuring out how to get
started, but teachers with no game-playing experience asked, “What
do I do next?”
Many so-called educational games fall short because they do not
really implement the features that make games so compelling and
motivating. Instead, they are like chocolate-covered broccoli, and the
players recognize the difference. We may not fully understand what
all those features are, but we have enough provocative evidence that
they are well worth pursuing.
NOTES
1 Gunn, E. A. A., Craenen, B. G. W., & Hart, E. (2009). A taxonomy of video
games and AI. In Proceedings from AISB. Citeseer.
224
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

2 Entertainment Software Association. (2013). Essential facts about the com-
puter and video game industry. Retrieved from www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/
esa_ef_2013.pdf
3 McGonigal, J. (2011). We spend 3 billion hours a week as a planet playing
videogames. Is it worth it? How could it be MORE worth it? TED Conversa-
tions.
Retrieved
from
www.ted.com/conversations/44/we_spend_3_bil
lion_hours_a_wee.html
4 Sherry, J. L., Lucas, K., Greenberg, B. S., & Lachlan, K. (2006). Video game uses
and gratifications as predictors of use and game preference. In P. Voderer &
J. Bryant (Eds.), Playing computer games: Motives, responses, and consequences.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
5 Bartle, R. (1998). Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit MUDs.
Retrieved from http://mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm
6 Yee, N. (2006). Motivations for play in online games. CyberPsychology and
Behavior, 9(6), 772–775. doi:10.1089/cpb.2006.9.772
7 Graham, L. T., & Gosling, S. D. (2013). Personality profiles associated with
different motivations for playing World of Warcraft. CyberPsychology,
Behavior and Social Networking, 16(3), 189–193. doi:10.1089/cyber.2012.0090
8 Park, A. E., & Henley, T. B. (2007). Personality and fantasy game character
preferences. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 27(1), 37–46.
9 Yee, N., Ducheneaut, N., Nelson, L., & Likarish, P. (2011). Introverted elves
and conscientious gnomes: The expression of personality in World of War-
craft. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 753–762). ACM. Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1979052
10 Lucas, K., & Sherry, J. L. (2004). Sex differences in video game play:
A communication-based explanation. Communication Research, 31(5), 499–523.
doi:10.1177/0093650204267930
11 Yee, N. (2014). The Proteus paradox. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
p. 104.
12 Dockterman, E. (2014, October 20). What Is #GamerGate and why are
women being threatened about video games? Time. Retrieved from http://
time.com/3510381/gamergate-faq/
13 Chan, T. (Peter). (2012). Playing with gender: The gender swapping experience of
massively multiplayer online role-playing game players(PsyD dissertation). Alli-
ant International University, California. Retrieved from http://search.pro
quest.com.proxy1.library.jhu.edu/docview/1033153297/abstract/
589614AC1B604574PQ/1?accountid=11752
14 Curtis, P. (1997). Mudding: Social phenomena in text-based virtual realities.
In S. Kiesler (Ed.), Culture of the Internet (pp. 121–142). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
15 Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms: An experimental analysis.
Oxford, UK: Appleton-Century.
16 Keovar. (2013, May 14). [Meta] Superstitions in MMO gaming. Paizo.
Retrieved
from
http://paizo.com/threads/rzs2prkm?Meta-Superstitions-in-
MMO-Gaming
17 Pritchard, R. D., Campbell, K. M., & Campbell, D. J. (1977). Effects of extrinsic
financial rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology,
62(1), 9–15. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.62.1.9
18 NinjaFox. Get out of my WAY!! www.eqnforum.com/threads/get-out-of-
my-way.1117/
225
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

19 Augur. (2013, September 27). What are the death penalties? EverQuest
Forums.
Retrieved
from
https://forums.station.sony.com/eq/index.php?
threads/what-are-the-death-penalties.203803/
20 Dingle, S. (2013). Grand Theft Auto V. Finweek, 26–28.
21 Anderson, C. A., Shibuya, A., Ihori, N., Swing, E. L., Bushman, B. J., Sakamoto, A.,
Rothstein, H. R., & Saleem, M. (2010). Violent video game effects on aggression,
empathy, and prosocial behavior in Eastern and Western countries: A meta-
analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 151–173. doi:10.1037/a0018251.
supp
22 Anderson, C. A., & Dill, K. E. (2000). Video games and aggressive thoughts,
feelings, and behavior in the laboratory and in life. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78(4), 772–790.
23 Carnagey, N. L. (2006). Is it competitiveness or violent content? The effects
of violent sports video games on aggression (PhD dissertation). Iowa State
University.
Retrieved
from
http://search.proquest.com/pqdtft/docview/
305315281/abstract/FD1CF222EA7F46A4PQ/1?accountid=11752
24 Carnagey, N. L., Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2007). The effect of video
game violence on physiological desensitization to real-life violence. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 43(3), 489–496.
25 Engelhardt, C. R., Bartholow, B. D., Kerr, G. T., & Bushman, B. J. (2011). This is
your brain on violent video games: Neural desensitization to violence
predicts increased aggression following violent video game exposure. Jour-
nal
of
Experimental
Social
Psychology,
47(5),
1033–1036.
doi:10.1016/j.
jesp.2011.03.027
26 Ferguson, C. J. (2014). Is video game violence bad? Psychologist, 27(5),
324–327.
27 Granic, I., Lobel, A., & Engels, R. C. M. E. (2014). The benefits of playing video
games. American Psychologist, 69(1), 66–78. doi:10.1037/a0034857
28 Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game modifies visual select-
ive attention. Nature, 423(6939), 534–537.
29 Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A. R., Warren, C., &
Newcombe, N. S. (2013). The malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of
training studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139(2), 352–402. doi:10.1037/a0028446
30 Jing Feng, Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action video game reduces
gender differences in spatial cognition. Psychological Science (Wiley-Blackwell),
18(10), 850–855. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01990.x
31 White, J. (2004). Defenders of the video gaming realm. Playthings, 102(8), 10–14.
32 Ventura, M., Shute, V., & Zhao, W. (2013). The relationship between video
game use and a performance-based measure of persistence. Computers and
Education, 60(1), 52–58. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2012.07.003
33 Russoniello, C. V., O’Brien, K., & Parks, J. M. (2009). EEG, HRV and psycho-
logical correlates while playing Bejeweled II: A randomized controlled
study. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 144, 189–192.
34 Klasen, M., Weber, R., Kircher, T. T. J., Mathiak, K. A., & Mathiak, K. (2012).
Neural contributions to flow experience during video game playing. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7(4), 485–495.
35 Pinckard, J. (2006). World of Warcraft is the new golf. PC Magazine, 25(7),
108–109.
36 Gentile, D. A., Anderson, C. A., Yukawa, S., Ihori, N., Saleem, M., Ming, L. K.,
Shibuya, A., Liau, A.K., Khoo, A., Bushman, B.J., Huesmann, L.R., & Sakamoto,
A. (2009). The effects of prosocial video games on prosocial behaviors:
226
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

International evidence from correlational, longitudinal, and experimental
studies. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35(6), 752–763. doi:10.1177/
0146167209333045
37 Yee, N., & Bailenson, J. (2007). The Proteus effect: The effect of transformed
self-representation on behavior. Human Communication Research, 33(3),
271–290.
38 Yee, N., Bailenson, J. N., & Ducheneaut, N. (2009). The Proteus effect: Implica-
tions of transformed digital self-representation on online and offline behav-
ior. Communication Research, 36(2), 285–312. doi:10.1177/0093650208330254
39 Mead, C. (2013). War play: Video games and the future of armed conflict.
New York, NY: Eamon Dolan/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
40 Kato, P. M., Cole, S. W., Bradlyn, A. S., & Pollock, B. H. (2008). A video game
improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and young adults with
cancer:
A
randomized
trial.
Pediatrics,
122(2),
e305–e317.
doi:10.1542/
peds.2007-3134
41 Barab, S., Pettyjohn, P., Gresalfi, M., Volk, C., & Solomou, M. (2012). Game-
based curriculum and transformational play: Designing to meaningfully
positioning person, content, and context. Computers and Education, 58(1),
518–533. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.08.001
42 Wouters, P., van Nimwegen, C., van Oostendorp, H., & van der Spek, E. D.
(2013). A meta-analysis of the cognitive and motivational effects of serious
games. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(2), 249–265. doi:10.1037/
a0031311
43 Wallace, P. (2005). Blending instructional design principles with computer
game design: The development of Descartes’ Cove. In Proceedings of the
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education. Montreal,
Canada.
227
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE GAMING

8
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNET
GROWING UP ONLINE
On a typical evening, twelve-year-old Jason splits his time between
texting friends, completing math homework, commenting on You-
Tube videos, playing video games, and listening to music. He eats
dinner with his parents and sister, a rule the parents insist on. But
during dinner his eyes frequently gaze down to check his smartphone
and he replies to texts.
If you were born in the 1980s or early 1990s, you are most likely a
member of the first generation of digital natives.1 Some of you might
have played Reader Rabbit on your home computer and learned to
type long before you reached high school, when typing classes were
offered. After the first web browser burst on the scene in 1993, you
found wonderful new ways to use the net to communicate with
friends, show off your personality, search for information, amuse your-
self, and do your homework.
When you reached college, your professors wondered if you really
were a different breed of human. They are digital immigrants, who
adopted some of these technologies as adults. But you grew up with
early versions of these technologies. Your younger siblings – the
second generation of digital natives born in the mid-1990s or later –
are far more connected and comfortable than even you are. In a short
YouTube video, a one-year-old daughter confidently swipes an iPad
touchscreen. But in the next scene, she tries to use the same finger
motions on page after page of a printed magazine – apparently coming
to the conclusion that the print version is a broken iPad.2
Lamenting the various failings of each new generation is certainly
nothing new for older generations, but this time, the context of child
development and parenting is different. For example, some parents
228

deeply regret buying a smartphone for their child, but the psycho-
logical attachment is so strong that they can’t take it away. They try
making rules, but it seems a constant tug of war that undermines
relationships.
How are these emerging technologies affecting child development?
When an infant expects a magazine to respond to finger gestures, will
she ever enjoy reading a good book? Can a teenager disconnect
from his virtual world for long enough to share a pleasant, uninter-
rupted family dinner? Research on the impact that cyberspace has on
child development is expanding, even as the technology continues to
advance. As you might expect, we see both positives and negatives and
many unanswered questions.
THE ECOLOGY OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Children grow up in a web of intersecting environments that interact
with one another and that the children themselves can influence.
Urie Bronfenbrenner first emphasized the need to look at the whole
ecology of human development, taking a systems approach that rec-
ognizes all the different contexts and their relationships to one
another.3
For example, the microsystem is the immediate environment
of parents, siblings, home life, school, and peers, and the mesosystem
is a system of microsystems and the relationships between them. The
quality of those interactions, such as the relationship between
the parents and the child’s school, affects the child’s development.
The exosystem brings in the larger context in which these microsystems
exist, such as the neighborhood, the mass media, the transportation
networks, and the major institutions of society. The macrosystem refers
to the overarching culture in which the child grows up – its political
and legal institutions and its social, educational, and economic oppor-
tunities. Consider, for example, a child growing up in a loving family,
but in a country torn apart by civil war. That child’s microsystem
contributes very positively, but in the context of a very dangerous
macrosystem. Finally, an even broader component of the ecology is
chronological – the child’s time in history and how that changes
over the lifespan.
How do all the technologies fit into this ecology? As part of
the microsystem, they emerge as connected computers and laptops,
smartphones, tablets, video game consoles, e-books, and all the
229
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

environments that the Internet has to offer. They may not even seem
like “technologies” at all. Instead, they are woven into the fabric of the
child’s surroundings, like furniture, toys, and appliances. They also
play a less obvious role in the macrosystem, as companies vie with
one another to attract more “eyeballs”; governments censor content;
hacking and electronic surveillance erode privacy; or lawmakers
struggle with ways to protect children without limiting freedom.
Cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development all occur
within this ecology, and teasing apart the role that one component
plays is not easy. The mind-numbing pace of change in the technology
layer adds to the difficulty, so researchers often find themselves
reporting on yesterday’s trends, not today’s or tomorrow’s. That said,
we are gaining a more nuanced understanding of the role the Internet
and other digital environments play in human development, thanks
to research that examines specific applications and online neighbor-
hoods rather than broad-brush investigations of overall Internet or
computer use.
What Are Children and Adolescents Actually Doing?
With all these choices, what are young people actually doing when
they pick up a smartphone, swipe a tablet, or tap at a keyboard?
Generation M2, a study of more than 2,000 children and adolescents,
finds that they are adding these digital activities to all the other
media they use, including TV, music, printed materials, and movies.4
Their average total media use was more than seven and a half hours a
day, an increase of 20 percent from five years earlier. They are also
doing more multitasking and multiscreening, so their total media
exposure, on average, jumped to ten hours, 45 minutes.
The majority of that time is still spent watching TV and listening
to music, but time spent on computers and video games increased
dramatically. Eighty-four percent have Internet access at home, and a
third can access the net from their own bedrooms. The loser was print
media, dropping from 43 minutes to 38 minutes over the five-year
period. The patterns changed somewhat for different age groups, with
the middle-school children age eleven to fourteen consuming the
most media, especially TV, computers, and video games. High school
students were big music consumers.
This study did not include the time children and adolescents spend
talking on a cell phone or sending text messages, an activity that takes
230
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

up another large chunk of time – especially from middle school on.
Texting occupies an astonishing one and a half hours a day for seventh
to twelfth graders.5
Drilling down into the actual content, the online neighborhoods
visited by teens on mobile devices most often tilt heavily toward
communications and social media. Mobile apps that support text
messaging and photo sharing are particular favorites, such as WeChat,
Vine, Flickr, Snapchat, WhatsApp, and Instagram. A survey of 7,000
teens, for instance, found that 87 percent texted every day, compared
with 61 percent who used Facebook.6
A study of younger children, aged eight to twelve, found that some
of their favorite sites are not age appropriate.7 YouTube, which
Common Sense Media rates as a site appropriate for age thirteen and
up, was the most popular site for these younger children. Facebook
was second, even though the site specifically requires members to
confirm that they are thirteen or older. To create a profile, children
under thirteen must lie about their age, sometimes with the consent of
their parents. One survey of parents found that 38 percent of the
children with Facebook accounts are under thirteen, and 4 percent
are actually under seven.8 Other popular sites were more age appropri-
ate, including Webkinz and Disney’s Club Penguin.
Whether activities are really “online” is increasingly difficult to pin
down, given the blurry lines between online and offline. For example,
a math software program that a child mostly uses without the need for
any Internet connectivity may upload data to a website for reporting
purposes. We will look at the research that touches on how children
and teens are using all kinds of digital media – whether they are
packaged CDs with educational software, games played on video con-
soles, or movies that might be viewed on regular TV or through
Netflix.
Let’s start with cognitive development, an area in which research
studies find mixed results about potential benefits and downsides.
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
Parents, school administrators, policy makers, and governments –
virtually around the world – strive to improve educational outcomes
for children, and many see computers and Internet access as critical
ingredients toward this end. The Internet delivers an almost limitless
array of information resources and new tools, and embracing these
231
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

technologies to enhance cognitive development seems obvious.
In many countries, significant government funding goes toward
expanding broadband access, especially for schools, libraries, and
low-income families.
Computers, Internet Use, and Academic Achievement
Some studies confirm the value of computers and the Internet for
academic achievement, often using scores on standardized tests as a
measure. For example, a two-year government-sponsored study in the
United Kingdom examined the relationships between computer and
Internet use, both inside and outside school time, and the students’
scores on national tests in English, math, and science from age ten to
sixteen.9 Students who used computers and the Internet the most
made the largest gains over the two-year period.
Other studies point to special value for disadvantaged students,
perhaps because there are larger gains to be had. A school in Nebraska
adopted a “one laptop” per student policy, and many poorer students,
who had not had a computer with broadband access at home before,
received one of them. After a year, those students made the largest
gains on their standardized test scores compared with students from
families with higher incomes, whether or not those students already
had access at home.10
But some studies paint a less rosy picture, finding very small or
insignificant effects, or even negative effects – particularly for students
who
use
computers
the
most.
The
Organisation
for
Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) administers academic tests peri-
odically to students in member countries, partly to compare academic
progress in one country with another and also to see how students in
each country are doing from year to year. In 2003, these tests, known as
the Programme for International Student Assessments (PISA), focused
on math, reading, science, and problem-solving skills. The students, who
were aged fifteen to sixteen, were also asked about their use of com-
puters and the Internet, with questions such as “How often do you use
the Internet to look up information about people, things, or ideas?” and
“How often do you use games on a computer?” One key conclusion
from this study was that students who report using the Internet the
most earned lower scores compared with the “medium” users.11
In another study, tenth graders in Ohio kept a log of their computer
and Internet use for a week. There was no relationship between the
232
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

amount of time those students spent on the Internet and their grade
point averages (GPAs). These researchers also found no particular rela-
tionship between what the students were doing online – such as
playing games, doing homework, communicating with friends, or
surfing – and their GPAs.12 Other studies find that moderate use of
the Internet is related to higher academic achievement, but heavy
users fare worse than students who rarely access the net.
A study in Brazil adds further caution to the generally held view
that more access to computers and the Internet inevitably leads to
gains in academic achievement. Every two years in Brazil, randomly
selected students in grades four, eight, and eleven take achievement
tests in reading and math.13 In one study, more than 125,000 students
also answered questions about their computer and Internet use at home
and at school. Very few relationships with test scores were found,
and some of those that did appear were negative rather than positive.
For example, the lower income fourth and eighth graders who had
Internet access at home did significantly worse than those who lacked
such access.
In more controlled investigations in which children use specific
types of educational software or online resources, the findings are
also inconsistent. For example, a study of more than 4,000 students
in elementary and middle school who used MathFacts in a Flash to
improve their computational fluency performed significantly better
than a control group on the final math test.14 But a U.S. government
report that evaluated the effectiveness of reading and math software
products in use in 132 schools found no evidence that students in first-
and fourth-grade classes that were randomly assigned to use the prod-
ucts had higher test scores at the end of the year compared with
controls.15 A follow-up study the next year looked at the same classes,
assuming that the teachers would now have more experience with
the software packages.16 That study painted a more mixed picture.
The math software still had no significant effects on math test scores,
but one of the reading packages helped fourth-grade students improve
reading scores.
What can we make of these conflicting findings? The studies vary
enormously, involving different grades, countries, software products,
and research designs. Some of these studies use a broad-brush approach
that relies heavily on correlations and general questions about overall
Internet or computer use, so they will miss the nuances of what
children and adolescents are actually doing in any of the Internet’s
233
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

environments. They also rely mainly on self-reports, so the respond-
ents might be exaggerating time spent in activities they think
make them look good and underestimating time spent on games and
texting. Heavy Internet users, for example, might suffer academically
because they spend too much time playing online games instead of
doing homework, but they don’t like to admit that.
Another reason not to dismiss the potential educational benefits is
that this is a new field; educators, software publishers, and parents
are learning about it through trial and error. Early educational soft-
ware was clunky and often just reproduced a worksheet on a computer
screen. But many innovative and lively products are emerging that
are far more engaging, such as the Khan academy videos and also
mobile learning applications for children.17
Success stories are mounting, as we learn how to engage students in
ways that will not only boost academic achievement, but also offer
opportunities to learn new skills. One area that may be a particularly
useful one to better understand engagement involves the lure of
digital games. While games present one of the chief concerns we have
about children, computers, and the Internet, they also have some
positive effects on cognitive development, as I described in Chapter 7.
Online Learning
An important contribution the Internet makes to cognitive develop-
ment is online learning, a trend that grew quickly for college-age
students, but also continues to gather momentum for younger stu-
dents. Many states have already launched virtual schools, and many
online courses are widely available for students of all ages, including
the elementary level.
Why do students take online courses? Most students enroll as a way
to recover credit, supplement their regular school curriculum, or make
academic progress during times when school is out. Online learning
opportunities also help expand academic options for students whose
schools may not be able to offer a wide range of courses. Advanced
Placement courses, for example, are some of the most popular online
enrollments for high school students seeking to build up their resumes
for their college applications.
Hundreds of thousands of students enroll in online programs full
time for various reasons. Some are home-schooled, while others may
not be able to attend a regular school because of illness or work
234
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

obligations. Child actors, for instance, can pursue their acting roles
on location without interrupting their education.
How does online learning compare to face-to-face classes? That
question generates considerable debate, particularly because the
answers are so important to the entire educational system, built
around brick and mortar schools and face-to-face classes headed by
teachers. Hundreds of studies have been conducted over the years,
but comparisons are difficult to make because online learning varies
so much. Some versions simulate face-to-face classes, and students
attend “live” class sessions using web conferencing software. Often
the sessions are recorded so students who can’t attend can view the
lectures later.
Many of the massive open online courses (MOOCs) fall into this
category. These are the free online courses that are offered to large
numbers of people around the world who are interested in the topic
and sign up to take the course. Faculty provide little or no individual
feedback to the students in these enormous classes, and most students
don’t actually complete the courses. However, many never intended
to complete and instead wanted to sample a few lectures or zero in on
a particular module.
In other models of online learning, teachers might be the “guide on
the side, not the sage on the stage.” Here, students would view videos,
read texts, do projects and assignments, collaborate with other students,
and take tests, and the teacher’s role is to guide, encourage, and provide
extensive feedback. In more self-paced versions of online learning, a
teacher may not even be involved. Instead, students work their way
through online lessons on their own. In some settings, they can post
questions to an online discussion forum that may be answered by other
students or by people with some expertise in the subject. To help judge
quality, people on the site can cast votes for the best answers or click
thumbs down for an answer they think is not helpful.
The U.S. Department of Education summarized more than 1,000
studies that compared outcomes in online learning with face-to-face
classes and found that the students in the online learning environ-
ments performed slightly better than their counterparts who received
face-to-face instruction.18 The online advantage was largest when
teachers led the courses and when students had opportunities
to collaborate virtually. Student performance in the online independ-
ent learning courses was about the same as it was for students taking
face-to-face classes.
235
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

The students in most of these studies were college level, but
younger students also benefit. For instance, students taking seventh-
grade science participated in a study to compare outcomes when the
course was taught in a face-to-face class or in a virtual world called
Virtual Events where they could control their own avatars, which is
an environment similar to Second Life.19 Those learning from the
teacher in the virtual worlds performed just as well as the students
learning from the same teacher in a classroom. The online students
also enjoyed their course more.
For younger students, online learning can be especially helpful for
certain populations that may not fit as well into a regular class, per-
haps because they show very high ability in certain subjects or need
more time and assistance. My own studies of online learning among
high ability students in grades K to twelve illustrate how courses can
be specially tailored to the academic needs and interests of each stu-
dent.20 Online, such students need not wait for the rest of the class.
Guided by their instructors, they can leap ahead at a pace that matches
their abilities in a subject they are passionate about or just skip topics
they have already mastered.21
Psychologically, online learning offers students some unique advan-
tages as well. For example, students who feel shy or awkward in a
regular classroom become more outgoing and confident in their virtual
classes. This can happen because the students have more time to think
through what they want to contribute to a discussion forum, for
instance, and are less self-conscious. They don’t have to worry about
their looks or dress, and they can’t see fellow students roll their eyes at
some idea they propose. In that kind of setting, they become more
willing to offer innovative ideas and defy the norms that classrooms
and other students impose. As I discussed in the last chapter on gaming,
that kind of experience could well lead to a Proteus effect in which the
confidence carries over to the child’s real life. Online classes can also
offer opportunities to interact with students around the world, not just
in their own school, which can expand their horizons even further.22
While online learning has many positive features, the research
suggests that the best learning environments are those that blend
online with face-to-face settings. Most students taking online courses
are not full time, and instead take an online course to supplement
their regular schoolwork. That approach combines the best of
both worlds and ensures that students enjoy the social and emotional
benefits of interacting with their peers.
236
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Games and Cognitive Development in Children
How much do children and adolescents play digital games? The
Generation M2 study described earlier found that on average, these
youth played about 90 minutes a day.23 Their overall use of media of
all kinds has risen considerably over the years, largely because many of
them now have smartphones handy all day long. Game playing rose as
well, again because so many young people play games on mobile
devices.
For some youth, game playing can lead to a cycle of compulsive
overuse that can have negative consequences. For example, they suffer
signs of withdrawal when they are unable to access the Internet for a
period of time, and despite their efforts to reduce their online time,
they continue to return. Their grades might be declining, and their
Internet use is taking a severe toll on their relationships with family
and friends. Gaming is one of those Internet neighborhoods that
appears frequently in such cases, but it is not the only one. Social media,
chat rooms, and email are also implicated. I take up the topic of prob-
lematic Internet use in Chapter 11, so here I will mainly describe the
relationships between gaming and cognitive development in children.
Much research shows that playing certain kinds of digital games
can boost some cognitive abilities, as we discussed in the last chapter.
Fast-paced action games, for instance, in which players must react
quickly to unpredictable events and hit tiny targets that might appear
anywhere on a large screen, can improve visual attention, spatial abil-
ities, and related cognitive abilities. Most of those studies involved
adults, not children, so effects on cognitive development are not yet
clear.24 Nevertheless, the findings are promising and point in the same
direction.
One study investigated whether practice with a game that requires
spatial skills might help improve spatial abilities in ten-year-olds,
much as it does in adults. The researchers first asked the children
how much past experience they had with video games, and then they
measured spatial abilities using a computer-based test. The girls and
boys were randomly assigned either to the experimental group, which
played Marble Madness for several days, or to the control group, which
played a word game that did not involve spatial skills. In Marble
Madness, players guide the marbles through a maze on the screen,
judging their speed and distance and avoiding traps. At the end of
the experiment, all the children took the spatial ability tests again.25
237
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

The experimental and control groups did not differ before they
started playing the games, but afterward, there were marked differ-
ences. The average spatial skills for the children who played Marble
Madness improved significantly, and most of the improvement
occurred in the kids who started out with weak spatial skills. Those
who already had strong spatial skills showed less improvement.
Studies using Tetris as the experimental game come to similar con-
clusions for older adolescents.26 As geometric shapes drop from the top
of the screen, players press keys to rotate them in a way that will best
fit the shapes that are already on the bottom. Players must be able to
imagine how each tile can fill the spaces and can build a platform that
makes it easier to embed new tiles. To assess spatial abilities before and
after playing the game, the researchers used tests that involved mental
rotation of objects, some of which were similar to the shapes in Tetris.
Compared with the subjects who played a word game, the ones who
played Tetris showed significant improvement in spatial abilities post-
test. Figure 8.1 shows an example of a question that assesses mental
rotation abilities.
For younger children, playing Tetris also helps improve spatial
abilities, particularly in mental rotation.27 Third-grade boys and girls
took a simplified mental rotation pretest and then were assigned to
play either Tetris or Where in the World Is Carmen SanDiego? – the
mystery game that helps students learn geography. On their post-tests,
the children who played Tetris performed significantly better, and
once again, the ones whose mental rotation skills were weakest bene-
fited the most. An interesting finding from this study was that initially,
scores on the mental rotation task and skill at playing Tetris were not
Figure 8.1. Example of a question that assesses mental rotation ability: Choose the
shape that is the same as the one on the left but rotated.
238
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

correlated, meaning that the children were using different strategies to
do the test and to play the game. But after playing Tetris for several
weeks, their scores on the post-test and their skill at Tetris were more
closely aligned. They learned something from Tetris that they could
then apply to the questions on the test.
Boys tend to do better at some spatial tests, particularly mental
rotation, and gender differences appeared in these studies. But game
playing can minimize or even erase that gender difference. For the
third graders, although some girls did just as well as the boys, the mean
for boys was almost 15 percent higher than the girls’ mean. But the girls
who played Tetris caught up, and there was no gender difference on
the post-test for the experimental group.
It appears that games that draw on spatial abilities offer training
that helps improve those skills, regardless of age. But the children who
benefit most are the ones who have the most to gain.
Strategy games may offer a different kind of benefit for cognitive
development in areas such as reasoning skills and problem solving. In a
study of the way children solve mathematical puzzles in the online
game called Railway Repair, researchers observed how children grad-
ually move from simple problem-solving strategies to more advanced
ones.28 Children choose different lengths of track labeled with deci-
mals to fill gaps in a train track, but they can use each length only one
time. They initially start out by choosing a length that exactly
matches the gap – for example, a length of 0.8 to fill a 0.8 gap. But soon
they run out of exact matches and need more complex strategies that
combine two or more lengths to accurately fill each gap. Eventually,
they run out of those and find that they can’t complete the task
because they ran out of smaller pieces to fill the remaining gaps. As
they start the game over, they adopt more advanced strategies, par-
ticularly planning ahead and not using up their exact matches so early.
The allure of digital games for children leads to widespread efforts
to create educational games that tap their compelling features. These
serious games that I described in the gaming chapter come in many
forms for children, and they especially emphasize the engagement
factor. For example, LearnMem1 is an adventure game developed in
Greece that helps students learn computer science terms. It includes
many of the most important features of games: rules, clear and chal-
lenging goals, fantasy story, progressive levels of difficulty, interaction,
high level of control, uncertain outcomes, and immediate feedback.
Students must collect flags in different rooms, negotiating obstacles,
239
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

bombing walls, and avoiding robots, and also collect information and
tips about the terms they need to know in order to answer questions
and earn points. Compared with control students who went online
to study the computer terms and then took the quiz, the students who
played the game not only earned better scores on the test, but also
found the game environment to be more motivating.29
Preschool Children and Digital Media
Most of the research on development involves school-age children,
but some researchers are looking more closely at how digital media
affect younger children. Even very young children can use a mouse
and certainly a touch screen. So far, the findings are mainly positive for
children nearing school age. Children who have access to computers as
preschoolers seem to be a bit better prepared for school.
For example, in a study of more than 1,500 preschool children in
Canada, the parents reported how much the child used a computer at
home and what role the parent played in teaching the child reading
skills. The four-year-olds participated in a variety of cognitive assess-
ments to better evaluate their progress in learning to read, such as their
knowledge of the letters of the alphabet. The study found a relation-
ship between the amount of computer use and knowledge of letters,
even after controlling for income and other variables.30
Access to age-appropriate digital media may be especially helpful
for lower income and disadvantaged preschoolers. In a controlled trial
at a Head Start program, researchers randomly assigned children to a
control group that received the regular Head Start curriculum or to an
experimental group in which the children also had daily access to
computers equipped with educational software such as Dr. Seuss’s
ABC, and Millie’s Math House.31 Before starting the program, the chil-
dren were given a variety of cognitive pretests, and then were tested
again as they were graduating from Head Start. The children in the
experimental group performed better than the controls on several of
the cognitive tests.
Caution
is
very
much
warranted
about
computer
use
for
young children, however, given the limits of the research thus far.
The American Academy of Pediatrics discourages any screen time for
children younger than two. While some exposure to high-quality
software appears to help preschoolers gain ground, parents should be
very much involved in the choice of materials and the amount of
240
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

time children spend on them. Especially at this young age, children
need the stimulation they can get only by interacting with real people
and real objects.
Media Multitasking in Children and Adolescents
Human beings have always had the capacity to manage more than
one task at a time, especially to stay alert to any sign of danger as we go
about our daily routines. But the Internet, and mobile technologies in
particular, offer opportunities to multitask in completely new ways.
Children might have several windows open on the computer, one for
homework, a second for chat sessions, another for web searching.
At the same time, they are listening to music and glancing at their
smartphone every few minutes, checking for incoming texts, tweets,
or Snapchat photos.
Observations of how middle- and high school students multitask
show how common it is. Researchers visited the homes of more than
250 students and watched them work on their homework, recording
what they did every moment for 15 minutes.32 On average, they were
on task for just 65 percent of the time and rarely went for more than
4 or 5 minutes without checking social media, sending a text, or doing
something else off-task.
Jason – the boy I mentioned in the beginning of this chapter – is
confident that he can easily manage two or more activities at the same
time, and even that he gets more done that way. My studies of chil-
dren with high academic ability find similar beliefs, especially for
adolescents who frequently multitask when doing homework.
In fact, humans can multitask reasonably well when one of the
tasks is a highly practiced, almost automatic one, such as walking,
exercising, or knitting. Some multitasking can improve performance
on less complex tasks, because it adds stimulation and prevents bore-
dom. But when the tasks demand more cognitive capacity, we don’t
actually multitask, we engage in task switching. We toggle back
and forth from one to the other, dropping a bit of efficiency with
each transfer.
The cognitive costs of rapidly switching from one task to another
can be very high, depending on what the tasks are. Completing two
complex tasks when you are switching back and forth between them
can actually double the time they take, compared witih completing
one task at a time.
241
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

In one study, subjects watched a screen and when a number
appeared, they pressed a key to indicate whether the number was
odd or even.33 This task is mixed in with a second task, in which the
subject presses one key if the number is high and another if it is low. It
certainly sounds simple enough, but results show that the cost of
cognitively changing gears to handle a different task is significant.
The subjects’ response times drop each time the task is switched, and
they also make more errors.
Distractions can also lead to multitasking, making it more difficult
to focus on a single task even if the distraction doesn’t actually require
any response. In a study in Italy, children watched a five-minute video
clip with scenes such as a girl making a phone call or a man stealing
money from a wallet.34 After the video, the children tried to recall as
much as they could. To see how distractions affected their ability to
recall the events, the researchers assigned the kids to different groups.
One group stared at a blank TV screen while answering the questions, a
second closed their eyes, a third looked at a screen flashing foreign
language words, and a fourth heard the words spoken aloud.
The children did the best when they closed their eyes or stared at a
blank screen, blocking out visual distractions. You can imagine how
the relentless ring tones and incoming texts could play a distracting
role similar to those foreign words, impeding performance on home-
work or tests.
Research on the seemingly universal multitasking in which teens
combine music with homework and practically everything else they
do leads to mixed results. Some studies find that listening to music
that you like can improve cognitive performance on certain tasks, but
others find negative effects. It seems to depend on your personality,
age, and the nature of the main task you are trying to accomplish.
Some people – introverts, for instance – seem to suffer more impair-
ment when music is playing. It also depends on the type of music.
In one study, researchers randomly assigned subjects to one of four
groups as they read four passages of text and answered questions about
them, similar to questions that would appear on the College Board’s
SAT. One group listened to music with lyrics that they liked, another
listened to lyrical music they said they did not like, and a third listened
to instrumental music. The “liked” music came from artists such as
One Direction and Katy Perry. The fourth group was a control, who
read the passages with no music or noise in the background.35
The subjects performed best when it was quiet, followed by the
242
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

condition in which instrumental music was playing. Music with lyrics,
which is what teens typically play, caused significant drops in reading
comprehension.
Studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans
and other measures of brain activity suggest that multitasking may
have effects on how people learn, a finding that could be extremely
important for cognitive development. In one study, subjects used trial
and error to learn how to predict the weather (rain or sun) for two
different cities using different cues, while high and low tones sounded
in the background. Researchers told some subjects to ignore the tones,
but the others had to listen and count the high tones. The subjects who
didn’t multitask did a little better as they were learning the task. But
afterward, it became clear that the impact of multitasking was even
greater. They took a test to determine how much they could apply
what they learned – actually selecting cues that would best predict rain
or sun, rather than predicting from the cues provided. On this test, the
subjects who were not multitasking during the learning phase did very
well when they were applying knowledge. But those who were also
trying to count high tones while they were learning the task were far
less able to correctly apply what they learned.36
Why did the multitaskers perform reasonably well during learning
but fare badly when they tried to apply their knowledge? The results
from the brain scans shed some light, because those scans also differed
depending on whether the subject was multitasking. When not dis-
tracted, the subjects showed most activity in the medial temporal lobe,
an area that supports memory and recall. One of its important struc-
tures is the hippocampus, which is well known as a critical region for
memory formation. But when the subjects were multitasking, their
brains showed more activity in the striatum, which is involved in the
formation of habits. One hypothesis is that learning while multitasking
can lead to a kind of learning that looks more like the way we acquire
habits, with little flexibility to apply the knowledge in a new context.
What
that
means
to
learning
outcomes
for
children
and
adolescents – the digital natives – is not entirely clear. Their multitask-
ing learning style may mean that they acquire information but have
less flexibility to apply it. Perhaps it means that they can pass multiple
choice tests that don’t ask for much critical thinking or application.
Subtle effects like these may be more difficult to recognize but are
very important to explore further because of their longer term
significance.
243
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT
Surrounded by technology and connected most of the time, digital
natives may also show somewhat different physical development. The
areas that trigger the most concern involve sleep patterns and obesity.
Sleep Patterns
Imagine Jason’s bedroom at 10 PM, his putative bedtime. His smart-
phone is charging on the night table, and his laptop is on the floor.
Across the room is a flat-screen TV on the dresser, with a video game
console next to it. With all those tempting technologies, can he get
to sleep?
A longitudinal study in Finland suggests that his sleep patterns
are definitely affected because of such easy access to technology.37
Children in fourth and fifth grades participated in a study lasting
eighteen months, in which their sleep patterns and technology use
were assessed. These researchers found that children who used a com-
puter or watched TV the most slept less than the others and went
to bed later.
Another study of more than 2,000 Swedish children from six to
sixteen years old found that those who slept less were more likely
to be heavier users of the computer and TV and were also more
likely to say they did not enjoy school very much.38 The youngest
children didn’t have much difficulty getting to sleep at night, but the
adolescents did. They also had more trouble waking up, and felt tired
in school a lot of the time.
Children and adolescents who don’t get enough sleep are at risk in
many ways, not just in their performance at school. Sleep loss reduces
their capacity to pay attention, and that can affect their safety.
An experiment tested the effects of sleep restriction on teens using
virtual reality. The subjects entered the virtual reality world as pedes-
trians and attempted to cross a busy street.39 When deprived of some
sleep the night before the test, they delayed longer before entering the
crossing; they left less space between themselves and the moving
virtual cars; and they had more close calls in which they were nearly
struck.
Although the mechanisms are unclear, the research suggests that
heavy computer and Internet use is linked to poorer sleep patterns in
children. Having easy access to these tempting devices in the bedroom
is certainly a likely reason. Some research also hints at a relationship
244
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

between the computer’s bright display of blue light and the produc-
tion of melatonin, a chemical that regulates sleep cycles. In the
evening, melatonin
typically
rises, but some studies
find that
the bright displays may suppress that hormone.40 That would just
compound the problem for children who are already getting too little
sleep. Taking this into account, parents might want to ban screen time
after a certain hour, and not just for their children. Their own sleep
could benefit as well.
Childhood Obesity and Physical Exercise
Do children who sit at a computer for long hours become overweight,
contributing to the obesity epidemic? The explosive increase in child-
hood obesity corresponds with the growing use of computers and
smartphones, but that correlation isn’t a smoking gun. We do know
there is a strong relationship between amount of TV viewing and
obesity in children, but the evidence that computer use makes its
own contribution is not as clear.
In a large cross-sectional study of preschoolers, researchers assessed
their TV viewing habits and computer use, along with their weight
and other signs of risk for obesity, such as the thickness of the skinfold
on the arm.41 There was no relationship between computer use
and the child’s actual weight, but there were signs that a relationship
might be emerging. Any computer use at all among these children was
associated with thicker skinfolds, suggesting that they may be on a
path to becoming less active and overweight.
For older children and adolescents, results are also suggestive.
For example, one study of American teenagers found a relationship
between amount of computer use and obesity in girls but not in boys.
But in a large study of Finnish children, researchers followed the
boys and girls from age eleven to seventeen and a half, obtaining data
from the subjects and their parents at various intervals.42 They found
that the more these subjects reported using a computer, the more they
were at risk for becoming overweight, and this finding applied to
boys as well as girls. They also discovered a relationship between cell
phone use – as measured by the size of their cell phone bill – and body
mass index.
The reasons that computer use may lead to obesity probably
include the fact that it is a typically sedentary activity and
might take time away from physical activity. It can also lead to more
245
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

snacking, just as TV viewing does. But certain types of computer
use may work in the opposite direction, by getting kids up off the
couch to do “exergaming,” with technology such as the Nintendo
Wii and innovative software that promotes physical activity.
Exergaming may be beneficial for cognitive development as
well. In one study, children aged six to nine engaged in one of four
activities each day for several days.43 For some periods, the children
did “exergaming,” in which they jogged in place to move a character
on the screen, zigzagging to avoid the online pits, rolling logs,
and
other
obstacles.
In
another
session,
the
children
played
Marathon, an exergame in which the child moves the character for-
ward by just jogging on a mat. The third activity was an engaging
video game (Super Mario World) that didn’t involve any physical
activity, and the fourth was a video on healthy living habits.
After each activity, the children took a child-friendly version of
the “flanker” test, in which a yellow fish appears in the center of a
screen, and the subject quickly presses a key to indicate which way it
faces. For some trials, the fish is surrounded by other fish facing the
same way, and for the others, the surrounding fish are facing in the
other direction. It takes longer to judge the direction of a fish facing
the “wrong” way, and longer still for children with cognitive impair-
ments. This test is a measure of executive functions, which include the
cognitive processes that help a child think and behave in controlled,
goal-directed ways. The exergamers performed better on the flanker
fish test than those who were sedentary, suggesting that physical
exercise is not just about avoiding obesity; it is a valuable ingredient
for cognitive development. If such software encourages more exer-
cise, so much the better.
SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Sophia starts texting her friends as soon as she boards the school bus
heading home, even though she just left them. She reports, “omg dg
53xe,” translated as “Oh my god, D.G. is so sexy” (D.G. is a boy on the
bus). The eighth grader sends about seventy-five texts every day,
including a few to say good night to the same friends before she falls
asleep. According to a Pew report, Sophia texts less than most teens
between fourteen and seventeen, for whom the average is a hundred
texts a day.44
246
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Friendship Patterns
Clearly, the Internet, mobile phones, and all the related technologies
are having important effects on social development and relationships,
especially for children as they transition into adolescence and as peer
friendships overshadow family relationships. The technology environ-
ments children venture into are also changing very fast, so parents,
educators, and researchers have trouble keeping pace. For example,
teens adopted texting as a favored means of communication at a
breathtaking pace, quickly overtaking phone calls and email. Sophia
rolls her eyes whenever her parents ask what apps she uses, loathe to
explain all the cool new tools she and her friends try out.
When the Internet was young, many concerns revolved around the
dangers of meeting strangers online or the risks of developing weaker
friendship ties online that could interfere with real-life relationships.
While those concerns have not evaporated, most children and adoles-
cents use their constant connectedness, as Sophia does, to communi-
cate with people they already know in person.
Indeed, the rich get richer hypothesis predicts that the outgoing,
extraverted teens who are socially adept and have strong face-to-face
connections will also be the ones to use the Internet the most to
communicate with friends, further strengthening their ties. In a study
of Dutch adolescents aged ten to sixteen, researchers asked how much
they used the Internet to communicate with friends or strangers and
how close they felt to their friends. Example items included “When
my friends know that something is bothering me, they ask me about
it” and “My friends help me to understand myself better.”45 The “rich,”
in terms of how close they felt to their friends, were also the ones who
used the Internet to communicate with them the most.
But what happens to the “poor,” the young people who are more
socially anxious or shy in face-to-face settings? Are they losing
ground? The social compensation hypothesis predicts that adolescents
who suffer from more social anxiety choose to use the Internet to
communicate with their peers because they have difficulty with face-
to-face interactions. The Dutch adolescents who reported more loneli-
ness and anxiety, the boys especially, used the Internet less often than
the extraverted ones, but they also said that the Internet was a better
place for deeper, more intimate self-disclosures and intimacies. For
these youngsters, the Internet is less important as a means to maintain
a lot of friendships than as a place where they can talk about intimate
247
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

topics that they can’t discuss offline. Those teens view online commu-
nication as less “risky,” compared with face-to-face communication,
because they have better control over what they say and can avoid
embarrassing fumbles.
Online environments can also be a welcoming home for adoles-
cents who find themselves isolated or marginalized in their face-to-
face settings. As I discussed in Chapter 6, online support groups can be
very important for people in special circumstances. A study of the way
pregnant teens or teen mothers use such forums found many instances
of emotional support and information sharing that help them cope
and improve their well-being. One poster wrote:
I’m so happy to know that other people are in the same boat as I am, i’ve
said it a million billion times already but i’ll say it again, i do not know
where i’d be without this site! Its a total life savior.46
Identity Development
At the same time online communication among friends is exploding,
adolescents begin struggling with identity issues – who they are, what
they believe, what occupation might suit them best, and how they
want to relate to family, friends, and their culture. Erik Erikson’s
classic work in developmental psychology stressed that achieving
an identity is a lifelong task, but it is the major task of adolescence,
when the child is maturing emotionally, socially, and sexually on
the way to adulthood. The task can span years in which the teen
experiments, explores, and finally comes to some conclusions that
seem to fit best. James Marcia identified two important elements in
this journey, with different outcomes (Table 8.1).47 The children who
don’t have opportunities to explore may fall into “identity diffu-
sion,” not really committing to much of anything. One might say,
“Politics? Oh no, I don’t really care much about that – never did.”
These kids might also fall into an identity foreclosure pattern, in
which they make commitments without having looked into options.
Jack, for instance, said both his parents are doctors and that’s what
he’ll pursue, too.
Children who actively explore different options – and the Internet
offers them plenty of ways to do that – might eventually come to
make a commitment based on what they’ve learned about themselves
and their beliefs, and then achieve a stable, satisfying identity.
248
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Adolescents who explore but who hesitate to commit fall into the
“moratorium” quadrant, putting off decisions.
For digital natives, the process is tightly connected to their online
worlds. As they choose nicknames for chat rooms or email and
develop their profiles on a social networking site, adolescents have
plenty of room to experiment. Indeed, online worlds are like identity
labs in which people of any age can try on different personas to see
how they feel and how others react.
Sonia Livingstone, who directed the UK Children Go Online project
in the United Kingdom, found that girls especially loved to tinker with
their profiles. Danielle, for example, said that what she enjoys most
“is that you can just change it all the time [and so] you can show
different sides of yourself.” You can also start over if things don’t go
as you hoped. Leo, speaking about his MySpace profile, said, “The one
I made before I thought I didn’t really like it, so I thought I’d start
again. I’d start a new one . . . it was just . . . people I didn’t like had the
address, so I thought I should start fresh.”48
Think for a moment about a teen who might want to experiment
with a tattooed biker identity but, a year later, realizes the crowd
doesn’t suit him. It’s much easier to start a new profile page than
remove a tattoo. However, digital footprints don’t disappear, and
youthful identity explorations may come back to haunt adolescents
as young adults on the job market. According to an article in the Wall
Street Journal, former Google CEO Eric Schmidt predicts that “every
young person one day will be entitled automatically to change his or
her name on reaching adulthood in order to disown youthful hijinks
stored on their friends’ social media sites.”49
Most of the major websites do allow users to delete their own
postings, and a California law passed in 2013 requires all websites to
prominently feature an “eraser button” for minors, so they can change
their minds. Software tools are also emerging that promise to make
Facebook posts self-destruct or delete instant messages. Although such
Table 8.1. Assessing the outcomes of an adolescent’s quest for an identity
COMMITMENT TO THE IDENTITY CHOSEN
Active Exploration
No
Yes
No
Identity diffusion
Foreclosure
Yes
Moratorium
Identity achievement
249
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

steps are helpful, they may also lead adolescents to believe their digital
tracks are easily erased. Once online, a post or image is basically “in the
wild,” where it could be photographed, retweeted, forwarded, or
uploaded to any website. Even Snapchat photos, which vanish ten
seconds after the recipient opens and views them, are easy for any
quick thinking recipient to preserve.
Particularly because most adolescents interact online with people
they already know in person, they don’t tend to stray too far from
reality when they craft an online persona. Occasionally they do invent
a whole new character and put on a masquerade. Some are created as
part of a cyberbullying effort (discussed later), but others are fanciful
efforts to experiment with identities. They often drop them after a
while, which may help explain why social networks have millions of
fake or discarded profiles.
The way online environments promote self-disclosure and disinhi-
bition also affects identity development. In one study, the researchers
found that most of their late adolescent subjects were in the morator-
ium state and that they showed a “culture of self-disclosure” on
Facebook. It may be that Facebook is an especially attractive venue
for adolescents in the moratorium state, because it offers that identity
lab in which they can safely experiment.50 These subjects also seemed
mindful that their online profiles and postings don’t quite show
the real “me,” perhaps because the real “me” continues to shift.
One explained, “It’s not accurate about who you are all the time; it
doesn’t show the whole picture.”
Clearly, the social network plays an important role in these adoles-
cents’ identity development. One of the subjects said, “I don’t know
how to separate my digital life from my real life.” Perhaps that is no
longer possible.
Navigating the Collapsing Context
The collapsing context on social networks often causes confusion, as
I discussed in Chapter 2 on impression formation. When you have
hundreds of “friends” – from very close ones to distant relations and
employers – how do you craft a clever post that will amuse your
audience, reflect your personality, and avoid offending some people?
The answer is, with great difficulty. Face to face, you can see exactly
who your audience is and have a reasonably clear idea how they will
react to something you say or do. Although tools exist to segment
250
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

your hundreds of friends or followers, the task is very labor intensive
and error prone.
Consider how eleven-year-old Susie customizes messages one after
the other to her grandparents and her friend, as researchers watch her
type on her keyboard:
To Gran and Grandad, We arrived home safe and well. Helen is really pleased
with her necklace and sends her thanks. Thank You for having us we really
enjoyed ourselves. Thanks again for having us, love from Susie XXXX
howd the move go? i cant wate 2 c yor new howse come round when you can!!
from Devilduck51
If Susie posts to a social network, what could she possibly say? It takes
considerable cognitive resources to segment audiences, and slip-ups are
common. This may help explain why Facebook use among teens is
declining, rather rapidly according to some reports. Between 2011 and
2014, the number of teens aged thirteen to seventeen using Facebook
dropped from 13.1 to 9.8 million – a drop of more than 25 percent. The
fastest growing demographic on the Facebook network is middle age
and older. During that same time period, the number of users aged
fifty-five and up shot up over 80 percent.52
Cyberbullying
A twelve-year-old girl in Florida suffered so much abuse from cyber-
bullies that she jumped to her death from a tower at an abandoned
cement plant. The perpetrators, two girls aged twelve and fourteen,
sent her frequent messages encouraging suicide, including a photo of
the girl with razor blades on her arm. Remorse for their actions was in
short supply. One posted, “Yes ik [I know] I bullied REBECCA nd she
killed her self but IDGAF [I don’t give a f**k].”53
Bullying in the digital age is not quite the same as the face-to-face
bullying that happens in schools around the world. One major differ-
ence is that the perpetrator can torment the victim around the clock,
regardless of where the victim is located. While traditional bullying
occurs mostly in school or on school buses, cyberbullying is a 24/7
phenomenon. The bully can send texts, create humiliating websites,
upload photos, or spread damaging information all day and night for
months on end.
Another key difference is that the potential audience for cyberbul-
lying is vast. If the bully posts a humiliating photo online, it could
251
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

reach thousands or millions overnight. It also may never be deleted, so
the victim continues to suffer month after month, even year after
year. In the school yard, only a handful of people might observe the
event, so the victim’s exposure would not linger – unless a bystander
recorded it on a cell phone and chose to add cyberbullying to the
traditional bullying event.
Third, cyberbullying occurs in the context of online communi-
cations, with all the psychological factors that affect how we behave
online in general. The perpetrators feel more anonymous, and
often they are. In a large survey of middle-school students, 11 percent
said they were victims of cyberbullying at least once in the last
two months, and almost half of them had no idea who the perpetra-
tor was.54
A longitudinal study demonstrated that a teen’s attitudes toward
anonymity actually can predict whether he or she will begin to
approve of cyberbullying, and then become someone who engages
in it. The teens completed surveys four times over the school year,
with items such as “Sending mean emails or text messages is
easy to do because I am not face-to-face with the other person” and
“It is acceptable to send mean emails to others when they deserve it.”
The researchers found that those who felt more anonymous
when they were online were also the ones who developed more
positive
attitudes
toward
cyberbullying
and
to
engage
in
it
themselves.55
Mobile apps that support anonymous messaging have been linked
to cyberbullying, particularly because they reduce accountability.
Such controversial apps rise and fall in popularity, and some countries
ban them completely.
Amplifying the effects of anonymity is simply the physical dis-
tance. Cyberbullies feel safer from retaliation, and the resulting disin-
hibition can unleash very troubling behavior. The perpetrators also
can’t observe the victim’s reaction, so they are less likely to experience
any empathy for the person in pain. The inability to observe the
victim applies to the bystanders as well. They, too, can’t see the effects
on the victim, so they may be less likely to intervene. Indeed, they
may trivialize the effects, thinking that there is a major difference
between a punch in the nose and a string of digital text.
How prevalent is cyberbullying? A review of several studies found
that from 10 to 40 percent of youth report having been bullied online,
and 7 to 11 percent say they cyberbullied someone else. Estimates in
252
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

different studies vary widely, though, partly depending on how the
phenomenon is defined and measured. Boys are most likely to bully
their victims in traditional ways, but cyberbullying is a type of indir-
ect aggression, the kind that girls favor. Studies show that girls and
boys become cyberbullies in equal numbers, and some find more girls
choosing that route. Middle school is when cyberbullying seems to
peak, tapering off in high school and college.56
Online environments may be especially prone to draw out bullying
in kids with certain personality characteristics, especially a lack of
empathy. The girl’s cavalier dismissal of the Florida teen’s suicide
illustrates how unsympathetic cyberbullies can be. They often believe
the victim provoked them and deserves what they get. Cyberbullies
also tend to score higher on narcissism, holding a grand view of
themselves and willing to taking advantage of others for their own
personal gain. Not surprisingly, victims tend to show more depression
and anxiety and lower self-esteem. The long-term cost of being cyber-
bullied can be high, indeed.
How can adults protect young people from cyberbullying? Much
of the time, the parents don’t even know about it, because children
and teens don’t report it. Some youth believe that they should be
able to manage communication technologies on their own, especially
ones that the parents may not know how to use. They also may think
it is childish to complain or that their parents might then restrict
further technology use. Taking the mobile phone away or setting
restrictive privacy settings are drastic ways to protect a victim, and it
may not stop the cyberbullying in any case. Although the victim
would no longer see hateful messages, others would see them, along
with any humiliating photos or videos that the bully spreads. The
victim’s level of anxiety would only grow while not knowing what
others were seeing.
Parents can help fight cyberbullying by knowing more about what
their children are doing online, what services they use, what their
privacy settings are, and how they are communicating with others.
They can also educate young people about this growing problem,
encouraging empathy and emphasizing how serious cyberbullying is.
Young people should be aware of consequences, not just from parents,
but from the school and law enforcement. While they have been slow
to respond to new technologies, many state legislatures are passing
laws that permit schools to discipline students for off-campus harass-
ment using electronic devices.
253
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
As in practically every other area of development, the Internet offers
both positives and negatives for adolescents as they mature sexually.
On the plus side, young people can learn the facts about sexual matur-
ation, reproduction, pregnancy, homosexuality, sexually transmitted
diseases, and other topics that they might not be comfortable discuss-
ing with their parents. Misinformation abounds, of course, but schools
are putting more emphasis on information literacy to help students
judge the quality and accuracy of online information.
Adolescents can also explore romantic relationships with communi-
cations technologies that they judge less risky in terms of potential
embarrassment. Fifteen-year-old Jarrod reports that it is much easier to
“like” a girl’s vacation photo to show some interest, compared with
asking her to dance or texting her. If she ignores the “like,” that suggests
she probably doesn’t want to pursue anything. Jarrod might feel sad,
but at least he wasn’t rejected to his face or in front of his friends.
Communicating romantic interest in the online environment is
challenging, and teens puzzle over constantly shifting, subtle mean-
ings. On HeTexted, a website where visitors submit questions about
how to “interpret” a text message, one girl anxiously explained how a
boy she had been communicating with started ending his text mes-
sages with a period. She thought it meant he was angry or annoyed,
but wanted advice from other users. Why would the boy end a sen-
tence with a period rather than a wink – ;) – or an exclamation point, or
even nothing? The question generated considerable discussion, with
no consensus reached.
The Internet also exposes children and adolescents to new tempta-
tions that, like cyberbullying, are facilitated by the disinhibiting
online environments. A key example is sexting.
Sexting
A neologism that combines “sex” and “texting,” sexting took off in the
early 2000s, and was added to Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Diction-
ary in 2012. It refers to sending sexually explicit messages, including
photos, typically from one mobile phone to another. Risqué selfies are
especially popular and easy to create alone, especially with the help of
“selfie sticks” that extend the arm so the user can snap selfies from any
angle. Mobile apps make it a very simple matter to embellish the
image and click “send.”
254
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The prevalence of sexting is difficult to pin down, but combining
results from several surveys leads to the conclusion that between
2.5 percent and 21 percent of minors in the United States report that
they have sent at least one sext. Somewhat more report that they
received a sext, particularly the older adolescents. Among seventeen-
year-olds, 30 percent said they received a least one sexually explicit
message. Among adults, sexting is even more common, and females of
all ages report more sexting than males.57
Most research on sexting focuses on its serious risks as a deviant
behavior, one that can lead to very negative consequences. One possi-
bility is cyberbullying in which the recipient simply shares the photo
or video with other people. An Ohio middle-school girl sent a racy
picture of herself to her boyfriend, but after the couple broke up,
the boy sent the photo around by email. Her classmates called her a
whore, in a reaction called “slut shaming.” Suffering from depression
and fearing the taunts of her classmates, the teen started skipping
classes, and she eventually hung herself.
Another risk comes from the legal side and laws that criminalize
sexting in hodgepodge ways. As so often happens, laws do not keep up
with modern technology or youth trends, and legal systems are poorly
prepared to deal with youth sexting. Many cases are adjudicated under
the severe laws covering the transmission of child pornography, which
carry steep punishments, jail time, and registration as a sex offender.
Some states are passing laws that deal more directly with youth sext-
ing, partly because legislators and educators argue that child pornog-
raphy laws do not quite fit and that their penalties are overly harsh.
Others have found ways to apply reduced penalties or require educa-
tion so that teens caught sexting are not grouped with online preda-
tors who exploit children. Even so, state laws vary dramatically, and
under federal law, sexting involving minors is illegal and can carry
severe penalties.
Given the risks, why are adolescents sexting? When undergraduates
were asked why they sexted as minors, 44 percent said it involved a
“mutual interest between exclusive romantic partners.” With sexual
maturation comes a strong need for intimacy and romance, and sext-
ing can show that the partners trust one another not to abuse that
kind of dangerous self-disclosure.
Another motive they cited was “to impress/flirt with someone in
whom I was romantically interested.” Peer pressure was also men-
tioned, but only 1 percent of this sample thought that was an
255
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

important driver. They did say, however, that they felt “compelled to
respond” to a sext that someone else had sent to them. Another
finding from that survey was that very few of the subjects recalled
any negative effects from their teenage sexting, but 71 percent said
they knew someone who suffered humiliation, tarnished reputation,
and bullying. Even though most of them escaped harm, and most had
no idea sexting could be prosecuted under child pornography laws,
they did recognize that sexting is risky behavior.58
Some argue that consensual sexting is simply an expression of
intimacy in the digital age, even for teens. But given the harsh legal
penalties and the potential for cyberbullying, this kind of expression
poses an extremely serious risk that youth underestimate.
Pornography and Online Predators
Protecting children from pornography has always been a top priority
for society, and it is generally an uphill battle. Porn sites are abundant,
and links to them spread in ads, email spam, tweets, social network
posts, texts, and mobile apps. Surveys suggest that most young people
have run into online pornography at one time or another, although
they may not have mentioned it to their parents. For example,
in the UK Children Go Online study, which surveyed young people
aged nine to nineteen and their parents, 57 percent of the youngsters
said they had seen online pornography at least once. A substantial
proportion of the subjects also reported that they are sometimes
harassed online, with unwanted sexual solicitations and comments
in chat rooms, email, instant messages, or texts. Among the U.K. chil-
dren who went online at least once a week, almost a third said they
had that kind of negative experience.
Parents, however, underestimate how frequently these events
occur. Only 16 percent of the parents thought that their child had
encountered any pornography, and just 7 percent thought their child
had received any online sexual solicitations.59
Findings for youth in the United States are similar. In a telephone
survey of a representative sample of youth aged ten to seventeen,
42 percent said they had been exposed to online pornography in the
last year.60 Not all the exposure is unwanted, of course. In the phone
survey, more than a third of the young people who had encountered
pornography – mostly boys – said they went to some adult websites
on purpose.
256
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

How does this exposure affect young people? In a study in Europe,
researchers interviewed thousands of children aged nine to sixteen, and
one question they asked was “What things on the Internet would
bother people of about your age?” So the children could answer more
honestly, they wrote their answers privately on a sheet of paper and
sealed it in an envelope, so neither parent nor interviewer could link
them to their comments. Thirty-eight percent identified one or more
risks, and one in five of those mentioned pornography, which was more
than any other category. Here are some examples of what they wrote61:
Ugly pictures, ugly videos that suggest sex really bother me.
– Boy, 11, Slovenia
I think it is not appropriate for children of my age to see images of naked
women, as in online advertisements that pop up when I am not looking for it,
such as on the website where I check my email.
– Girl, 15, Italy
A striking finding from this study was the sheer diversity in the risks
these children wrote about – cyberbullying, vulgar language, viruses,
fraud, being tracked online, violent and gory videos on Youtube,
images of animals being abused, and many others. Clearly these chil-
dren thought more broadly about online risks, and what is really
bothering them, than most adults might assume.
On a positive note, unwanted exposure to pornography is also
declining for children, thanks to filtering software. Also, unwanted
online sexual solicitations are becoming less and less frequent,
according to data from the Youth Internet Safety Surveys, which are
conducted periodically in the United States with children aged ten to
seventeen. In 2000, 19 percent reported events such as someone trying
to get them to talk about sex when they didn’t want to or someone
asking for sexual information when they didn’t want to answer ques-
tions like that. That figure dropped to 13 percent in 2005, then to
9 percent in 2010.
By and large, the people who are contacting children and adoles-
cents in this way are not the strangers they might encounter in open
chat rooms – the “Internet predators” who troll such venues for lonely
kids. Instead, the solicitors are increasingly people the children know
in person – youthful friends and acquaintances. Most solicitations
appear to occur in the context of social networking sites, where people
already know one another. A child’s network of friends might include
257
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

one or two people who are not exactly “friends,” which is something
for parents to consider.62
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE INTERNET:
PROMOTING THE GOOD, AVOIDING THE BAD
The public and the press swing back and forth on the Internet and the
role it plays in child development. A tragic case of cyberbullying or
the arrest of a child pornography ring capture news headlines, and the
press, in its 24/7 news cycle, explores every possible angle. Our hearts
go out to the families whose children were egregiously harmed, and
we demand that educators and policy makers pay attention to the
growing online risks for children and adolescents.
But are we going overboard with moral panic about the Internet’s
dangers for child development? Human beings often show an avail-
ability bias, in which we judge the likelihood of events based on how
readily they come to mind. After reading about a tragic suicide due to
cyberbullying, we will overestimate how much it occurs and how
high the actual risks are.
That is not to say there are no risks when children go online.
Beyond the ones described in this chapter are several that all Internet
users face. Viruses, spam, phishing, and tracking are all part of the
online experience now, and children need to learn early how to pro-
tect themselves and their computers. The Internet is far less the
“Wild West” that it was in the 1990s and now is more dominated by
hard-driving commercial interests and highly sophisticated business
strategies. All of those “free” services – from Facebook and Twitter to
Candy Crush Saga – carry their own costs for privacy.
Children also come to love aspects of their virtual lives, whether it
is their character on Club Penguin or a virtual pet. When Zynga made
the business decision to terminate its free game called PetVille, the
company gave just two weeks’ notice. Outraged players who for years
had been nurturing their own virtual pets on the site poured out their
anguish. One mother wrote,
My autistic son and I had played Petville together for two years. It was
something we could do together, and made us very happy. I wish you “people”
could have seen the streams of tears running down both our faces as we
played our last session. We even took photographs. I guess money trumps
everything.63
258
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Yet denying children the opportunity to go online deprives them of
its many highly positive elements and the contribution they can
make to development. Finding the right balance between unlimited
and tightly restricted access is the job of parents and educators, who
have many tools at hand, including filtering software, passwords, and
other types of technical controls. For instance, schools often restrict
access to YouTube on school computers, but surveys show that once
the students get home, YouTube is one of their favorite destinations,
whether for fun or for schoolwork. That disconnect led Google,
YouTube’s parent company, to implement “YouTube for Schools,”
a network setting that schools can use to allow access to the site’s
educational material but still filter out the rest of YouTube’s content.
Kids often find ways around technical attempts to prevent them
from entering risky environments, so education, awareness, and
simple rules will always be important. Some parents, for example, set
a bedtime “check in” rule, in which mobile phones and laptops are
safely stored outside the bedroom, when it is time to go to sleep.
Finally, parents should start early to know how their children are
using the Internet, what kind of sites they visit, and who they com-
municate with. As the child grows, parents can educate children about
risks, trusting that the child will become increasingly competent to
deal with them and will know when to inform parents. Yes, there are
risks, but they can be reduced so that the Internet remains a positive
part of child development.
NOTES
1 Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants, Part 1. On the Horizon,
9(5), 1–6. doi:10.1108/10748120110424816
2 Matyszczyk, C. (2011, October 13). 1-year-old thinks a magazine is a broken
iPad. CNET. Retrieved August 3, 2014, from www.cnet.com/news/1-year-old-
thinks-a-magazine-is-a-broken-ipad/
3 Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human devel-
opment. American Psychologist, 32(7), 513–531.
4 Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010). Generation M2: Media in the
Lives of 8- to 18-Year-Olds. Retrieved from http://kff.org/other/poll-finding/
report-generation-m2-media-in-the-lives/
5 Madden, M., Lenhart, A., Duggan, M., Cortesi, S., & Gasser, U. (2013). Teens and
Technology 2013. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from www.pewInternet.org/
files/old-media//Files/Reports/2013/PIP_TeensandTechnology2013.pdf
6 Thompson,
D.
(2014,
June
19).
The
most
popular
social
network for
young people? Texting. The Atlantic. Retrieved from www.theatlantic.com/
technology/archive/2014/06/facebook-texting-teens-instagram-snapchat-most-
popular- social-network/373043/
259
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

7 Blackwell, C. K., Lauricella, A. R., Conway, A., & Wartella, E. (2014). Children
and the Internet: Developmental implications of web site preferences
among 8- to 12-year-old children. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media,
58(1), 1–20. doi:10.1080/08838151.2013.875022
8 Protalinski, E. (2012, April 12). 38% of kids on Facebook are under the
minimum age of 13. ZDNet. Retrieved August 11, 2014, from www.zdnet.
com/blog/facebook/38-of-kids-on-facebook-are-under-the-minimum-age-
of-13/11745
9 Harrison, C., Lunzer, E. A., Tymms, P., Fitz-Gibbon, C. T., & Restorick, J.
(2004). Use of ICT and its relationship with performance in examinations:
A comparison of the ImpaCT2 project’s research findings using pupil-level,
school-level and multilevel modelling data. Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, 20(5), 319–337.
10 Kingston, K. J. (2013). The impact of high-speed Internet connectivity at home
on eighth-grade student achievement (EdD dissertation). University of
Nebraska at Omaha. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.proxy1.
library.jhu.edu/docview/1348909294/abstract/CA446E7CEE4E4C2APQ/1?
accountid=11752
11 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2006). Are stu-
dents ready for a technology-rich world? Retrieved from www.oecd.org/
edu/school/programmeforinternationalstudentassessmentpisa/35995145.
pdf
12 Hunley, S. A., Evans, J. H., Delgado-Hachey, M., Krise, J., Rich, T., & Schell, C.
(2005). Adolescent computer use and academic achievement. Adolescence,
40(158), 307–318.
13 Wainer, J., Dwyer, T., Dutra, R. S., Covic, A., Magalhães, V. B., Ferreira, L. R. R.,
Pimenta, V. A., & Claudio, K. (2008). Too much computer and Internet use is
bad for your grades, especially if you are young and poor: Results from the
2001 Brazilian SAEB. Computers and Education, 51(4), 1417–1429. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2007.12.007
14 Ysseldyke, J., Thrill, T., Pohl, J., & Bolt, D. (2005). Using math facts in a flash
to enhance computational fluency. Journal of Evidence-Based Practices for
Schools, 6, 59–89.
15 Dynarski, M., Agodini, R., Heaviside, S., Novak, T., Carey, N., Campuzano, L.,
Means, B., Murphy, R., Penuel, W., Javitz, H., Emery, D., & Sussex, W. (2007).
Effectiveness of reading and mathematics software products: Findings from the
first student cohort. Report to Congress. National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences.
Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pdf/20074006.pdf
16 Campuzano, L., Dynarski, M., Agodini, R., & Rall, K. (2009). Effectiveness of
reading and mathematics software products: Findings from two student cohorts.
National
Center
for
Education
Evaluation
and
Regional
Assistance.
Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20094041/pdf/20094041.pdf
17 Wallace, P. (2011). M-Learning: Promises, perils, and challenges. New Horizons
for Learning, IX(1).
18 Means, B., Toyama, Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M., & Jones, K. (2010). Evaluation of
evidence-based practices in online learning: A meta-analysis and review of
online learning studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Retrieved from www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/tech/evidence-based-practices/
finalreport.pdf
19 Carnahan, C. D. (2012). The effects of learning in an online virtual environment
on K–12 students (PhD dissertation). Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
260
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.proxy1.library.jhu.edu/docview/
1252057250/abstract/31B549CDC00A45FFPQ/1?accountid=11752
20 Wallace, P. (2005). Distance education for gifted students: Leveraging tech-
nology to expand academic options. High Ability Studies, 16(1), 77–86.
doi:10.1080/13598130500115288
21 Wallace, P. (2009). Distance learning for gifted students: Outcomes for elem-
entary, middle, and high school aged students. Journal for the Education of
the Gifted, 32(3), 295–320.
22 Wallace, P. (2013). Nurturing innovation through online learning. In
L. Shavinina (Ed.), The Routledge international handbook of innovation edu-
cation (pp. 430–441). New York, NY: Routledge.
23 Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010). Generation M2: Media in the
Lives of 8- to 18-Year-Olds. Retrieved from http://kff.org/other/poll-finding/
report-generation-m2-media-in-the-lives/.
24 Blumberg, F. C., Altschuler, E. A., Almonte, D. E., & Mileaf, M. I. (2013). The
impact of recreational video game play on children’s and adolescents’
cognition. In F. C. Blumberg & S. M. Fisch (Eds), Digital Games. New York,
NY: Wiley.
25 Subrahmanyam, K., & Greenfield, P. M. (1994). Effect of video game practice
on spatial skills in girls and boys. Journal of Applied Developmental Psych-
ology, 15(1), 13–32. doi:10.1016/0193–3973(94)90004-3
26 Okagaki, L., & Frensch, P. A. (1994). Effects of video game playing on measures
of spatial performance: Gender effects in late adolescence. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 15(1), 33–58. doi:10.1016/0193-3973(94)90005-1
27 De Lisi, R., & Wolford, J. L. (2002). Improving children’s mental rotation
accuracy with computer game playing. The Journal of Genetic Psychology:
Research and Theory on Human Development, 163(3), 272–282.
28 Fisch, S. M., Lesh, R., Motoki, E., Crespo, S., & Melfi, V. (2011). Children’s
mathematical reasoning in online games: Can data mining reveal strategic
thinking? Child Development Perspectives, 5(2), 88–92.
29 Papastergiou, M. (2009). Digital game-based learning in high school com-
puter science education: Impact on educational effectiveness and student
motivation. Computers and Education, 52(1), 1–12.
30 Castles, A., McLean, G. M., Bavin, E., Bretherton, L., Carlin, J., Prior, M.,
Ukoumunne, O., Wake, M., & Reilly, S. (2013). Computer use and letter
knowledge in pre-school children: A population-based study. Journal of
Paediatrics and Child Health, 49(3), 193–198. doi:10.1111/jpc.12126
31 Xiaoming Li, Atkins, M. S., & Stanton, B. (2006). Effects of home and school
computer use on school readiness and cognitive development among Head
Start children: A randomized controlled pilot trial. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,
52(2), 239–263.
32 Rosen, L. D., Mark Carrier, L., & Cheever, N. A. (2013). Facebook and texting
made me do it: Media-induced task-switching while studying. Computers in
Human Behavior, 29(3), 948–958. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.12.001
33 Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 134–140.
34 Mastroberardino, S., & Vredeveldt, A. (2014). Eye-closure increases children’s
memory accuracy for visual material. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 241.
35 Perham, N., & Currie, H. (2014). Does listening to preferred music improve
reading comprehension performance? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 28(2),
279–284. doi:10.1002/acp.2994
261
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

36 Foerde, K., Knowlton, B. J., & Poldrack, R. A. (2006). Modulation of compet-
ing memory systems by distraction. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 103(31), 11778–11783.
37 Nuutinen, T., Ray, C., & Roos, E. (2013). Do computer use, TV viewing, and
the presence of the media in the bedroom predict school-aged children’s
sleep habits in a longitudinal study? BMC Public Health, 13(1), 1–8.
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-684
38 Garmy, P., Nyberg, P., & Jakobsson, U. (2012). Sleep and television and
computer habits of Swedish school-age children. The Journal of School Nurs-
ing, 28(6), 469–476.
39 Davis, A. L., Avis, K. T., & Schwebel, D. C. (2013). The effects of acute
sleep restriction on adolescents’ pedestrian safety in a virtual environment.
Journal
of
Adolescent
Health,
53(6),
785–790.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.
2013.07.008
40 Wood, B., Rea, M. S., Plitnick, B., & Figueiro, M. G. (2013). Light level
and duration of exposure determine the impact of self-luminous tablets on
melatonin suppression. Applied Ergonomics, 44(2), 237–240. doi:10.1016/j.
apergo.2012.07.008
41 Mendoza, J. A., Zimmerman, F. J., & Christakis, D. A. (2007). Television
viewing, computer use, obesity, and adiposity in US preschool children.
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 4, 44–53.
doi:10.1186/1479-5868-4-44
42 Lajunen, H.-R., Keski-Rahkonen, A., Pulkkinen, L., Rose, R. J., Rissanen, A., &
Kapri, J. (2007). Are computer and cell phone use associated with body mass
index and overweight? A population study among twin adolescents.
BMC Public Health, 7, 24–8. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-7-24
43 Best, J. R. (2012). Exergaming immediately enhances children’s executive
function. Developmental Psychology, 48(5), 1501–1510. doi:10.1037/a0026648
44 Lenhart, A. (2012). Teens, Smartphones & Texting. Pew Research Center.
Retrieved
from
www.pewInternet.org/2012/03/19/teens-smartphones-text
ing/.
45 Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2007). Preadolescents’ and adolescents’ online
communication and their closeness to friends. Developmental Psychology,
43(2), 267–277.
46 Sherman, L. E., & Greenfield, P. M. (2013). Forging friendship, soliciting
support: A mixed-method examination of message boards for pregnant
teens and teen mothers. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(1), 75–85.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.07.018
47 Marcia, J. E. (1966). Development and validation of ego-identity status. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 3(5), 551–558.
48 Livingstone, S. (2009). Children and the Internet. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press,
pp. 102–103.
49 Jenkins, H. Jr. (2010). Google and the search for the future. Wall Street
Journal. Retrieved May 3, 2015, from www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405
2748704901104575423294099527212
50 Jordán-Conde, Z., Mennecke, B., & Townsend, A. (2014). Late adolescent
identity definition and intimate disclosure on Facebook. Computers in
Human Behavior, 33, 356–366. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.07.015
51 Livingstone, S. (2009). Children and the Internet. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press,
p. 100.
262
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

52 Fox, Z. (2014, January 16). How many teens are actually leaving Facebook?
Mashable. Retrieved August 23, 2014, from http://mashable.com/2014/01/
16/teens-leaving-facebook/
53 Alvarez, L. (2013, September 13). Girl’s suicide points to rise in apps used by
cyberbullies. The New York Times. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2013/
09/14/us/suicide-of-girl-after-bullying-raises-worries-on-web-sites.html
54 Kowalski, R. M., & Limber, S. P. (2007). Electronic bullying among middle
school students. Journal of Adolescent Health, 41(6, Supplement), S22–S30.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.08.017
55 Barlett, C. P., Gentile, D. A., & Chew, C. (2014, August 18). Predicting cyber-
bullying from anonymity. Psychology of Popular Media Culture. doi:10.1037/
ppm0000055
56 Kowalski, R. M., Giumetti, G. W., Schroeder, A. N., & Lattanner, M. R. (2014).
Bullying in the digital age: A critical review and meta-analysis of cyberbul-
lying research among youth. Psychological Bulletin, 140(4), 1073–1137.
doi:10.1037/a0035618
57 Döring, N. (2014). Consensual sexting among adolescents: Risk prevention
through abstinence education or safer sexting? Cyberpsychology, 8(1), 1–18.
doi:10.5817/CP2014-1-9
58 Strohmaier, H., Murphy, M., & DeMatteo, D. (2014). Youth sexting: Preva-
lence rates, driving motivations, and the deterrent effect of legal conse-
quences. Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 11(3), 245–255. doi:10.1007/
s13178-014-0162-9
59 Livingstone, S., & Bober, M. (2004). UK children go online: Surveying the
experience of young people and their parents. Economic and Social
Research Council. Retrieved from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/395/1/UKCGOsur
veyreport.pdf
60 Wolak, J., Mitchell, K., & Finkelhor, D. (2007). Unwanted and wanted expos-
ure to online pornography in a national sample of youth Internet users.
Pediatrics, 119(2), 247–257. doi:10.1542/peds.2006-1891
61 Livingstone, S., Kirwil, L., Ponte, C., & Staksrud, E. (2014). In their own words:
What bothers children online? European Journal of Communication, 29(3),
271–288. doi:10.1177/0267323114521045
62 Mitchell, K. J., Jones, L. M., Finkelhor, D., & Wolak, J. (2013). Understanding
the decline in unwanted online sexual solicitations for U.S. youth
2000–2010: Findings from three Youth Internet Safety Surveys. Child Abuse
and Neglect, 37(12), 1225–1236. doi:10.1016/j.chiabu.2013.07.002
63 Benedetti, W. (2012, December 31). Unhappy New Year: Zynga shuts down
“PetVille,” “Mafia Wars 2,” 9 other games. NBC News. Retrieved August 30,
2014,
from
http://sys03-public.nbcnews.com/technology/unhappy-new-
year-zynga-shuts-down-petville-mafia-wars-2-1C7785090
263
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE NET: GROWING UP ONLINE

9
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY
ON THE INTERNET
Gender has not vaporized in cyberspace, and issues related to gender
roles and stereotypes have, in some ways, been exacerbated as we
migrated to online environments in large numbers. I have touched
on some gender issues in previous chapters as they relate to impres-
sion formation, social networking, aggression, helping, and other
aspects of the psychology of the Internet. To understand why gender
is relevant to our online behavior, and why this environment appears
to magnify certain issues, we first need to look closely at the stereo-
types people often hold about men and women, in particular, where
they come from and how they affect our behavior in face-to-face
settings.
MALE AND FEMALE: NOT OPPOSITE SEXES
Calling men and women “opposite” sexes has probably biased our
thinking about gender roles. The truth is that there are far more similar-
ities than differences. A major review of the huge body of research
that examines gender differences came to the conclusion that when
differences are found, the vast majority are quite small.1
Even when statistical differences are found on some measure, the
variation within each group is almost always extremely high. If, for
example, a study finds that the mean score for men on a spatial
abilities test comes out higher than the mean score for women, the
finding is often reported with the headline, “Research confirms that
men have better spatial abilities than women.” The underlying data
would have shown considerable overlap, with many women outscor-
ing men, but that is not the way it appears in the press. We like things
264

simple, and it is just easier to slap labels on people than to struggle with
the complexity underlying any kind of human behavior.
Are You Adventurous or Affectionate?
Consider, for example, a large multinational study in which research-
ers described two different people.2 One person is adventurous, coarse,
dominant, forceful, independent, and strong, while the second is affec-
tionate, dependent, dreamy, emotional, submissive, and weak. In country
after country, the subjects came to the same conclusion: the first one is
a man and the second one is a woman. The adjectives we tend to
associate with each gender seem quite opposite, even though the
reality underlying them is far more complicated.
Research on behavioral differences between demographic groups
is often controversial because results are so easily misreported, misin-
terpreted, and potentially misused. They are also quite slippery, and
differences that appear in one study can easily vanish in the next. Yet
news stories about differences in achievement test scores, personality
measures, brain functioning, and so on can be blown out of proportion
and used to perpetuate stereotypes and discrimination, especially
when the details are lost in the fine print. But politics and oversimpli-
fications aside, researchers have found differences between men and
women in a variety of behaviors. Sometimes these are negligible and
never appear again in later studies. Sometimes they are larger and more
stable, though there is always that overlap.
Some of the differences match the stereotypes, while others coun-
teract them. On personality tests, for example, men – especially young
men – often do, on average, come out higher on aggressiveness, com-
petitiveness, dominance, and task orientation. Women tend to show
more orientation toward connectedness and relationships, more
empathy, and more sensitivity to the emotions and feelings of others.3
Many studies have found that when women look at images of people
showing some emotion, they often are, on average, better able to
interpret that emotion correctly, but even here, many nuances emerge.
Anger, for instance, is an emotion that both sexes recognize, especially
if the person displaying it is male.
Gender and Social Networks
That women orient a bit more toward connectedness and relation-
ships plays out in online social networks, where they use their sites
265
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

somewhat differently compared with men. A study of more than 1,000
Facebook users from around the world found that women spend more
time on Facebook, have more friends, and are engaged in more rela-
tionship building with family and friends.4 Younger women were
especially active and interested in checking the relationship status of
other people.
Although an orientation toward relationships offers many posi-
tive benefits in terms of stronger friendships and connectedness, it
also has some drawbacks for social network users. A lot happens on a
network, and people see some things they may not want to see or
that they misinterpret. In Chapter 5 I described studies showing
how Facebook use can promote jealousy because people often don’t
have a reliable context to interpret what they see. A woman might
notice a new female friend added to her boyfriend’s network, and
her stronger orientation toward relationships may increase her anx-
iety and jealousy.
A survey of undergraduate students who were in a romantic rela-
tionship asked about their feelings of jealousy, with items that assessed
behaviors such as “worry that partner uses Facebook to re-connect
with past partners,” “suspicions about partner’s private messages,”
and “jealous over wall message received by partner.”5 Then they filled
out the questionnaire a second time, but instead of answering for
themselves, they were to answer how they thought their partner
would answer.
Based on the first round, women were more prone to jealousy trig-
gered by Facebook events – imagined or real – compared with the men.
“Mate guarding” was especially pronounced, in which the woman
spends more time monitoring the partner’s Facebook activity and feel-
ing anxious about it. Responses to the second round showed that
women did not perceive themselves as more jealous than their partners,
but the men thought women would behave in more jealous ways.
Let’s turn now to the actual words people speak or type and how
gender relates to them.
GENDER AND LANGUAGE
Sometimes I don’t even understand some of the stuff my girlfriend
texts me. Girls have so many weird abbreviations they use I can’t even
keep up. I feel like they make up a new one every day.
– Male, college sophomore6
266
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Do men and women use language differently? The relationship
between language use and gender is very important to understand
how differences might play out online, and not just in the text mes-
sages the college sophomore is talking about.7
People use words differently for many reasons, and each of us can
quickly adapt our linguistic performance to the social context and
audience. To a friend, I might say, “How about lunch tomorrow?”
To a professional colleague, I might say instead, “Are you available
for a lunch meeting tomorrow?” thereby embedding a hint that
I would like to discuss professional issues. To my daughter, “Let’s grab
some Chinese food” would be appropriate. The context plays a major
role, and so do many other factors – culture and professional setting,
for example. But gender differences also appear.
Gendered Language in Face-to-Face Settings
In some contexts men generally talk longer than women do, and women
tend to use more verbal fillers – such as “you know.” Women tend to use
more intensifiers, as well, with words such as “so,” “awfully,” “quite,” or
“really.” Hedges and qualifiers that soften the statement in some way
are also somewhat more common in women’s speech. Phrases such
as, “It seems to me that” or “Perhaps it is” are more reluctant and less
definitive compared with “It is the case that” or “Obviously.” A study of
Ernest Hemingway’s novels demonstrated that the author certainly
drew on these tendencies when he penned dialog for the women.8
Women also ask more questions in conversation and show more
agreement with the partner than men do. They also tend to use
more justifiers in their speech, in which they make a statement
and then follow it up with a reason. Compare “We should do it this
way” with “We should do it this way because I think it is the fairest
approach.” The overall impression from these differences is that
in some circumstances women may be using speech in more tenta-
tive and hesitant ways and in styles that emphasize the relational
aspects of the social environment, rather than a task-oriented
approach.9
In some cases, these sex-differentiated softeners are built into the
grammatical structures of the language itself. The Japanese language,
for example, has certain forms that are used only by women. The
particle wa appears at the end of some sentences used by women,
and its role is formally called a softener.
267
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

A study that involved face-to-face conversations between same-sex
or mixed-sex pairs illustrates that there appear to be slight differences
in speech patterns but also that people adapt, depending on the char-
acteristics of the other person.10 Each of the conversational pairs took
5 minutes to discuss a burning issue about their university’s financial
crisis, and the researchers analyzed the transcribed recordings.
Regardless of who they were talking with, the women used more
justifiers and intensifiers than the men, and they also expressed more
agreement with their partners. Men used more vocalized pauses such
as “ahh,” “err,” or “umm.” Interruptions and conversational overlaps
showed some interesting differences, depending on whether the pairs
were same-sex or mixed-sex. Interruptions, defined as simultaneous
speech in which a listener speaks at a point that was not a possible
completion point in the speaker’s utterance, occurred more frequently
in mixed-sex pairs. The same was true for overlaps, in which someone
starts speaking just before the partner came to an ending point. Per-
haps the mixed-sex pairs were more involved in the discussion and
eager to talk.
Gendered Language and Power
Differences in language use may have more to do with power than with
gender, and more powerful women may adopt “male-like” speech pat-
terns. In one study, researchers artificially rigged the power equation
between pairs of people who were role-playing scenarios in which one
person tries to sell a car to the other.11 The seller always had a backup
position – an offer from a dealer – so the seller could always refuse the
buyer’s offer. In different scenarios, however, the dealer’s offer was
higher than in others. The sellers with the higher backup option would,
in principle, have more power in the negotiation with the private buyer
and would not need to compromise as much to make a profit. The
sellers whose dealer offered the bare minimum had far less power.
Analysis of the conversations focused on the use of direct or
implied threats. Threats are certainly a power-oriented verbal strategy;
people with little power are not likely to use that technique unless
they are extremely good bluffers. In a bargaining situation such as this
one, a threat could surface as a statement like, “Unless you improve
your offer, there is no deal.” A less obvious example might be, “I have
a good offer for the car now.” The telling feature is that the person is
threatening to wield power.
268
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The results support the notion that power may be more important
than gender when people choose their verbal strategies. Both gender
and power differences affected the use of threats, but power was more
important. Women who were in positions of power used threats just
about as often as the men did, and men who were in low power
positions used fewer threats. Gender, though, was a key element in
the kind of threats the people in the higher power positions used. The
men were more likely to use direct and explicit threats, while the
women preferred a bit more subtlety.
This study is especially intriguing because it highlights the situation
and its effects on how humans behave in different settings, regardless
of gender. It is always problematic to state that x, y, and z differences
exist between men and women when all of us are so influenced by the
environment in which we are behaving.
Interaction Styles
Gender differences in interaction styles also appear. On balance,
women seem to place greater emphasis on the socioemotional role
that words play to maintain cohesion and cooperation within a
group, while men are more likely to take a task-oriented tack with
their speech. For example, I mentioned earlier that women indicate
agreement more than men, while men are more task oriented.
A simple speech act of agreement, such as “Yeah, good idea,” tends
to build cohesiveness in a group. This remark can make women seem
friendlier in group settings and more willing to engage in behavior
that has less to do with their own power and prestige and more to
do with the maintenance of the group as a smoothly functioning
team. The greater task orientation that men show creates a “getting
down to business” atmosphere.
Research shows that both styles can each lead to productive results,
but not necessarily for the same kind of work. In one study, same-sex
groups worked on a task to identify the personal characteristics likely
to make someone a successful person.12 However, different groups
received different instructions about how to go about the task. Some
groups were told to approach the task as a brainstorming session and
to come up with as many solutions as possible to the problem. Others,
however, were instructed to come up with the single best solution and
to prepare an essay to justify their conclusions. The two sets of instruc-
tions required the people in the groups to relate to one another in
269
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

different ways. In the brainstorming session, group members could be
extremely task oriented because there was no need for any group
consensus. However, the “best-solution” approach required some
group rapport and cooperation to accomplish the task.
Task-oriented remarks formed the lion’s share of the conversation,
particularly for all-male groups, while positive socioemotional remarks
were slightly more common in the all-female groups. Notice that
although some differences appeared, they were small. As I discussed,
men and women are not opposite sexes, and there is considerable
commonality in the way the genders approach a group effort. We are
not separate and alien species from Mars and Venus.
As for the results, women did a better job on the task requiring
consensus, while the men did better on the brainstorming sessions by
generating more ideas. Again, the differences weren’t large, but they
suggest that the interaction styles of men and women can affect
group productivity in ways that depend on what the group is trying
to do.
Much group work involves completing a project on time rather
than brainstorming, so one might assume all-male teams might be at
a disadvantage in some real-world settings. One study of business
majors at a university in the United Kingdom found some support
for that hypothesis. During a five-year period, more than 1,000
students worked in small teams that were all-female, all-male, or
mixed. The performance of the all-male teams was slightly lower than
teams of other gender compositions.13
Another nuance about interaction styles in same-sex groups
involves the pace and timing of conversations.14 Recordings of such
conversations highlight the “conversational floor” and how men and
women use it a bit differently. For men engaged in an informal chat,
there is little or no overlap in their speech. Each man speaks his piece,
or takes over the floor, in his turn. Among women, however, a more
collaborative floor often emerges in which people speak at the same
time, finish one another’s sentences, or add a supportive point right
in the middle of someone’s sentence. Men tended to take turns on the
floor, while it looked like the women were dancing together on
it, or holding a musical jam session. One of the fallouts from these
conversational styles is that the two genders might interpret overlap
and interruption differently. Men might perceive it as a rude power
play to grab the floor, while women could see it as a contribution to a
shared narrative.
270
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

LANGUAGE ONLINE: ARE WE TYPING IN PINK AND BLUE?
When men and women show up in cyberspace, can you tell who is
who by what they say and how they say or type it? Much of the time,
the gender is obvious because the person uses his or her real name or
shows a photo. Other times, each person chooses a nickname that
strongly suggests male or female, such as “BadDude,” or “Eliza129.”
The content of the post, however, might also point in one direction
or another, even without the more obvious clues.
Automatic Proﬁling
Software programs can be trained to sort out linguistic elements of the
language people use online, and some have become rather adept at
predicting people’s demographic characteristics, including gender.
Essentially, the software taps machine learning by first delving into a
large volume of documents in which the gender is known, identifying
features that discriminate the male posts from the female posts. Those
features may or may not be apparent to human observers, but the
software doesn’t carry any previous biases or stereotypes about how
men and women talk.
In one study, the software examined blogs by 19,320 authors whose
gender was known, so accuracy could be determined. Relying on
stylistic features, the software was correct 72 percent of the time.15
Men, it appears, use words such as “the,” “of,” and other prepositions
more often than women, and women use more personal pronouns.
Adding subject content, the software became a little more accurate – 76
percent. Here, men were more likely to use words such as “system,”
“software,” “game,” and “site,” whereas women use more relational
terms – “love,” “boyfriend,” “mom,” “feel,” and “cute.” This program
was even a little better at guessing the blogger’s age group, based on the
use of words like “haha” and “lol” by teens and words such as “office,”
“work,” “wife,” and “children” for older people.
Gendered Language on Twitter
With just 140 characters to work with, can we distinguish tweets from
men and women by the style? David Bamman and his colleagues at
Carnegie Mellon retrieved over nine million tweets from 14,464 users
to answer that question, filtering out the unanswered tweets directed
to celebrities, along with tweets from infrequent users and those with
271
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

ambiguous names.16 Their software program confirmed that women
use pronouns and acronyms such as “lol” more often and that men are
more likely to use articles such as “the” or mention numbers and
technology. In this tweet sample, women were also more likely to tack
on emoticons, lengthen words by adding more letters (such as
“noooooo” or “yayyyy”), and use more nonstandard spellings, such
as “vacay.” Men used more swear words.
Interaction Styles Online
What happens in less free-wheeling, more business-oriented settings?
One illustration of gender differences in online interactions comes
from a study of students who received an email from a university
official that read, “Dear Student, The records show that you have failed
to submit your last piece of work . . . Therefore, you are required to
write the reason for your failure.” For some students, “Miss Jane Cook,
Administrative Officer” signed it, and for others, the sender was
“Mr. Mark Cook, Administrative Officer.”17
The findings show marked differences in the way students replied
that depended not just on the subject’s gender, but also on the gender
of the supposed letter-writer. When replying to “Mark Cook,” the male
students were more likely to request assistance and plead for lenient
treatment. The female students leaned toward thanking “Mark” and
mentioning an emotional state. When replying to “Jane Cook,” men
chose a different tactic: emphasizing past diligence. Women were
more likely to add a friendly signature and request assistance to resolve
the problem. Whether consciously or unconsciously, people take into
account the gender of the audience, and that leads to different online
styles. The study, incidentally, also found that status matters. Emails
signed by “Dr. Mark Cook” or “Dr. Jane Cook” led students to empha-
size personal situations or physical illness more frequently.
When men and women are interacting online in groups, as in
mailing lists or discussion groups, some similar trends unfold. Susan
C. Herring examined the structure of posts made to two professional
mailing lists that included both men and women, looking first at the
way posters organized their messages, and second at the content.18
One mailing list was Linguist, a discussion forum for academics
involved in the study of linguistics, and the other was WMST, another
academic list for people interested in women’s studies. WMST sub-
scribers are mainly women, while members of Linguist are mainly
272
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

men. The discussion on the Linguist mailing list centered on the term
“cognitive linguistics,” a controversial one to linguists, while the
WMST discussion was about sex differences in the brain.
Herring first identified five sets of macrosegments that commonly
appeared in the messages. Two were epistolary conventions: a saluta-
tion at the beginning (such as “To Joe:”) and a signature file or other
kind of formal closing at the end. Within the messages, a common
macrosegment was an introduction that might serve various purposes,
such as making some link to the content of a previous post. The body
of the message might do different things as well: express the author’s
views, request or provide information, express feelings, or suggest a
solution. Many messages also contained some closing remark. These
were rarely formal closings, but they wound down the message and
made a more casual exit with an appeal to hear others’ views, an
apology for long-windedness, or perhaps a snide remark.
On the surface, the message structures were rather similar for both
lists. Few added any salutations, for instance, and on both lists, many
posters linked to someone else’s post at the start. But the content
varied. Women were more concerned with the exchange of informa-
tion and asked more questions, while men were more likely to express
their own opinions.
Another gender difference in Herring’s findings supports the notion
that women engage in online discussions in more relationship-
oriented ways. On WMST, the women were more likely to start with
a link to someone else’s post and then go on to align with it and
expand it in some way. This happened less on the male-dominated
Linguist. Instead, posters linked to someone else’s post, but rather than
support it, the Linguists contradicted it, with statements such as, “J.K.’s
remark took me by surprise because it is so completely without data to
back it.” That kind of stark disagreement is reasonably polite in profes-
sional forums like these, but they can burn a hole in your screen on
others.
Adapting to the Majority
One other finding from Herring’s study was that women on the Linguist
list aired more disagreeing comments compared with women on
WMST. One possible explanation might be that women linguists
are just more irascible and argumentative than women involved in
women’s studies programs. Another, though, and one that may be more
273
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

plausible, is that women – as the minority gender on Linguist – are
adapting their posts to the dominant male style. The minority gender
on WMST – the men – may also have modified their style. One male
poster, for example, contributed a post arguing that a biological basis for
certain sex differences should be considered, but he was rather indirect
about it and included hedges such as “it seems to me” and “perhaps.”
Recall that these hedges are slightly more common in women’s speech
compared with men’s.
In the Twitter study I described earlier, people also appeared to adapt
to the language patterns based on the composition of their networks.
Women whose posts classified them as strongly female by the software
were more likely to have networks with a very high percentage of
women. In contrast, women whose tweets were more ambiguous in
terms of the presence of “female” markers were more likely to have
an evenly balanced set of followers, gender-wise. The trend for men was
similar. On average, the men’s networks were about 67 percent male, but
that figure went up to 78 percent for men whose own language was
dominated by the “male” markers. One plausible explanation is that we
adjust our language choices based on the norms of our networks, which
shift somewhat depending on their composition.
Clues to Gender, Gender Bending, and the Turing Game
The fact that there are some differences in how men and women use
language online suggests that we should be able to make a guess
about gender when it is not apparent. Can we draw on knowledge of
“gendered language” to
guess the gender of the
person we’re
communicating with?
College students in New Zealand logged onto a network every few
days to reply to a “netpal.”19 As expected, small gender differences in
the students’ language appeared, similar to what other studies find.
Men used slightly more words, for instance, and women made some-
what more references to emotion and used more intense adverbs. In
a follow-up study, sixteen of the messages those male and female
students wrote were shown to a new group of students, who tried to
guess whether each author was male or female. The students did better
than chance, especially when the author was female.
But other studies suggest the picture is not that clear. Notorious
cases in which someone masquerades as the opposite sex online,
fooling people they are interacting with for months at a time, show
274
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

that the amount of overlap is more than enough to allow plenty of
room for wrong guesses. (See the case of Alex and “Joan” in Chapter 6.)
Nevertheless, when people attempt gender bending, they often
overdo it by using very stereotypical styles, so that suspicion is
aroused. In chat rooms and MMORPGs, for instance, “female” charac-
ters who behave in overtly sexy ways are typically thought to be men
posing as women. The same trend shows up in experimental research
of gender bending. In a study using email communications, subjects
tried to convince a “netpal” partner that they were the opposite
gender. To do that, they relied mainly on the choice of discussion
topics they thought would be most interesting to one gender or the
other based on stereotypes. They relied far less on linguistic cues, and
they weren’t too successful at the masquerade. Their netpals became
suspicious and claimed that the sender was “too male to actually be
male” or that “a real male [or female] would never say that.”20
An experiment using the Turing Game shows that in some settings,
gender bending can be more difficult to spot. Developed by Joshua
Berman and Amy Bruckman, the online game pays tribute to Alan
Turing’s imitation game – the Turing Test – in which an observer uses
text messages to question a live human being and a computer, and
attempts to tell which is which from the answers. Rather than
“humanness,” the Turing Game offers a way to explore identities –
how they unfold in an online environment and whether people can
successfully pretend to possess an identity different from their
true one.
To play, a panel of men and women (contestants) attempt to con-
vince their audience (judges) that they are all men or all women, so
that some are telling the truth and others are not. The members of
the audience try to identify the imposters by asking questions and
analyzing the typed answers.21 For example, Fran, a forty-eight-year-
old woman, pretends to be a man and starts out with “‘I’m 6’3’ Blk h[ai]
r, 220 lbs.” Roger, a thirty-four-year-old man on the same panel, begins
with “Hello, Go Seminoles.”
Logs from the publicly available online game were coded for gen-
dered content, linguistic style, actual gender, and other variables over
several months. The contestants definitely presented themselves in
stereotypical ways when they were gender bending, choosing content
such as sports when pretending to be male, or shopping and relation-
ships when imitating a female. Contestants also gave off cues to their
true gender through their stylistic choices, but the judges relied mainly
275
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

on content rather than style to spot imposters. As a result, they missed
the linguistic cues and were not very successful at guessing contest-
ants’ true genders.22 It seems that we carry stereotypes of how men and
women talk, or at least what they talk about, but subtle differences in
communication styles may go unnoticed.
THE INTERNET AND LGBT ISSUES
The Internet can be extremely valuable to lesbians, gays, bisexuals,
and transgendered individuals, as well as other nonheterosexuals who
might include people who identify as queer, asexual, or uncomfortable
with any particular label because their sexuality is more fluid. The
ability to reach across geographical boundaries to meet people, find
social support, and obtain information is especially important.
Online Social Networks
For LGBT youth in particular, online resources and social support are
vital. These young people are in the midst of exploring identities, and
the access to information and connections outside their local school
can offer great value. Even in societies in which same-sex relationships
are recognized, and in which LGBT identities are more prevalent
in the media, the Internet plays a critical role for that transition to
adulthood.
Gary Downing at the University of Reading interviewed LGBT
youth aged sixteen to twenty-five in the United Kingdom, learning
how they are actively shaping their own lives as they seek an identity,
and what role the Internet plays.23 Specialized social networking sites
are especially central for many in the LGBT community, especially
because they serve as a safe place for youth to ask questions they
might not ask their face-to-face friends, and get answers from people
who shared their concerns. Even in sex education classes, topics that
touch on sexual diversity are rarely raised. Hannah, age eighteen,
complained, “in all the millions of hours I’ve had being lectured about
sex (and why you shouldn’t do it) I never had something that even
CONSIDERED the possibility of anyone being gay . . . completely
useless, most of it.”
About one of the social networking sites, Philip, age 23, said,
It was one of the most essential parts of me coming out to be honest. When
I had the kind of curiosity about my sexuality, I searched the Internet . . .
276
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

without me doing that research I would always be curious . . . there would
always be a big question mark hanging over me . . . thinking “is it just
because I’m young” . . . or “is this really because I do actually like men.”
The social networks designed for the LGBT community vary consider-
ably, each with their own norms, practices, and reputations. Some are
mainly for people who want to share information about lifestyles and
safe practices or to organize for political action. Others are more for
meeting and dating, with varied reviews and reputations, similar to
the kinds of widely varying evaluations that users contribute about
other dating sites.
Some sites are organized and promoted by the health professions,
particularly because this population is more vulnerable to human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and that risk can be reduced through
education and information.24 In an online focus group moderated by
health professionals, male youth aged fourteen to eighteen logged
in twice a day to answer questions, reply to the moderator, and engage
in discussions with one another.25 The experience was especially
welcome to the participants who did not yet have any sexual experi-
ence. One said, “It was an amazing experience . . . taught me so much
more than I thought it would.” The sexually experienced participants
were not quite as effusive, but they all asked the moderator to open
up new threads to talk about more personal interests beyond health,
such as music, friends, family, and school. Clearly, the participants
welcomed an opportunity to share life experiences, and not just use
the online groups as an information resource.
Online Performance Strategies
On the Internet, people craft personas and make impressions using their
typed words, their photos and videos, their nicknames, and those online
behavioral residues described in Chapter 2. Interviews with LGBT
individuals show quite a variety of ways in which they use the social
networks to create not just one persona, but several, as you might
expect from the uses and gratifications theory. Although joining a site
such as Gay.com would be a relatively strong signal about sexual orien-
tation, joining Facebook is not, unless the individual crafts the profile
that way. Many gay men are fully out to family, friends, and coworkers,
so their profiles on Facebook confirm their status by, for instance, listing
“interested in men” or including the name or photo of their partner.
277
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

Others want to use Facebook differently, as David Gudelunas
at Fairfield University found in his interview study. A thirty-five-
year-old man explained how he manages the audience:
I say I am interested in men, because I think Facebook is a good way to meet
guys who I might want to date or whatever. But I’m not out to my entire
family, my cousins and stuff, and I don’t really care, but I guess I just don’t
want them to find out through Facebook, so I simply don’t friend them. I feel
bad ignoring their requests, but you do what you gotta do.26
Another man in the study changed the spelling of his name on
Facebook, so curious relatives would not find him. Thus, erecting
boundaries to segment the audience is a common strategy to deal with
potential context collapse.
Almost all the interviewees in this study had another profile on a
different site, and some had as many as twelve active profiles. Thus the
multiple identities strategy was a popular way to manage their presen-
tations to different audiences. One man who shaved his head suddenly
realized how he had to rush to change all his profile pictures before
someone thought it was a deliberate fake.
While LGBT individuals benefit enormously from the Internet’s
resources, they are not immune to its risks and hazards. Sexual harass-
ment is a key example, as we discuss in the next section.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT ONLINE
Just as in the case of cyberbullying, the nature of many Internet
environments can facilitate sexual harassment, with perceived ano-
nymity, physical distance, and relative safety from retribution – legal
or otherwise. Let’s first examine the different types of sexual harass-
ment to see how these forces play out.27
Types of Sexual Harassment
Gender harassment occurs when someone makes insulting comments
that degrade people because of their gender or sexual orientation.
Making derogatory remarks about women at work or posting porno-
graphic images in a car window fall into this category. Unwanted
sexual attention is another type of harassment and includes uninvited
and unwelcome behavior that signals sexual desires toward someone.
278
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Sexual coercion is a third type; here, the perpetrator puts pressure on
someone to obtain sexual favors, either through threats or promises
of reward.
Gender harassment and unwanted sexual attention are the most
prevalent types in the online world. For instance, the comments sections
that appear after articles in online magazines and newspapers routinely
contain sexist remarks that qualify as gender harassment, with little
moderation or restraint. To gather empirical data on commenting
behavior, researchers analyzed 831 comments that readers posted in
response to articles that appeared online in the New York Times, Discover
magazine, and IFL Science.28 The articles were reporting on an academic
study that found that science professors gave higher ratings to applicants
for a lab manager position when the resume indicated a male candidate
compared with a female candidate with the same qualifications.29
Those particular online magazines are hardly backwater corners on
the Internet, and you might expect commenters to display a certain
decorum. Many did, but the comments also included a significant
number of highly negative and sexist remarks. One example: “The
reason why there is gender bias is because there are only a limited
amount of experiments that can be conducted in the kitchen.”
Comments like that could land the speaker in serious trouble in the
workplace, where employment laws apply.
Is the online environment drawing out more gender harassment?
One possibility, of course, is that the online comments of some of these
posters reflect their actual views, ones they can’t publicize at work or
school. But as I’ve discussed in other chapters, the disinhibiting effects
of online environments can amplify any underlying sexism and
unleash some troubling behavior.
Unwanted sexual attention is also common in many Internet
neighborhoods. In chat rooms, for instance, both males and females
might receive private messages containing sexually explicit language
or with pornographic images attached. Another venue in which such
attention is common is in games, the MMORPGs in particular. Most
players are male, and women playing as female avatars may experi-
ence ogling and catcalling. Some women deliberately choose male
avatars to avoid such attention. Ironically, men sometimes choose
female avatars for other reasons – to get more help in the game or just
for variety. One man playing the female avatar in an MMORPG
remarked, “I never realized how irritating it can be to have to put up
with unwanted advances.”30
279
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

Sexual harassment can have quite severe effects on victims, ranging
from increased stress, depression, feelings of helplessness, reduced per-
formance at work, and interrupted careers. One study showed how
harassment can easily interfere with a person’s success at a job inter-
view.31 Fifty women volunteered to interview for a job as research
assistant, and half of them – assigned to the experimental group –
experienced subtle sexual harassment from the male interviewer. He
asked questions such as “Do you have a boyfriend?” and “Do people
find you desirable?” Controls heard surprising questions, but not ones
that rated high on the sexual harassment dimension. One example of a
question posed to controls was “Do you think it is important for
people to believe in God?”
The women hearing those subtly harassing questions did a poorer
job on their interviews, speaking less fluently and giving lower quality
answers. That kind of milder harassment has negative effects, and
when it occurs in the context of a job interview, it could affect whole
careers.
Although women are the targets of the majority of sexual harass-
ment occurring online, men are certainly not immune. Men are more
likely to experience same-sex harassment, that is, harassment from
other men. The character and type of harassment also appears to be
somewhat different for men. According to a Pew Research Center
survey of adults, 44 percent of men reported that they experience some
online harassment, compared with 37 percent of women, but the type
of harassment men say they experience is less severe – such as being
called offensive names – compared with stalking or sexual harassment.32
A common theme of the kind of harassment men are more likely to
receive from other men is humiliation and ridicule for failing to
behave in stereotypically masculine ways. Just as women are often
the targets of sexual harassment when they step out of a feminine
stereotype, men receive abuse for acting too much like a “girl.”
To learn more about how men react to this kind of harassment, male
volunteers participated in a study to investigate “the effects of strength
training on academic performance.”33 The study began with a handgrip
test of strength, which served as the baseline. Then, half the subjects
were randomly assigned to the “harassment” condition, and they heard
that their handgrip performance was “strange” – closer to the results for
women. In a mocking tone, the female experimenter said that the
subject squeezed the handgrip “like a girl,” regardless of his actual scores.
Men in the control group received no feedback on their performance.
280
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

After the handgrip test, all subjects took a test of cognitive ability in
which they tried to solve as many anagrams as possible in 5 minutes.
The Stroop test followed that, which is a measure of attentional
capacity. Subjects name the color of words printed on cards when
some words contradict the font color. For instance, one card might
read “green,” but the word appears in a red font.34 Finally, all subjects
took the handgrip test once more, to see if they performed differently
the second time.
The harassment was psychologically draining for those men, and
subjects who thought their scores were similar to those of women
did worse on the anagrams compared with controls and worse on
the Stroop test measuring attentional capacity. On the handgrip test,
though, they performed better than controls, suggesting that they had
something to prove and put everything they had into the task.
We know that sexual harassment has many negative effects on
women, and research such as this suggests that men do not just shrug
it off.
The Mr. Bungle Affair
Sexual coercion may not be as common online, given its nature, but
one early case illustrates a dramatic example that raised many ques-
tions about virtual life and online sexual harassment. The Mr. Bungle
affair happened on LambdaMOO, one of the forerunners of the
MMORPGs, in which players communicate through synchronous text
chat.35
The case involved a character named Mr. Bungle, and the crime was
cyberrape. Mr. Bungle, a male-presenting clown-like character whose
description was laced with obscene and repugnant epithets toward
women, was in the crowded Living Room on the MUD one evening
with several other players. Around 10 PM, Mr. Bungle used a program-
matic device called a voodoo doll to make it appear as though legba,
one of his victims, was performing sexual acts for his pleasure in front
of the others. On their computer screens, the players in the Living
Room saw statements scrolling up their screens describing legba’s per-
formance, and the voodoo doll made it appear as though legba were
voluntarily typing in these actions herself. Mr. Bungle left the room
but continued his assault from another location in the Lambda man-
sion, using his programmatic magic trick to make it appear as though
another player, Starsinger, was engaging in sexual activities with the
281
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

others who were still in the room. Eventually a player silenced
Mr. Bungle using a virtual gun with special powers that could envelop
its target in a cage to prevent the use of such voodoo dolls.
The real human beings whose onscreen characters were legba and
Starsinger felt violated and were furious and distraught. The next day
legba, who in real life was a graduate student working on her doctor-
ate, denounced Mr. Bungle publicly and called for his “toading” – the
equivalent of a death sentence for his character.
Most players were outraged and sympathetic, and a large group
gathered online to discuss what actions to take. The discussion
drifted to many related topics about virtuality, freedom of speech,
sexual violence, and due process. Though the group unanimously
condemned Mr. Bungle, some were reluctant to endorse toading
because of its implications for free speech and due process. The
participants eventually wandered off and logged out back to their
real worlds, with no consensus reached and no action plan endorsed.
One of the wizards, however, decided to take things into his own
hands and later that night permanently banished Mr. Bungle from
the database.
Julian Dibbell, the journalist who first documented the case, wrote,
“Where before I’d found it hard to take virtual rape seriously, I now
was finding it difficult to remember how I could ever not have taken
it seriously.” Words do matter.
SEXUALITY ON THE INTERNET
“Sex” is one of the most commonly entered search terms on the net,
and Internet neighborhoods devoted to the topic have flourished
from the beginning. The way sexuality unfolds online illustrates the
good, the bad, and the ugly about the Internet and how we behave
when we enter its many environments.
The Internet as Information Resource
When people enter “sex” as a search term, their motives vary consider-
ably. Many of them are just looking for information, which can often
be difficult to get in face-to-face settings. Some might be too embar-
rassed to ask certain questions or fearful that the questions themselves
might disclose too much sensitive information. In one survey,
respondents frequently mentioned being motivated by a desire for
282
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

knowledge, curiosity, and simple embarrassment – not daring to talk
about certain sexual topics offline.36
Online information is especially valuable for adolescents in the
process of forming a stable identity as they transition to adulthood.
Many seek information about sexual health, topics that might or
might not have been covered in a sex education class in high school.
One woman explained how she became the local expert as a teenager
because of her extensive online research:
And as soon as we learned about sex and all that, and as soon as it really
started to cross my mind as something I might be interested in, I started
researching online everything I could possibly find. Like bad things that
happen because of sex, STDs, pregnancy, so birth control, ectopic pregnancy.
Everything that could possibly result from sex I wanted to know about. So
I became this well of information. My friends would come to me and ask,
“Could I get pregnant from this?”37
One major drawback to the Internet as a source of information about
sexuality is the questionable quality of many online resources. An
analysis of 177 websites that adolescents visit to obtain information
revealed that quality and accuracy varied considerably.38 Almost half
the websites that dealt with the topic of contraception had at least one
inaccuracy. More than 25 percent of the sites that discussed sexually
transmitted diseases and HIV had at least one mistake. Sites ending in
“.org,” which might signal to visitors that the organization behind the
site was nonprofit – perhaps a medical institution – had some of the
highest error rates. Unlike “.edu” or “.gov,” the “.org” top-level domain
is open to any organization, just as “.com” is.
These websites also often lacked many of the features that people
should be using to judge the quality of the site’s information. Only
26 percent of the sites, for instance, displayed the name of the person
or organization that contributed the information, and even fewer
included their credentials. About half failed to display the date the
information was created or last updated, so much information was
likely out of date.
Most people are not very adept at judging the quality or accuracy of
any website, let alone websites that cover sexual topics, and they often
don’t bother to check those quality markers. Clearly, the Internet
could be a far more valuable resource for information about sex if
people were better able to evaluate the sites they visit.
283
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

Virtual Passion and Cybersex
Perhaps the least understood component of interpersonal relationships
on the Internet is cybersex, in which two people become sexually
excited by sending explicit messages to each other over the Internet. It
might involve synchronous chat rooms, instant messaging, video chat,
or some areas of the graphical metaworlds. The practice of sex in
cyberspace goes by many names, and all indications are that varieties
of virtual passion are very popular, partly because the medium supports
and encourages hyperpersonal communication quite well.
Who engages in cybersex? At one time, the term “cybersex” was
mainly associated with online sex between strangers, and that might
have been true when the net was young. But like almost every other
activity on the Internet, that changed; cybersex is now more common
between people who are already partners in real life. In a survey of
men and women who had had at least one cybersex experience,
82 percent of respondents said that at least one such experience was
with their primary partner. In contrast, only 37 percent reported
having had cybersex with a stranger, and fewer still said that they only
engage in cybersex with strangers (6.5%).39
One might expect that men would participate in cybersex more
than women, but at least some studies find that women participate as
much as men do, especially in their middle years. A survey of several
hundred Swedish adults found that 38 percent of the men in the
youngest age group (18–24) said they experienced cybersex, compared
with 34 percent of the women. But that figure continued to increase
for women in older age groups, only dropping for those over fifty.
For men, the percentage dropped continuously after the age of
twenty-four.40
Cybersex can have both positive and negative consequences. On
the positive side, the Internet affords opportunities to explore sexual-
ity in new ways, with a greater degree of safety compared with real-life
encounters. The increasing number of women who participate may
indicate that many of them are doing just that, empowered by the
disinhibiting effects of the online world as well as the reduced risks.
An interview study of cybersex participants on Second Life actually
used an avatar as the interviewer, one whose characteristics and acces-
sories matched the role of “researcher.”41 For his dissertation, graduate
student David Smith purchased a small private island on the virtual
world and created a “research station” called the Trout Farm, a name
284
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

drawn from Shakespeare’s Measure for Measure. Rather than building
an office, he made it a more relaxing setting with seagulls, a wharf,
deck chairs, and trout pens.
He found tremendous variety in the way the participants thought
about cybersex in Second Life and how it was integrated (or not) into
their real lives. To some, it was mainly fun with no commitment.
Others saw it as deeply intimate and connected. One said, “It’s love-
making, to me. It’s committed. It’s entirely personal, emotional, and the
context is always in a love relationship.”
Several interviewees used Second Life cybersex as a way to play
out fantasies that were not feasible, or even possible, in real life. One
person in a dominant/submissive relationship online typed, “life
doesn’t always allow us to be who we really are, not and maintain
a professional job . . . It [Second Life] allows me an outlet for it, so it
makes me a happier person I think.”
Second Life also hosts “avatar sex workers” who approach players
with notecards that explain their services and fees, all paid in Linden
dollars, the world’s virtual currency. Salena, for example, is a health
professional in her late twenties who moonlights as a sex worker in the
virtual world. She believes she has been able to enhance her own real-life
sexuality because of what she learns online through experimentation,
such as with audio chat: “So here I learned how to use a very sensual
voice and now I feel a difference in real life, because for me it is easier
to use the same words and voice with my sexual partner in real life.”
Cybersex participants also have different views about whether their
online sexual activities can be called infidelity, and whether their real-
life partner should feel justifiably jealous. However, a survey of their
partners, who discovered that they were engaging in cybersex with
other people, found widespread agreement that cybersex is cheating,
even if the encounters never lead to anything beyond the computer
screen.42 About two thirds discovered evidence of their partner’s activ-
ities on the computer, smartphone, or other device, and 87 percent
said it had negative consequences for their relationship, particularly
through the loss of trust. One said, “Trust has been SHATTERED
beyond belief.”
As I discussed in Chapter 5, on interpersonal attraction, the Internet
offers a unique environment in which people can come to love one
another, even without meeting in real life. And it also is a place in
which people can unleash their passions in new ways. But cybersex,
like so much else on the Internet, carries pitfalls and risks as well.
285
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

INTERNET PORNOGRAPHY
Sexually explicit materials are available in adult bookstores, through
900-number phone lines, and – in great abundance – on the Internet.
How is pornography evolving online, and what effects is it having on
human behavior?
Psychological Aspects of Pornography
Some social scientists maintain that the use of sexually explicit
materials is harmless and that it can also be functional, healthy, and
liberating in some contexts because it provides education, erotic
enhancement, an outlet for exploration, and entertainment. It can
also be useful in some therapeutic treatment programs for sexual
dysfunctions. Others, however, point to the ethical and moral
issues involved – particularly the exploitation and objectification of
women. Males are the principal users of pornography, and a major
concern
is
that
so
much
of
the
material
depicts
women
in
dehumanizing ways.
The fact that most countries restrict the use of pornography in one
way or another indicates that many people around the globe believe
pornography has some harmful effects. But Denmark’s experience sug-
gests that legalizing pornography can lead to some societal good. The
laws in that country were changed in the 1960s so that all restrictions
on the production and distribution of pornography were removed.
Contrary to what many expected, the incidence of sex crimes such as
exhibitionism, Peeping Tomism, and child molestation decreased
almost immediately, supporting the hypothesis that some types of
pornography may be harmless or even beneficial. Perhaps the easy
availability of erotic material for people with those inclinations made
it less likely they would act them out in real life.
Behavioral research on the psychological effects of pornography
was just about nonexistent until the 1970s, but since then, research
has clarified certain aspects. One consistent and not too surprising
finding is that erotica is often sexually arousing to both men and
women. When people view explicit photos, read stories, watch films,
or listen to audiotapes, many report feeling aroused, and physiological
measurements confirm this.
Some laboratory-based experimental studies have been conducted,
and generally the results point to negative consequences, especially for
pornography that depicts women in objectifying ways. For example,
286
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

prolonged exposure can lead to more sexist attitudes and a greater
willingness to accept myths about rape that blame the victim. It also
leads to changes in attitudes about premarital and extramarital sex.43
In another study, men who viewed photographs of extremely
attractive centerfold models and watched passionate, consensual sex
in videos become somewhat less enthusiastic about the attractiveness
of their own real-life partners.44 Probably, a contrast effect is occurring,
such that viewing beautiful models in sexually explicit settings makes
people less satisfied with their lot in life and their own real-life part-
ners. Although the pictures or the movie may have been temporarily
stimulating, the longer-term effects on the men’s personal relation-
ships may not be promising.
Inadvertent Exposure
Exposure to online pornographic materials accidentally is a common
experience – through email spam or typos, for instance. “Whitehouse.
com” once featured very profitable adult content until its owner
decided to sell the name, insisting the buyer not use it for pornog-
raphy because so many visitors happened upon the site by accident.
Concern about this kind of exposure among youth is especially acute.
On the positive side, surveys suggest that the incidence of inadvertent
exposure has been declining, from 34 percent reporting such exposure
in 2005 to 23 percent more recently. The widespread use of filtering
software probably accounts for a good part of that drop.45
Young people react in different ways when they stumble on sexu-
ally explicit materials online. In one survey, less than half said they
told someone about it, and even fewer said they told a parent – even
if the parent had specifically had a talk with the child about Internet
risks. Most of the children used a passive coping strategy – usually
just logging out or leaving the site – but about one quarter said the
incident made them feel upset, embarrassed, or frightened. Fortu-
nately, many of these children put the incident behind them, but
about 20 percent said they couldn’t stop thinking about it.46
Adults may also be affected in different ways by inadvertent expos-
ure. In one study, for instance, researchers found that such exposure
can increase men’s interest in pornography, particularly of the hard-
core variety, provided the man feels relatively anonymous when the
exposure occurs.47 College men were invited to the lab, ostensibly to
participate in a study about keyword searches in online newspapers.
287
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

But after they completed a brief survey, a ten-second pop-up appeared –
apparently by accident. For half the subjects, the brief video was
pornographic and degrading to the woman, while the control group
watched a history professor talking about American railroads. Within
those two groups, the men were assigned to either an anonymous
condition, in which they were told they would not be monitored
or tracked, or a nonanonymous condition, in which a webcam and
software would be tracking their choices.
The men who saw the sexually explicit video reported more sexist
attitudes, and when that video was combined with feelings of ano-
nymity, the men also expressed more interest in viewing hardcore
pornography compared with men in the other conditions. Whether
that kind of exposure would have longer lasting effects isn’t known,
but the fact that a ten-second surprise video clip can influence
attitudes toward pornography and women in general suggests that
even a short-duration inadvertent exposure is not trivial.
Effects of Violent Pornography
When the U.S. Commission on Obscenity and Pornography deter-
mined in 1970 that scientific evidence did not support the view that
pornography was harmful, most of the erotica on the market was of
the nonviolent, consensual variety. But images and stories depicting
aggression toward women and sexual violence became more frequent
and widely available during the 1970s, probably because the general
attitude toward all kinds of pornography relaxed. Now, online, one
can find horrendous examples of the most violent and vicious porn-
ography imaginable.
Psychologically, violent pornography is especially dangerous in
terms of negative consequences. In a classic series of experimental
studies, Edward Donnerstein at the University of Wisconsin found
that the kind of videos men watch affects how much aggression they
show toward women.48 In one study, he randomly assigned male
subjects to watch different films, some neutral, some erotic but not
violent, and some involving a rape. Later, the men participated in
what they thought was a totally separate experiment in which they
played the role of “teacher” and were supposed to administer shocks,
at a level they themselves could choose, to another subject when he or
she failed to learn nonsense syllables. The other “subject” was actually
a confederate of the experimenter, and the real point of the study was
288
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

to find out whether exposure to those films influenced the men’s
behavior toward women. It did.
The men who watched the neutral film were the least punitive, and
chose rather low-level shocks for both the men and women “subjects.”
Watching an erotic but nonviolent video caused the men to show a
little more aggression toward the male “pupils” but not the women.
The violent rape scene, however, was a different matter. Men who
watched that film increased the shock levels, but only for their female
victims – not for the men. Recall that all men were randomly assigned
to these conditions. The experiment provided some evidence that
exposure to sexually explicit and violent material influenced these
men in a way that made them more aggressive toward women.
Much of the aggressive pornography out there perpetuates
the rape myth – the view that women say no but don’t mean it and
that they enjoy sexual coercion. Donnerstein looked more closely
at whether men behaved differently toward those women “pupils”
depending on the kind of aggressive pornography they watched.
He created two films depicting a rape scene, but each ended differ-
ently. One showed the woman smiling at the end; the other version
indicated she found the experience humiliating and disgusting. Men
who watched either version delivered higher levels of shock than
men who watched neutral or nonaggressive pornography and, again,
only to the women confederates – not the men. But the subjects
exposed to the rape myth version of the story administered the
highest shock levels.
The implication is that violent pornography, particularly the kind
that supports the rape myth, is not harmless at all. Certainly each
man’s personality and susceptibility may moderate the effects of such
exposure,49 but the experimental evidence points to potentially very
negative consequences on attitudes and behavior.
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE FRONTIER
We still have much to learn about sexuality and gender issues online
and how they are unfolding in a world in which so much is accessible
with just a few keystrokes. I’ve often heard the Internet compared to
America’s “Wild West,” and I use that analogy myself. The folklore and
myths surrounding this period in American history stress how men
and a few adventurous women went out first, seeking fortune and
glory. There were few people, fewer laws, and almost no one to enforce
289
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

them anyway. Women were in the minority, but as they moved west
their presence brought order and conduct control, as well as safer
environments to raise families. The Internet started out as a lawless
and male-dominated place, and even now, after the towns, cities, and
shopping malls were built, some of its characteristics remind us of the
“frontier” images we hold in our imaginations.
Like most analogies, this one breaks down quickly when it is carried
beyond the superficial. Cyberspace itself is not physically dangerous,
and superior writing, typing, and technical skills mean more than
superior strength. The Internet is no longer dominated by pioneers.
When you see www.pizzahut.com on a passing van, or preschool
children playing an online game together, you know civilization has
arrived. Yet some elements of that frontier may linger a bit longer than
others in certain Internet neighborhoods, and may even flourish.
Gender stereotyping and discrimination, adventurous sexuality, and
unfettered, extreme pornography are examples.
NOTES
1 Zell, E., Krizan, Z., & Teeter, S. R. (2015). Evaluating gender similarities and
differences
using
metasynthesis.
American
Psychologist,
70(1),
10–20.
doi:10.1037/a0038208
2 Williams, J. E., & Best, D. L. (1990). Measuring sex stereotypes: A multination
study (rev. ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
3 Kret, M. E., & De Gelder, B. (2012). A review on sex differences in pro-
cessing emotional signals. Neuropsychologia, 50(7), 1211–1221. doi:10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2011.12.022
4 McAndrew, F. T., & McAndrew, Francis T., F. (2012). Who does what on
Facebook? Age, sex, and relationship status as predictors of Facebook use.
Computers in Human Behavior, 28(6), 2359–2365.
5 McAndrew, F. T., & Shah, S. S. (2013). Sex differences in jealousy over face-
book activity. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(6), 2603–2606. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2013.06.030
6 Wainschel, S. (2014, March 25). How girls text vs. how guys text. Her
Campus. Retrieved from www.hercampus.com/love/how-girls-text-vs-how-
guys-text
7 This controversial research area mushroomed after the 1975 publication of
R. Lakoff (1975), Language and woman’s place. New York: Harper and Row.
8 Baranauskienė, R., & Adminienė, V. (2012). Gender differences in the lan-
guage of E. Hemingway’s fiction. Gender Studies and Research, 10, 111–118.
9 Leaper, C., & Robnett, R. D. (2011). Women are more likely than men to use
tentative language, aren’t they? A meta-analysis testing for gender differ-
ences and moderators. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 35(1), 129–142.
doi:10.1177/0361684310392728
10 Turner, L. H., Dindia, K., & Pearson, J. C. (1995). An investigation of female/
male verbal behaviors in same-sex and mixed-sex conversations. Communi-
cation Reports, 8(2), 86–96.
290
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

11 Scudder, J. N., & Andrews, P. H. (1995). A comparison of two alternative
models of powerful speech: The impact of power and gender upon the use
of
threats.
Communication
Research
Reports,
12(1),
25–33.
doi:10.1080/
08824099509362035
12 Hutson-Comeaux, S. L., & Kelly, J. R. (1996). Sex differences in interaction
style and group task performance: The process–performance relationship.
Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 11(5), 255–275.
13 Takeda, S., & Homberg, F. (2014). The effects of gender on group
work process and achievement: An analysis through self- and peer-assess-
ment. British Educational Research Journal, 40(2), 373–396. doi:10.1002/
berj.3088
14 Coates, J. (1997). One-at-a-time: The organization of men’s talk. In S. Johnson
& U. H. Meinhof (Eds.), Language and masculinity. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishers.
15 Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Pennebaker, J. W., & Schler, J. (2009). Automatically
profiling the author of an anonymous text. Communications of the ACM,
52(2), 119–123. doi:10.1145/1461928.1461959
16 Bamman, D., Eisenstein, J., & Schnoebelen, T. (2014). Gender identity and
lexical variation in social media. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 18(2), 135–160.
doi:10.1111/josl.12080
17 O’Neill, R., & Colley, A. (2006). Gender and status effects in student e-mails to
staff. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(5), 360–367. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2729.2006.00186.x
18 Herring, S. C. (1996). Two variants of an electronic message schema. In S. C.
Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and
cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 81–108). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
19 Thomson, R., & Murachver, T. (2001). Predicting gender from electronic
discourse. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40(2), 193.
20 Hills, M. (2000). You are what you type: Language and gender deception on the
Internet (Honors thesis). University of Otago. Retrieved from www.netsafe.
org.nz/Doc_Library/Internet_language_dissertation.pdf
21 Berman, J., & Bruckman, A. S. (2001). The Turing Game: Exploring identity in
an online environment. Convergence, 7(3), 83–102.
22 Herring, S. C., & Martinson, A. (2004). Assessing gender authenticity
in computer-mediated language use: Evidence from an identity game.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 23(4), 424–446. doi:10.1177/
0261927X04269586
23 Downing, G. (2013). Virtual youth: Non-heterosexual young people’s use of
the Internet to negotiate their identities and socio-sexual relations. Chil-
dren’s Geographies, 11(1), 44–58. doi:10.1080/14733285.2013.743280
24 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012, November 12). Vital
signs: HIV infection, testing, and risk behaviors among youths – United
States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 61(47), 971–976.
25 Ybarra, M. L., DuBois, L. Z., Parsons, J. T., Prescott, T. L., & Mustanski, B. (2014).
Online focus groups as an HIV prevention program for gay, bisexual, and
queer adolescent males. AIDS Education and Prevention, 26(6), 554–564.
doi:10.1521/aeap.2014.26.6.554
26 Gudelunas, D. (2012). There’s an app for that: The uses and gratifications of
online social networks for gay men. Sexuality and Culture, 16(4), 347–365.
doi:10.1007/s12119-012-9127-4
291
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

27 Barak, A. (2005). Sexual harassment on the Internet. Social Science Computer
Review, 23(1), 77–92. doi:10.1177/0894439304271540
28 Moss-Racusin, C. A., Molenda, A. K., & Cramer, C. R. (2015, January 8). Can
evidence impact attitudes? Public reactions to evidence of gender bias in
STEM fields. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 0361684314565777. doi:10.1177/
0361684314565777
29 Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M. J., &
Handelsman, J. (2012). Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male
students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(41), 16474–
16479. doi:10.1073/pnas.1211286109
30 Yee, N. (2014). The Proteus paradox. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, p. 106.
31 Woodzicka, J. A., & LaFrance, M. (2005). The effects of subtle sexual harass-
ment on women’s performance in a job interview. Sex Roles, 53(1–2), 67–77.
doi:10.1007/s11199-005-4279-4
32 Duggan, M. (2014). Online harassment. Pew Research Internet Project.
Retrieved from www.pewInternet.org/2014/10/22/online-harassment/
33 Funk, L., & Werhun, C. (2011). “You’re such a girl!” The psychological drain
of the gender-role harassment of men. Sex Roles, 65(1/2), 13–22. doi:10.1007/
s11199-011-9948-x
34 To take an online version of the Stroop test, visit www.onlinestrooptest.
com/.
35 Tuesday, J. D., & Dibbell, J. (1993, December 23). A rape in cyberspace. The
Village Voice. Retrieved from www.villagevoice.com/2005-10-18/specials/a-
rape-in-cyberspace/
36 Daneback, K., Månsson, S.-A., Ross, M. W., & Markham, C. M. (2012). The
Internet as a source of information about sexuality. Sex Education, 12(5),
583–598. doi:10.1080/14681811.2011.627739
37 Smith, M. D. (2011). Adolescents learning about sex – Broadband Internet
access, sexual education, moral panics and youth citizenship (PhD dissertation).
University of Colorado at Boulder. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.
com.proxy1.library.jhu.edu/docview/867837684/abstract?accountid=11752
38 Buhi, E. R., Daley, E. M., Oberne, A., Smith, S. A., Schneider, T., & Fuhrmann,
H. J. (2010). Quality and accuracy of sexual health information web sites
visited by young people. Journal of Adolescent Health, 47(2), 206–208.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2010.01.002
39 Shaughnessy, K., & Byers, E. S. (2014). Contextualizing cybersex experience:
Heterosexually identified men and women’s desire for and experiences
with cybersex with three types of partners. Computers in Human Behavior,
32, 178–185. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.12.005
40 Daneback, K., Cooper, A., & Månsson, S.-A. (2005). An Internet study of
cybersex
participants.
Archives
of
Sexual
Behavior,
34(3),
321–328.
doi:10.1007/s10508-005-3120-z
41 Smith, D. J. H. (2013). Theorizing avatar sexualities: A grounded theory study on the
erotics of Second Life (Dissertation). York University. ProQuest (AAINR88703).
42 Schneider, J. P., Weiss, R., & Samenow, C. (2012). Is it really cheating? Under-
standing the emotional reactions and clinical treatment of spouses and
partners affected by cybersex infidelity. Sexual Addiction and Compulsivity,
19(1–2), 123–139. doi:10.1080/10720162.2012.658344
43 Zillmann, D. (1989). Effects of prolonged consumption of pornography.
In D. Zillmann & J. Bryant (Eds.), Pornography: Research advances and policy
considerations (pp. 127–157). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
292
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

44 Kenrick, D. T., Gutierres, S. E., and Goldberg, L. L. (1989). Influence of popular
erotica on judgments of strangers and mates. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 25, 159–167.
45 Jones, L. M., Mitchell, K. J., & Finkelhor, D. (2012). Trends in youth Internet
victimization:
Findings
from
three
youth
Internet
safety
surveys
2000–2010.
Journal
of
Adolescent
Health,
50(2),
179–186.
doi:10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2011.09.015
46 Priebe, G., Mitchell, K. J., & Finkelhor, D. (2013). To tell or not to tell? Youth’s
responses to unwanted Internet experiences. Cyberpsychology, 7(1), 71–84.
doi:10.5817/CP2013-1-6
47 Jae Woong Shim, & Paul, B. M. (2014). The role of anonymity in the effects
of inadvertent exposure to online pornography among young adult males.
Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal, 42(5), 823–834.
doi:10.2224/sbp.2014.42.5.823
48 Donnerstein, E. (1980). Aggressive erotica and violence against women.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 269–277; Donnerstein, E.
(1984). Pornography: Its effects on violence against women. In N. M.
Malamuth & E. Donnerstein (Eds.), Pornography and sexual aggression
(pp. 53–81). New York: Academic Press.
49 Hald, G. M., & Malamuth, N. N. (2015). Experimental effects of exposure to
pornography: The moderating effect of personality and mediating effect of
sexual arousal. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 44(1), 99–109. doi:10.1007/s10508-
014-0291-5
293
GENDER ISSUES AND SEXUALITY ON THE NET

10
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ONLINE
PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE
When was the last time you read the end-user license agreement
(EULA) before installing an app on your smartphone? These EULAs
stretch to thousands of words of legalese, and many of them require
you to relinquish a considerable amount of privacy before you
can use the app. Embedded in all that tiny print are terms that
might allow the company to collect data on usage patterns, your
location and movements, your purchases, your messaging habits,
and more.
How do people think about online privacy, and what strategies are
they using to protect it? Perhaps many of us have just given up and are
taking the advice of Scott McNealy, the co-founder and former CEO of
Sun Microsystems. Back in 1999, long before Facebook’s breaches,
Edward Snowden’s revelations, and the hacked records at the Office
of Personnel Management. McNealy said, “You have zero privacy
anyway. Get over it.”1
Intellectually, we may suspect that privacy in cyberspace is an
endangered species, but we often don’t act like it. People rant about
their bosses online in ways they would never do at the office. They
attach compromising photos to their text messages, but certainly
won’t slip the same photo into a 9  12 envelope and drop it in the
mail. We profess to value privacy, but we still click “install” without
reading the fine print.
This chapter focuses on the ways in which online privacy and
surveillance are evolving, how people are reacting to the changes,
and what psychological effects the overall erosion of privacy is having.
To start, however, let’s look at what the term actually means and how
our understanding of privacy continually changes.
294

THE HISTORY AND MEANING OF “PRIVACY”
Although much writing on the concept of “privacy” is relatively
recent, anthropologists contend that the drive to keep certain things
private dates back millions of years. For a hunting and gathering
group, individuals might want to withdraw from interactions at times
or conceal some of their actions from other group members. But as
human beings settled into larger agricultural communities, they no
longer knew all the members quite as well, and they had fewer oppor-
tunities to form strong, trusting bonds with all those people. That
may also foster a greater interest in privacy along with social norms
that define what constitutes intrusions.
Privacy’s Legal Roots
Modern ideas about the nature of privacy and privacy rights in the
United States emerged mostly from the legal sphere, with a ground-
breaking essay published in the Harvard Law Journal by Samuel
Warren and Louis Brandeis in 1890. They fully understood that priv-
acy is not just a legal matter but also a psychological concept. Writing
about how the law had evolved to first protect the right to life, and
then the rights to liberty and property, Warren and Brandeis argued
that it was time that a new right was recognized: the right to privacy.
Their concern with the psychology of privacy was clear:
This development of the law was inevitable. The intense intellectual and
emotional life, and the heightening of sensations which came with the
advance of civilization, made it clear to men that only a part of the pain,
pleasure, and profit of life lay in physical things. Thoughts, emotions, and
sensations demanded legal recognition . . .2
These legal scholars defined privacy as the “right to be left alone” and
maintained that any violation could be considered a tort – a wrong-
ful act that could be addressed through the civil legal system, with
awards for damage done. They also understood that they were
opening a new legal frontier and that the new right needed limits.
For instance, they warned that the right to privacy “does not prohibit
any publication of matter which is of public or general interest . . .
Peculiarities of manner and person, which in the ordinary individual
should be free from comment, may acquire a public importance if
found in a candidate for political office.” This caveat offered cover for
295
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

journalists investigating a politician’s scandals. Another caveat added
that it mattered not at all whether the privacy violator was publiciz-
ing something that was actually true. It mattered only that the
victim’s privacy was violated.
Warren and Brandeis pointed to an intriguing motivation for
their argument: “recent inventions” that called for better privacy pro-
tections. The invention they referred to was photography, and the
notorious case involved a Broadway actress who complained that
a photographer took pictures of her in tights while she was onstage,
without her consent. She did not want the photo publicized and
obtained a preliminary injunction to prevent it. Those prescient
scholars recognized that emerging technologies would continue to
introduce new ways to violate privacy, although even they would
have been astonished by the scope of what the Internet would mean
for privacy.
Deﬁning Privacy in Legal Terms
While the “right to be let alone” was a first cut at a definition for
“privacy,” it lacks precision, particularly in any legal context. The legal
systems rely heavily on case law to sort out the details of such things.
But more than 120 years after Warren and Brandeis offered their
opinions, the details are still muddled and contradictory.3
Many privacy violation cases that make it to courts involve crim-
inal suspects who claim that police conducted a search without
a warrant, so whatever evidence they collected is unusable. The U.S.
Constitution doesn’t actually mention privacy, but the Fourth Amend-
ment provides protections for citizens against “unreasonable search
and seizure” by the government, provided the citizen has a reasonable
expectation of privacy. This may seem straightforward on the surface,
but what constitutes a “reasonable expectation of privacy” is not so
obvious. For example, the courts went back and forth on one case in
which police tapped a public phone booth that a man was using for
his illegal bookmaking business. One court agreed with the police; it
was a public phone so there was no expectation of privacy. A higher
court disagreed, saying that the man expected to be seen in the glass
booth, but after closing the door and paying for the call, he did not
expect to be heard. Of course, public phone booths have virtually
vanished in the twenty-first century, but you can imagine the corol-
lary of these cases for loud cell phone users. Courts would not likely
296
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

grant suspects the benefit of the doubt if they claimed they had an
expectation of privacy for their annoyingly loud utterances, at least
not for their end of the conversation.
The “garbage” cases also show how uncertain and shifting these
definitions can be. Can police search your garbage? That depends.
In one case, a suspected drug trafficker left his plastic bags at the curb
for pickup, and the garbage collector handed the bags to the police.
The trial court dismissed the case because the police didn’t get a
warrant to search the garbage first. But when the case went to the
U.S. Supreme Court, the justices disagreed; the majority concluded that
plastic garbage bags left for pickup were fair game, with no expect-
ation of privacy. In another case, however, the suspect’s garbage was
not in plastic bags, but in a can with a lid, a few feet away from the
curb. The court decided that this suspect did enjoy an expectation of
privacy for his garbage.
When the government is not involved as the defendant, the Fourth
Amendment doesn’t apply, and the privacy violation cases often fall
into categories such as these:4
▪Intrusion: Intruding on another person’s solitude in an offensive
manner, or into the person’s private affairs.
▪Private facts: Public disclosure of embarrassing private material
about another person, which does meet the test of public value
or interest.
▪False light: Publicizing offensive material about another person
that leads to a false impression of that person in the public’s eye.
▪Appropriation: Using another person’s name or likeness without
consent.
Here, also, clarity about the details is still elusive. For example, the term
“doxing,” which combines “document” and “dropping,” involves
public disclosure of private facts that the target would prefer not
disclosed. A hacker might use doxing to seek revenge on someone by
posting mobile phone number, home address, net worth, credit
reports, email address, and other personal information. Doxing could
wreak considerable havoc for the victim, but is generally not illegal
as long as the information was obtained legally and the hacker does
not use it for purposes such as harassment or stalking.
Cases that land in court also illustrate how elusive the concept of
privacy can be. In one Pennsylvania case against Google, the court
297
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

came to some head-scratching decisions. The Borings live up a private
road on which they had posted a sign: “Private Road, No Trespassing.”
Not to be deterred, Google’s driver ignored the sign, drove up the road,
and snapped images of the property for the company’s Street View
application, which were then posted on the Internet. The Borings sued
Google for privacy intrusion and the public disclosure of private facts,
along with other wrongdoings, including trespassing. This may seem
like a cut-and-dried case, but the Pennsylvania court agreed only with
the trespassing charge, and awarded the Borings $1.00 in damages.5
However, since that time courts in the United States and many other
countries have pushed back on Google’s Street View because of priv-
acy concerns.
Psychological Aspects of Privacy
Most people are not lawyers, and their views about privacy are what
matter from a psychological perspective. When we think about priv-
acy, we think about more than intrusions that might be highly offen-
sive. We certainly tie the right to be left alone to privacy, but we also
emphasize control, especially over information. We want to be able to
control what private information is made available to others, who
those others are, how they access the information, and how it might
be used. The Borings, for instance, certainly felt that their privacy had
been violated, even though the court didn’t see it that way. They lost
control over the images of their home, and the Internet amplified
the public disclosure exponentially.
The emphasis on control doesn’t mean that most people think that
the more privacy they have, the better. Much of what people do
online, for instance, is share information, often very private informa-
tion, and that desire for control is why social network users often
become outraged when they perceive that they lost control.
Another psychological aspect of privacy is a sense of autonomy.
We desire freedom of choice, and the ability to choose among options
independently. Youth mention this frequently, perhaps because their
freedom of choice is more limited due to age. For example, a study of
children and young people, ranging in age from four to nineteen,
found that they often connected independence to privacy.6 When
they were asked to explain why they thought certain situations had
privacy, they said, “I felt independent,” or “I could have my own
opinions.”
298
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

In that study, four predominant meanings for the concept of
privacy emerged: “controlling access to information,” “being alone,”
“no one bothering me,” and “controlling access to spaces.” In one sense,
privacy is about control over inputs – those intrusions by unwelcome
others – and outputs – what information about oneself is released.
An additional psychological ingredient to privacy is that it is not
just at the individual level, as it is typically considered in a legal
context. There, laws protect the individual’s privacy, and the cases
center around the privacy rights a person may or may not have. But
in human societies, privacy is not just about the individual; it is a
group phenomenon. The notion of privacy is a fluid one that depends
heavily on social relationships and culture, and the social norms that
groups adopt.
For instance, while all cultures appear to value privacy, they may
not approach it in quite the same way.7 Some cultures maintain what
appears to be a minimum level of privacy, partly because their envir-
onment does not support the “right to be let alone” very easily. The
Pygmies of Zaire, who fall into this category, live in small hunting and
gathering communities in huts made mostly of leaves. As a group, they
have little privacy in that they are in relatively constant contact with
one another, and no one could put up a sign saying “Private property,
keep out.” But within the group, they use cultural strategies to regulate
interactions. For example, they rearrange the entrances to their huts
to avoid certain neighbors when they go in and out, and sometimes
put up “spite” fences between huts. They also separate into small
family groups for weeks at a time, and then return to the communal
encampment when they had enough alone time.
As we will see, this social aspect of privacy is especially important
on the Internet, as is the emphasis on control.
ONLINE PRIVACY
The characteristics of the online world make privacy an explosive
topic that introduces new twists and turns, well beyond the confusion
surrounding a “Private Property” sign or lidded garbage can. First,
anything uploaded to the Internet can potentially be viewed by
anyone with access to the net, a number climbing into the billions.
Second, the information is, in all likelihood, there to stay. As we have
seen, it is no easy matter to erase digital footprints once they are laid
down because digital copies are created at lightning speed, passed
299
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

around to different servers around the world, and stored on any
number of local devices. A racy photo meant just for the eyes of a
significant other can go viral on Twitter in minutes, with no way for
the sender to exert control over its release or its viewing.
Losing Control
Not only has the sender lost control of the information, he or she has
no idea who is accessing it or how they will use it. Try suing millions
of people for unlawfully sharing your photo without your consent.
The loss of control over how people use your information is espe-
cially perilous. In 2003, a fourteen-year-old boy in Canada made a
video of himself pretending to be a Jedi knight brandishing a light
saber, and his classmates uploaded it to the net. The video went viral,
and the boy suffered years of cyberbullying and harassment, including
death threats. He eventually quit school and underwent psychiatric
treatment for severe depression. School officials hesitated to get
involved, and the police could do nothing. His parents tried suing
the families of the children who uploaded the video, but the video
was already out there.
Years later, as a grown man, he thoughtfully reflected on his unwel-
come, instant celebrity:
Every single talk show in North America wanted me as a guest . . . But why
were they inviting me? They wanted to turn me into a circus act. Having
your 15 minutes of fame, when you’ve done something truly worthwhile, is
one thing. When you earn it for something humiliating, that’s entirely
different.8
The Privacy Paradox
The Internet’s characteristics do not just complicate privacy because of
the way they make it so easy to release information, and then amplify
its exposure to a worldwide audience. They also affect the way we
behave, as the other chapters in this book illustrate. The online world
promotes disinhibition, in particular. People are more willing to dis-
close sensitive information online, not just about themselves, but
about other people. The physical distance, along with a heightened
perception of anonymity in many Internet neighborhoods, combine
to promote behavior that makes it seem as though we no longer even
care about online privacy.
300
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

We also continue to use a service like Facebook despite the com-
pany’s checkered history of privacy abuses. In 2007, for instance, Face-
book launched what users called a “creepy” service that tracked their
actions on third-party websites, and then broadcast the information
to their friends. Facebook dropped that practice, but then in 2010 the
company decided to default users’ privacy settings to “everyone,”
meaning that anyone could view the user’s site, not just “friends.”
Facebook reversed course on that as well but continues to trigger
outrage and class-action lawsuits for many other practices that leave
users with little control over their information.9
Yet people keep posting. And they keep “friending” people they
know little about. A Missouri University student did an experiment
that showed how willing people are to add “friends.” He wrote a
computer program that generated requests to add him as a friend,
and sent it to 250,000 people. Almost one third of them accepted the
request, even though they had no idea who he was. Many Facebook
users found his experiment infuriating, and they sent him hate mes-
sages and obscenities.10 His results, though, illustrate how eager many
people are to bloat their “friends” list.
The privacy paradox is that people say they are concerned
about the issue; they also say they have at least some knowledge
about how to configure privacy settings. But at the same time, their
behavior often does not mirror those concerns. People reveal
detailed, personal information to large numbers, and they are sharing
more than ever before. Indeed, “sharing” is a key component of
Web 2.0, and the development of software tools to facilitate it is big
business. Privacy concerns don’t seem to be related in any direct way
to how much people disclose about themselves, and such concerns
also don’t lead to sustained efforts to modify privacy settings in
meaningful ways.
One study, for example, surveyed college students and found that
only about half said they restricted their profile so that “only friends”
could see those details, which often include personal and sensitive
information. On the surface, that sounds like a smart step. But consider
how many Facebook users add “friends” to their network about whom
they know little – who might be loosely considered friends of friends,
or even complete strangers, as that Missouri student’s experiment
showed.11
What accounts for this paradox? One possibility is that people
really don’t know how to manage their privacy online, even though
301
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

most proclaim that they have at least some knowledge. Privacy set-
tings are getting more and more complicated, and companies continu-
ally change policies. The policies themselves are tiresome to read,
difficult to interpret, and often not enforced anyway. Facebook and
Instagram, for instance, ban users from impersonating others, but that
certainly happens. Law enforcement agents, for instance, impersonate
people on those sites to trap criminals, with or without a judge’s
approval.12
Another possibility is that people have a general concern about
privacy but don’t always connect that concern to their own online
activities. In fact, one study confirmed that people think that others
are more vulnerable to privacy risks than they themselves are.13
A survey of a national sample in Korea asked two key questions.
One was, “How likely are you to fall victim to improper use of online
personal information?” The other question substituted “others” for
“you” in the same question, and added an age group for those “others,”
from teens to people fifty and up. Overall, people were more optimistic
about their own risks compared with the risks they thought others
were taking on, particularly if the others were teenagers.
A third possibility to explain the paradox is that a social network
is an especially precarious online environment for privacy, both psy-
chologically and technologically. People imagine that their posts are
restricted to the audience they invited – mainly, their “friends.” They
may disclose general facts about themselves in more public arenas,
but they think of their social network site as a private circle and feel
freer to share more sensitive information. Indeed, self-disclosure is a
key reason for joining a network to begin with. It is fundamental to
developing and maintaining relationships. If you post only about the
weather, you are not taking advantage of the networking site to build
stronger bonds and connections.
But as a person’s network grows, privacy risks grow with it. What
was once a tight circle of college buddies suffers from the context
collapse I discussed in Chapter 2. Parents, coworkers, bosses, aunts
and uncles, friends of friends, and random acquaintances see the same
disclosures, unless the individual takes great care to segment the audi-
ence. Even then, blunders happen. A friend might widely share a photo
you intended to display to close friends only, without your consent or
knowledge – until you see it trending on Twitter. Your friend thinks
the photo is hilarious, not embarrassing, and thought you would as
well. If you disagree, it’s too late.
302
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Finally, a conflict of interest exists between users concerned about
privacy and the companies that launch these very alluring “free”
services, as we discuss next.
BUSINESS MODELS AND “BIG DATA”
On most of the popular social network sites, people can create an
account for free and begin crafting their online personas by entering
their personal information, uploading photos and videos, and inviting
friends. The companies who develop and support the sites have
expenses for servers, payrolls, and bandwidth, and the more users who
join the site, the higher the expenses.
YouTube, for example, launched in the spring of 2005 with bills
of a few thousand dollars per month. By the end of that year, “hyper-
growth” was under way. Users were uploading thousands of videos
every day, and by mid-2006, uploads reached millions of clips daily.
The company still had few employees, but monthly web hosting
fees alone topped $1 million.14 Often, venture capitalists will help pay
such bills, betting that the new application will become a big winner
and that one of the cash-heavy tech giants will buy them out for a
princely sum. That happened to YouTube. In 2006, Google snapped
up the video-sharing company for $1.65 billion, making the site’s
creators very wealthy, indeed.
Free sites also earn revenue by charging for premium services, as
LinkedIn does, or by selling virtual goods, as Second Life does. But the
most important source of revenue comes from marketing. The social
networks, however, offer marketers far more than just a banner ad on
top of a public web site that almost no one clicks. They offer access
to your data, and that is extremely valuable.
Targeted Marketing
If you are the marketing director for a company that makes athletic
footwear, how should you allocate your marketing budget? Would
you buy space for a colorful full-page ad in a print newspaper? Would
you buy time on ESPN for a thirty-second TV commercial? The sports
channel is more likely to draw an audience that is interested in athlet-
ics, so that might be a better choice. But because of the Internet, you
have an infinitely greater set of options for reaching the audience
you want to reach, with just the right message. You can use the data
303
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

that people themselves contribute to social networks to target, for
instance, single women in their twenties who belong to a gym and
list jogging as an interest. Then you display an ad that features shoes
in the target’s favorite color.
The more users in the social network, and the more useful
marketing data those users contribute, the more revenue the site will
earn from advertisers. This is a key reason for that conflict of interest
between privacy concerns and the goals of the social network site. The
users are not really customers of those sites; they, and the data they
provide, are the site’s assets – the products that generate revenue. And
that data can be combined with other digital trails the user leaves
behind, from visiting websites, checking into a location, making
purchases, or posting comments.
Social network users may not realize – or even notice – that the ads
they see are not the same as the ones their sedentary friends who hate
jogging see when they log in. Some may appreciate the targeted
marketing, so they see special deals on just the kinds of products
they would actually purchase. But privacy advocates are deeply con-
cerned about just how much data are being collected about people by
companies as well as governments. It is called big data, but “big”
doesn’t even begin to describe it.
Going Viral
In addition to targeted marketing, social networks offer advertisers
unique opportunities to tap into word-of-mouth advertising and find
those influential people whose opinions everyone respects. Your
friend’s post about a great new restaurant carries much more weight
than any ad the restaurant paid for, especially if the friend is someone
you trust.
Considerable effort goes into mathematically analyzing the activity
on social networks to see who might be the most valuable “influen-
cer.” One study, for instance, explored these influence relationships
by analyzing the ratings people in the network gave to one another’s
posts, and the number of supporting and opposing interactions among
the users. Someone whose posts are frequently liked or retweeted by
many different people in the network, for instance, would be one of
the influencers. And within a network, there are often some key
individuals who jointly can be quite powerful opinion leaders – the
“in” crowd that sets the norms and that others follow.15
304
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

The psychology of going viral is also getting more research atten-
tion, especially because that kind of word-of-mouth promotion –
which costs nothing – is incredibly valuable to marketers, celebrities,
politicians, and anyone who wants a big, supportive audience. Internet
memes can gather an astonishing amount of momentum in a short
period of time, engaging thousands or millions in a shared theme.
What features make people want to spread certain items to their
networks and beyond? In one set of studies, researchers used infrared
eye-tracking scanners to follow what people were actually looking
at when they were shown different video ads; they also analyzed
the subjects’ facial expressions for emotional expression.16 The goal
was to find out which ads people are most likely to watch to the end
and then share with their networks.
One finding is that two key emotions play the most important role
in keeping viewers engaged in an ad: joy and surprise. Online, people
get bored quickly and will stop watching, so the strategies that TV
commercials of the past used – building toward a dramatic or surprise
ending – don’t work. TV watchers can’t just stop an ad with a click, but
online viewers can. Triggering joy or surprise in the beginning is the
best way to hold their attention. Bud Light’s “Swear Jar” ad, for
instance, starts out by showing that workers have to drop a quarter
into a jar for any curse word they utter. When one worker learns the
money will be used to buy Bud Light for the office, he immediately
swears, and happily drops in a quarter to build up the pot.
The Tip of the Iceberg
Social network sites are like icebergs in terms of how the users perceive
the information they contribute and what is actually collected and
stored. What they see, and what they share, is just the tip. Underlying
that is the enormous amount of personal data that is collected on
each user, drawing from what users themselves voluntarily add, but
also from visiting websites, adding “likes,” posting comments, and
checking into location apps. Big data can also draw on records about
marriages, deaths, divorces, net worth, home address, charitable dona-
tions, criminal offenses, and more. As the Internet of Things expands,
that smartwatch on your wrist might add your heart rate into the
mix, or your refrigerator might relay your midnight snacking habits.
The technology to collect, store, and analyze all of this big data has
advanced by leaps and bounds, and social network companies have
305
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

huge incentives to encourage people to keep contributing data.
To this end, they design software that makes it extremely easy to
ignore privacy concerns. Clicking “update” without thinking about
privacy implications is astoundingly easy. Spontaneous sharing of that
impromptu photo on Instagram or video on Vine is equally effortless.
On the flip side, the software developers erect high hurdles for those
who are reluctant to post sensitive information online. Social net-
works constantly remind you to update your status, check in with
your friends, or send someone in your network a virtual gift. Prompts
to complete your profile seem endless, with promises of more friends
and a richer network. On one service I was testing, I just used initials
and some numbers as my “name,” but the software detected that and
prompted me to “correct” that.
Nevertheless, companies must be careful not to alienate their users
to the extent that they delete their accounts because of privacy
concerns. So it is in their interest to keep users’ focus on the iceberg’s
tip and not draw attention to the vast and rapidly growing big data
under the surface. When a misstep triggers a wave of user outrage, a
few people will protest by moving onto a rival’s service. However,
because of network effects, this risk is not that big for the major social
networks. Switching costs are extremely high because users would
want to persuade all their network friends to switch as well, abandon-
ing all their digital assets and histories and starting over.
SURVEILLANCE
With more and more sensors, cameras, and chips in the Internet of
Things, we can expect more surveillance as well. But who is doing it?
The Agents of Surveillance
The business models of the online services depend on data collection
and surveillance, but they are not the only ones who have an interest
in such tracking. Governments also launch programs that collect
enormous amounts of data, albeit for different reasons. Government
interests cover a wide range – from tracking political opponents and
dissidents to preventing terrorist attacks and apprehending criminals.
Social media are a particularly rich target for government surveil-
lance. Egyptian authorities, for instance, solicited bids for a new
surveillance system that would systematically monitor activity on
306
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Facebook, Twitter, Skype, and YouTube, along with popular mobile
phone apps such as WhatsApp. The system would flag communica-
tions that suggest defamation of religion, illegal demonstrations,
strikes, sit-ins, and violence.
Surveillance is not just about being watched by businesses and gov-
ernments. It also includes mutual surveillance. Social media give every-
one a stage to perform on, and a pair of binoculars so that we can all
watch. It becomes an Internet “omnopticon,” with people watching one
another. We might think that our performances would interest only
friends and family, but when they go online, they can reach far further.
A surprisingly large amount of surveillance happens because we
agree to it, often enthusiastically. We sign up for those free services
that are the bedrock of online surveillance, without reading the terms
of use, because the services are so useful. We welcome the suggestions
from Amazon’s recommendation engine, not minding where the com-
pany got all that information.
Coupons, discounts, and prizes also play a role in this kind of “do-it-
yourself” surveillance. Progressive Insurance, for instance, launched
a program called the MyRate plan for customers who agree to put a
device in their cars to track their driving habits. The drivers can get
discounts as high as 30 percent for a good driving record, but they
could also pay more if the reports show speeding, jack-rabbit starts,
or panicked stops.
The Internet of Things
The age in which objects all around us are connected to the Internet is
upon us, and we may or may not be consenting to surveillance by
all those “things,” as Progressive’s customers are encouraged to do. The
Internet of Things is the next trillion-dollar business, and it requires
a major upgrade to the Internet’s original addressing scheme to accom-
modate billions more connections.
What are all these objects, besides the obvious smartphones and
tablets? Cameras on utility poles, sensors embedded in roadways,
toll collection sensors on windshields, and event data recorders or
“black boxes” installed in the vast majority of new cars are a few that
track driving behavior. In the home, TVs and security cameras are
already connected, and thermostats that track your energy usage are
spreading rapidly. General Electric announced a new line of connected
ovens and refrigerators, so you can preheat your oven with a
307
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

smartphone and receive an email reminder from your refrigerator if
you accidentally left the door open.
Health monitoring via connected devices is a major category for the
Internet of Things, with devices to track your heart rate and oxygen
saturation as you exercise, or bracelets to monitor your exposure
to ultraviolet rays. For instance, one device attaches to your smart-
phone and contains a sensor to estimate your blood alcohol level from
your breath. The device and the app are promoted as a means to help
people make informed decisions about whether they should drive,
and the online service also tracks your data.
Much of this innovation will benefit all of us, but in the rush to
embed chips in children’s toys and household appliances, the potential
for surveillance and threats to privacy is not getting much attention.
One legal scholar bought the breath-testing device to look into privacy
issues, and he was quite troubled by his findings.17 The instruction
manual contained no mention of a privacy policy that covered the
data the company collected, nor was privacy mentioned when he
downloaded the app to his smartphone. He found a barely visible link
to a “Privacy Policy” at the bottom of the company’s web page and
learned that this very sensitive data would be stored indefinitely in
the cloud; users appeared to be unable to delete or correct it.
Surrounded by objects that collect and store all kinds of informa-
tion about human beings, a host of privacy issues come to mind.
But how does surveillance affect human behavior?
On Being Watched: Psychological Effects of Surveillance
Much behavioral science research demonstrates that “being watched”
has significant effects on the way we behave. As I discussed in
Chapter 3, the mere presence of other people makes a difference. In
general, our performance tends to improve when other people are
present, at least for the more automated kinds of tasks that don’t
require intense concentration. Arousal goes up, along with alertness.
In one early study, for example, subjects came to the lab to perform a
rotary-pursuit task in which they used a wand to track a target moving
around in a circle. Their goal was to keep the wand on the target as it
rotated for as long as possible.18 Some subjects performed the task in a
room with another person sitting passively off to the side, out of the
subject’s view. These people performed considerably better compared
with controls who performed the same task in a room by themselves.19
308
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

People also show more prosocial behavior when others are watch-
ing them. A study conducted in various London neighborhoods inves-
tigated whether people would donate more money to a charity if the
door-to-door collector used good eye contact. Regardless of neighbor-
hood, those collectors who gazed into the eyes of the person who
answered the door raised considerably more money compared with
the collectors who avoided eye contact.20
The feeling of being watched, even when another person isn’t pre-
sent, also has effects on charitable giving. Researchers in the United
Kingdom demonstrated the “watching eyes effect” by inviting subjects
to participate in a study that ostensibly would examine how personal-
ity and faith affect prosocial behavior. When the subjects arrived, they
went to a cubicle in which they were supposed to complete a variety of
personality tests on a computer. On the desk sat a charity jar in which
subjects could voluntarily drop coins to help a well-known organiza-
tion that provided ambulance services. On the wall in front of them was
a sign that said, “Please do not consume any food or drink in the
cubicle.” For half the subjects, just above that sign, the researchers tacked
a photo showing a man’s eyes, gazing straight ahead. The image for the
control subjects was the logo of the Institute of Neuroscience, where
the research took place. The “watching eyes” worked. Subjects who took
the personality tests with the eyes “staring” at them contributed signifi-
cantly more to the charity by dropping more money in the jar.
Cameras are becoming nearly ubiquitous in public spaces of major
cities around the world, and these “eyes” are watching citizens all the
time. Many argue that the cameras help deter criminal activity and
other kinds of antisocial behavior. A study conducted in Cincinnati
over a four-month period found just that – at least for the first couple
of months.21 After that, the cameras’ effects waned, as though people
ignored them or forgot they were there. The cameras might be more
effective if someone mounted a pair of “eyes” over them, or at least a
sign reminding people about the surveillance.
Cameras are also proliferating in less public spaces, such as schools.
A study of schools in the United Kingdom found that teachers think
the surveillance is mostly positive and that it is useful to prevent theft
and vandalism. The students, however, hold very mixed views. Many
expressed outrage, judging the cameras as a symbol of distrust.
I think it is an invasion of privacy. I think if you want pupils to act
responsibly then you need to show them that they are trusted. You need to
309
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

treat them like adults, and with a little bit of respect. For some individuals it
becomes a self fulfilling prophecy. If you are always expecting them to be up
to no good then they might decide that they might as well misbehave
because they are being treated like they are doing anyway. – Sarah, Urban
High.22
For these students, the surveillance could backfire, poisoning relation-
ships with teachers and administrators and increasing bad behavior.
They are particularly incensed when cameras are installed in bath-
rooms. One student, apparently resigned to their presence, said, “I don’t
like it. I have got used to it – you have to, but I still don’t like it . . .”
It would seem that people do behave differently when they have a
feeling of being watched, but what happens when there are no “eyes,”
or camera lenses, in the room? We all know, or should know by now,
that immense quantities of data are scooped up by businesses and
governments, but we can’t see their eyes or feel their presence as we
type at our keyboards or post a video. Does that knowledge alone
affect how we act? The privacy paradox suggests that the answer is
“not much,” but research does find evidence that different types of
surveillance trigger privacy concerns and can affect our behavior.
In the absence of eyes, one factor that affects how we react to online
surveillance is our judgments about intentions. Why is that organiza-
tion tracking my data? Is it to help me, or is the reason less benign? An
intriguing study of almost 2,000 Finns presented a series of scenarios
in which the subjects’ data were being collected without their explicit
consent, and then asked them how they felt about it in terms of privacy,
and whether they would change their behavior.23 For example, one
scenario read,
Your only computer has a device that logs everything typed on the computer’s
keyboard to a file. You know it is possible for your employer to view the file.
You find it likely that the employer wants to monitor whether you are
sharing confidential information regarding your job with nonemployees.
For some scenarios, such as this one, the intention was painted as
negative – to check to see if you’re stealing company secrets, goofing
off at work, or lying about something. In others it was more neutral
or positive, such as recording your data in case of emergency or in the
event of a natural disaster. No motive was mentioned for some scen-
arios, so the subjects didn’t know why the data were collected.
310
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

As you might expect, data collection for benign intentions triggered
the least concern about privacy, while negative intentions triggered
the most. But the scenarios in which the reason for the surveillance
was unknown caused almost as much concern as the ones with nega-
tive intentions. It seems we do not give the agents of surveillance the
benefit of the doubt. If they are not transparent about their motives,
we assume they are unlikely to be to our advantage.
STRATEGIES FOR MANAGING PRIVACY ONLINE
While the individual’s ability to manage and protect online privacy
may be far from perfect, especially given the advantages that the data
collectors have gained, some creative strategies have emerged. Some
of these work reasonably well, others less so. Let’s start with the most
fundamental strategy, which is about making careful decisions about
what to actually post online.
Managing Disclosure
Arguably, the most effective strategy is to manage disclosure. But that
is easier said than done – partly because we want to share information
with trusted others and also because so many applications that we
want to or must use require disclosure. Registering on healthcare.gov,
for example, requires applicants to enter a considerable amount of
very sensitive information.
How do we judge whether it’s safe to enter personal data into online
forms? Depending on the context, we rely on a variety of cues, such as
the “lock” symbol on the browser that signifies encrypted transmis-
sion, or the URL itself. Sometimes, however, our evaluations of the
context are not very accurate, and we rely on misleading cues to
judge risk.
One study, for example, explored how the online context affects the
willingness to disclose sensitive information.24 The experimenters
created an online survey that asked intrusive questions such as “Have
you ever tried cocaine?” and “Have you ever ‘cheated’ while in a
relationship?” Then they designed three different interfaces in which
the survey would appear. One was very professional looking, with
the title, “Carnegie Mellon University Executive Council Survey on
Ethical Behaviors.” A second was designed to downplay privacy con-
cerns, and bore the title, “How BAD are U??” with a cartoon devil next
311
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

to it. The third interface was a neutral control, with a simple heading
that read, “Survey of Student Behaviors.”
Surprisingly, the students admitted to engaging in more bad behav-
ior on the survey that appeared on the unprofessional site bearing
“How BAD are U??” The organization behind the professional site
would likely do a better job of protecting private information, but
the unprofessional one apparently led students to downplay privacy
concerns.
In a follow-up study, those researchers tried arousing some privacy
concerns before the students started the survey. They added an initial
task in which students either identified photos of endangered fish
(Find the endangered fish) or picked out emails that were most likely
to be “phishing” (Find the “phishing” emails). When the task was about
fish and unrelated to privacy, students made more sensitive admissions
on the unprofessional site, as they did in the previous experiment. But
the “phishing” task aroused privacy concerns, and students who did
that task first were more reluctant to disclose sensitive information
on the unprofessional site. The conclusion is that we do care about
privacy but the environment affects our choices. In certain settings,
we might misinterpret cues that can mislead and even increase the
danger of exposure.
On social networks, users develop quite a variety of techniques
to navigate privacy issues and avoid disclosing information to the
“wrong” people. Teens, for example, bear a reputation for not caring
much about privacy, but they actually care very much about certain
types of surveillance. They may worry less about government surveil-
lance but far more about intrusions by parents or other adults.
To deal with the concerns that matter to them, teens develop some
innovative privacy management strategies. Researchers interviewed
eighteen-year-old Mikalah, who was a ward of the state, and she found
a unique way to manage her privacy on Facebook. She deactivated her
account during the day when the adults at the government agencies
would be checking it, and then activated it again every evening when
her friends were on. She created a kind of “invisibility cloak” for the
daytime, so the adults thought she didn’t even have a Facebook page.25
Teens also make good use of social steganography to manage the
collapsing context on Facebook, a technique that involves hiding
messages in plain sight. Carmen, a seventeen-year-old Latina inter-
viewed in the same study, complained that her mom often jumps in
and adds inappropriate comments on her wall, which scares everyone
312
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

away: “Everyone disappears after the mom post . . . And it’s just uncool
having your mom all over your wall, that’s just lame.” When she broke
up with her boyfriend, she wanted sympathy from her friends, but
didn’t want her mom to overreact. So she posted, “Always look on
the bright side of life,” which her mother thought was a good sign.
Her friends, though, immediately recognized the reference to Monty
Python’s Life of Brian, a comedy in which a man being crucified sings
those lyrics, so they contacted her privately to console.
On social networks that offer users a way to segment their audience
into categories, users can tailor messages to target groups in a more
intentional way. Carmen could have done that by putting her mom
and other family members into a “family” group that would see only
updates she chooses. As I mentioned earlier, many students don’t
bother to do that because of the time and effort it takes. But some
do. In a survey of college students, those with large and diverse net-
works were more likely to use that kind of segmentation, creating
groups such as college classmates, childhood friends, family, and fac-
ulty.26 These students also said they could then be more honest,
intimate, and detailed by limiting the audience.
Another way people manage privacy is by creating multiple iden-
tities in different spaces. They might voice their extreme political
views on one site, but restrain the content they post to their Facebook
account where their views might generate endless arguments from
friends and family who disagree.
People who prefer a safer route, especially those who are more
concerned about privacy, often drift toward the lowest common denom-
inator approach on their social networks.27 They stick to the most
innocuous information that is safe for anyone to see, whether it is an
employer, teacher, parent, child, or significant other. Social media
are awash with humorous G-rated posts, such as those about Grumpy
Cat and Henri, le Chat Noir, that avoid offense, regardless of who
might be viewing.
One much riskier strategy that some people use in an attempt to
control the release of sensitive or embarrassing information about
them is to seek legal action to have it removed from the Internet.
Sometimes this works, but the strategy can also easily backfire. The
Streisand effect became a well-known Internet phenomenon when
Barbra Streisand sued a photographer for taking an aerial photograph
of her home in Malibu. The photographer was documenting erosion
along the California coastline for the government, and he added the
313
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

image to an online public collection of thousands of such coastal
images. Before she filed her $50 million lawsuit, the image had been
downloaded only a few times, some of which were by Streisand’s own
legal team. But afterward, hundreds of thousands of people learned of
the lawsuit; they promptly downloaded the image and spread it far
and wide. This effect plays out over and over, and illustrates how
strategies to contain something once it is uploaded can backfire.
Technical Protections
More technically savvy users are less likely to accept the default
settings for privacy, and instead tinker with them in ways that reduce
the hazards of the collapsing context, public disclosure, or just a break-
in. They also take time to untag their names from photos, and ask
friends not to tag them.
The settings can often be quite complicated, and just remembering
what your own settings are and who sees what can be taxing. Some
innovative entrepreneurs have stepped in to help privacy-conscious
social network users with products such as “Internet Shame Insurance.”
This software helps you avoid embarrassing disclosures by showing you
exactly who will see a post you’re working on based on your settings.
Snapchat is another app for smartphones that offers a technical
control to help people protect privacy and avoid unintended disclos-
ures. Any image or video sent through the service is automatically
deleted a few seconds after the recipient opens it. The app is wildly
popular – with teens in particular – but it offers a false sense of security.
The recipient can easily just snap a picture of the picture using a
second device, and then upload that to the Internet. Users also must
rely on the company to uphold its own privacy policies, but the
Federal Trade Commission charged the company with collecting loca-
tion data on its users, which it promised not to do.28 To make matters
worse, Snapchat servers are as vulnerable to break-ins as any other
service. Hackers have threatened to hold a “snappening” in which they
release thousands of images that the senders thought had “vanished.”
Technical controls that are used to prevent unauthorized access rely
on three strategies, as shown in Table 10.1. For websites and applica-
tions, some of these aren’t feasible, at least not yet. Passwords and
secret questions are the most commonly used, but concerns about
privacy and unauthorized access are motivating organizations to
implement more secure methods.
314
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

For instance, some sites offer two-factor authentication, which
requires users to pass a second test to enter the site, not just enter a
password. For example, each time you want to log in from a new device,
the website might send a code to your phone that you must also enter,
along with your password. This way, the site depends not just on
something the user knows. It also demands that the user has something
in his or her possession, in this case, the person’s mobile phone.
One of the most powerful defenses for online privacy is Tor, origin-
ally developed to protect government communications. Tor is a dis-
tributed network of computers with accompanying software that
people can use to communicate anonymously and keep websites from
tracking their activities or location. Tor also offers users the opportun-
ity to publish websites without revealing the site’s physical location.
Tor is widely used by people who have a strong need for privacy
protection and anonymity, such as journalists, activists, political dissi-
dents, whistleblowers, and those who want to discuss sensitive topics
in an anonymous environment. But anonymity also protects the priv-
acy of criminal gangs, terrorists, drug dealers, and others evading the
law. Tor and its community of developers often find themselves at the
center of the many debates surrounding the need to balance privacy
and security.
THE FUTURE OF PRIVACY
The norms about privacy have never changed so fast in human his-
tory,
although
technological
advances
have
certainly
triggered
changes before. When the telephone was introduced, for instance,
wealthy Londoners placed the device in the servants’ quarters, believ-
ing that an unannounced phone call from someone was an outrageous
invasion of privacy. How rude not to stop by and leave a calling card!
Table 10.1. Strategies to authenticate users
AUTHENTICATION STRATEGY
EXAMPLES
Something the user knows
Password, PIN, answers to security
questions
Something the user has in his or her
possession
ID card, badge, credit card, passport,
mobile phone
Something the user is
Fingerprint, retinal pattern, voice
pattern, DNA
315
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

The constantly evolving and expanding world of cyberspace is creat-
ing much more turbulence, more controversy, and far more uncer-
tainty about privacy. What would those Londoners have thought
about the endless stream of emails, texts, and status updates that flow
into smartphones?
The chaos is especially acute because the Internet is a global tech-
nology, but privacy norms are more local in terms of culture, age, and
other sociodemographic characteristics. The legal systems are well
behind the trends in how our conceptions of privacy are transforming,
and major legal disputes are unfolding that will have explosive effects –
psychologically, socially, and economically.
The “Right to Be Forgotten”
As I mentioned in Chapter 8 on child development, Google’s former
CEO Eric Schmidt once suggested that teens should be able to change
their names when they reach adulthood, so they can leave their spotty
digital records behind them and start fresh. In the European Union,
where privacy is considered a human right and data privacy laws are
stricter than in the United States, the “right to be forgotten” gained
hold. This would let teens and anyone else do something similar to
what Schmidt suggested, but without having to change names. Essen-
tially, the right to be forgotten gives people the right to have data
about them erased under certain circumstances.
A key case involves a Spanish lawyer who had financial problems in
the 1990s and had to sell off property. A newspaper reported the trans-
action – in print form at the time – but then later launched its online
presence, which included access to the older archives. The lawyer had
long since resolved his financial difficulties, but in 2010, he discovered
that the report appeared in the result list when anyone Googled his
name. The newspaper refused to delete the report, so the lawyer
submitted a request to Google to remove the search results from its
index so people could not so easily find that damaging report.29
Google argued that it was just a search engine – a medium – and that
it didn’t control the information. But the Spanish court disagreed and
determined that Google should “de-index” the material.
That ruling and others like it open up many questions about how
much control individuals should have over information about them –
a key part of the very definition of privacy. Free-speech advocates
worry that too much control is not in the public interest; for example,
316
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

a candidate for office might insist that information about a ten-year-
old scandal be “forgotten” by the Internet. Legal scholars Warren and
Brandeis worried about this same issue back in 1890 when they first
proposed a legal framework for privacy. The right to be forgotten
might lead to unintended consequences in which history is rewritten.
Privacy advocates cite the dangers of surveillance, public disclosure,
and privacy violations that have grown so quickly, as well as the unfair-
ness that results when the big tech companies vacuum up all this
personal data, use it to generate revenue, but do not pay the contribu-
tors anything for it.30 Most tech companies in the United States are
firmly against the right to be forgotten, claiming that it would lead to
a further Balkanization of the Internet, with different privacy policies
by region. It would also be immensely difficult to implement on any
scale. As you might expect, however, entrepreneurs have certainly
taken up the opportunity toprovide new services that promise to delete
customers’ online presence, with or without a right to be forgotten.
Predictions
The debates about the right to be forgotten – and privacy in general –
raise many questions that don’t yet have answers and that are not
likely to generate much consensus in any case. Although the Internet
is now well out of infancy and into its young adulthood, it continues
to change and present new challenges for all of us.
The Pew Research Center canvassed thousands of people involved
in the Internet’s development to learn what they thought the future
holds for online privacy, and whether a trusted and reliable privacy
infrastructure would emerge.31 Their predictions ran the gamut from a
very dark vision in which privacy becomes obsolete to an optimistic
one in which human beings achieve a balance between privacy pro-
tection and competing concerns.
On the pessimistic side, one advisor to a government ministry
said, “George Orwell may have been an optimist” in imagining “Big
Brother.” Many respondents lamented how willing people are to dis-
close personal information online for minor conveniences, some free-
bies, or even a chance at 15 minutes of Internet fame. Without a major
catastrophe that gets worldwide attention and causes major damage,
privacy is likely to continue to erode. Companies and governments
will increase surveillance and data gathering, and only the fanatical,
the technically savvy, and the wealthy will have the time, knowledge,
and resources to protect their privacy. Corporations and governments
317
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

will not give up their data-gathering practices without a huge fight. “It
is too convenient and too profitable for all parties involved,” said one
professor. The Internet of Things will add immeasurably to this march
toward ubiquitous surveillance and privacy’s funeral.
In contrast, optimists cite the rapid advance of technologies that
counteract surveillance, such as Tor. The revelations of Edward Snow-
den, who leaked classified government information, woke up a lot of
people who are now hoping that a solid privacy infrastructure will
eventually follow. The massive hack in which millions of employee
records at the Office of Personnel Management were stolen adds fur-
ther weight to the importance of a strong privacy infrastructure. Some
also believe that people are getting smarter about how they use the
Internet and what kinds of information they contribute. A policy
analyst who participated in the Pew study said, “People will become
more aware of the tradeoffs, which will drive an evolution of norms.
They will have become more sophisticated about choices regarding
disclosures they make, exercising finer-grained control – in part
because there will be more technical support for doing so.”32
I lean toward the optimists’ view, partly because of the research
I described in this chapter. We all certainly make blunders, but the
research shows that we are finding ways to learn from them and adopt
privacy strategies that fit our needs – whether that means using the
lowest common denominator to post on a social network or purchas-
ing a subscription to a service that tracks and erases digital footprints.
Many people are becoming more knowledgeable about online risks
and are willing to push back when some egregious privacy violation
comes to light. Privacy advocacy groups, such as the Electronic Priv-
acy Information Center, publicize these and gather support for better
protections through legislation or other kinds of pressure.
The privacy infrastructure that emerges in the coming years may be
creaky, and it will still have many holes. We will still need to rely on
our own resources, recognizing that the Internet is a risky place when
it comes to privacy. Our own online behavior is at the same time one
of the greatest risks, but also something we are learning to better
manage in a digital world.
NOTES
1 Sun on privacy: “Get over it.” (1999, January 26). Retrieved January 4, 2015,
from http://archive.wired.com/politics/law/news/1999/01/17538
2 Warren, S. V., & Brandeis, L. D. (1890). The right to privacy. Harvard Law
Review, 4(5), 193–220.
318
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

3 Gomberg, L. J. (2012). The case for privacy: A history of privacy in the United
States as seen through a psychological lens and defined by case law
and the impact of social media (whatever happened to “it’s none of your
business”?) (PhD dissertation). Fielding Graduate University, California.
Retrieved
from
http://search.proquest.com.proxy1.library.jhu.edu/doc
view/921498079/abstract?accountid=11752
4 Prosser, W. L. (1960). Privacy. California Law Review, 48(3), 383.
5 Boring v. Google. (n.d.). Retrieved January 5, 2015, from http://itlaw.wikia.
com/wiki/Boring_v._Google
6 Laufer, R. S., & Wolfe, M. (1977). Privacy as a concept and a social issue:
A multidimensional developmental theory. Journal of Social Issues, 33(3),
22–42. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1977.tb01880.x
7 Altman, I. (1977). Privacy regulation: Culturally universal or culturally
specific? Journal of Social Issues, 33(3), 66–84.
8 Zimmerman, N. (2013, May 10). “Star Wars Kid” breaks silence, says online
fame made him suicidal [update]. Gawker. Retrieved January 6, 2015, from
http://gawker.com/star-wars-kid-breaks-silence-says-online-fame-made-h-
499800192
9 Singleton, M. (2014, August 4). 11,000 people sue Facebook over privacy
violations. Daily Dot. Retrieved January 6, 2015, from www.dailydot.com/
technology/facebook-class-action-lawsuit/
10 Jump, K. (2005, September 1). A new kind of fame. Columbia Missourian.
Retrieved
from
www.columbiamissourian.com/a/85954/a-new-kind-of-
fame/
11 Debatin, B., Lovejoy, J. P., Horn, A.-K., & Hughes, B. N. (2009). Facebook
and online privacy: Attitudes, behaviors, and unintended consequences.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 15(1), 83–108. doi:10.1111/
j.1083-6101.2009.01494.x
12 Palazzolo, J., & Gershman, J. (2015, January 22). More investigators go under-
cover online. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/law/
2015/01/22/privacy-advocates-say-police-impersonations-a-growing-concern/
13 Baek, Y. M., Kim, E., & Bae, Y. (2014). My privacy is okay, but theirs is
endangered: Why comparative optimism matters in online privacy con-
cerns. Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 48–56. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.010
14 Kafka, P. (2010,March19).The numbers behind the world’s fastest-growing web
site: YouTube’s finances revealed. Retrieved from http://allthingsd.com/
20100319/the-numbers-behind-the-worlds-fastest-growing-web-site-youtubes-
finances-revealed/
15 Xu, K., Guo, X., Li, J., Lau, R. Y. K., & Liao, S. S. Y. (2012). Discovering target
groups in social networking sites: An effective method for maximizing joint
influential power. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 11(4),
318–334. doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2012.01.002
16 Teixeira, T. (2012, March). The new science of viral ads. Harvard Business
Review, 90(3), 25–27.
17 Peppet, S. R. (2014). Regulating the Internet of Things: First steps toward
managing discrimination, privacy, security, and consent. Texas Law Review,
93(1), 85–178.
18 An online version of the rotary pursuit task is available on YouTube at
www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGhJ0lWkQOw.
19 Guerin, B. (1986). The effects of mere presence on a motor task. The Journal of
Social Psychology, 126(3), 399–401. doi:10.1080/00224545.1986.9713602
319
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SURVEILLANCE

20 Bull, R., & Gibson-Robinson, E. (1981). The influences of eye-gaze, style of
dress, and locality on the amounts of money donated to a charity. Human
Relations, 34(10), 895–905. doi:10.1177/001872678103401005
21 Mazerolle, L., Hurley, D., & Chamlin, M. (2002). Social behavior in public
space: An analysis of behavioral adaptations to CCTV. Security Journal, 15(3),
59–75. doi:10.1057/palgrave.sj.8340118
22 Taylor, E. (2010). I spy with my little eye: The use of CCTV in schools and
the impact on privacy. The Sociological Review, 58(3), 381–405. doi:10.1111/
j.1467-954X.2010.01930.x
23 Oulasvirta, A., Suomalainen, T., Hamari, J., Lampinen, A., & Karvonen, K.
(2014). Transparency of intentions decreases privacy concerns in ubiqui-
tous surveillance. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 17(10),
633–638. doi:10.1089/cyber.2013.0585
24 John, L. K., Acquisti, A., & Loewenstein, G. (2011). Strangers on a plane:
Context-dependent willingness to divulge sensitive information. Journal
of Consumer Research, 37(5), 858–873. doi:10.1086/656423
25 Marwick, A. E., & boyd, d. (2014). Networked privacy: How teenagers nego-
tiate context in social media. New Media and Society, 16(7), 1051–1067.
doi:10.1177/1461444814543995
26 Vitak, J. (2012). The impact of context collapse and privacy on social
network site disclosures. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 56(4),
451–470. doi:10.1080/08838151.2012.732140
27 Hogan, B. (2010). The presentation of self in the age of social media: Distin-
guishing performances and exhibitions online. Bulletin of Science, Technol-
ogy and Society, 30(6), 377–386. doi:10.1177/0270467610385893
28 Snyder, B. (2014). Snapchat deceived its customers, FTC says. Fortune.com, 1.
29 Bygrave, L. A. (2015). A right to be forgotten? Communications of the ACM,
58(1), 35–37. doi:10.1145/2688491
30 Lanier, J. (2013). Who owns the future?. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
31 Rainie, L., & Anderson, J. (2014). The future of privacy. Pew Research Center.
Retrieved from www.pewInternet.org/2014/12/18/future-of-privacy/
32 Ibid.
320
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

11
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK
One year ago, I left the Internet. I thought it was making me
unproductive. I thought it lacked meaning. I thought it was corrupting
my soul.
– Paul Miller1
Technology writer Paul Miller decided to “unplug” in 2012, burnt out
by what he called the hamster wheel of email and the deluge of
information on the web. He kept his job at The Verge, partly because
his boss approved of the plan and thought it would make a great story.
Miller continued to submit articles, but he stopped using email, the
web, social media, and everything else on the net.
Miller is not the only one alarmed by how central the Internet had
become in his life and how much time he spent online. Many of you
reading this chapter can relate to his angst, a sinking feeling that we
may have gone overboard with our gadgets and constant connected-
ness. A friend asked me, “Do you check your smartphone as soon as
you wake up?” Then she added, “My problem is that I wake up to
check it and can’t get back to sleep.”
Researchers interested in how much people use the Internet often
ask questions such as, “How many hours a week do you spend online?”
But with net access available on smartphones, watches, and Google
Glass headgear, we are increasingly always online, so questions like
that seem quaintly antiquated. Advantages abound, of course, from
catching up on work during a long commute on a train equipped with
wifi to an instant notification about a flash flood on a road you were
about to cross. But problems are also arising as the Internet’s time sink
encroaches on more and more of our lives. Let’s start with what is
321

called work–life balance, which may need a new name because it is
now less “balance” and more “merger.”
THE 24/7 WORK WEEK
Do your colleagues expect you to read email in the evenings and on
weekends? Does your boss expect that? Do you expect that of yourself,
and of your own coworkers? Many do, especially if they are in indus-
tries such as real estate, sales, journalism, consulting, finance, or safety.
And even if your employer doesn’t write down any particular policies,
you may feel as if you need to stay in close touch – to earn that
promotion, for instance, or to escape the next layoff.2
In the 1930s, John Maynard Keynes predicted that we would soon be
enjoying a fifteen-hour work week, thanks to advances in technology.
It hasn’t quite worked out that way. Instead, people in the United States
are working more hours – an average of forty-seven hours per week
according to one survey.3 They also use fewer and fewer of their vac-
ation days.
Work–Life Balance
Research on how people juggle their work responsibilities and their
personal lives took quite a sharp turn when home Internet access
became widespread. Especially when mobile devices became stand-
ard equipment, our working and personal lives became increasingly
merged. One woman I know wears a bluetooth earpiece all day at
work, and appears to be engaged in conversations much of the time
as she works at her computer or walks to the coffee machine. She also
keeps a window open in the corner of her screen to receive instant
messages from friends and family members. She earns high marks
for her work, despite the technological blending – or perhaps because
of it. She said that if she couldn’t stay in touch with her loved ones
this way while she is at work, she would miss a lot of work to be
with them.
LinkedIn conducted a survey of more than 18,000 professionals in
twenty-six countries and found that a better work–life balance was the
second-most important reason (after more pay) that people would
happily jump ship to a new job.4 However, the interest in improving
work–life balance varied by age. Millennials were less concerned about
that compared with people over forty, perhaps because they had not
322
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

yet started families or because they felt more comfortable with the
“merger” model in which work and personal lives intertwine.
Managing Boundaries
Boundary theory explores the way people manage the boundaries for
work life and home life, how we make decisions about how permeable
any particular boundary should be, and how our roles shift as bound-
aries are crossed. One way to achieve boundaries between work and
home life is to separate the roles by time, space, or both.
For instance, a parent walks in the front door, announcing, “I’m
home!” That signals to all in earshot that the boundary between work
and family was crossed. The person transitions from the working role
to the parent role, just by crossing the threshold.
If that sounds a bit 1950s, it is, and boundaries as simple as that were
television fare in shows like Father Knows Best or Leave It to Beaver.
With ubiquitous Internet access and mobile devices, such simple
boundaries defined by time and space are illusory. Boundaries are
now much more porous, so that you receive a text message from your
boss even as you walk in the door. Spatially, you may be in your
parent/spouse role, but psychologically, you shift back to your
working role to immediately read the text.
How Mobility Blurs Boundaries
A smartphone is a kind of portal, not just to everything the Internet
has to offer but to a bewildering variety of apps that adapt perfectly to
the device’s size and mobility. From the car service app that summons
your next ride to the mobile-friendly online college course, your
portal is always available and within easy reach. The mobile phone
also enables constant connectedness to your work role. Besides email,
texting, and voice, corporations offer apps to their employees so they
can access corporate databases and other resources while on the go – to
look up clients, make deals, and chase down sales leads.
Perhaps more than any other device, the smartphone blurs boundar-
ies between work time and nonwork time, and research finds negative
effects on family life. In one longitudinal study, for example, researchers
followed couples in New York for two years, collecting data about
their family lives, levels of distress, and how they used technology.
Persistent use of cell phones was closely tied to a “spillover” effect, in
323
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

which work permeated home life in negative ways, resulting in more
distress and lower family satisfaction.5
People who reported using their smartphones to stay connected to
work recognized the downsides, with spouses complaining about the
interruptions. They also understand how distracting a mobile phone
can be, particularly if they used it while driving. Yet to these people,
the phone was not so much a “leash” to the office but a liberator.
When they left the office, they knew that they would stay in touch
should some emergency arise. It gave them a feeling of control.6
In principle, anyone can turn the phone’s alerts off so texts go
unnoticed and calls unanswered, and some people seem better able
to manage boundaries between work and family time, even if the
boundary is a permeable one. Another longitudinal study – this one
involving well-educated sales people in the high-pressure pharmaceut-
ical industry – found intriguing differences between the way people with
mobile phones managed their boundaries and the effects their strategies
had on any spillover. Some of them – the “segmenters” – strictly separated
their work and family time, refusing to use their smartphone during
nonwork hours. “I don’t use it outside of work,” said one.“It’s that simple.”
Others were “integrators,” using their phones initially in a way that
caused more family distress. But they soon learned to manage the
devices and not let the phone manage them. One said,
People complain that the Blackberry ties them to the office. They call it an
electronic leash. From my perspective people need to take responsibility for
their own actions. Just because I have a BlackBerry doesn’t mean I am on call
24 hours a day. If someone sends me an email at 10 o’clock at night it doesn’t
mean I will be seeing it at 10 o’clock.7
The people who had the most trouble – the “failed segmenters” – were
unable to get control over the technology; they underestimated how
much it would add to their workload. They also were unable to resist
the pressure to be available 24/7: “There’s a total change in culture
now – got to have it yesterday. The BlackBerry has made everything
urgent.” This group also showed more infatuation with the device,
even signs of compulsiveness. They spoke of how hard it was not to
look at the device frequently and how cut off they would feel if they
didn’t have it with them. Not surprisingly, their family lives suffered
the most. Clearly, people handle technology differently, and some
have difficulty managing the boundaries that separate their roles.
324
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Although they might have managed better before the company
handed them a smartphone, the alluring features of the devices were
irresistible for this group.
Many of those failed segmenters are also likely to be the ones who
get “caught in the net” – unable to control their use of mobile phones
and the Internet despite the problems their behavior might be creating
in their lives. For them, the time sink can become a giant cavern,
and their behavior can start to appear pathological, as we see in the
next section.
THE INTERNET’S ADDICTING PROPERTIES
Some psychological spaces of the Internet may be so attractive,
so absorbing, that they may lead people into very heavy use, even
compulsive overuse. In the mid-1990s, the notion that people could
become “addicted” to the Internet was often greeted with howling
laughter, but as more and more cases came to light through anecdotes
and surveys, and people began seeking professional help, many started
to wonder. Amid the exciting rush to connect homes, schools, libraries,
and businesses, some fainter voices were describing behavioral prob-
lems that were emerging behind the scenes.
As usual, anything that has to do with the Internet and our rela-
tionship to it can get blown out of proportion and become a subject of
intense debates and hyperbole. Indeed, the term “Internet addiction
disorder” was first coined by psychiatrist Ivan Goldberg as a hoax,
a way to mock how people leap to pathologize everyday behaviors.
Nevertheless, underlying the sensationalized accounts are some real
people who are having serious trouble because they spend far too
much time online and can’t seem to shake free. As we will see, certain
features of some Internet locales can cause that behavioral pattern to
flourish. I’ll come back to the question of what to call this phenom-
enon later. For now, I will use the term “Internet addiction” when the
researchers who study it use that label, although there is considerable
debate about whether that term is appropriate.
Diagnosing the Problem
Kimberly Young conducted an early study on Internet addiction,
approaching it as though it shared characteristics with pathological
gambling.8
She
modified
a
questionnaire
often
used
to
assess
325
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

problematic gambling in an effort to separate people who could be
considered “dependent” on the Internet from those who were “not
dependent.” The screening instrument included just eight questions,
and people who answered “yes” to five or more were considered
dependent. Here are some examples:
▪Have you repeatedly made unsuccessful efforts to control, cut
back, or stop Internet use?
▪Do you feel restless, moody, depressed, or irritable when
attempting to cut down or stop Internet use?
▪Do you stay online longer than originally intended?
▪Have you jeopardized or risked the loss of a significant relationship,
job, educational or career opportunity because of the Internet?
The goal of this survey was to touch on the criteria that are used
to diagnose gambling addictions or addictions to substances such as
alcohol and drugs. The main criteria are tolerance; withdrawal symp-
toms; relapses; lack of control; negative consequences at work, school,
or in social relationships; and the inability to stop or reduce the
activity, despite clear evidence of harm.
Respondents were solicited through newspaper advertisements,
flyers on college campuses, postings on electronic support groups
dedicated to Internet addiction, and other means; the survey was
conducted either by telephone or via the web. Out of about 600
responses, almost two thirds met the criterion for “dependent.” On
the surface, this sounds staggeringly high, but if you consider the
sample, it is not so surprising. The advertisements for the survey
targeted people who were concerned about the subject for one reason
or another, probably because they or someone close to them was
experiencing the problem.
Demographically, the dependent group who chose to respond to
the survey was not exactly what you would expect if your stereotype
of the heavy Internet user is the disheveled male student in his late
teens or early twenties. More than 60 percent of them were women
whose average age was in the forties. Breaking it down differently,
42 percent fell into the “no employment” category, indicating home-
maker, disabled, retired, or student as their vocation. Another 39 per-
cent were in white collar, nontechnical jobs, while only 8 percent said
they were working in high-tech positions. The nondependents, how-
ever, were mainly male, and the average age of this group was mid- to
326
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

late twenties. As usual, any survey like this has problems, and they
aren’t all in the sampling. For example, the fact that so many women
were classified as dependents could be because women, in general, are
more willing to seek assistance for various kinds of psychological
problems, and they also self-disclose more readily. The finding that
they made up such a large percentage of this dependent sample may
reflect their greater willingness to respond to it in the first place, admit
they have a problem, and seek help.
The dependent group said they spent, on average, 38.5 hours per
week on the Internet engaged in activities that were not academic or
employment related. This was nearly eight times the average of 4.9
hours per week that the nondependents reported, and it constituted
quite a large slice of time for those people – almost equivalent to a full-
time job.
That early investigation generated considerable interest in the Inter-
net’s addictive properties, and much more research followed. Young
and other researchers have been refining the questionnaire and
developing new ones – trying to keep pace with technology changes
and changes in human behavior. Young’s expanded version, for
instance, is called the Internet Addiction Test and includes twenty
items.9
Other surveys tap somewhat different behaviors, but most empha-
size the same kinds of problems that can wreak havoc in people’s
lives.10 Table 11.1 shows the dimensions that these surveys assess, with
sample items. The most important criterion has to do with whether
Internet use is leading to negative outcomes at school, on the job, or at
home. With net access virtually ubiquitous, it matters far less how
much time you spend online, because the answer for many people
would be “all the time.” It does matter what you are doing online –
which Internet neighborhood you find so compelling that you can’t
seem to leave it, even though your time spent in it is causing serious
problems.
How Prevalent Is the Phenomenon?
Not surprisingly, prevalence rates vary dramatically depending on the
sample, the survey used, and the choice of cutoff points that separate
the “dependent” from the “nondependent.” For example, a study of
Italian high school students found a very low incidence – less than
1 percent were classified as severely addicted, and 5 percent as
327
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

moderately addicted.11 A longitudinal study of adolescents in Hong
Kong found a much higher rate – over 26 percent of those subjects
were diagnosed as addicted to the Internet.12 Indeed, rates appear to be
higher in China and some other East Asian countries, particularly for
adolescent boys. Among adults, rates vary just as much. One study in
Norway reported that just 1 percent were addicted,13 and a study of
Iranian adults reported an incidence of over 22 percent.14
What can we make of those figures? Because the studies use different
samples and different measurement tools with various shortcomings,
we can’t easily make comparisons. But unlike the people who answered
Young’s original survey, these more recent results show that adolescents –
boys especially – seem to be particularly vulnerable. For example,
concerns about boys in China are especially acute, and alarming rates
appear even for elementary-school children. China labels “Internet
addiction” as a very serious clinical disorder. The recent trends
suggest that Young’s early findings were probably influenced by the
fact that most Internet users of the time were young adults, and net
access had not yet become widely available among youth. Also, as we
will see next, the online activities that attract adolescent boys – games,
in particular – were still in their infancy back then.
Table 11.1. What do surveys that attempt to identify Internet addiction actually
measure?
DIMENSIONa
SAMPLE ITEM
1
Negative
outcomes
Going online has negatively affected my schoolwork
or job performance.
2
Compulsive use
I have attempted to spend less time online but have
not been able to.
3
Salience
Do you feel preoccupied with the Internet (think
about previous online activity or anticipate next
online session)?
4
Mood
regulation
I have gone online to make myself feel better when
I was down or anxious.
5
Social comfort
I feel safer relating to people online rather than face-to-
face.
6
Withdrawal
symptoms
I feel distressed or down when I stop using the Internet
for a certain period of time.
7
Escapism
Do you use the Internet to escape from sorrows or get
relief from negative feelings?
a Dimensions are shown in descending order of emphasis, along with sample
survey items.
328
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

THE INTERNET’S ADDICTIVE NEIGHBORHOODS
Are certain aspects of the Internet as compelling as Blackjack to a
gambler, a sale at Bloomingdale’s to a compulsive shopper, or cocaine
to an addict? Any number of the Internet’s neighborhoods may be
seductive enough to create problems for vulnerable people who may
be prone to compulsive behavior in other areas of their lives. But
when we dig down into the studies that assess prevalence rates, we
find that certain environments reappear regularly. People who earn
high scores on an Internet addiction test rarely mention CNN.com or
Yahoo! Sports. Instead, they point to a handful of environments that
seem most likely to be implicated in compulsive overuse.
Many of these environments are, in essence, online outlets for
addictive environments that are readily available offline, and the net
is just a delivery mechanism. For instance, compulsive gamblers have
access to casinos, and compulsive shoppers can go to malls. Pornog-
raphy is also readily available offline, from any adult bookstore. The
Internet certainly offers opportunities to facilitate these behaviors by
making them available 24/7 from any mobile device. And the net
makes it easier for people to overindulge in private, without others
looking on. But the net also supports certain neighborhoods for which
offline equivalents are less apparent. Gaming, for example, is one of
the most frequently cited activities for people who score high on those
surveys.
Online Games
Hints that online gaming and fantasy virtual worlds were going to be
potential time sinks appeared in the earliest days of the net, when the
text-based MUDs such as LambdaMoo were attracting people from all
over the world. As vivid graphics became feasible and player numbers
mushroomed, more social scientists started looking into the phenom-
enon. For example, John Suler, a psychologist at Rider University,
observed virtual life within an early interactive play world called The
Palace, and he documented a trend toward compulsive overuse.15 Users
paid a fee to join, and then they donned avatars of their choice. They
added a few props such as cigars or top hats, and moved around stun-
ningly decorated rooms to explore and chat with the other inhabitants
using their keyboards.
Even The Palace’s programmers recognized that overuse was preva-
lent, and they gently reminded Palace denizens by rubbing it in. When
329
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

a resident mentioned the word “Palace” in a chat session, such as in
“Where can I get the latest version of the Palace software?” the pro-
grammers wrote code to make an amusing substitution. Instead of
displaying what the player actually typed, the output read, “Where
can I get the latest version of this thing that is eating my life?” John
Suler points out, “When the user finally figures out that the Palace
program itself is making this silly little substitution of words, his
confusion may turn to delight, and then, perhaps, to a self-conscious,
even worrisome realization.”
Today’s massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) – the role-
playing versions in particular (MMORPGs) – often top the list when
people describe the activities that keep them online far longer than
they intended. As I discussed in the chapter on gaming, people play the
games for many reasons. Some are attracted by the opportunities for
achievement – analyzing how to progress in the game, accumulating
the right equipment and stats, and developing tactics to knock out
enemies. The immersive nature of these worlds is another compelling
feature that attracts players eager to leave the stresses of their real lives
behind and escape into a spellbinding online environment. This kind
of immersion underlies the sensation of flow, in which the player
focuses very intently on the game and ignores fatigue, hunger, and
outside influences.
The social aspect draws people who love team play and socializing
online in a liberating and graphical fantasy world. This element con-
tradicts the stereotype of the lonely misfit who turns to games due to
social awkwardness in real life. In fact, some research suggests that
the more social a game is, and the more socially driven the player is,
the more risk for addictive behavior.
In these richly graphical virtual communities, part of the attraction
is that – like the patrons of that long-running TV show Cheers –
everybody knows your persona’s name and you will be greeted
warmly. If you are pleased with the way you have managed your
self-presentation as you gain a reputation in one of the worlds, you
will be eager to maintain it. Building an online persona takes time,
imagination, and creativity. As I discussed in Chapter 2 on the psych-
ology of impression formation, you have some unique tools to accom-
plish this absorbing task on the Internet, and some people do a very
good job. You’re unencumbered by your physical appearance or other
aspects of your real life, and you can change or modify your persona’s
appearance or personality at will. If you type fast, think quickly, play
330
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

well, and have a sense of humor that survives the transition to a chat
window, you will be noticed, liked, and respected.
In most multiplayer games, you have many avatar choices, but
people tend to choose attractive avatars, and they can make them
more attractive as they select hair styles and accessories. On World of
Warcraft, for instance, players can choose among over a dozen “races”
who belong to different warring factions, such as a dwarf, human,
night elf, and gnome on the Alliance side, and orc, undead, troll, and
goblin on the Horde side. Seeing their limited choices, players avoided
the Horde side rather than choose such an ugly avatar, until the
company added one more race to that faction – the blood elf. This
attractive avatar quickly became very popular, luring many players
over to that faction. The data show that almost 40 percent of players
choose one of the three most attractive races – human and night elf
on the Alliance side, and blood elf on the Horde side.16
Are some games more likely to lead to compulsive overuse com-
pared with others? Research on this question is sparse, but the
MMORPGs appear to be the most likely candidates. These have all
the features that make games so compelling and that produce flow,
including brilliant graphics, team play, challenging but doable mis-
sions, and increasing rewards for leveling up. The advanced missions
available only to well-equipped and experienced teams also may con-
tribute to overuse, because players schedule blocks of time to gather
online, plan a mission, and carry it out. The player who says, “Sorry,
gotta go” in the middle of a raid causes consternation and anger,
because the rest of the team becomes more vulnerable.
Social Networks
Another compelling Internet neighborhood is the social network. How
much time do people spend on their social networking sites? For
many, the reality is far longer than they realize. Some keep an app open
all the time on their smartphones. On the laptop, their web browser
always has a tab in which they are logged onto their favorite network.
One survey of a cross section of Americans from teens to baby
boomers asked how often they check into their social network. About
one third of teens and young adults said they checked Facebook at
least every 15 minutes.17 That means they certainly can’t make
it through a class lecture or a family dinner without checking the
social network several times.
331
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

For text messages, which would include regular texting along with
tweeting, even more people tagged themselves as very frequent checkers.
It’s not surprising that we increasingly see people walking around with
their smartphones in their hands, not in a belt clip or a purse, often
staring at the screen, deep in concentration. A Taiwanese tourist visiting
Melbourne walked right off a pier while she was checking her Facebook
app, and had to be rescued by the police. She couldn’t swim well,
especially because she kept hold of her phone while waiting for help.18
Women tend to use these sites as a means to communicate with
members of their own peer group, while men use social networks
somewhat more as a means to compensate for fewer face-to-face inter-
actions. Whether your social networking is leading to negative conse-
quences in your life and work depends partly on why you are spending
so much time on these sites. For instance, extraverts love the social side
of the social network, and they use it to enhance existing relationships.
In contrast, more introverted people may rely on social networks
as a way to compensate for fewer real-life friendships. Online, they
can interact in ways that are less threatening.19
Fear of Missing Out (FOMO)
Checking your social network at least every 15 minutes points to a
deep anxiety about “missing out,” a fear of being out of the loop
and missing something important that happens in your social circle.
The acronym “FOMO” emerged in the 1990s and has made it into the
Oxford English Dictionary:
FOMO: Anxiety that an exciting or interesting event may currently be
happening elsewhere, often aroused by posts seen on a social media website.
A study of FOMO asked a large international sample to complete a
questionnaire with items such as “I fear others have more rewarding
experiences than me,” “When I go on vacation, I continue to keep tabs
on what my friends are doing,” and “I get anxious when I don’t know
what my friends are up to.” The findings suggest that younger people –
young males especially – were more anxiety-prone about missing out
compared with older people.20 People with high FOMO scores were
also more anxious about their own competence and less connected to
others, even though they spent more time trying to stay connected.
Not surprisingly, they also engaged with their social media more,
332
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

checking Facebook during university lectures and checking text mes-
sages and emails while driving.
The picture that emerges is of a person who is becoming danger-
ously compulsive about social media presence and increasingly anx-
ious about being “in the loop.” The powerful variable ratio reward
schedule that I discussed in Chapter 7 is certainly one ingredient that
draws all of us into the habit of checking emails, texts, and social
network sites more and more frequently. But for many people this
tendency goes overboard. Even though it is exhausting for them to be
“on” all the time, it is even more anxiety producing to unplug and
worry about what they are missing.
FOMO also contributes to excessive use among gamers who play on
teams. Gamers establish reputations in the virtual worlds they play in,
but to maintain that reputation, they have to show up frequently.
If they miss a few weeks, or even a few days, they might be left out of
an important mission, and people will begin to forget their standing.
The game distributors also post various kinds of stats on leaderboards
that will drop quickly if the player stays away.
Online Auctions
The online auction is, perhaps surprisingly, another Internet neighbor-
hood that sometimes leads to compulsive overuse, with eBay as the
main player in this space. If you have something you want to sell, you
can register at the site for free, send in a description and a picture if
you have one, and decide on the auction details, such as the length
of time you want the auction to run and the lowest price you will
accept. Your item will be listed and potential buyers learn what you’re
offering by rummaging through the virtual auction shelves using
categories or key words. The lists of items for sale display the current
highest bid and number of bidders, and the amount of time left before
each auction closes. Time left is highlighted in red when the auction
nears closing time, presumably to attract attention and build suspense
in the final moments.
Novelist William Gibson, who is credited with inventing the term
“cyberspace,” avoided the net for many years and didn’t even have an
email address. But he was then bitten by the eBay bug until it turned
into an obsession. Gibson collects antique timepieces, and he found
the online auction an exhilarating way to hunt for treasures. Describ-
ing his excitement, he writes:
333
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

eBay is simply the only thing I’ve found on the Web that keeps me coming
back. It is, for me anyway, the first “real” virtual place . . .
What if someone else got this watch, this watch I’d never seen but which
I now, somehow, was emotionally invested in winning? I began to have some
sense of the power of the psychology of auctions, something I hadn’t really
experienced before.21
The power he describes is amplified considerably because the auction
is on the Internet, open twenty-four hours a day, to anyone with net
access. Gibson realized his involvement with eBay was getting out of
control and decided to kick his habit with a “binge cure” to get it out
of his system. He immersed himself in hunts for serious collectors’
items for several months, and eventually became far more selective
about his use of the online service.
One study of online auction users asked them questions such as
“I become anxious and/or depressed when I am prevented from using
the eBay website” and “My participation in eBay auctions interferes
with my social, school, work, or role functioning.”22 The researchers
found that the ones who were most compulsive about their eBay
bidding also had distorted perceptions about the auction site and their
own behavior. Like gamblers who disregard how much time they
spend in online gambling and who ignore or downplay past losses,
compulsive eBay users find many justifications for their behavior.
They really did need that antique watch, for example. Or they show
how clever they are by snapping up that trinket with a winning bid in
the final seconds.
Negative consequences are not uncommon for people who com-
pulsively bid on auctions. Some lose their jobs when their employers
find out how much time they spend on the auction sites during work
hours. Many also spend much more money than they can afford.
Severe emotional swings are also common. Bidders become giddy
when they win, but many show intense anger when a competitor
snatches the prize away at the last moment. A thirty-seven-year-old
paralegal on eBay describes her distress when she lost her bid for an
antique mirror:23
I purposely came home just in time for the auction to end . . . and there were
about twenty-five seconds remaining. So I kept hitting the refresh button and
looking down. When it got to about two seconds, I was still the winner and
I was so happy . . . Then I hit the refresh button and the next time the screen
334
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

came up, I had lost. Somebody bid large with one second to go. I got really
upset and I started yelling “no, no, no” . . . I wasn’t able to calm down . . .
CAUSES AND TREATMENTS
What leads some people be so drawn to an Internet neighborhood
that they risk or sacrifice their jobs, families, and even their own lives?
Research on the causes of addictive behavior as it relates to Internet
use often points to psychological problems: low self-esteem, depres-
sion, hostility, and emotional instability.24 Cause and effect are
often difficult to disentangle, however, and it isn’t clear whether
those problems are the reason people begin to show problematic
Internet use. Some of those problems could also be the result. Depres-
sion and low self-esteem might, for instance, lead people to escape
into the vivid fantasy worlds of the online games where they can
craft a powerful persona and better control their virtual identities.
On the other hand, someone who tries hard to control online
activities but continually fails may begin to feel depressed. It’s also
quite possible that such negative emotions could be both cause
and effect.
Changes in the Brain
Researchers have uncovered a variety of changes in the brain that
correlate with heavy Internet use. For example, the brains of compul-
sive Internet users show different activity patterns in regions that have
been implicated in reward and emotion processing. Studies also find
poorer white matter integrity, which is associated with cognitive def-
icits. Very heavy gamers show lower volume of gray matter in several
regions of the brain.25 Findings from functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) point to decreased connectivity in adolescents diag-
nosed as addicted. Neurochemical differences have also been found
between normal people and those diagnosed as Internet addicted,
particularly in the neural system involving dopamine, a neurotrans-
mitter implicated in reward and emotion.26
Similar patterns of changes in the brain have been found in
people with gambling disorders and in those who are addicted to
drugs or alcohol. A tempting hypothesis is that parallel mechanisms
underlie many types of addictive behavior, particularly as they
335
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

involve the reward systems in the brain.27 If these similarities are
confirmed, gambling and Internet overuse may turn out to be espe-
cially valuable for studying the underpinnings of addictive behavior
in general because, unlike substance abuse, such “behavioral” addic-
tions do not involve toxic chemicals that have their own effects on
neurophysiology.
Treating the Afﬂicted
Treatment centers that offer specialized help for problematic Internet
use have been opening up in a number of countries, including the
United States, the Netherlands, China, South Korea, Taiwan, and the
United Kingdom. In China, where Internet addiction is seen as a serious
clinical disorder affecting millions of youth, military-style boot camps
are springing up as treatment centers. Worried parents bring their teen-
age sons and daughters – often against their will – to these camps, where
they undergo strict training drills and physical exercise. Living in spar-
tan conditions, the young people might spend months at the camp,
learning cooking, cleaning, and other life skills. Filmmaker Hilla Medalia,
who codirected the documentary Web Junkie about these camps, said,
“Most of the kids were forced to come there, they didn’t know where
they were going. Some of them were drugged, one of our kids thought
he was going skiing and found himself behind bars at the center.”28
Most treatment centers use much less draconian regimens. One
center in Pennsylvania, for example, admits patients for voluntary
ten-day stays. During this time, the patients engage in various types
of therapy that help them gain control over their use of the Internet.
Treatments don’t call for patients to forego the Internet entirely. Total
abstinence is nearly impossible given how important the net is to
productivity, interpersonal relationships, and general enjoyment. But
they do undergo “digital detoxification” on their way to a better
balance between their activities online and off.
One promising psychological treatment approach is cognitive behav-
ior therapy (CBT), which is commonly used to treat other types of
addictions as well.29 Here, the treatment focuses on developing specific
goals for controlling and reducing Internet use, strengthening the
motivation to succeed, expanding real-life contacts, developing strat-
egies to make more constructive use of free time, and regaining a
balanced daily routine. Patients also learn strategies for preventing
relapse and improving coping skills.
336
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Some elements of this kind of therapy are as simple as attaching an
alarm clock to the top of the computer screen. One of the common
symptoms of problematic Internet use is a lack of knowledge about
how long one is really spending online or denial that so many hours
slipped by. Time passes quickly, and the individual who says, “I’ll just
play for half an hour or so, then get back to work,” often gets caught
up and spends far longer. The alarm clock becomes the unyielding
referee that says, “Time’s up!”
Software tools can also help. For instance, an extension for Google’s
Chrome web browser called StayFocused will block access to those
time-wasting websites after the time you specify is used up. Those who
can’t stop checking their smartphones can try an app such as Break-
Free. This software first calculates how much time you actually spend
on various smartphone apps and provides detailed statistics. Then you
can set blocks, such as disabling the phone’s Internet access from six to
nine in the evening, when you want to focus on your family life.
Drug therapy is also used to treat various problems involving
impulse control and addiction. For example, the antidepressant bupro-
pion is used to treat substance abuse and pathological gambling because
it appears to reduce cravings, likely because of its effects on dopamine
pathways. For addicted gamers, some research suggests that this drug
may also reduce cravings for video game play after a six-week period.30
The good news is that therapy often leads to positive outcomes.31
People who seek treatment tend to improve, showing less depression
and anxiety and a greater ability to control the amount of time they
spend online.
Newbie Disease?
Another ray of hope, at least for youth who become tangled in one of
the net’s compelling environments, is that many of them grow out of it
in time. In Kimberly Young’s early study, for instance, dependents and
nondependents were quite different in terms of the length of time they
had been on the net. Those categorized as dependents were mostly
newbies – about 83 percent had been online for a year or less. The
nondependents, however, were mostly veterans – only 29 percent had
less than a year of Internet experience. The figures might suggest that
people who are going to get hooked, get hooked quickly, within the
first few months of their online adventures. Another interpretation,
however, is that being “hooked” is a temporary phenomenon for some
337
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

people who eventually come to learn better time-management skills.
After the rush and excitement of these virtual worlds wear off a bit, and
Internet users recognize that they may be spending too much time with
nonproductive activities, many may just grow out of it and develop a
healthier balance.
In The Psychology of Addiction, Mary McMurran points out that
addictive behavior is not necessarily progressive and that fluctuations
and movements in and out occur routinely.
There is a continuum of levels of involvement . . . depending on the current
situation and his or her skills for coping with that situation. For example,
many people will drift in and out of problematic substance use consequent
upon finding or losing jobs, being in a stable relationship or breaking up from
their partner, and having good living accommodation or finding themselves
without a home.32
The same is probably true of problematic Internet use. People who
find themselves “caught in the net” can shake loose, especially if they
recognize the problem and take steps to address it.
An ex-Palace “addict” wrote to John Suler to explain how – and
why – he quit the habit. He was affected by Suler’s website about the
Palace and began to wonder if he could ever achieve self-actualization,
in the sense that Abraham Maslow described it, by sitting on his rear
interfacing with avatars:
I thought I’d drop you a note saying “Thank you.” I’ve been on the Palace ever
since I entered college back in September, and I found that it was slowly but
surely sucking away my time and social life (small as it was) . . . I had become
addicted, and I had even tried to stop once or twice, but got back on after a
few hours of my supposed permanent exit . . . In any case, around 2:00 AM,
I transferred my registration code to a deserving guest, and asked the wiz to
banish me. I made a nice little dramatic exit, and wiped that sucker clean off
my hard drive. (Interestingly enough, I found that rollerblading is an
adequate alternative for Palace, so whenever I get the urge to Palace, I just hit
the streets instead.)33
Certainly, some people who are prone to excess may have great
difficulty controlling overuse of one or more of the Internet’s most
compelling neighborhoods, especially if they show compulsive behav-
ior in other realms. It is important to look at the person behind the
compulsive behavior, at the reasons for doing anything to such excess.
338
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

NAMING THE AFFLICTION: ADDICTION? OVERUSE?
SELF-INDULGENCE?
In addition to the controversy about the extent of Internet overuse, a
heated debate is swirling around the issue of what we should call it. As
I mentioned, many researchers use the term Internet addiction disorder,
relying on diagnostic criteria similar to pathological gambling. Other
terms include compulsive overuse, problematic Internet use, Internet
dependency, and pathological Internet use.
“Internet addiction disorder” was not listed in the fourth edition
(1994; revised in 2000) of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM), which is the master document published by the
American Psychiatric Association that classifies mental disturbances.
However, many researchers, especially those who study the phenom-
enon, thought it would be included in the fifth edition, which came out
in 2013. It was not. Gambling disorder was included in the section
covering “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders.” “Internet gaming
disorder” was named in Section III of the manual, which lists patholo-
gies that require further study before they are considered as formal
disorders.
Based on the case histories that have surfaced, no one denies that
excessive involvement with certain psychological spaces on the net
can have seriously negative consequences on a person’s life. For
example, students who begin spending extended hours in chat rooms,
social networks, or games have little time for studying, socializing, and
even sleeping. They may skip classes, pull all-nighters, and watch their
grades plummet. The Internet never sleeps, of course, and there are
always more dragons to fight, chat rooms to visit, and statuses to
update at three or four in the morning. At a large university in New
York, the dropout rate among freshmen newcomers rose dramatically
as their investment in computers and Internet access increased, and
the administrators learned that 43 percent of the dropouts were
staying up all night on the Internet.
Despite the alarm, some researchers and clinicians find the disease
label of “Internet addiction disorder” to be premature or wrong-
headed. Concern about the way so much of what we do is patholo-
gized is very real. Perhaps in many cases it is more a matter of
self-indulgence and lack of self-control, more like spending too much
time gabbing at the water cooler. The loose application of the “A” or
the “D” word in conjunction with the Internet may just add to a
339
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

growing list of pathologies, which could have more negative than
positive consequences. There are psychologically compelling areas of
the Internet that can devour far too much time if we let them, and we
are beginning to understand why. We now have enough research and
case histories to identify the characteristics of these psychological
spaces and to recognize that some people may be particularly suscep-
tible to their attraction.
However, the Internet is not cocaine, alcohol, or nicotine. And people
who understand why some Internet environments can be such a time
sink are often able to get the problem under control and get back to
more productive activities. Using the therapies and tools now available,
many of them are quite successful without “unplugging” entirely.
NOTES
1 Miller, P. (2013, May 1). I’m still here: back online after a year without the
Internet. Retrieved September 1, 2014, from www.theverge.com/2013/5/1/
4279674/im-still-here-back-online-after-a-year-without-the-Internet
2 Wallace, P. (2004). The Internet in the workplace: How new technology is
transforming work. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
3 Saad, L. (2014). The “40-hour” workweek is actually longer – by seven hours.
Gallup. Retrieved from www.gallup.com/poll/175286/hour-workweek-actu
ally-longer-seven-hours.aspx
4 Srinivasan, L., Gager, S., & Ignatova, M. (2014). Talent trends 2014. Linkedin.
Retrieved
from
http://snap.licdn.com/microsites/content/dam/business/
talent-solutions/global/en_US/c/pdfs/linkedin-talent-trends-2014-en-us.pdf
5 Chesley, N. (2005). Blurring boundaries? Linking technology use, spillover,
individual distress, and family satisfaction. Journal of Marriage and Family,
67(5), 1237–1248. doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2005.00213.x
6 Middleton, C. A., & Cukier, W. (2006). Is mobile email functional or dysfunc-
tional? Two perspectives on mobile email usage. European Journal of Infor-
mation Systems, 15(3), 252–260. doi:10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000614
7 Duxbury, L., Higgins, C., Smart, R., & Stevenson, M. (2014). Mobile technol-
ogy and boundary permeability. British Journal of Management, 25(3),
570–588. doi:10.1111/1467-8551.12027
8 Young, K. S. (1996). Internet addiction: The emergence of a new clinical disorder.
Paper presented at the 104th annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Toronto, Canada, August 15, 1996.
9 Young, K. S. (2011). Clinical assessment of Internet-addicted clients. In In K. S.
Young (Ed.), Internet addiction: A handbook and guide to evaluation and
treatment. New York, NY: John Wiley.
10 J. Kuss, D., D. Griffiths, M., Karila, L., & Billieux, J. (2014). Internet addiction:
A systematic review of epidemiological research for the last decade. Current
Pharmaceutical Design, 20(25), 4026–4052.
11 Poli, R., & Agrimi, E. (2012). Internet addiction disorder: Prevalence in an
Italian student population. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 66(1), 55–59.
doi:10.3109/08039488.2011.605169
340
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

12 Yu, L., & Shek, D. T. L. (2013). Internet addiction in Hong Kong adolescents:
A three-year longitudinal study. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gyne-
cology, 26, S10–S17. doi:10.1016/j.jpag.2013.03.010
13 Bakken, I. J., Wenzel, H. G., Götestam, K. G., Johansson, A., & Øren, A. (2009).
Internet addiction among Norwegian adults: A stratified probability sample
study. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 50(2), 121–127. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9450.2008.00685.x
14 Kheirkhah, F., Ghabeli Juibary, A., & Gouran, A. (2010). Internet addiction,
prevalence and epidemiological features in Mazandaran Province, North-
ern Iran. Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal, 12(2), 133.
15 Suler, J. (1996). Why is this thing eating my life? Computer and cyberspace
addiction at the “Palace.” Retrieved from http://users.rider.edu/~suler/psycy
ber/eatlife; Suler, J. (1996). Computer and cyberspace addiction. Retrieved
from www.rider.edu/~suler/psycyber/cybaddict.html
16 Distribution of World of Warcraft characters in U.S. and EU realms as of
November 2014, by race. Retrieved May 25, 2015, from www.statista.com/
statistics/276315/distribution-of-world-of-warcraft-characters-by-race/
17 Rosen, L. (2012). iDisorder: Understanding our obsession with technology and
overcoming its hold on us. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
18 Facebook tourist walks off pier. (2013, December 19). Retrieved September
28, 2014, from www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-25426263
19 Kuss, D. J., & Griffiths, M. D. (2011). Online social networking and addiction:
A review of the psychological literature. International Journal of Environ-
mental Research and Public Health, 8(9), 3528–3552.
20 Przybylski, A. K., Murayama, K., DeHaan, C. R., & Gladwell, V. (2013). Motiv-
ational, emotional, and behavioral correlates of fear of missing out. Com-
puters in Human Behavior, 29(4), 1841–1848. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.02.014
21 Gibson, W. (1999). My obsession. Wired. January, 104ff.
22 Turel, O., Serenko, A., & Giles, P. (2011). Integrating technology addiction
and use: An empirical investigation of online auction users. MIS Quarterly,
35(4), 1043–1061.
23 Peters, C., & Bodkin, C. D. (2007). An exploratory investigation of problem-
atic online auction behaviors: Experiences of eBay users. Journal of Retailing
and Consumer Services, 14(1), 1–16. doi:10.1016/j.jretconser.2006.02.002
24 Wallace, P. (2014). Internet addiction disorder and youth. EMBO Reports,
15(1), 12–16. doi:10.1002/embr.201338222
25 Weng, C.-B., Qian, R.-B., Fu, X.-M., Lin, B., Han, X.-P., Niu, C.-S., & Wang, Y.-
H. (2013). Gray matter and white matter abnormalities in online game
addiction. European Journal of Radiology, 82(8), 1308–1312. doi:10.1016/j.
ejrad.2013.01.031
26 Haifeng Hou, Shaowe Jia, Shu Hu, Rong Fan, Wen Sun, Taotao Sun, & Hong
Zhang. (2012). Reduced striatal dopamine transporters in people with Inter-
net addiction disorder. Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, 2012, 1–5.
doi:10.1155/2012/854524
27 Leeman, R. F., & Potenza, M. N. (2013). A targeted review of the neurobiology
and genetics of behavioural addictions: An emerging area of research. Can-
adian Journal of Psychiatry/La Revue Canadienne de Psychiatrie, 58(5), 260–273.
28 Williams, S. (2014, August 25). “Electronic heroin” spawns Chinese Internet
addiction camps. Voice of America. Retrieved from www.voanews.com/con
tent/electronic-heroin-spawns-chinese-Internet-addiction-camps/2427495.
html
341
THE INTERNET AS A TIME SINK

29 Rooij, A., Zinn, M., Schoenmakers, T., & Mheen, D. (2012). Treating Internet
addiction with cognitive-behavioral therapy: A thematic analysis of the
experiences of therapists. International Journal of Mental Health and Addic-
tion, 10(1), 69–82. doi:10.1007/s11469-010-9295-0
30 Han, D. H., Hwang, J. W., & Renshaw, P. F. (2010). Bupropion sustained release
treatment decreases craving for video games and cue-induced brain activity
in patients with Internet video game addiction. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 18(4), 297–304. doi:10.1037/a0020023
31 Winkler, A., Dörsing, B., Rief, W., Shen, Y., & Glombiewski, J. A. (2013).
Treatment of Internet addiction: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review,
33(2), 317–329. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2012.12.005
32 McMurran, M. (1994). The psychology of addiction. Philadelphia, PA: Taylor &
Francis.
33 Ex-Palace Mermber. (n.d.). Cold turkey: Messages from an ex-Palace “addict.”
Retrieved from http://users.rider.edu/~suler/psycyber/coldturkey.html
342
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

12
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET
The Internet’s sheer vastness and mind-bending growth rate make it
impossible for anyone to get to know more than a tiny sample of the
whole. This is one reason it is so enchanting: you ever know what you
will find when you click the mouse and explore a new location.
Google likes to remind us of that by adding the occasional “Easter
egg” to its applications to surprise visitors. One editor at the Dallas
Morning News complained that some of them were so funny they
ruined the rest of her work day.1 In Google Hangouts, when you type
“Happy Birthday” into the chat box to send your coworker birthday
greetings, a lively emoji character in a pointy paper hat leaps onto the
screen, surrounded by confetti. Various hidden commands also pro-
duce endless amusement. Typing “/ponystream” sends a colorful herd
of animated ponies across the screen.
THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY
Our nonrandom sampling of the net’s neighborhoods may also con-
tribute to the diversity of opinions about its value in our lives and to
society in general. Each of us partakes of different Internet niches, and
even within shared spaces such as social media, our experiences can
leave us with markedly different views.
Some early net pioneers, such as the astronomer turned hacker-
tracker Clifford Stoll, find little worthwhile in the Internet’s virtual
life. In Silicon Snake Oil, Stoll writes:
It’s an unreal universe, a soluble tissue of nothingness. While the Internet
beckons brightly, seductively flashing an icon of knowledge-as-power, this
nonplace lures us to surrender our time on earth.2
343

Nicholas Carr, best known for asking whether Google is making us
stupid,3 laments how attention spans are plummeting because people
now flit from link to link, scanning and skimming, without reading
anything deeply:
Over the last few years I’ve had an uncomfortable sense that someone, or
something, has been tinkering with my brain, remapping the neural
circuitry . . . I used to find it easy to immerse myself in a book . . . Now my
concentration starts to drift after a page or two.4
Many people also are alarmed by the way online communications can
dampen and “dumb down” real-world conversations, and thus dilute
relationships. Sherry Turkle, an MIT professor and author of Alone
Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each
Other, believes we are sacrificing conversation for mere connection.5
Maintaining eye contact is like a new skill that young people must
learn because they spend so much time staring at their smartphones,
even on dates. A sixteen-year old boy she interviewed said, “Someday,
someday, but certainly not now, I’d like to learn how to have a
conversation.”6
Loss of privacy, toxic disinhibition, compulsive overuse, multitask-
ing, security threats, self-absorption, and “trials by Twitter” are all
trends that certainly cause concern. However, much of the research
I describe in this book paints a different picture and shows that many
Internet environments are bright spots that bring out our best. For
instance, anyone in need of help who drops into one of the online
support groups is likely to find an astonishing amount of warmth
and human kindness from total strangers. Though we might question
how “real” their compassionate feelings are, they are forming commit-
ments and attachments that clearly mean a great deal to them and
that they might not have otherwise. Paradoxically, some aspects
of the net draw out our warmth and openness and lead the shy out
of their shells.
TECHNOLOGICAL DETERMINISM REVISITED
If there is worthwhile life on the net, then we are part of that life and
we are in a position to guide this technology and what happens inside
of it. But how much can ordinary Internet users really influence the
direction of a technological juggernaut like the Internet? Historians
344
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

have debated questions like this for many years in the context of
technological determinism. How much do inventions, such as the
Internet, drive social history once they take hold? For example,
Karl Marx’s comment about how the hand mill gave us the feudal
lord and the steam mill gave us the industrial capitalist suggests
we would all still be living as serfs or nobles if the steam mill had
not been invented. It was invented, of course, and the social changes
that followed were dramatic. Once technology was around that could
support large-scale production in a centralized location, the economics
of power and survival changed, and our social structures changed with
them. Our values and beliefs can also be profoundly affected by tech-
nological innovations. Consider how the machine gun, first used
during World War I, shook our views about war, tactics, acceptable
casualties, and what it means to be a soldier.
On the other end of the debate is the social construction position
that technological innovations are more effect than cause. Social and
cultural forces build up and set the stage for a technological break-
through, perhaps by directing human energy and capital toward solu-
tions for existing problems. On the TV show Jeopardy, a popular
“answer” in search of the correct question goes something like this:
“In 1895, his invention of the radio ushered in a new era of wireless
communication.” The answer “Who is Guglielmo Marconi?” would
earn the points, but think of all the technologies out there whose
inventors we can’t remember. That is partly because no single person
is responsible. Social forces and potential payoffs attracted many
people to think about the problem and come up with solutions,
whether they were lone inventors in a garage or well-funded engin-
eering teams. The more people available to work on a technical prob-
lem, the more likely someone will “invent” a solution. Sometimes
this is crystal clear, as when the conflict between the United States
and the Soviet Union led to enormous outlays of money in the
1960s on the space race – and many new space-related technological
advances in both countries. Sometimes the underlying social forces are
not so obvious, but they may still be there, and they are clearly
entwined in any widespread adoption of a new technology.
Technological innovations, however, can be both cause and effect
of social change, and certain aspects of them may affect how they
slide back and forth between the two. Robert L. Heilbroner, the econo-
mist I mentioned in Chapter 1, suggests that there is much more
determinism in a free-wheeling capitalist environment compared with
345
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

the socialist one because there are no organized societal agencies to
control or guide an emerging technology.
Thomas Hughes coined the term technological momentum to clarify
why some technologies – at certain points in their life cycles – have
tremendous power to drive social change:
A technological system can be both a cause and an effect; it can shape or be
shaped by society. As they grow larger and more complex, systems tend to be
more shaping of a society and less shaped by it . . . The social constructivists
have a key to understanding the behavior of young systems; technical
determinists come into their own with the mature ones.7
Somewhere between the poles of technological determinism and
social construction lies the Internet. Its roots were in academia and
research organizations, but now it has gone well beyond those early
foundations to become embedded in almost every kind of human
activity. As for its age, the net is a mixed bag, psychologically speaking.
Many corners are well into middle adulthood, while others are still
infants. And the birthrate for new and innovative online environ-
ments is climbing. Overall, it is far from a mature technology, and
what seems to be a high-tech mobile app today may appear, a decade
from now, as quaint as the original Pacman game.
The role that governments around the world play is also still unset-
tled, and disputes are common. Some governments try to shut down
whole online neighborhoods to stifle dissent, but enterprising citizens
can often find ways around the blockades. In the United States, the
role that the Federal Communications Commission will assume in
Internet regulation is likewise unresolved, as the heated debates over
net neutrality make clear.
Laws about ownership and inheritance of digital assets also remain
ambiguous. For example, what happens to all your e-books, music,
photos, videos, texts, game characters, and other electronic assets after
you die? Terms of service often state that users’ accounts will termin-
ate on their deaths, with no rights of survivorship. But digital assets are
growing very valuable, both monetarily and psychologically. They
store precious memories, and legislators are considering laws that
will handle the transition in more humane ways.8
These factors add up to a still malleable Internet, one that is not yet
a technological armored tank, immune to social forces. In other words,
346
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

the timing is good and the political environment auspicious for our
own role in the Internet’s development.
A PERFECT PLACE FOR CONSPIRACIES
When most writers use the term “empowerment” in connection
with the Internet, they are referring to the technology’s potential to
spread power around. Power is complex online, and governments and
corporations – in particular, the major tech giants – hold a tremendous
amount, far more than most people realize. But unlike TV or radio, the
Internet’s power structure is more fluid, and ordinary people can
sometimes take the reins. We’ve seen many examples in this book of
how individuals can tap the net’s capabilities to wield power, some-
times as vicious digital lynch mobs or hacker gangs, but also for a
larger purpose. Esther Dyson wrote about this feature of the net:
It’s worth stressing that although the Net can be used for good and bad
(like most powerful tools), it is asymmetrical in the way it gives power to the
powerless. That is, it undermines central authorities whether they are good or
bad, and it helps dispersed forces to act together, whether they are good or bad.
In other words, it’s a feeble tool for propaganda, but it’s perfect for conspiracy.9
All of us Internet users are part of those “dispersed forces” and “con-
spiracies,” and if we want to promote the good and discourage the bad
we do have options. I have drawn on a considerable body of research
to show the many ways online environments affect us and how they
can bring out our best, our worst, our boring sides, and our most
illuminating. We don’t mutate into a new species when we connect
to cyberspace, but the psychological factors that affect our behavior in
real life play out differently online because the environments we enter
are different. The more we know about these environments and their
effects on all of us, the better chance we have to use our own contri-
butions to them to shape them into something better.
SHAPING THE ONLINE WORLD
I have no bulleted list of “ten ways to make the Internet a better place
for human habitation” in this book. Human behavior is far too com-
plex for such a distillation, and the range of experiences you might
have as you touch down in different corners of the Internet is much
347
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

too great. Yet throughout this book you have seen research showing
how we are affected by the net and how our own behavior can have
positive or negative consequences on our net companions. Certain
themes are especially important for Internet users because of their
empowerment potential. The first is the meta-discussion, which is a
discussion about discussion.
The Meta-discussion
Imagine that you joined an online group on alternative medicine,
eager to hear people’s experiences with St. John’s Wort as an anxiety
treatment. You read a few unrelated messages and then send in your
first contribution, mentioning a brand name, source, and price in the
text, and asking the group if they’ve ever tried it. The next day, one
participant publicly criticizes you for making such a thinly disguised
sales pitch, pointing out that spam is unacceptable in this forum.
Another poster humorously bemoans how no one ever reads the
FAQ. A third sends you a private message introducing himself and
telling you his own experiences with the herb. At the end of his
message, he adds a postscript: “BTW, better not mention brand names
in this group because it can look like free advertising. They might
think you’re a dealer or something.”
You unwittingly violated the group norms by mentioning a brand
name. The three people who reacted to the offense used distinct
strategies, each with different psychological effects. The first used an
aggressive ad hominem attack, one that could trigger a sarcastic rebut-
tal from you. You would feel unjustly accused, and it would be hard to
resist the temptation to fight back in the public forum. If you were too
shy to do that, and if this had been the only reply you received, you
would probably just leave the group with a bad taste in your mouth.
The third person answered your inquiry directly, showing respect
for your question and a shared interest in the subject – two very potent
social rewards. He also wisely chose to remind you of the rules pri-
vately rather than publicly. He assumed the best about you, that you
were not a cunning dealer and that you just made a mistake, and he
made a friend. With his support, you might stay in the group and
laugh together in a digital back channel about how some of those
people in the alternative medicine forum have an attitude. You two
might conspiratorially think up some appropriate herbs for them to
take (a little virtual chamomile, perhaps?).
348
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

A surprising amount of human interaction on the Internet consists
of the meta-discussion in which people step back from the subject at
hand and mull over the nature of the discussion itself. In the comment
sections, for instance, you will often see prolonged exchanges over
who is trolling and how people should deal with trolls. Meta-
discussions like that are less common in face-to-face settings where
the norms and expectations are more stable and understood.
From the standpoint of this book, it is worthwhile to spend a few
moments in a “meta-meta-discussion.” This may sound like psycho-
babble, but I simply mean that the tone and style of those meta-
discussions can have an important psychological impact. The three
different reproaches in that alternative medicine thread, for example,
show that the way people handle a meta-discussion can have dramat-
ically different effects.
How we conduct meta-discussions online matters, especially when
they are relatively public, as on a company email distribution list,
and contain remarks that are easily perceived as critical. On the posi-
tive side, meta-discussions are important because we can use them to
develop consensus on group norms. On the negative side, they can
create tensions that might lead to disharmony and group breakdown.
The group polarization phenomenon I described in Chapter 3 on
group dynamics will apply just as well to the meta-discussion as to
the discussion. Meta-discussions are needed, but because the Internet
strips away certain communication channels that can soften the hard
edge of your message, they can sometimes sound as patronizing as
“Don’t talk with your mouth full” or as aggressive as “I didn’t like the
way you said that, buddy. Shut up and sit down.”
Anonymity and Accountability
Weaving through those online environments and mediating their
effects on us is the degree of anonymity and accountability we feel
when we are in them. People can act in very uninhibited ways when
they think no one can find out who they really are. In the environ-
ments that offer a way to do this, or some measure of it, people tend
to let loose in both positive and negative ways.
Anonymity is highly valued in some settings, for good reasons. It
can promote more self-disclosure in support groups, and it can help
protect whistleblowers, dissidents, and news sources. In the political
arena, anonymity has always been a treasured commodity because
349
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

governments have so much more power than individuals. We vote
anonymously, for example, and people in repressive countries might
find any loss of online anonymity life-threatening. Celebrities might
want to conceal their identities in a discussion forum or in an online
game. Maybe that elf on the MMORPG with you is actually a famous
actor wearing sunglasses and a wig, Internet-style.
Nevertheless, no one denies that online anonymity has its down
side and can bring out some very troubling behavior. It can unleash
toxic disinhibition, as I described in Chapter 4, on online aggression,
and it can dramatically change group dynamics. On one of the earliest
online discussion groups, called the WELL, some participants wanted
to have an anonymous conference where identities would not be
known, and the results were startling. Perhaps starting out as games,
the participants began telling tales about each other, attacking one
another, and eventually pretending to be one another in vicious ways.
Strangely, attacks and counterattacks were perfectly acceptable in the
nonanonymous conferences, but they were not at all acceptable when
they appeared as unsigned or forged notes. They closed that confer-
ence after just two weeks because it became too destructive. WELL
founding father Stewart Brand said, “Trust was the casualty. It was easy
to destroy; hard to rebuild.”10
How much anonymity do people actually have when they log on?
This varies depending on the particular neighborhood and on what
software tools you use. I mentioned the computer networks and soft-
ware called Tor in Chapter 10, and people who want to communicate
anonymously often rely on that environment. Whether that offers
perfect protection is a matter for debate.
Outside the dark web and Tor, anonymity is certainly a fleeting
commodity. For example, you might create an account on some free
service using a nickname, but you must also enter a valid email
address. Will the service protect that link? Sometimes the service
provider can be pushed into difficult legal and moral corners when
problems arise. For example, the operator of the secure, anonymous
email service that Edward Snowden used decided to close down rather
than expose user data to government agencies. But most companies
willingly turn over such data, with or without court orders. The Inter-
net’s worldwide reach also makes efforts to protect anonymity a slip-
pery matter, with so many different laws about privacy.
Some sites, such as 4chan, support anonymity by disallowing any
registrations and making posts quite ephemeral. The site offers
350
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

discussion groups on Japanese Anime and many other topics, but its
most active discussion is the very rowdy “random” board (/b/). Posts
automatically expire and are deleted unless someone replies to them; a
study found that the majority of threads have an extremely short
lifespan of just a few minutes.11 The operators can’t turn over data that
they no longer have.
If we recognize how anonymity can affect behavior, we have an
excellent chance to ameliorate its negative effects and still take advan-
tage of the positive aspects. We can also spot its influence when an
anonymous person begins mixing with nonanonymous participants.
At that point, we might want to begin a thoughtful meta-discussion to
explore the pros and cons of anonymity with the group, raising that
critical issue of trust in online communities.
Tragedies of the Electronic Commons
Trust winds its way through another aspect of online behavior: the
social dilemma called the “tragedy of the commons.” A social dilemma
exists when the choice a person makes is rewarding to that person
individually, but negative outcomes and collective disaster can result
as everyone else makes the same choice. You may have heard of the
“prisoner’s dilemma” in which two guilty crime suspects are arrested
and interrogated separately by the police. Each is given the same
choice: confess and rat on the partner or deny all charges. The
dilemma emerges because the outcome for each prisoner is affected
by the choice of the other. If only one confesses, the confessor will
get immunity, and the one who tried to stand firm will get the max-
imum sentence. If both confess, they will get moderate sentences. If
they stick together and both deny the charges, trusting one another to
do the same, they will receive light sentences or get off entirely.
Unfortunately, trust is usually in short supply in these games, and
most people rat on their partner because that choice is best for the
individual. Mathematically, it would have been better for both if
they trust one another, but they usually don’t.
Ecologist Garrett Hardin pointed out a related social dilemma
that occurs in large groups, one that is especially relevant to the
psychology of the Internet.12 In old English towns a centrally located
pasture called the “commons” was available for farmers to graze their
livestock, as a kind of adjunct to their own land. If each showed
restraint and used the resource sparingly, the grass replenished and
351
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

the commons flourished. But if one family started to let its cows
overgraze and others followed suit, the commons was destroyed. The
individual family might think that a few extra days for their cows on
that commons couldn’t hurt, and they would probably be right. The
dilemma arises because all families reason the same way. The tragedy
of the commons can occur to any limited resource shared by a large
group of people, such as ocean fishing or water supplies. It also is a
hazard for the Internet.
The Internet’s bandwidth is one of those resources, and many
people, equipped with free or flat-rate unlimited net access, are making
choices about its use that are individually rewarding but might be
collectively harmful. We stream high-definition video at peak times,
and Netflix alone accounts for a considerable portion of Internet
traffic in the evenings. When you use your 4G connection on a smart-
phone or tablet, you watch how much bandwidth you use because
going over your data cap is costly. But when access is free and unlim-
ited, people watch movies unless streaming video is specifically
blocked to avoid such bottlenecks.
The potential for a commons tragedy won’t go away entirely as
high bandwidth services become more widely available, or Internet2
spreads. The pipes will be bigger, but the amount of data we want to
transmit through them will also grow. The debate over net neutrality
touches on whether Internet service providers (ISPs) can charge com-
panies extra for access to faster lanes with more bandwidth. The ISPs
argue that they need the revenue to expand and upgrade their net-
works, but net neutrality advocates point out that smaller companies
and websites will be at a disadvantage if they can’t pay extra. Stuck in
the slow lanes, those websites will lose customers and visitors.
Trust
The Internet is vulnerable to another kind of tragedy of the commons,
one that is less obvious but psychologically even more hazardous. This
one involves trust and how it plays out in many different online
environments. For instance, you may recall Alex, the male psychiatrist
who pretended to be a disabled woman online and established intim-
ate relationships with many women who fell for his charade. Individu-
ally, people who engage in these deceptions might justify their
alternate personas as highly valuable for self-exploration, and no
doubt they often are. It can be quite instructive for people to feel
352
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

firsthand how others react to them when they change their gender,
race, age, or any other characteristic. Yet the classic social dilemma
exists because the more people make that individually rewarding
choice, the more we damage the online trust that is so essential to
the establishment of vital virtual communities. It does not take too
many experiences as a dupe to make you forever skeptical of anyone
you meet online.
Trust is also an issue for sites such as Craigslist, where scams are
rampant and “buyer/seller beware” is the watchword. That site
emerged as a welcome platform for grass-roots commerce, in which
people could buy and sell used merchandise to one another without
an intermediary. But scammers found many ways to fleece the
unsuspecting.
Important components of Web 2.0 are the contributions users
around the world make as they post reviews of products, vacation
spots, movies, restaurants, and more. But fake reviews posted by com-
panies paid to make positive remarks pollute many of the sites that
feature reviews, a fact that further damages trust. A sting operation in
New York caught nineteen different companies illegally writing fake
reviews for payments, but fake reviews are not that easy to spot. They
are “the 21st century’s version of false advertising.”13
The flood of malware, viruses, data breaches, and break-ins further
erodes trust. By now, most people know how to spot a phishing email
and know that they shouldn’t open an attachment they weren’t
expecting. They also know they need strong passwords and should
not share them with someone else or write them down. Knowing
these things, however, does not ensure that people follow through.
In a study on password sharing, for instance, London commuters were
happy to share their login information with researchers in exchange
for a chocolate bar. Over one third shared the password without any
bribe at all.14
How can we slow the decline in online trust? When our own
behavior contributes, we can certainly take note and strive to do
better. We can also support and encourage organizations that take
trust seriously, and protest when they don’t. The online review site
Yelp, for example, continually refines its algorithms to filter out fake
reviews. If a positive review sounds too much like the company bro-
chure, it would likely be flagged. Some small businesses complain that
the imperfect filter often traps perfectly genuine reviews, but Yelp
must guard its reputation for gathering trustworthy reviews by real
353
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

people. The company does offer visitors the option of seeing reviews
they don’t recommend, so they are not deleting them outright. For
companies that abuse trust, online protests have some effect. After an
online firestorm erupted, Instagram backed down from giving itself
the right to accept payments from businesses that want to display
users’ names, likenesses, or photos in their ads. The company posted
“Thank you and we’re listening” to its blog.15
We can also applaud people who do business online ethically and
reliably. For example, eBay implemented a reputation system that
tracks how fellow eBay users rate the transaction. The company pro-
duces detailed statistics on these ratings, a feature that motivates
sellers. To help this kind of system work in the eBay world, buyers
should always post a carefully thought-out review.
Piling On
Retweeting, clicking “like,” or adding one more snide remark to a
mounting chorus that is turning into a furious mob can be very
seductive. In Chapter 3, I described how social media – Twitter in
particular – sometimes explode into a righteous barrage of “shaming”
when someone makes an offensive remark. As we’ve seen in this book,
such remarks are easier to make in online environments because of
disinhibition and the limitations of the medium. Without the non-
verbal cues, they are also easier to misinterpret, so the mob may be
jumping to a conclusion about a target who never intentionally
meant anything offensive.
Jon Ronson, journalist and author of So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed,
freely admits he was a keen shamer, eagerly starting or joining the pile-
on whenever he spotted any columnist making a racist or homopho-
bic remark.16 During one such pile-on, and amid hundreds of messages
congratulating him for calling out the columnist, one message read,
“Were you a bully at school?” Taken aback, he began wondering about
the fates of the people who suffer brutal pillory in such social media
trials, and started interviewing some of them.
One Massachusetts woman uploaded a photo of herself standing
next to a sign in front of the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at
Arlington National Cemetery that read “Silence and Respect.” In the
photo, she was pretending to scream and wave her middle finger, and
the act was part of a running visual joke with her coworker about
disobeying signs – smoking in front of No Smoking signs, for example.
354
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

She didn’t realize her cemetery photo was publicly accessible, and
when someone found the photo and posted it to social media, thou-
sands began clamoring for her punishment. The woman worked for an
organization that serves the disabled, and despite profuse apologies in
which they insisted no disrespect was ever intended, both she and her
coworker were fired. When Ronson interviewed her, he found that she
barely left home any longer and was suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and insomnia.
Some might argue that people who do stupid or offensive things
online deserve the public shaming and the ruined careers and lives
that follow. But the psychological characteristics of social media make
it easy for anyone to blunder, and those pile-ons also catch people who
didn’t mean any harm. The lesson for anyone who wants to help make
a more positive contribution to the Internet is to think hard before
you click “submit,” and don’t pile on.
Critical Thinking and Information Literacy
The enormous collection of materials online varies considerably in
quality and accuracy, and we should use, and encourage in others,
critical thinking about the nature of the sources. At one time, for
example, educators were enthusiastically helping students get online
to do research; now, many are concerned that students submit term
papers whose bibliographies list nothing but Internet resources, and
many of the sources they cite are questionable. Universities are rapidly
revising their curricula to promote the critical thinking aspect of infor-
mation literacy, not just the earlier wholesale promotion of online
information searches.
Consider, for example, a person hunting for material on agorapho-
bia, which is an intense fear of open spaces, perhaps to write a school
paper or an article for a newspaper or because a friend shows symp-
toms. Search engines will turn up reputable sites – the Mayo Clinic,
for instance – but the result list may also include sites of unknown
quality. As I mentioned in Chapter 9, many people do not know how
to evaluate the quality of the information on such pages or do not
have enough experience and knowledge to separate the wheat from
the chaff.
Wikipedia entries often appear near the top of a search engine’s
results, but many students do not realize that the online encyclopedia
is crowdsourced and that anyone can contribute or edit an article.
355
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

The author may or may not be an expert and might also have strong
biases, but the reader is left in the dark. Certainly Wikipedia is a
tremendously valuable resource with many high-quality articles, and
studies assessing reliability and other quality metrics report mixed but
generally positive results.17 But the articles are not part of the academic
tradition of scholarly discourse that emphasizes accountability. A few
are hoaxes that are just made up, such as an article that stayed online
for more than eight years about “Daniel de Burca,” an eighteenth-
century Irish philosopher who never existed. (Wikipedia posts a list
and deletes hoaxes when they are discovered.) Most universities cau-
tion students to be very careful about how they use Wikipedia articles
in their academic work.
The race to include long lists of links to “other resources” on web-
sites devoted to particular topics can compound the problem, because
most of these links remain unevaluated. Webmasters eager to increase
visitor counts conduct “link campaigns” in which they find related
sites and then propose a reciprocal linking arrangement: you include a
link to my site, and I’ll add a link to yours. Unwary net surfers become
confused by the wealth of material and can’t assess its value or quality.
Also, because of the nature of hyperlinks, you may not be quite sure
where you are and whether the material you are reading was endorsed
or filtered by some trustworthy source.
Information quality varies considerably in other media, as well, but
we all have far more experience making distinctions in those contexts.
For a term paper, students would know better than to cite the National
Enquirer in the same way they would cite an article from a respected,
peer-reviewed, academic journal. We also have some long-standing
filtering mechanisms to sort out the material even before we find it.
At a college library, for example, I can put some trust in the librarians
who select the journals and books. On the Internet, we need to use
caution and critical thinking, and encourage others to do the same.
Providing Guidance
Many of the concerns surrounding the Internet involve children and
adolescents. Within just a few years, an immensely powerful technol-
ogy arose that opened up easy access to the best and the worst that
humankind has to offer and everything mediocre, amusing, or pecu-
liar that lies between. The child may be far ahead in terms of technol-
ogy adoption, trying out the next new thing while the parents remain
356
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

content with email, a few websites, and some familiar mobile apps.
The children quickly share their finds with one another, but few
parents may tune in. The pattern is typical, even in other primates.
I am reminded of some classic research on the way new knowledge
spread through a troop of Japan’s snow monkeys.18 When a young,
lower ranking individual came up with a useful innovation, such as
rinsing the sand out of wheat by dropping the stalks in the water, the
technique was quickly picked up by the younger troop members.
The older and more dominant members were always conservative
and reluctant to try something so novel.
Our genuine belief in the Internet’s educational value and our hope
that technology will improve access to high-quality resources and
courses may have led us to downplay its multidimensional nature.
The net is far more than a public library on a desktop. Young people
need knowledge about the psychological characteristics of online
environments and how they can affect human behavior in both
positive and negative ways. Even though we know we are responsible
for guiding children away from trouble spots and danger zones on the
net, many do not feel particularly competent in this role.
The way educators are trying to deal with a mobile app called Yik
Yak illustrates some of the challenges. The app allows users to post
anonymous messages that other users will be able to see if they are in
the same geographic area. It became wildly popular among students
who want to mouth off about classes and teachers, but it also is a
platform for racism, sexism, cyberbullying, and bomb threats. School
administrators are struggling with this new scourge, and some are
demanding that the company deploy geofencing to block access to
the site from campus grounds. The app relies on GPS coordinates to
determine location, so students in a “fenced” location receive a mes-
sage that reads, “it looks like you’re trying to use Yik Yak on a middle
school or high school grounds.” The problem, of course, is that stu-
dents can access the app as soon as they walk outside the blocked
range.
I discussed the issue of pornography in Chapters 8 and 9, and for
some parents, the triple X–rated sites are at the top of the danger zone
list. The use of filtering software and website rating services has
reduced this threat, but automated tools won’t replace sound judg-
ment and guidance, particularly because the Internet moves so
quickly and pornography is just one type of material on the net that
is not appropriate for children. Other examples are the hate sites that
357
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

vilify specific groups, the discussion forums on violence and weapons,
the hacker sites that promote illegal access, or the terrorist sites that
recruit young people. Parents and teachers are the adults who bear the
responsibility for guiding children as they explore the online world,
and that points directly to the need for people to become better
acquainted with what is out there, how it is evolving, what our chil-
dren are doing, and what effects their experiences have on their
development.
Rewards on the Internet
One of the most powerful tools we have to influence the behavior of
other people is the reward, and on the net we have several to hand out
or withhold. Indeed, an important feature of our empowerment is
control over those sought-after rewards, but we need to understand
what they are to use them wisely. A major one is simply attention. We
are in an age when attention is a commodity in short supply but in
great demand. The commercial vendors clamor for it with their adver-
tising, free giveaways, contests, and promotions. And ordinary people
are hungry for a little attention from their fellow net users, too.
Clicking “like” and retweeting a tweet are both surprisingly power-
ful but low-cost rewards that can influence behavior. Adding a positive
comment is even more potent as a positive reinforcement. Attention is
such a powerful reward that even negative remarks serve as reinforce-
ment to people in some settings. Just like children who deliberately
misbehave to get attention from parents and teachers who might
otherwise ignore them, net users may find any reply better than no
reply to their post, even if it is a criticism or insult. As I discussed in
Chapter 4, on aggression, the best way to handle online trolls is to
ignore them. Indeed, in the original Rules of the Internet, thought to
be created by the hacking group called Anonymous, the fourteenth
rule is “Do not argue with trolls – it means that they win.”
Trolls aside, we can differentially use positive reinforcement and
punishment to encourage the kind of online behavior we want to
promote. We can praise people when they make a positive contribu-
tion, even if we don’t agree with the point of view. If they make
negative remarks, we can ignore them and instead attend to someone
else in the discussion. These may seem like simplistic strategies, but
computer-mediated communication is a lean medium in which
subtler efforts to reward or punish behavior go unnoticed. In a
358
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

face-to-face setting, you might just nod to signal that you heard and
approved. But online, you need to type, “I agree.”
As a comprehensive theory of human behavior, behaviorism has
limitations, and the influence of this perspective in psychological
research circles has waned. Human behavior is richer and more com-
plex than the early behaviorists suggested, and the consequences of
behavior – those rewards and punishments – are just one ingredient in
the mix. Nevertheless, they are powerful tools, and too few people use
them to promote the kind of behavior that we want to see flourish on
the net and to discourage the kind that poisons virtual environments.
Just as in real life, we often inadvertently reward the wrong things
with attention and ignore the positive behavior.
Remember the Human
Finally, we all need to remind ourselves that there is a real human
being, or many of them, on the other end of our communications. The
first rule of Virginia Shea’s netiquette guide is to “remember the
human,”19 and that advice summarizes the most powerful strategy
for making the Internet fit for human habitation. Before clicking
“send” or “submit,” ask yourself if you would say that to the person’s
face if he or she were standing in front of you.
To help us remember, we might pin an image of a pair of eyes
looking straight at us as we type on the keyboard. You may recall
from Chapter 6 that eye contact promotes prosocial behavior and
that even the image of eyes has positive effects.
Following the golden rule about treating others as we would want
to be treated, we should also respect each other’s privacy and not
forward anyone’s images or text messages without their permission.
Remembering how easy it is to make mistakes online, we should also
forgive the mistakes other people make.
PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET: THE NEXT GENERATION
Where will the Internet go next, and what role can we play in guiding
its future? Predictions about the future of the online world abound
and, perhaps not surprisingly, run the gamut from the extremely
positive to the downright apocalyptic. Many of them point to particu-
lar trends that will gather momentum in the coming years and that
may lead to fundamental changes. Examples include cyberattacks,
359
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

privacy threats, growing inequality, advances in artificial intelligence,
and the Internet of Things.
To mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the World
Wide Web by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the Pew Research Center canvassed
thousands of people involved in the net to share their thoughts about
what the future holds.20 Although most agreed on what the major
technology trends will be, they disagreed on the impact of those
trends on human behavior and society. Some predicted that much of
the impact will be negative. Economically, the net may just deepen the
divide between haves and have-nots, which may result in more resent-
ment and even violence. As we share information globally, the divide
will become more and more apparent.
The Internet may also facilitate greater inequality by hollowing out
the middle class. In The Internet Is Not the Answer, Andrew Keen levels
a biting critique at the tech moguls of Silicon Valley, pointing out that
the creative destruction of so many industries hurts the broader econ-
omy by eliminating middle-class jobs. Kodak, for example, employed
140,000 people in 1996, but digital photography and services such as
Instagram led to its bankruptcy in 2012. When Facebook bought
Instagram for $1 billion, the tiny company employed only thirteen
people. While on one level the Internet spreads power around, that
power does not show up in dollars. Wealth is heavily concentrated in
a winner-take-all economy, Keen argues, and many of the winners are
the tech billionaires.21
Another negative theme is that all the problems the net has now,
from bullying and stalking to crime, hacking, and privacy invasions,
will just grow larger. Human nature doesn’t change, and the next-
generation Internet will just provide better tools to make life online
miserable. At the same time, governments and corporations will
gain even more power to exert political and social control, grabbing
back much of the power that the Internet had initially shifted to
individuals.
Recent breakthroughs in artificial intelligence are also a source
of concern; the “intelligent future” is a key theme at the South by
Southwest (SXSW) convention, which attracts thousands of techies to
explore the next new thing each year. Much about artificial intelli-
gence is very promising, and the giddy excitement at the convention
is hard to deny. But some are alarmed by what they see as an inexor-
able march toward “superintelligence,” in which computers and digital
networks surpass humans in every cognitive domain. Computers armed
360
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

with machine learning are already better than your own friends at
judging your personality characteristics, just by analyzing your Face-
book “likes.”22
If you watched IBM’s supercomputer Watson take on two all-time
Jeopardy! champs, you would have been very impressed with its intelli-
gence as it beat both of them handily. But Watson also offered some
responses that caused its designers to shake their heads. “What is
Toronto?” was one, but Watson was supposed to come up with a city
in the United States. Superintelligence may not be around the corner,
but the first steps are in place. Nick Bostrom, director of the Future of
Humanity Institute at Oxford University, suggests that once certain
milestones are reached, a superintelligence would emerge very quickly,
and humans would have small hope of competing with it.23 Ken
Jennings, one of the players who lost to Watson, jokingly wrote on
his slate, “I for one welcome our new computer overlords.” But some
futurists weren’t laughing.
On the technical side, the Internet has many weaknesses, particu-
larly because its original design emphasized openness and public
access rather than security and privacy. Futurist and science-fiction
author Bruce Sterling argues that the Internet is like Icarus in Greek
mythology, who found a way to fly using wings made of wax and
feathers, only to fall to his death when the sun melted the wax.24 He
sees the current Internet as a first-generation platform that is vulner-
able to that deadly fall, largely because of three underlying trends. One
is the “data stalker” economy in which companies collect massive
amounts of personal data seeking competitive advantage. Another is
the rampant criminal activity that plagues the Internet and that is
growing ever more threatening. Mounting privacy invasions by gov-
ernments is the third trend. He points out that humans eventually
dropped the glued-on wings approach and created a better and safer
way to fly using airplanes, and we may need to do the same for the
Internet.
On the more hopeful side, many believe the Internet will become
invisible, like electricity. It will be so interwoven into everyone’s daily
life that people won’t even notice it any longer. Particularly with the
Internet of Things, all those bits and bytes will just blend into the
background, but we will come to rely heavily on computer-mediated
judgment to make a host of decisions for us. Joe Touch, at the Univer-
sity of Southern California’s Information Sciences Institute, said, “The
Internet will shift from the place we find cat videos to a background
361
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

capability that will be a seamless part of how we live our everyday
lives. We won’t think about ‘going online’ or ‘looking on the Internet’
for something – we’ll just be online, and just look.”
Following the current guidance from the Chicago Manual of Style,
I capitalize “Internet” in this book. Other technology innovations, like
“phonograph,” started out as capitalized proper nouns, but as they
became so commonplace, the style manual made them lowercase.
That manual already changed “web” to lowercase, and “internet” may
be next, as it takes its place alongside electricity.
Another positive theme suggests that the continued spread of the
net will enhance global connectivity and make educational opportun-
ities far less expensive and more widely available. The massively open
online courses (MOOCs), for example, can reach people in poor, rural
villages around the world, and many more online resources are under
development. Such trends will make a major dent in the enormous loss
of human potential that results when people don’t have access to
education. They will also lead to greater political awareness.
More optimism comes from viewpoints, like my own, that stress
our own role in the future development of the Internet. We’ve already
seen how people can push back on companies and governments that
threaten privacy rights, not just by deserting the service but by online
protests and demands for legislation. The European concept of the
right to be forgotten is one example. In the United States, organiza-
tions such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Electronic
Privacy Information Center advocate for stronger privacy protections
and provide information to users about the choices they make.
Pushing back against harassment and trolling can also be an effect-
ive way to urge companies to take action. When online protests about
hostile climates reach critical mass, they get some attention. The
Verge, an online news magazine, obtained a leaked memo from
Twitter’s former CEO Dick Costolo who frankly admitted the service
has a serious problem:
We suck at dealing with abuse and trolls on the platform and we’ve sucked
at it for years. It’s no secret and the rest of the world talks about it every day.
We lose core user after core user by not addressing simple trolling issues that
they face every day. I’m frankly ashamed of how poorly we’ve dealt with this
issue during my tenure as CEO. It’s absurd. There’s no excuse for it. I take full
responsibility for not being more aggressive on this front. It’s nobody else’s
fault but mine, and it’s embarrassing.25
362
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Another aspect of empowerment is our ability to influence which
technological features are added to the online world, and which new
ones we might want. We welcome the reputation systems that com-
panies like eBay, for example, use to sort out reliable sellers, even if
imperfect. And we’ll be very interested to see how Twitter uses new
algorithms to address trolling.
Wearable technologies will also need to be chosen wisely. Some of
those devices that will be part of the Internet of Things will be
extremely welcome. For instance, watches that monitor our blood
pressure will improve health outcomes and lengthen lives, and tools
that provide “augmented reality” as we tour the country will enrich
our experience. Gazing at the Washington monument, you could
call up all kinds of relevant data, including directions to nearby
attractions.
But some features may be more troubling. Google Glass, for
example, is an eyeglass-shaped headset that can access the Internet
with voice commands, make phone calls, and take pictures and videos.
On one hand, the device offers a way to augment your physical reality
by providing on-demand information about what you’re currently
doing. But the device caused a social backlash; the original adopters
became known as “glassholes.” Bars and restaurants banned visitors
from wearing them inside, seeking to prevent anyone from secretly
filming their customers. Some think the main problem is fashion, and
if Google can come up with something more discreet and attractive,
it will be a winner. I do not agree. The main obstacle is the psycho-
logical effect the device has on the people around you, which to
some is downright creepy.
Author, musician, and computer scientist Jaron Lanier laments that,
unfortunately, our choices about guiding the Internet’s technologies
are not unconstrained because software development happens so fast.
He says, “It’s as if you kneel to plant a seed of a tree and it grows so fast
that it swallows your whole village before you can even rise to your
feet.”26 Features become “locked in” before we have time to really
evaluate how they affect behavior or society. As time progresses and
software becomes more and more complex, early technical choices
become much harder to change, even if they were not the best
decisions.
Yet we still do have choices, as we’ve seen throughout this journey
through the psychology of the Internet, and we have options to
choose a host of promising technologies ahead that will benefit
363
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

humankind. Armed with more knowledge about how Internet envir-
onments affect our behavior, what choices lie ahead, and what hazards
loom, we should be able to help technologists make better decisions to
influence the Internet’s direction in positive ways.
Building platforms that draw thousands or millions of Internet
users into massive, collaborative problem-solving efforts is one of
those directions, one that the Internet’s first inventors and pioneers
didn’t predict. Up until the start of the twenty-first century, scientific
advances happened mainly in universities, government labs, or com-
pany research and development departments. Science was mostly a
closed affair, with scientists competing to be the first to publish results
and get credit for their findings. But some graduate students in com-
puter science and a few postdocs in David Baker’s biochemistry lab
at the University of Washington began to imagine a new way to
engage thousands of people in a scientific puzzle they were unable
to solve.
These scientists were tackling the problem of “protein folding,” and
because their computer algorithms were slow and expensive, they
decided to try “crowd science” that would tap the intuitive leaps and
visual abilities of human beings. They built an online game called
Foldit in which players who knew nothing about biochemistry could
fold proteins into different patterns and compete with each other
to find the best fit. Players set up teams called “Void Crushers” or
“Another Hour Another Point,” and team members shared strategies
and tips. The game attracted thousands of players, and they achieved
striking results. In less than three weeks, for example, they solved the
structure of a protein involved in the HIV virus that scientists had
been struggling to understand for over a decade. To give credit where
credit is due, the name “Foldit Players” now appears as an author on
several scientific papers.27
As we think about the Internet’s future and our role in it, it’s worth
remembering how predictions are often way off the mark. Jeff Jarvis,
at the City University of New York Graduate School of Journalism,
brings up the “ghost of Gutenberg” to add a bit of humility to the
exercise. In the 1400s, would anyone have predicted that Gutenberg’s
printing press would lead to the Reformation and the scientific revo-
lution, or the transformation of education? It took over a hundred
years for the printed book to impact society so fundamentally, and
even now, six hundred years later, the book remains a major part of
our lives.
364
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

Considering how much the Internet surprised us in its first few
decades, a safe prediction is that many more surprises are in store for
all of us.
NOTES
1 Ricciardi, T. (2014, December 11). Google Hangouts’ hidden emojis will
ruin the rest of your work day. Retrieved from http://whateverblog.
dallasnews.com/2014/12/google-hangouts-hidden-emojis-will-ruin-the-
rest-of-your-work-day.html/
2 Stoll, C. (1996). Silicon snake oil: Second thoughts on the information highway.
New York, NY: Anchor.
3 Carr, N. (2008, August). Is Google making us stupid? The Atlantic.
Retrieved from www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-goo
gle-making-us-stupid/306868/
4 Carr, N. (2011). The shallows: What the Internet is doing to our brains.
New York, NY: W. W. Norton.
5 Turkle, S. (2012). Alone together: Why we expect more from technology and less
from each other. New York, NY: Basic Books.
6 Turkle, S. (2012, April 21). The flight from conversation. The New York Times.
Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2012/04/22/opinion/sunday/the-flight-
from-conversation.html
7 Hughes, T. P. (1994). Technological momentum. In M. R. Smith & L. Marx
(Eds.), Does technology drive history? (pp. 101–114). Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
8 Bissett, W., & Blair, A. W. (2014). Planning implications of new legislation for
digital assets. Journal of Financial Planning, 27 (12), 21–24.
9 Dyson, E. (1997). Release 2.0: A design for living in the digital age. New York,
NY: Broadway Books.
10 Brand, Stewart, in an email to Esther Dyson, quoted in Dyson, E. (1997).
Release 2.0: A design for living in the digital age. New York, NY: Broadway
Books.
11 Bernstein, M. S., Monroy-Hernandez, A., Harry, D., Andre, P., Panovich, K., &
Vargas, G. (2011). 4chan and /b/: An analysis of anonymity and epherality in
a large online community. In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. Retrieved from www.aaai.org/ocs/
index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM11/paper/view/2873/4398
12 Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162, 1243–1248.
13 Roberts, D. (2014). Yelp’s fake review problem. Fortune.com, 1.
14 Passwords revealed by sweet deal. (2004, April 20). BBC. Retrieved from
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/3639679.stm
15 Hill, K. (2012). Instagram cowed by privacy outrage, won’t put photos in ads.
Forbes.com, 15.
16 Ronson, J. (2015, February 12). How one stupid tweet blew up Justine Sacco’s
life. The New York Times. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2015/02/15/
magazine/how-one-stupid-tweet-ruined-justine-saccos-life.html
17 Mesgari, M., Okoli, C., Mehdi, M., Nielsen, F. Å., & Lanamäki, A. (2015). “The
sum of all human knowledge”: A systematic review of scholarly research on
the content of Wikipedia. Journal of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 66 (2), 219–245. doi:10.1002/asi.23172
365
NURTURING LIFE ON THE INTERNET

18 Kawai, M. (1965). Newly-acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop
of Japanese monkeys on Koshima Islet. Primates, 6(1), 1–30.
19 Shea, V. (1994). Netiquette. San Francisco, CA: Albion Books. The online
edition is found at www.albion.com/netiquette/index.html.
20 Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2014). Digital life in 2025. Pew Research Center.
Retrieved from www.pewinternet.org/2014/03/11/digital-life-in-2025/
21 Keen, A. (2015). The Internet is not the answer. New York, NY: Atlantic
Monthly Press.
22 Youyou, W., Kosinski, M., & Stillwell, D. (2015). Computer-based personality
judgments are more accurate than those made by humans. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 112 (4), 1036–1040. doi:10.1073/pnas.1418680112
23 Bostrom, N. (2014). Get ready for the dawn of superintelligence. New Scien-
tist, 223 (2976), 26–27.
24 Sterling, B. (2014, March 28). Dead media beat: The Internet as Icarus.
Retrieved February 20, 2015, from www.wired.com/2014/03/dead-media-
beat-internet-icarus/
25 Tiku, N., & Newton, C. (2015, February 4). Twitter CEO: “We suck at dealing
with abuse.” Retrieved from www.theverge.com/2015/2/4/7982099/twitter-
ceo-sent-memo-taking-personal-responsibility-for-the
26 Lanier, J. (2010). You are not a gadget. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
27 Franzoni, C., & Sauermann, H. (2014). Crowd science: The organization of
scientific research in open collaborative projects. Research Policy, 43 (1), 1–20.
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2013.07.005
366
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE INTERNET

INDEX
Accountability, anonymity and,
349–51
Achievement in gaming, 199
Action-adventure games, 194–5
Action games, 194–5, 214–16
Activism online, 80–2
Adobe, 27
Adolescent development. See Child
development
Adventure games, 194–5
Ages of Empires (game), 194–5
Aggression
overview, 3, 96–7
ambiguity, effect of, 100–3 (See also
Ambiguity, effect on aggression)
amplification, effect of, 117
anonymity, effect of, 103–7 (See also
Anonymity)
as catharsis, 112–13
causes of, 97
CMC and, 97
context collapse and, 119
cyberstalking as, 113–16 (See also
Cyberstalking)
frustration, effect of, 97–100 (See also
Frustration, effect on aggression)
as harassment, 117
as “letting off steam,” 112–13
multimedia, effect of, 117
in online context, 116–17
permanence, effect of, 117
proximity, effect of, 116
reputation systems as strategy to
reduce, 119–21
retaliation as, 107–11 (See also
Retaliation)
retweeting and, 117
strategies to reduce, 117–21
trolls and, 96–7
unfollowing as strategy to reduce,
118–19
unfriending as strategy to reduce,
118–19
unliking as strategy to reduce,
118–19
violence in gaming, effect of,
210–12
Agha-Soltan, Neda, 80–1
Agreeableness
dating sites and, 152
gaming and, 200–2
impression formation and, 35–6, 41
prosocial behavior and, 167–8
Ahern, Pam, 158
“Alex and Joan” case, 185
Algorithms used by dating sites, 151–3
Alone Together (Turkle), 344
al-Qahtani, Mohammad, 81
367

Altruism. See Prosocial behavior
Amazon, 307
Ambiguity, effect on aggression, 100–3
overview, 100
flame wars and, 102–3
sarcasm, misinterpretation of, 100–2
American Academy of Pediatrics, 240
American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants, 90
American Psychiatric Association, 339
American Red Cross, 187
Amplification, effect on aggression, 117
Anagram-Riddle Task, 216–17
Angry Birds (game), 196–7
Anonymity
overview, 103–4, 116
accountability and, 349–51
advantages of, 349–50
aggression, effect on, 103–7
CMC and, 105
components of, 104–5
cyberbullying and, 252
disinhibition and, 103–4, 350
eye contact and, 105–7
invisibility, 104–5
“life-saving drug dilemma,” 106
“Moon survival problem,” 105
psychological dimensions, 16–17
toxic disinhibition and, 103–4, 350
trolls and, 111
unidentifiability, 104
videoconferencing and, 105–7
Anorexia, support groups for, 165
AOL (ISP), 37
Apple Computers, 16
Appropriation of likeness, 297
Arab Spring, 80
Aristotle, 57
Arlington National Cemetery, 354
Aronson, Elliott, 130
Arousal
in gaming, 199
violence in gaming and, 212–13
Asch, Solomon, 30, 41, 61–3
Ashley Madison (dating site), 144
Assassin’s Creed (game), 194–5
Asynchronous discussion forums,
10–11
The Atlantic, 12
Attentional blink, 214
Attraction. See Interpersonal
attraction
Auctions, 333–5
Audience perception, 17
Authentication strategies, 314–15
Availability bias, 258
Avatars
on dating sites, 147–8
Proteus effect and, 220–1
Bailenson, Jeremy, 220
Baker, David, 364
Bamman, David, 271–2
Bandwidth, “tragedy of the
commons” and, 352
“Banner blindness,” 98–9
Barker, Roger, 97–8
Bartle, Richard, 199–201
Batson, C. Daniel, 171–2
Bay Area Rapid Transit, 83
Behaviorism, 359
Bejeweled (game), 194–5, 217
Believe in Tomorrow Children’s
Foundation, 159
Bem Sex Role Inventory, 203–4
Berman, Joshua, 275
Berners-Lee, Tim, 360
“Big Brother,” 317
“Big Data,” 303
“Big Five” personality traits. See
Personality traits; specific trait
BlackBerry (smartphone)
flash mobs and, 83
work-life balance and, 324–5
Blogs defined, 11–12
Blood pressure, gaming and, 212
368
INDEX

Blue Ruin (film), 161
BOINC project, 160, 181
Bookwork Adventure (game), 179
Bostrom, Nick, 361
Bouazizi, Mohamed, 80
Boundary theory, work-life balance
and, 323
Brainstorming, 89–91
Brand, Stewart, 350
Brandeis, Louis, 295–6, 316–17
BreakFree (mobile app), 337
Breathometer, 308
Brewer, Marilynn, 41–2
Bronfenbrenner, Urie, 229
Bruckman, Amy, 275
Brunswik, Egon, 37
Buckels, Erin, 110
Budweiser, 28, 305
Bullying. See Cyberbullying
Burnout Paradise (game), 194–5
Business models, privacy and, 303
Business Tycoon Online (game), 194–5
Bystander effect
experiments regarding, 168–70,
176–9
online prosocial behavior and,
176–7
prosocial behavior generally, 168–70
reversing, 177–9
Cameras, surveillance and, 309–10
Candid Camera (TV program), 61
Candy Crush Saga (game)
overview, 194–5
as casual game, 194
child development and, 258
Cannes Film Festival, 161
Carnegie Mellon University, 271–2
Carr, Nicholas, 344
Carroll, Dave, 25
Castells, Manuel, 22
Casual games, 194–5
Catfish (documentary), 150
“Catfishing,” 149–50
Catharsis, aggression and, 112–13
Censorship, group mobilization and,
81
Challenge in gaming, 199
Charity scams, 186–7
Cheers (TV program), 330
Chemistry.com (dating site), 151
Chicago Manual of Style, 362
Child development
overview, 4, 228–9, 258–9
academic achievement and, 232–4
activities of children and
adolescents, 230–1
age inappropriate sites, 231
availability bias and, 258
child pornography, 256–8 (See also
Child pornography)
cognitive development (See
Cognitive development in
children)
cyberbullying and (See
Cyberbullying)
ecology of human development
generally, 229–30
exercise and, 245–6
“exergaming” and, 246
friendship patterns and, 247–8
gaming and, 237–40
identity development, 248–50 (See
also Identity development in
children)
Internet use, 230
MOOCs, 235
multitasking and, 241–3 (See also
Multitasking)
music, 230
obesity and, 245–6
online learning and, 234–6
photosharing, 230–1
physical development (See Physical
development in children)
predators, 257–8
369
INDEX

Child development (cont.)
in pre-school children, 240–1
sexting, 254–6 (See also Sexting)
sleep patterns and, 244–5
social networks and, 248–50
socioemotional development (See
Socioemotional development in
children)
task switching, 241–2
texting, 230–1
total media exposure, 230
Child pornography, 256–8
predators and, 257–8
prevalence of, 256
studies regarding, 257
Chuck (TV program), 22
Chuffed.org, 158
City University of New York, 364
Civilization (game), 194–5
Club Penguin (social network), 231,
258
CMC. See Computer-mediated
communication (CMC)
CNN.com (news website), 329
Cognitive behavior therapy,
problematic Internet use and,
336–7
Cognitive benefits of gaming,
214–16
Cognitive development in children
overview, 230
academic achievement and, 232–4
children generally, 231–2
gaming and, 237–40
gender and, 239
MOOCs, 235
multitasking and, 241–3 (See also
Multitasking)
online learning and, 234–6
in pre-school children, 240–1
research regarding, 232–3, 240–3
serious games and, 239–40
spatial games and, 239
strategy games and, 239
studies regarding, 236–9
task switching, 241–2
Cognitive dissonance, 109–10
Cognitive misers, 34
Columbia University, 169
Comcast (ISP), 37
Commission on Obscenity and
Pornography, 288
Common Sense Media, 231
Compatibility Matching System, 151
Competition
in gaming, 197, 199
violence in gaming and, 212
Compulsive Internet use. See
Problematic Internet use
Computer-mediated communication
(CMC)
aggression and, 97
anonymity and, 105
group dynamics and, 58, 62, 86
hyperpersonal model of, 87
Conformity
overview, 61
Asch experiments, 61–2
in online context, 62
reasons for, 62–3
Conscientiousness
gaming and, 200–2
impression formation and, 35–6,
38–9, 45
Conspiracies, 347
Constitution (U.S.), privacy and, 296–7
Context collapse
aggression and, 119
impression formation and, 45–7
privacy and, 312–13
social networks and, 45–7, 250–1,
312–13
socioemotional development and,
250–1
Continuous reinforcement in
gaming, 205
370
INDEX

Cost-benefit analysis, prosocial
behavior and, 166
Costolo, Dick, 362
CougarLife.com (dating site), 144
Craigslist (resource)
cyberstalking on, 115
deception on, 149–50
trust and, 353
“Creeping,” 142
Criado-Perez, Caroline, 96
Criminal activity on Internet, 361
Criminal penalties for sexting, 255
Critical thinking, encouraging, 355–6
Crowdfunding, 160–2
Crowdrise.com (crowdfunding site), 161
Crowd science, 364
Curtis, Pavel, 204
Cyberbullying
anonymity and, 252
cyberstalking distinguished, 116
disinhibition and, 252
as harassment, 253
identity development and, 250
narcissism and, 253
in online context, 251–2
personality traits and, 253
prevalence of, 252–3
prevention strategies, 253
prosocial behavior and, 167
proximity and, 252
retaliation and, 252
studies regarding, 252
suicide and, 251–2
traditional bullying distinguished,
251–2
Cybersex, 284–5
demographics of, 284
effects of, 284
gender and, 284
as infidelity, 285
jealousy and, 285
research regarding, 284–5
in Second Life, 284–5
Cyberstalking, 113–16
overview, 113–14
cyberbullying distinguished, 114
defined, 113–14
as harassment, 113–16
offenders, 116
physical stalking combined, 114–15
stalking behaviors, 114–15
statistics, 115
victims, 115
Dabbs, James, 168–9
Darknet, 9
Dark web, 9
Darley, John, 170–2
“Data stalker” economy, 361
Dating online. See Online dating
DeBruine, Lisa, 175
de Burca, Daniel (hoax), 356
Deep web, 8–9
Definition of Internet, 5–6
Deindividuation, 20–1, 76–7
Descartes’ Cove (game), 224
Desensitization
violence in gaming and,
212–14
violent pornography and, 288–9
Development of Internet, 1–2
Diablo (game), 194–5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (APA), 339
Dibbell, Julian, 282
Digital assets, inheritance, 346
Digital footprints, 249–50
Digital immigrants, 228
Digital manipulation, prosocial
behavior and, 187–8
Digital natives, 228
The Dish (blog), 12
Disinhibition
anonymity and, 103–4, 350
cyberbullying and, 252
identity development and, 250
371
INDEX

Disinhibition (cont.)
support groups and, 163
toxic disinhibition (See Toxic
disinhibition)
Disney (social network), 231
Dispersed forces, 347
Diversion in gaming, 199
Dogster (social network), 12–13
Domain names, effect on impression
formation, 36–7
Donnerstein, Edward, 288–9
Do Some Good (mobile app), 181–2
Downing, Gary, 276
Doxing, 297
Dr. Seuss’s ABC (software), 240
Drug therapy, problematic Internet
use and, 337
Duke Nukem (game), 213
Dungeons and Dragons (game), 14,
207
Dutton, William H., 6
Dyson, Esther, 347
“Easter eggs,” 343
eBay (auction site)
compulsive overuse and, 333–5
reputation systems and, 363
trust and, 354
Economic effects of Internet, 360
Education
applications of gaming in, 221–2
future trends in online education,
362
massive open online courses
(MOOCs), 235, 362
Education Department (U.S.), 236
EEG, gaming and, 218
eHarmony (dating site), 151
Elder Scrolls (game), 194–5
Electronic brainstorming, 89–91
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 362
Electronic Privacy Information
Center, 318, 362
Email
defined, 9
impression formation, effect of
email addresses on, 35–7
Emoji, 32
Emoticons, impression formation
using, 32–4
Emotional benefits of gaming, 217–18
Emotional development in children.
See Socioemotional development
in children
Empowering Internet users, 21–3
End-user license agreements (EULAs),
68
Entertainment Software Rating Board
(ESRB), 197
Environment, effect on prosocial
behavior, 168
“Eraser buttons,” 249–50
Erikson, Erik, 248
Escapism
in online gaming, 193, 200
problematic Internet use, related to,
327–8
ESRB (Entertainment Software Rating
Board), 197
EULAs (End-user license agreements),
68
Everquest (game), 194–5, 208–9
Evolutionary biology
interpersonal attraction and, 153
prosocial behavior and, 166
Executive functions, 246
Exercise, physical development and,
245–6
“Exergaming,” 246
Extraversion
dating sites and, 152
gaming and, 200–2
impression formation and, 35–6,
38–9, 41–3, 45
prosocial behavior and, 167
Eye contact, anonymity and, 105–7
372
INDEX

Facebook (social network)
overview, 12, 360
aggression, strategies to reduce, 119
audience perception on, 17
child development and, 258
children on, 231, 251
context collapse and, 46
“creeping” on, 142
following, 135–6
gaming and, 194, 197
gender and, 265–6
group norms on, 71
group polarization on, 78
identity development on,
249, 250
impression formation on, 27–9,
37, 41
jealousy on, 140–1
liking on, 135–6
mutual liking on, 135
narcissism on, 48–53
number of friends on, 42–3
personal websites distinguished,
40
photographs on, 42, 136
privacy and, 301–2, 312–13
privacy breaches on, 294
problematic Internet use and,
331–2
profiles on, 42–5, 137–8
prosocial behavior on, 179–81,
184
rules of behavior on, 68
support groups on, 162
surveillance and, 141–2, 306–7
unfriending on, 118–19
violations of group norms, 70
Facial morphing, digital
manipulation using, 188
Fahlman, Scott, 32
Fairfield University, 278
Fake online reviews, 353–4
False light impression, 297
Familiarity
experiments regarding, 127–8, 133–4
interpersonal attraction generally,
127–8
online interpersonal attraction and,
133–4
Fantasy in gaming, 199
Farmville (game)
overview, 194–5
operant conditioning in, 206
social interaction in, 197, 204–5
FatSecret (social network), 28–9
“Fear of missing out” (FOMO), 332–3
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 187
Federal Communications
Commission (U.S.), 346
Federal Trade Commission (U.S.), 314
Festinger, Leon, 109
Fiddler on the Roof (film), 142
Filters
pornography and, 257, 287, 357
reputation systems and, 121,
353–4
Final Fantasy (game), 194–5, 203–4
First generation Internet
environments, 7
Fiske, Susan, 34
Flame wars, 102–3
Flash mobs, 82–3
Flickr (social network)
overview, 12
children on, 231
Flow
in online gaming, 217–18
problematic Internet use and,
330, 331
fMRI. See Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI)
Foldit (game)
as crowd science, 364
FOMO (“Fear of missing out”), 332–3
Foot-in-the-door phenomenon, 182
Forums, 10–11
373
INDEX

4chan (forum)
overview, 16–17
anonymity and, 350–1
gaming and, 203
Foursquare (social network), 46
Fourth Amendment, privacy and,
296–7
Free speech, privacy and, 316–17
Freud, Sigmund, 47
Friedman, Tom, 83, 85
Friendship patterns, socioemotional
development and, 247–8
Frustration, effect on aggression,
97–100
advertisements, 98–9
customer service, 99
interruptions, 98
lines, 98
Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI)
gaming and, 218
multitasking and, 243
problematic Internet use and, 335
Fundraising
digital manipulation and, 188
as prosocial behavior, 160–2
Funt, Allen, 61
Future of Humanity Institute, 361
Future trends, 359–65
overview, 5
criminal activity on Internet, 361
“crowd science,” 364
“data stalker” economy, 361
economic effects, 360
in education, 362
government intrusions into
privacy, 361
growth of problems, 360
Internet of Things, 361–2
“superintelligence,” 360–1
trolls, regarding, 362–3
wearable technology, 363
Galvanic skin response, gaming and,
213
#Gamergate, 203
Gamification
education and, 221–2
evaluation of games, 223–4
health and, 222–3
Gaming. See also specific game
overview, 3, 193
achievement in, 199
“achievers,” 199–200
action-adventure games, 194–5
action games, 194–5, 214–16
adventure games, 194–5
agreeableness and, 200–2
arousal in, 199
benefits generally, 214
blood pressure and, 212
casual games, 194–5
challenge in, 199
child development and, 237–40
cognitive benefits of, 214–16
cognitive development and,
237–40
competition in, 197, 199
complexity of, 196
conscientiousness and, 200–2
continuous reinforcement in, 205
death of players in, 208–9
demographics of players, 198
diversion in, 199
education, applications in, 221–2
EEG and, 218
emotional benefits of, 217–18
“exergaming,” 246
“explorers,” 199–200
extraversion and, 200–2
fantasy in, 199
flow in, 217–18
fMRI and, 218
galvanic skin response and, 213
gender and, 202–3, 215–16, 239
374
INDEX

gender-swapping in, 203–4, 275
genres of, 194
harassment in, 203
health, applications in, 222–3
heart rate and, 212–13, 217
immersion in, 199
“killers,” 199–201
military, applications in, 222
MMORPGs (See Massively
multiplayer online role-playing
games (MMORPGs))
motivation as benefit of, 216–17
motivations for, 198–200
MUDs (See Multi-user dimensions
(MUDs))
neuroticism and, 200–1
openness to experience and, 200–2
operant conditioning in, 204–6
persistence as benefit of, 216–17
personality traits and, 200–2
problematic Internet use and,
329–31, 339
Proteus effect, 220–1
psychological dimensions of, 194–7
psychological effects generally, 210
psychological principles of game
design, 204–6
rating of, 197
research regarding, 200–4, 216–21,
223–4
rewards in, 207–8
role-playing games, 194–5
serious games, 221, 223–4, 239–40
sexual harassment in, 279, 281–2
shaping in, 205–6
simulations, 194–5
social benefits of, 218–19
social interaction in, 196–7, 199–200
“socializers,” 199–200
spatial games, 239
strategy games, 194–5, 216, 239
superstitions in, 207
taxonomy, 194
training, applications in, 221–2
unintended consequences of game
design, 208–9
unwanted sexual attention in, 279
violence in, 210–14 (See also
Violence in gaming)
Garbage, privacy of, 297
Gates, Bill, 11
Gay.com (dating site), 277
GDSS (Group decision support
software), 88
Gender
overview, 4, 264, 289–90
behavioral differences, 265
brainstorming and, 269–70
cognitive development and, 239
“conversational floor,” 270
cybersex and, 284
descriptions of, 265
differences between male and
female generally, 264–5
future trends, 289–90
gaming and, 202–3, 215–16, 239
gendered language (See Gendered
language)
interaction styles and, 269–70,
272–3
MMORPGs and, 203
online prosocial behavior and,
183–4
personality traits and, 265
problematic Internet use and,
326–7
prosocial behavior, effect on, 174,
183–4
social networks and, 265–6
stereotypes, 265
task-orientation and, 269–70
Gendered language
overview, 266–7
adapting to majority and, 273–4
375
INDEX

Gendered language (cont.)
automatic profiling by software, 271
clues to gender in, 274
in face-to-face settings, 267–8
gender-bending and, 274–5
intensifiers in, 267–8
justifiers in, 267–8
in online context, 271
power and, 268–9
studies regarding, 272–4
threats in, 268–9
Turing Game and, 275–6
on Twitter, 271–2, 274
Gender harassment, 278–9
Gender-swapping in gaming, 203–4,
275
General Electric, 307–8
Generation M2 study, 230, 237
Genovese, Kitty, 168, 174, 176
Germany, social networks in, 13, 115
Gibson, William, 333–4
Gizmodo (blog), 12
Global Assessment of Internet
Trolling, 110
God of War II (game), 194–5
Goffman, Erving, 26, 28, 54
“Going viral”
advertisements, 305
photographs, 299–300
privacy and, 304–5
videos, 300
Goldberg, Ivan, 325
Golden, Emma, 142
Golden Rule, 359
Good Samaritan experiment, 171–2
Google Glass (wearable technology)
problems with, 363
time management and, 321
Google Groups (forum), 10
Google Hangouts (social network)
“Easter eggs” on, 343
group dynamics on, 57
support groups on, 162
Googleþ (social network), 50
Google (search engine)
overview, 7–8, 303
censorship and, 81
child development and, 259
“Easter eggs” on, 343
impression formation and, 37
privacy and, 297–8, 316
problematic Internet use and, 337
Gosling, Samuel D., 38
Grand Theft Auto (game), 197, 210
“Great Chinese Firewall,” 81
GreenSingles.com (dating site), 144
Grohol, John, 189
Group decision support software
(GDSS), 88
Group dynamics
overview, 3, 57
CMC and, 58, 62, 86
conformity (See Conformity)
emergence of groups, 57–8
group defined, 57–8
group mobilization (See Group
mobilization)
“groupness,” 59–60
group norms (See Group norms)
group polarization (See Group
polarization)
in online context, 58–9
social identity and, 59–60
virtual work groups (See Virtual
work groups)
zero-history virtual groups, 60
Group mobilization
overview, 80
activism, 80–2
censorship and, 81
flash mobs, 82–3
micro-coordination, 81–2
in online context, 80–2
oppression and, 81
sustainability of, 81
Group moderators, 17
376
INDEX

“Groupness,” 59–60
Group norms
overview, 63
harassment and, 70–1
“Leviathan,” search for, 71–2
netiquette, 67–9
in online context, 64–6
rules of behavior, 67–9
Sherif experiments, 63–4
sources of, 66–7
violations of rules, 69–71
Group polarization
overview, 72–3
echo chamber effect, 77–8
minimal groups, 72–3
in online context, 75–7
“risky shift” and, 73–5
SIDE and, 76–7
on Twitter, 78–9
Grumpy Cat (meme), 313
Gudelnas, David, 278
Gutenberg, Johannes, 364
Halo (game), 194–5
Hampton, Keith, 53
Harassment
aggression as, 117
cyberbullying as, 253
cyberstalking as, 113–16
group norms and, 70–1
in online gaming, 203
sexual harassment (See Sexual
harassment)
strategies for opposing, 362
Hardin, Garrett, 351
Harvard Law Journal, 295
Hate groups, guidance regarding, 357–8
Head Start, 240
Health
applications of gaming in, 222–3
support groups for, 162–6
Heart rate, gaming and, 212–13, 217
Heilbroner, Robert L., 22–3, 345–6
HelpFromHome.org (volunteerism
website), 181
Hemingway, Ernest, 267
Henri, le Chat Noir (meme), 313
Here Comes Everybody (Shirky), 165
Her (film), 154
Herring, Susan C., 272–3
Hiltz, Starr Roxanne, 31
HIV/AIDS
crowd science and, 364
Internet as information resource,
283
support groups for, 184
Hobbes, Thomas, 71
Holt, Joe, 53
Homan, Matt, 154
Homer, 220
House of Cards (TV program),
194
Huffington Post (blog), 12
Hughes, Thomas, 346
Human development
child development generally (See
Child development)
cognitive development in children
(See Cognitive development in
children)
ecology of, 229–30
exosystems, 229
macrosystems, 229
mesosystems, 229
microsystems, 229
physical development in children
(See Physical development in
children)
socioemotional development in
children (See Socioemotional
development in children)
technology and, 229–30
Humor
experiments regarding, 128–9
interpersonal attraction generally,
128–9
377
INDEX

Hurricane Katrina, charity scams
involving, 187
Hyperpersonal model
of CMC, 87
dating sites and, 149
interpersonal attraction and, 140,
154
support groups and, 163
virtual work groups and, 87
IBM, 361
Icarus (mythological figure), 361
Identifiability, anonymity and, 104
Identity development in children,
248–50
cyberbullying and, 250
disinhibition and, 250
identity achievement, 248–9
identity diffusion, 248–9
identity foreclosure, 248–9
identity moratorium, 248–9
self-disclosure and, 250
iFixit (resource), 160
Immersion in gaming, 199
Impression formation
overview, 2–3, 25–6, 53–4
agreeableness and, 35–6, 41
behavioral residues, 38–9
challenges in, 27–8
characteristics of friends and,
44
chilliness, 30–2
conscientiousness and, 35–6, 38–9,
45
context collapse and, 45–7
cues, 38, 45
domain names, effect of, 36–7
email addresses, effect of, 35–7
emoticons, using, 32–4
extraversion and, 35–6, 38–9, 41–3,
45
lens model and, 37–9
likeability, 30
lowest common denominator
approach, 46
for multiple audiences, 45–7
narcissism (See Narcissism)
neuroticism and, 35–6, 45
number of friends and, 42–3
openness to experience and, 35–6,
40–1, 45
personality traits and, 35–6, 40–1
on personal websites, 39–41
photographs, using, 41–2
predictors, 45
shortcuts in, 34–7
on social networks, 41
strategies for, 28–9
theater analogy, 26
warmth, 30
Indiana Jones and the Emperor’s
Tomb (game), 223
Infidelity, cybersex as, 285
Information literacy, encouraging,
355–6
Information Sciences Institute, 361–2
Ingroups
group polarization and, 72–3, 75–7
prosocial behavior and, 175
as virtual work groups, 84–6
Instagram (social network)
overview, 12, 360
children on, 231
“creeping” on, 142
mutual liking on, 135
privacy and, 302, 306
Instant messaging defined, 11
Institute for Volunteering Research,
181–2
Institute of Neuroscience, 309
Interactive video defined, 15
“Internet addiction disorder,” 325,
339–40
Internet Addiction Test, 327
Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers (ICANN), 37
378
INDEX

Internet “creeping,” 142
The Internet is Not the Answer (Keen),
360
Internet of Things
future trends, 361–2
privacy and, 307–8
wearable technology and, 363
Internet service providers (ISPs)
Internet connectivity and, 5–6
“tragedy of the commons” and, 352
“Internet shame insurance,” 314
Internet support groups. See Support
groups
Interpersonal attraction
overview, 3, 124, 154
“creeping” and, 142
dating sites (See Online dating)
evolutionary biology and, 153
familiarity and, 127–8, 133–4
humor and, 128–9
hyperpersonal model and, 140, 154
intersection frequency, 133
jealousy and, 140–1
law of attraction, 128, 134–5
matching process, 131–2
MUDs and, 132
mutual liking, 129–31, 135–6
in offline context, 124–5
olfactory cues and, 153
in online context, 132–3
online dating (See Online dating)
photographs and, 136–7
physical attractiveness and,
125–7, 136–7
popularity and, 137–8
proximity and, 127–8, 133–4
self-disclosure and, 138–40
similarity and, 128, 134–5
surveillance and, 141–2
Intersection frequency, 133
Intrusion into privacy, 297
Invisibility, anonymity and, 104–5
InvisibleBoyfriend (virtual world), 154
InvisibleGirlfriend (virtual world),
154
iPads, 228
ISPs (Internet service providers)
Internet connectivity and, 5–6
“tragedy of the commons” and, 352
Ito, Joi, 218–19
Jarvis, Jeff, 364
Jealousy
cybersex and, 285
experiments regarding, 140–1
on Facebook, 140–1
interpersonal attraction and, 140–1
Jennings, Ken, 361
Jeopardy (TV program), 345, 361
“Joan and Alex” case, 185
Johanssen, Scarlett, 154
Journalism
micro-journalism, 80
Twitter and, 66
Keen, Andrew, 360
Keynes, John Maynard, 322
Khan Academy, 234–5
Kickstarter.com (crowdfunding site),
161
Kiva.org, 161–2
Kodak, 360
Koko (gorilla), 1
Korean Communications
Commission, 106–7
Korenman, Joan, 59
LambdaMOO (game)
gender-swapping in, 204
problematic Internet use and, 329
sexual harassment in, 281–2
Language
gendered language (See Gendered
language)
on Internet, 17–19
Lanier, Jason, 363
379
INDEX

Latané, Bibb, 168–71
Law of attraction, 128, 134–5
LearnMem1 (game), 239–40
Legal action as privacy management
strategy, 313–14
Legends of Zelda (game), 194–5
Lens model, 37–9
overview, 37–8
behavioral residues, 38–9
cues, 38
Lewin, Kurt, 97–8
LGBT issues
overview, 276
online strategies, 277–8
research regarding, 276–8
social networks and, 276–7
Library of Congress, 72
Life of Brian (film), 313
“Life-saving drug dilemma,” 106
Liking
on Facebook, 135–6
as reward, 358
Linden Labs, 15, 68
Linguist (mailing list), 272–4
“Link campaigns,” 356
LinkedIn (social network)
overview, 12–13, 303
context collapse and, 46
impression formation on, 27
personal websites distinguished, 40
profiles on, 43
work-life balance and, 322
Listservs, 10
Livingstone, Sonia, 249
“Long tail” effect, 143–4
The Lord of the Rings (game), 194–5
“Lowest common denominator”
approach, 46, 313
Lyft (mobile app and car service), 16
Maasai Wilderness Conservation
Trust, 161
Machiavellianism, trolls and, 110–11
Machrone, Bill, 72
Macy’s Department Store, 82
Madden Football (game), 194–5, 212
Mailing lists, 10
Manchester United (football team),
175
Marathon (game), 246
Marble Madness (game), 237–8
Marcia, James, 248
Marx, Karl, 22, 345
Mashable (blog), 12
Maslow, Abraham, 338
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 78, 218–19, 344
Massively multiplayer online role-
playing games (MMORPGs)
overview, 14–15, 194–5
benefits of, 218–19
gender and, 203
gender-swapping in, 275
problematic Internet use and, 330–1
rewards in, 208
social interaction in, 196
unwanted sexual attention in, 279
Massive open online courses
(MOOCs)
cognitive development and, 235
future trends, 362
Match.com (dating site), 147
Matching process, 131–2
Math Facts in a Flash (software), 233
Matrimonial News (newspaper), 144
Mayo Clinic, 355
MBTI (Myers Briggs Type Inventory), 31
McKinney, Bruce, 52–3
McMurran, Mary, 338
McNealy, Scott, 294
Measure for Measure (Shakespeare),
284–5
Medali, Hilia, 336
Medal of Honor (game), 215–16
Media multitasking, 241–3
Media richness theory, 19–20
380
INDEX

Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate
Dictionary, 254
Metadiscussions, nurturing online life
using, 348–9
Meyers, Seth, 182
Michigan State University, 43
Microblogging, 13–14
Micro-coordination on, 81–2
Micro-journalism, citizens and, 80
Microloans, 161–2
Microsoft Word (software), 32
Micro-volunteering, 181–2
Military, applications of gaming in,
222
Miller, Paul, 321
Millie’s Math House (software), 240
Missouri University, 301
MLB Slugfest (game), 212
MMORPGs. See Massively multiplayer
online role-playing games
(MMORPGs)
Mobile apps defined, 15–16
Mobility, work-life balance and, 323–5
Mobilization. See Group mobilization
Monty Python, 313
MOOCs (Massive open online
courses)
cognitive development and, 235
future trends, 362
Mood
online prosocial behavior and,
179–81
problematic Internet use, mood
regulation and, 327–8
prosocial behavior generally,
173–4
“Moon survival problem,” 105
Mortal Kombat (game), 213
Mosaic (browser), 7
Mr. Bungle Affair, 281–2
Mubarak, Hosni, 80
MUDs. See Multi-user dimensions
(MUDs)
Multimedia, effect on aggression, 117
Multiple identities as privacy
management strategy, 313
Multitasking
cognitive development and, 241–3
distractions, effect of, 242
fMRI and, 243
learning versus applied knowledge,
243
music, effect of, 242–3
task switching and, 241–2
Multi-user dimensions (MUDs)
overview, 14
interpersonal attraction and, 132
motivations for playing, 199–200
Munchausen syndrome, 185–6
Mutual liking
experiments regarding, 129–31
interpersonal attraction generally,
129–31
online interpersonal attraction and,
135–6
Mutual surveillance, 307
MVP Baseball 2004 (game), 212
Myers Briggs Type Inventory (MBTI),
31
MySpace (social network)
identity development on, 249
narcissism on, 50–2
Myst (game), 194–5
Narcissism
overview, 47
cyberbullying and, 253
dating sites and, 152
dimensions of, 47–8
on Facebook, 48–53
increase in, 49–50
in online context, 48–9
promotion by online
environments, 50–3
prosocial behavior and, 167–8
studies regarding, 36
381
INDEX

Narcissistic Personality Inventory, 49,
51
Narcissus (mythological figure), 47
National Enquirer, 356
National Security Agency, 4
Negative outcomes, problematic
Internet use and, 327–8
Negroponte, Nicholas, 78
Netflix
overview, 194
“tragedy of the commons” and, 352
Netiquette, 67–9, 359
Neuroticism
dating sites and, 152
gaming and, 200–1
impression formation and, 35–6, 45
prosocial behavior and, 167
New York City Marathon, 161
NFL Blitz Football (game), 212
Nintendo Wii (game), 245–6
NoiseTube (mobile app), 16
Norton, Edward, 161
Nurturing online life
overview, 5, 343, 347–8
accountability, anonymity and,
349–51
critical thinking, encouraging,
355–6
guidance, providing, 356–8
human factor, remembering, 359
information literacy, encouraging,
355–6
metadiscussions, using, 348–9
“piling on,” avoiding, 354–5
rewards, using, 358–9
“shaming,” avoiding, 354–5
“tragedy of the commons” and,
351–2
trust, 352–4
Obesity, physical development and,
245–6
Oculus Rift (virtual reality), 15
Odyssey (Homer), 220
OECD (Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development),
232
OKCupid (dating site), 142
Olfactory cues, interpersonal
attraction and, 153
One Direction, 242
Online activism, 80–2
Online dating. See also specific site
overview, 142
access to, 145–6
agreeableness and, 152
avatars on, 147–8
browsing, 145
“catfishing,” 149–50
deception on, 149–50
demographics of users, 142–3
experiments regarding, 146–50
extraversion and, 152
forums versus, 148–9
hyperpersonal nature of, 149
initiating contact on, 147–9
“long tail” effect, 143–4
matching algorithms and, 151–3
narcissism and, 152
neuroticism and, 152
offline dating distinguished, 144–5
personality traits and, 151–2
photographs on, 150
profiles on, 145
proliferation of, 145–7
Online gaming. See Gaming
Online learning, 234–6
Open Elm Project, 181
Openness to experience
gaming and, 200–2
impression formation and, 35–6,
40–1, 45
Operant conditioning in gaming,
204–6
Oppression, group mobilization and,
81
382
INDEX

Orange is the New Black (TV program),
194
Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development
(OECD), 232
Orkut (social network), 13
Orwell, George, 317
Outgroups
group polarization and, 72–3, 75–7
as virtual work groups, 84–6
Over-retaliation, 109–10
Ownership of digital assets, 346
Oxford English Dictionary, 332
Oxford Institute for Internet Studies, 6
Oxford University, 361
Page, Larry, 8
The Palace (virtual world), 329–30, 338
Pandora (music service), 152
Passwords, 314–15
PC Magazine, 72
Peggle (game), 179
PerfectMatch (dating site), 152
Permanence, effect on aggression, 117
Perry, Katy, 242
Persona. See Impression formation
Personality traits. See also specific trait
cyberbullying and, 253
dating sites and, 151–2
gaming and, 200–2
gender and, 265
impression formation and, 35–6,
40–1
prosocial behavior, effect on, 167
Petville (game), 258
Pew Research Center, 4, 142–3, 246,
280, 317, 360
“Phishing,” 312
Phoenix, Joaquin, 154
Photographs
on dating sites, 150
deception in, 150
“going viral,” 299–300
impression formation using, 41–2
interpersonal attraction and, 136–7
privacy and, 296
Photoshop (software)
deception using, 150
impression formation using, 27
Physical attractiveness
experiments regarding, 125–6
interpersonal attraction generally,
125–7
online interpersonal attraction and,
136–7
Physical development in children
overview, 230, 244
exercise and, 245–6
“exergaming” and, 246
obesity and, 245–6
sleep patterns and, 244–5
studies regarding, 244–5
“Piling on,” avoiding, 354–5
Pinball (game), 213
Pinterest (social network), 68
PISA (Programme for International
Student Assessments), 232
Plenty of Fish (dating site), 149
Polarization. See Group polarization
Popularity
experiments regarding online,
137–8
interpersonal attraction and, 137–8
Pornography
overview, 286
child pornography, 256–8 (See also
Child pornography)
exposure of children to, 287
filters and, 257, 287, 357
guidance regarding, 357
inadvertent exposure to, 287–8
legalization of, 286
in online context, 286
psychological aspects of, 286–7
research regarding, 286–9
violence in, 288–9
383
INDEX

Predators, 257–8
Pre-school children, cognitive
development in, 240–1
Priming, prosocial behavior and,
172–3
Princeton Theological Seminary, 172
“Prisoner’s dilemma,” 351
Privacy
overview, 4, 294
appropriation of likeness, 297
authentication strategies, 314–15
autonomy and, 298–9
“Big Data” and, 303
business models and, 303
changing settings to protect, 314
context collapse and, 312–13
control and, 298, 300
disclosure, management of, 311–14
doxing, 297
experiments regarding, 301
false light impression, 297
Fourth Amendment and, 296–7
free speech and, 316–17
future trends, 315–16
of garbage, 297
“going viral” and, 304–5
government intrusions, 361
historical background, 295
Internet of Things and, 307–8
“Internet shame insurance” and,
314
intrusion into, 297
legal action as management
strategy, 313–14
legal background, 295–6
legal definition, 296–8
“lowest common denominator”
approach and, 313
management strategies generally,
311
multiple identities as management
strategy, 313
in online context, 299–300
paradox, 297
passwords and, 314–15
photographs and, 296
predictions regarding, 317–18
private facts, 297
psychological aspects of, 298–9
reasonable expectation of, 296–7
“right to be forgotten,” 316–17, 362
“right to be left alone,” 295–6
security questions and, 314–15
social aspects of, 299
social networks and, 312–13
social steganography as
management strategy, 312–13
studies regarding, 298–9, 301–2,
311–12
surveillance (See Surveillance)
targeted marketing and, 303–4
technical protections, 314–15
technology and, 305–6
teens and, 312–13
two-factor authentication, 315
Privacy paradox, 300–3
Private facts, privacy and, 297
Problematic Internet use
overview, 4–5, 325
alternative names, 339–40
auctions and, 333–5
causes generally, 335
changes in brain, correlation with,
335–6
cognitive behavior therapy and,
336–7
compulsive use and, 327–8
controversies concerning use of
term “addiction,” 339–40
demographics of, 326–7
diagnosis of, 325–7
drug therapy and, 337
escapism and, 327–8
“fear of missing out” (FOMO) and,
332–3
fMRI and, 335
384
INDEX

gaming and, 329–31, 339
gender and, 326–7
“growing out of,” 337–8
“Internet addiction disorder,” 325,
339–40
Internet Addiction Test, 327
Internet gaming disorder, 339
MMORPGs and, 330–1
mood regulation and, 327–8
MUDs and, 329
negative outcomes and, 327–8
as “newbie disease,” 337–8
in online context, 325
pathology of, 339–40
prevalence of, 327–8
salience and, 327–8
screening questions, 325–6
social comfort and, 327–8
social networks and, 331–2
software and, 337
surveys regarding, 325–8
treatment centers, 336
treatment of, 336–7
withdrawal symptoms and,
327–8
Production blocking, 89
Profiles
on dating sites, 145
multiple identities as privacy
management strategy, 313
photographs in, 41–2, 150
virtual work groups, hidden
profiles in, 84
Programme for International Student
Assessments (PISA), 232
Progressive Insurance, 307
Prosocial behavior
overview, 3, 158, 189
agreeableness and, 167–8
“Alex and Joan” case, 185
bystander effect and, 168–70,
176–7 (See also Bystander effect)
charity scams and, 186–7
cost-benefit analysis and, 166
crowdfunding, 160–2
cyberbullying and, 167
deception involving, 185
digital manipulation and, 187–8
environment, effect of, 168
evolutionary biology and, 166
experiments regarding, 168–74,
179–81
extraversion and, 167
on Facebook, 179–81
faking illnesses and, 185–6
fundraising, 160–2
gender, effect of, 174, 183–4
Good Samaritan experiment,
171–2
ingroups and, 175
larger groups, reduced
responsibility in, 170–1
microloans, 161–2
micro-volunteering, 181–2
mood, effect of, 173–4, 179–81
Munchausen Syndrome and,
185–6
narcissism and, 167–8
neuroticism and, 167
in online context, 158–9, 175–6
personality traits, effect of, 167
priming and, 172–3
reasons for, 166
similarity, effect of, 175, 184
situation, effect of, 168
slacktivism, 182–3
social norms and, 166
support groups, 162–6 (See also
Support groups)
surveillance, effect of, 309
time pressures and, 171–2, 181–2
toxic disinhibition versus, 158–9
virtual reality and, 188
volunteerism, 159–60
Protein folding, 364
Proteus effect, 220–1, 236
385
INDEX

Proximity
aggression, effect on, 116
cyberbullying and, 252
experiments regarding, 133–4
interpersonal attraction generally,
127–8
online interpersonal attraction and,
133–4
trolls and, 111
Psych Central (resource), 189
The Psychology of Addiction
(McMurran), 338
Psychopathy, trolls and, 110–11
Railway Repair (game), 239
Ramm, Leandra, 113
Reader Rabbit (game), 228
Reasonable expectation of privacy,
296–7
Reddit (forum)
overview, 11
#Gamergate and, 203
group dynamics on, 59–60
Re-Mission (game), 222–3
Renren (social network), 13
“Replyallcalypse,” 25–6
Reproaches, retaliation and, 108–9
Reputation systems
filters and, 121, 353–4
metrics of, 119–20
“shoot first and ask questions later”
approach, 120
as strategy to reduce aggression,
119–21
trolls and, 121, 363
Retaliation, 107–11
overview, 107–8
cognitive dissonance and,
109–10
cyberbullying and, 252
over-retaliation, 109–10
reproaches and, 108–9
trolls and, 110–11 (See also Trolls)
Retweeting
overview, 13
aggression and, 117
impression formation and, 28
as reward, 358
Rewards
in gaming, 207–8
nurturing online life using, 358–9
“Rich get richer” hypothesis, 247
Rider University, 329
“Right to be forgotten,” 316–17, 362
“Right to be left alone,” 295–6
Rise of the Shadow Specters (virtual
world), 222
“Risky shift,” 73–5
Rodin, Judith, 169
Role-playing games, 194–5
Ronson, Jon, 354–5
Royal Game of Ur, 193
Rutgers University, 53
Sadism, trolls and, 111
Salience, problematic Internet use
and, 327–8
Sarcasm, misinterpretation of,
100–2
Saturday Night Live (TV program),
182
Saulnier, Jeremy, 161
Save Darfur Cause, 81
Schmidt, Eric, 249, 316
Screening questions for problematic
Internet use, 325–6
Search engines, 7–8
Second Life (virtual world)
overview, 15, 194–5, 236, 303
cybersex in, 284–5
group norms in, 67
impression formation in, 28
rules of behavior, 68
social interaction in, 196–7
Security questions, 314–15
Self-awareness, 17
386
INDEX

Self-disclosure
experiments regarding, 139
identity development and, 250
interpersonal attraction and,
138–40
Semantic web, 8
Serious games, 221, 223–4,
239–40
SETI@Home (website), 160
Sexting, 254–6
criminal penalties for, 255
defined, 254
prevalence of, 255
reasons for, 255–6
risks of, 255
“slut shaming” and, 255
Sexual coercion online, 279, 281–2
Sexual harassment
overview, 278
effects of, 280
in gaming, 279, 281–2
gender harassment, 278–9
Mr. Bungle Affair, 281–2
in online context, 278
research regarding, 279–81
sexual coercion, 279, 281–2
unwanted sexual attention, 278–9
Sexuality
overview, 4, 282, 289–90
cybersex, 284–5 (See also Cybersex)
dating sites (See Online dating)
future trends, 289–90
health information and, 283
information resource, Internet as,
282–3
LGBT issues (See LGBT issues)
in online context, 282
online dating (See Online dating)
predators, 257–8
sexting, 254–6 (See also Sexting)
sexual harassment (See Sexual
harassment)
Shakespeare, William, 284–5
“Shaming”
avoiding, 354–5
“slut shaming,” 255
Shaping in gaming, 205–6
Shaping online life. See Nurturing
online life
Shea, Virginia, 68, 359
Sherif, Muzafer, 63–4, 66, 68
Shirky, Clay, 165
Short, John, 19
Shulman, Nev, 150
SIDE (Social identity model of
deindividuation), 20–1, 76–7
Silicon Snake Oil (Stoll), 343
Silk Road (dark web site), 9
SimCity (virtual world), 194–5
Similarity
experiments regarding, 134–5
interpersonal attraction generally,
128
online interpersonal attraction and,
134–5
online prosocial behavior and,
184
prosocial behavior generally, 175
The Sims (virtual world), 28, 194–5
Skinner, B.F., 205–7
Skype (chat software)
as dating site, 148–9
surveillance of, 306–7
videoconferencing on, 105
Skyrim (game), 194–5
Slacktivism, 182–3
Sleep patterns, physical development
and, 244–5
“Slut shaming,” 255
Smartphones, work-life balance and,
323–5
Smith, David, 284–5
Snapchat (social network)
overview, 22
children on, 231
group norms on, 72
387
INDEX

Snapchat (social network) (cont.)
identity development on, 250
impression formation on, 28
privacy and, 314
Snowden, Edward, 294, 318, 350
Social benefits of gaming, 218–19
Socialcompensation hypothesis, 247–8
Social construction, 345–6
Social identity model of
deindividuation effects (SIDE),
20–1, 76–7
Social information processing theory,
20
Social interaction
in gaming, 196–7, 199–200
in MMORPGs, 196
Social networks. See also specific
network
adolescents and, 248–50
children and, 248–50
context collapse and, 45–7, 250–1,
312–13
defined, 12–13
gender and, 265–6
impression formation on, 41
privacy and, 312–13
problematic Internet use and, 331–2
Social norms, prosocial behavior and,
166
Social presence theory, 19
Social steganography as privacy
management strategy, 312–13
Socioemotional development in
children
overview, 230, 246
context collapse and, 250–1
cyberbullying and (See
Cyberbullying)
friendship patterns and, 247–8
identity development, 248–50
(See also Identity development in
children)
studies regarding, 247–8
Sony, 294
South by Southwest, 360
So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed
(Ronson), 354
Space, Kelli, 161
Spacewar! (game), 194–6, 222
Spatial games, 239
Spears, Russell, 75–7
Speeddate.com (dating site), 148
Stalking. See Cyberstalking
Stanford University, 8
Starcraft (game), 194–5
StayFocused (software), 337
Sterling, Bruce, 361
Stickiness, 41
Stoll, Clifford, 343
Strategy games, 194–5, 216, 239
Streisand, Barbra, 313–14
Streisand effect, 313–14
Stroop Test, 281
StudiVZ (social network)
overview, 13
cyberstalking on, 115
SugarSugar.com (dating site), 143–4
Suler, John, 329, 338
Sullivan, Andrew, 12
Sun Microsystems, 222, 294
“Superintelligence,” 360–1
Super Mario Brothers (game), 194–5,
209
Super Mario World (game), 246
Superstitions in gaming, 207
Support groups, 162–6
advantages of, 163–4
disadvantages of, 164
disinhibition and, 163
effectiveness of, 163–4
empowerment on, 165–6
hyperpersonal nature of, 163
research regarding, 163–4
for stigmatized afflictions, 164–5
writing, importance of, 164
Surface web, 8
388
INDEX

Surveillance
agents of, 306–7
cameras and, 309–10
consent to, 307
experiments regarding, 141–2
by governments, 306–7
Internet of things and, 307–8
mutual surveillance, 307
prosocial behavior, effect on, 309
psychological effects of, 308–11
studies regarding, 309–10
“Swift trust,” 91–2
Synchronous chats defined, 11
Tactical Ops (game), 218
Tajfel, Henri, 72–3
Tallman, Glenna, 184
Targeted marketing, privacy and,
303–4
Task switching, 241–2
Tastebuds.fm (dating site), 144
Taxonomy, 6–7. See also specific term
Taylor, Shelley, 34
TCP/IP (Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol), 5
Technological determinism, 22–3,
344–7
Technological momentum, 346
Terrorism, 357–8
Tetra Madness (game), 213
Tetris (game), 215, 238–9
Texas Holdem Poker (game), 194–5
Texting defined, 14
Thomas, Rob, 161
Tiller, George, 79
Time management
overview, 4–5, 321–2
work-life balance and, 322 (See also
Work-life balance)
Time pressures
online prosocial behavior and,
181–2
prosocial behavior generally, 171–2
Tinder (dating site), 146
TMZ (blog), 12
Tombs of the Unknowns, 354
Tor
anonymity and, 350
privacy and, 81, 315, 318
Touch, Joe, 361–2
Tourette Syndrome, support groups
for, 163
Toxic disinhibition
anonymity and, 103–4, 350
eye contact and, 105–7
prosocial behavior versus, 158–9
reduction of, 118
“Tragedy of the commons” in online
context, 351–2
Training, applications of gaming in,
221–2
Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), 5
TrekPassions.com (dating site), 144
“Trial by Twitter,” 69–71, 344
Trolls
aggression and, 96–7
anonymity and, 111
future trends regarding, 362–3
ignoring, 358
Machiavellianism and, 110–11
proximity and, 111
psychopathy and, 110–11
reputation systems and, 121, 363
retaliation and, 110–11
sadism and, 111
Trust, nurturing of, 352–4
Turing, Alan, 275
Turing Game, gender and, 275–6
Turkle, Sherry, 344
Turoff, Murray, 31
Twenge, Jean, 49–50, 52
Twitter (social network)
overview, 13–14
aggression on, 96
anonymity on, 16
389
INDEX

Twitter (social network) (cont.)
child development and, 258
context collapse and, 46–7
gendered language on, 271–2, 274
group dynamics on, 57
group norms on, 65–6, 72
group polarization on, 78–9
impression formation on, 28
journalism and, 66
micro-coordination on, 81–2
narcissism on, 52
privacy and, 302
rules of behavior on, 68
“shaming” on, 354
surveillance of, 306–7
“trial by,” 69–71, 344
trolls on, 362–3
violations of group norms, 70–1
Two-factor authentication, privacy
and, 315
Uber (mobile app and car service)
overview, 16
work-life balance and, 323
UGC (User-generated content), 7, 159
UK Children Go Online project, 249,
256
Uncharted (game), 194–5
Under, Darwyn, 130
Unfollowing as strategy to reduce
aggression, 118–19
Unfriending as strategy to reduce
aggression, 118–19
Unidentifiability, anonymity and,
104
United Airlines, 25
University of California at Berkeley,
160
University of California at Los
Angeles, 41–2
University of Leipzig, 35
University of Minnesota, 125
University of Reading, 276
University of Southern California,
361–2
University of Washington, 364
University of Wisconsin, 288
Unwanted sexual attention, 278–9
Usenet (forum)
overview, 10–11
group norms on, 72
violations of group norms, 70
User-generated content (UGC), 7, 159
Uses and gratifications theory, 21
The Verge (online magazine), 321, 362
Veronica Mars (TV program), 161
Videoconferencing
anonymity and, 105–7
interactive video, 15
Vine (social network)
children on, 231
impression formation on, 28
privacy and, 306
Violence in gaming, 210–14
overview, 210
aggression, effect on, 210–12
arousal and, 212–13
competition and, 212
desensitization and, 212–14
research regarding, 210–14
Violent pornography, 288–9
Viral. See “Going viral”
Virtual Battlespace 2 (game), 222
Virtual Events (virtual world), 236
Virtual reality
defined, 15
digital manipulation and, 188
Oculus Rift, 15
Virtual work groups
overview, 83
biased discussions in, 83–4
electronic brainstorming and,
89–91
group decision support software
and, 88
390
INDEX

hidden profiles in, 84
hyperpersonal model and, 87
ingroups, 84–6
minority opinions in, 87–9
outgroups, 84–6
production blocking and, 89
status effects, 86–7
“swift trust” in, 91–2
Virtual worlds defined, 14–15
Visibility, anonymity and, 104–5
VK (social network), 13
Volunteerism
micro-volunteering, 181–2
as prosocial behavior, 159–60
Volunteermatch.org, 159
Walther, Joseph B., 20, 43–4, 87, 133–4,
140
Wanzer, Melissa Bekelja, 128
Warren, Samuel, 295–6, 316–17
Watson (supercomputer), 361
Wearable technology, 363
Web Junkie (documentary), 336
Webkinz (social network), 231
Web 2.0
overview, 7
blogs and, 11
privacy and, 301
search engines and, 8
sharing and, 301
trust and, 353
user-generated content (UGC), 7,
159
WeChat (social network), 231
WELL (discussion group), 350
Werry, Christopher, 18
WhatsApp (social network)
children on, 231
surveillance of, 306–7
Where in the World is Carmen
Sandiego (game), 221, 238
Who Wants to be a Millionaire
(TV program), 63
Wikipedia (resource)
overview, 8
critical thinking and, 355–6
prosocial behavior on, 183
volunteerism on, 159
Wilde, Oscar, 87
Williams, Robin, 59–60
Withdrawal symptoms, problematic
Internet use and, 327–8
WMST-L (mailing list)
gendered language and, 272–4
group dynamics on, 59–60
rules of behavior, 68
Words with Friends (game), 194–5
Work-life balance
overview, 322–3
boundary theory and, 323
management of boundaries, 323
mobility and, 323–5
smartphones and, 323–5
time management generally, 322
work-life merger versus, 321–2
The World is Flat (Friedman), 83
World of Warcraft (game)
overview, 194–5, 210
complexity of, 196
gender and, 203
operant conditioning in, 206
personality traits and, 200–1
problematic Internet use and,
331
Proteus effect and, 221
social benefits of, 218–19
World Wide Web defined, 7–8
Wyatt, Nancy, 59
Yahoo! Answers (resource)
as reputation system, 121
volunteerism on, 159
Yahoo! Groups (forum)
overview, 10
bystander effect on, 176–7
group dynamics on, 58–9
391
INDEX

Yahoo! Sports (forum), 329
Yee, Nick, 220
Yelp (social network)
fake reviews on, 353–4
as reputation system, 119–20
trust and, 353–4
Yik Yak (mobile app), 357
YM (magazine), 165
Young, Kimberly, 325–8, 337
Youth Internet Safety Surveys, 257
YouTube for Schools (social network),
259
YouTube (social network)
overview, 12, 303
children on, 231, 259
group norms on, 71–2
impression formation on, 37
profiles on, 43
surveillance of, 306–7
volunteerism on, 159–60
Zajonc, Robert, 127
Zero-history virtual groups,
60
Zimbardo, Philip, 104
Zooniverse.org, 160
Zoosk (dating site), 34
Zynga, 258
392
INDEX

