THE PIMSLEUR GUIDE
PIMSLEUR
®
SIMON & SCHUSTER’S
how the program works
Travel the world with Pimsleur!

PIMSLEUR® LANGUAGE PROGRAMS
You have just purchased the most effective language program 
ever developed. As you probably know, learning a new language 
can be frustrating. Your first experience with a foreign language 
may have been in school. If the classes seemed difficult, or if your 
grades were poor, you probably believed you had no aptitude for 
languages. Even if you did well, you may have been surprised 
later to discover that what you learned was of little or no use 
when you tried to converse with native speakers. 
Perhaps you waited until later in life and tried adult education 
classes, language schools, or home training programs. There too 
you may have found the information hard to retain, the lessons 
tedious, and your progress slow. Many language students give up 
early in these programs, convinced they lack the natural ability 
to understand and use what they read and hear. 
The truth is that anyone can acquire a foreign language—
with the right teaching system. With the Pimsleur® Method, 
you will benefit from the years of research and development 
that have helped  create the world’s most effective method for 
teaching foreign languages. The Pimsleur® Language Programs, 
developed by Dr. Paul Pimsleur, fill an urgent need for self-
instructional materials in many languages.

2
HOW TO USE THE PROGRAM
To get the full benefit of each lesson, choose a quiet place 
where you can practice without interruption and a time of day 
when your mind is most alert and your body least fatigued. 
The length of each lesson, just under 30 minutes, is that 
recommended by teaching specialists for a concentrated learning 
task. Once you’ve started the program, simply follow the tutor’s 
instructions. The most important instruction is to respond aloud 
when the tutor tells you to do so. There will be a pause after 
this instruction, giving you time to reply. It is essential to your 
progress that you speak out in a normal conversational voice 
when asked to respond. Your active participation in thinking and 
speaking is required for your success in mastering this course.  
The simple test for mastery is whether you are able to respond 
quickly and accurately when your tutor asks a question. If you 
are responding correctly about eighty percent of the time, then 
you’re ready to proceed to the next lesson. It is important to keep 
moving forward, and also not to set unreasonable standards of 
perfection that will keep you from progressing, which is why we 
recommend using the eighty percent figure as a guide. 
You will notice that each lesson contains both new and 
familiar material, and just when you may be worrying about 
forgetting something, you will conveniently be reminded of it. 
Another helpful feature of the Pimsleur® Language Program is 
its rate of “saturation.” You will be responding many times in 
the half-hour. This saturation enables you to make substantial 
progress within a short period of time.

3
GUIDELINES FOR SUCCESS
Complete the lesson units in strict consecutive order (don’t 
skip around), doing no more than one lesson per day, although 
the lesson unit for the day may be repeated more than once. Daily 
contact with the language is critical to successful learning.
Listen carefully to each lesson unit. Always follow the 
directions of the instructor. 
Speak out loud when directed by the tutor and answer 
questions within the pauses provided. It is not enough to just 
silently “think” of the answer to the question asked. You need to 
speak the answer out loud to set up a “circuit” of the language 
you are learning to speak so that it is heard and identified through 
your ears, to help to establish the “sounds” of the target language. 
Do this prior to hearing the confirmation, which is provided as 
reinforcement, as well as additional speech training.
Do all required activities according to the instructions, 
without reference to any outside persons, book, or course.
Do not have a paper and pen nearby during the lessons, 
and do not refer to dictionaries or other books. The Pimsleur® 
Method works with the language-learning portion of your brain, 
requiring language to be processed in its spoken form. Not only 
will you interrupt the learning process if you attempt to write the 
words that you hear, but you will also begin to speak the target 
language with an American accent. This is because the “sounds” 
represented by the American letters are different from the same-
looking letters from the foreign language. 

4
DR. PAUL PIMSLEUR AND HIS UNIQUE METHOD
Dr. Paul Pimsleur devoted his life to language teaching and 
testing and was one of the world’s leading experts in applied 
linguistics. He was fluent in French, good in German, and had 
a working knowledge of Italian, Russian, Modern Greek, and 
Mandarin Chinese. After obtaining his Ph.D. in French and a 
Masters in Psychology from Columbia University, he taught 
French Phonetics and Linguistics at UCLA.  He later became 
Professor of Romance Languages and Language Education, and 
Director of The Listening Center (a state-wide language lab) 
at Ohio State University; Professor of Education and Romance 
Languages at the State University of New York at Albany; and 
a Fulbright lecturer at the University of Heidelberg. He did 
research on the psychology of language learning and in 1969 
was Section Head of Psychology of Second Language Learning 
at the International Congress of Applied Linguistics.
Dr. Pimsleur was a member of the American Association of 
Teachers of French (AATF), American Educational Research 
Association (AERA), Modern Language Association (MLA), 
and a founding member of the American Council on the Teaching 
of Foreign Languages (ACTFL).   
His many books and articles revolutionized theories of 
language learning and teaching. After years of experience and 
research, Dr. Pimsleur developed a new method (The Pimsleur 
Method) that is based on two key principles: the “Principle of 
Anticipation” and a scientific principle of memory training 
that he called “Graduated Interval Recall.” This Method has 
been applied to the many levels and languages of the Pimsleur 
Programs. 

5
GRADUATED INTERVAL RECALL
The term, “Graduated Interval Recall” is a complex name 
for a very simple theory about memory. No aspect of learning a 
foreign language is more important than memory, yet before Dr. 
Pimsleur, no one had explored more effective ways for building 
language memory. 
In his research, Dr. Pimsleur discovered how long students 
remembered new information and at what intervals they needed 
to be reminded of it. If reminded too soon or too late, they failed 
to retain the information. This discovery enabled him to create 
a schedule of exactly when and how the information should be 
reintroduced. 
Suppose you have learned a new word. You tell yourself to 
remember it. However, after five minutes you’re unable to recall 
it.  If you’d been reminded of it after five seconds, you probably 
would have remembered it for maybe a minute, at which time 
you would have needed another reminder. Each time you are 
reminded, you remember the word longer than you did the time 
before. The intervals between reminders become longer and 
longer, until you eventually remember the word without being 
reminded at all.
This program is carefully designed to remind you of new 
information at the exact intervals where maximum retention 
takes place.  Each time your memory begins to fade, you will be 
asked to recall the word.  

6
PRINCIPLE OF ANTICIPATION
The “Principle of Anticipation” requires you to anticipate 
a correct answer. Practically, what this means is that you must 
retrieve the answer from what you have learned earlier in the 
course. It works by posing a question, asking you to provide a new 
sentence, using information you’ve learned previously and putting 
it into a new combination. This provides novelty and excitement 
which accelerates learning.
A possible scenario:
Speaker’s cue: “Are you going to the movies today?”  
(PAUSE)
Drawing on information given previously, you respond  
(in the target language): 
“No, I’m going tomorrow.” 
The instructor will then confirm your answer: 
“No, I’m going tomorrow.”
The Narrator then may cue: 
“Is your sister going to Europe this year?”  (PAUSE)
Response: “No, she went last year.” 
Before Dr. Pimsleur created his teaching method, language 
courses were based on the principle of “mindless-repetition.” 
Teachers drummed words into the students’ minds over and over, 
as if there were grooves in the mind that could be worn deeper 
with repetition.  
Neurophysiologists tell us however, that on the contrary, simple 
and unchallenging repetition has a hypnotic, even dulling effect  
on the learning process.  Eventually, the words being repeated 
will lose their meaning. Dr. Pimsleur discovered that learning 
accelerates when there is an “input/output” system of interaction, 
in which students receive information and then are asked to 
retrieve and use it.

7
CORE VOCABULARY
While “Graduated Interval Recall” and the “Principle of 
Anticipation” are the foundation of the Pimsleur® Method, there 
are other aspects that contribute to its uniqueness and effectiveness. 
One involves vocabulary. We have all been intimidated, when 
approaching a new language, by the sheer immensity of the 
number of new words we must learn. But extensive research has 
shown that we actually need a comparatively limited number of 
words to be able to communicate effectively in any language.
Language can be divided into two distinct categories: 
grammatical structures (function words) and concrete vocabulary 
(content words). By focusing on the former category and enabling 
the student to comprehend and employ the structure of the new 
language, Dr. Pimsleur found that language learners were able to 
more readily put new knowledge to use. There are few content 
words that must be known and used every day. The essential 
“core” of a language involves function words, which tend to 
relate to human activities. 
This course is designed to teach you to understand and to 
speak the essential elements of your new language in a relatively 
short time. During each half-hour lesson, you will actually 
converse with two native speakers, using the level of language 
spoken by educated citizens in their everyday business and social 
life. The program’s unique method of presenting dialogue in-
situation relieves you of the most common learning problem, the 
problem of meaning.  

8
ORGANIC LEARNING
The Pimsleur® Method centers on teaching functional 
mastery in understanding and speaking a language, in the most 
effective and efficient way possible. You will be working on 
your vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation in an integrated 
manner, as you are learning specific phrases that have practical 
use in everyday activities.
There are several thousand languages in the world. Because 
fewer than five hundred of these languages have developed formal 
systems of writing, linguistic specialists accept that language 
is primarily speech. For this reason, it is also accepted that the 
human brain acquires language as speech. Therefore, when Dr. 
Pimsleur created his language programs, he began teaching with 
recorded materials, which enabled the learners to acquire the 
sounds, the rhythm, and the intonation of the target language. 
The learners did this more rapidly, more accurately, and with 
great enthusiasm because they found themselves capable of 
almost instant beginning communication skills.
Dr. Pimsleur called this “organic learning” because it involves 
learning on several fronts at the same time. His system enables 
the learner to acquire grammatical usage, vocabulary, and the 
“sounds” of the language in an integrated, exciting way.  In short, 
the learner gains the language as a living, expressive form of 
human culture.

9
COURSE CONTENT
When you have mastered a Pimsleur® Language Program, 
you will have a highly-practical, every-day vocabulary at your 
command.  These basic words, phrases, and sentences have been 
carefully selected to be the most useful in everyday situations 
when you visit a foreign country. You will be able to handle 
social encounters graciously, converse with native speakers in 
travel situations, and use transportation systems with confidence. 
You’ll be able to ask directions and to navigate your own way 
around the cities and countryside.  
The language skills you learn will enable you to participate 
in casual conversations, express facts, give instructions, and 
describe current, past, and future activities. You will be able to 
deal with everyday survival topics and courtesy requirements. 
You will be intelligible to native speakers of the language—even 
to those who are not used to dealing with foreigners. What is 
equally important, you will know how to ask the kinds of 
questions that will further expand your knowledge of and facility 
with the language, because you will have been trained by the 
Pimsleur® open-ended questioning technique. 
The Pimsleur® Method becomes a springboard for further 
learning and growth to take place—the ultimate purpose of any 
real educational system. This desire to learn will be apparent to 
the people with whom you speak. It will indicate sincere interest 
in and respect for their culture.

10
A NOTE ON REGIONAL LANGUAGE DIFFERENCES
In any large country, and even in many smaller countries, 
regional differences in language are common. In the United States, 
for example, a person from Maine can sound very different than 
someone from Texas. Pronunciations (“accents”) vary, and there 
are also minor differences in vocabulary. For example, what is 
called a “drinking fountain” in New York or Arizona is known 
as a “bubbler” in Wisconsin, and a “soft drink” in one part of 
America will be called a “soda” elsewhere. The differences in 
English are even more distinct between North Americans and 
Britons, or between Britons and Australians.  But all are native 
speakers of English; all can communicate with spoken English, 
read the same newspapers, and watch the same television 
programs, essentially without difficulty. 
Native speakers of a language can often tell where someone 
is from by listening to him or her speak. In addition to regional 
differences, there are social differences. Pimsleur® Language 
Programs use a standard “educated” speech, which will generally 
carry you throughout the country without difficulty.

11
Reading in a Pimsleur Program 
A phonetic alphabet, such as the Latin alphabet and the Greek 
alphabet, is a list of symbols (letters) that are used to represent the 
sounds of the language in writing.  And given that language is 
primarily speech, the spoken sounds of the language necessarily 
precede learning how to decode the written form, i.e., learning 
how to “read” – just as a child first learns to speak and then 
eventually to read.  This is the natural progression Dr. Pimsleur 
followed in his courses.
After an initial introduction to the spoken language, reading 
is then integrated into the program and the new alphabet is 
systematically introduced, associating each letter with the 
sounds of the new language.  Initially, you are sounding out 
words, mastering the different sounds associated with the new 
alphabet.   You are not, at first, reading for meaning, but rather for 
sound/symbol correlation.  Eventually, when the sound system 
is mastered, you will be able to look at known vocabulary and 
“read for meaning.”  By the end of the first 30 lessons, you will 
be reading at the same level as you are speaking.

 
• Arabic
 
• Chinese (Cantonese)
 
• Chinese (Mandarin)
 
• French
 
•  German
 
• Haitian
 
• Hindi
 
• Albanian
 
• Arabic (Eastern)
 
• Arabic (Egyptian)
 
• Arabic (Modern Standard)
 
• Armenian (Eastern)
 
• Armenian (Western)
 
• Chinese (Cantonese)
 
• Chinese (Mandarin)
 
• Croatian
 
• Czech
 
• Danish
 
• Dari (Persian)
 
• Dutch
 
• Farsi (Persian)
 
• Finnish
 
• French
 
• German
 
• Greek (Modern)
 
• Haitian Creole
 
• Hebrew (Modern)
 
• Hindi
 
• Hungarian
 
• Indonesian
 
• Irish
 
• Italian
 
• Japanese
 
• Korean
 
• Lithuanian
 
• Norwegian
 
• Ojibwe
 
• Pashto  
 
• Polish
 
• Portuguese (Brazilian)
 
• Portuguese (European)
 
• Punjabi
 
• Romanian
 
• Russian
 
• Castilian Spanish
 
• Latin American Spanish
 
• Swahili
 
• Swedish
 
• Swiss German
 
• Tagalog
 
• Thai
 
• Turkish
 
• Twi
 
• Ukrainian
 
• Urdu 
 
• Vietnamese
Pimsleur covers the world of languages. You can choose from 
over 60 language programs, many with multiple levels, ranging 
from the most popular to the exotic.  Become a Pimsleur learner 
and travel the world!
 
• Italian
 
• Korean
 
• Persian
 
• Portuguese
 
• Russian
 
• Spanish
 
• Vietnamese
ESL (English as a Second Language):
Programs available for these languages:

© 1997 Simon & Schuster, Inc. 
Pimsleur® is an imprint of Simon & Schuster Audio, 
a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.  Mfg. in USA.  All rights reserved.
Pimsleur® is a registered trademark of Beverly Pimsleur,
used by Simon & Schuster under exclusive license.
Pimsleur® Language Programs are available 
in all of the commonly spoken languages.  
Many other languages are also available. 
For more information, call 1-800-831-5497
or visit us at www.Pimsleur.com
PIMSLEUR
®
SIMON & SCHUSTER’S

