Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
1
The Senses 
Jennifer Carbrey, PhD 
 
The underlined headings correspond to the three Senses videos. 
 
1. Introduction and vision 
 
Sensory systems consist of sensory cells that respond to changes in the external 
or internal environment of our bodies and relay that information to the central nervous 
system. We are unaware of most of the sensory information collected by sensory cells. 
The sensation tells us what the stimulus is, where it is in relation to our body, and the 
strength of the stimulus. Sensory systems also have the ability to adapt to constant 
stimulation by decreasing in sensitivity. Adaptation leads to decreased action potential 
frequency after exposure to the same stimulus repeatedly. Interpretation of a sensation 
by the central nervous system leads to our perception of the stimulus. How the central 
nervous system is able to convert sensations into perceptions is not well understood in 
most cases.   
 
Peripheral Nervous System Input 
 
In general, there are two different ways that sensory information is conveyed to 
the central nervous system. In some cases, such as the odorant receptor cells of the 
nose, an afferent neuron has a specialized ending that produces graded potentials that 
can lead to action potentials in response to a stimulus. In other systems such as vision, 
taste, and hearing, a specialized receptor cell produces graded potentials that can 
trigger an action potential in an afferent neuron. Each afferent neuron receives signals 
from a single type of stimulus. 
 
Somatosensation 
 
The skin, muscles, and joints have receptors that can sense touch, pressure, 
temperature, pain, or the position of the body. The information gathered by these 
receptors leads to sensations referred to as somatosensations.  
Each receptor type responds primarily to only one type of stimulus. 
Mechanoreceptors are nerve endings that are encapsulated by connective tissue that 
sense touch and pressure. There are different types of encapsulated nerve endings that 
have different morphologies which allow them to respond to a specific kind of touch. 
Stretching of the connective tissue fibers of the encapsulated endings activates ion 
channels which can produce action potentials that signal to the central nervous system. 
Posture and movement of body parts are sensed by muscle stretch 
mechanoreceptors, as well as mechanoreceptors present in skin, joints, tendons, and 
ligaments. Together they sense the amount of muscle stretch as well as the rate of 
muscle stretch. Vision and balance also play a role in the perception of where the body 
is in space, or proprioception. 
Temperature is sensed in the skin using different types of thermoreceptors. 
Free nerve endings, which are processes of neurons, sense temperature using ion 
channels that are activated only at certain temperatures. A single sensory neuron only 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
2
expresses a single kind of thermoreceptor. Thermoreceptors can also detect certain 
chemicals. For instance, cold-sensing thermoreceptors respond to menthol, while heat-
sensing thermoreceptors respond to capsaicin (from chili peppers) and ethanol. 
Pain is sensed by free nerve endings expressing nociceptors, which are 
receptors that sense extreme mechanical deformation, high temperatures, as well as 
chemicals released by damaged cells or immune cells. 
 
Vision 
 
Overview. The visual 
system detects light to allow us 
to perceive the shape and color 
of objects as well as their 
movement. The light sensing 
portion of the eye, the retina, 
lines the inside of the back of 
the eye (Fig. 1). It consists of 
photoreceptor cells and their 
afferent neurons. Before 
coming in contact with the 
retina, light passes through the 
cornea, a clear epithelium, and 
the lens of the eye. Between 
the cornea and lens, the 
anterior chamber is filled with 
fluid, called aqueous humor. 
The posterior chamber is 
between the lens and the 
retina. It contains a gel called vitreous humor. 
In vision, light is reflected by objects and enters the eye. The pupil controls the 
amount of light entering the eye. The light is focused by the lens on to the retina (Fig. 1). 
The photoreceptor cells convert energy from the light into an electrical signal that is 
processed by the brain and transformed into a perceived image. 
 
 
Refraction and Focusing of light. Only photons with certain wavelengths can 
be detected by the retina. Different wavelengths of light within the visible range are 
perceived by the central nervous system as different colors. When light hits the cornea, 
it is bent, or refracted as it passes from air into the tissue. This is the largest source of 
refraction and focusing by the eye. The light continues through the aqueous humor and 
is refracted as it travels through the lens, which can adjust to focus on objects a certain 
distance away. Ciliary muscles encircle the perimeter of the lens and flatten the lens 
when the muscles relax or make the lens more round when the muscles contract. A lens 
that is more round allows the eye to focus on closer objects. Due to the refraction of 
light by the cornea, the image on the retina appears upside down and backwards. The 
pupil plays a role in focusing light by restricting bright light to the center of the retina for 
clearer vision. 
Figure 1. The anatomy of the human eye. image from 
http://www.nei.nih.gov/photo/eyean/images/NEA13_72.jpg 
(modified), National Eye Institute, public domain 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
3
 
Retina. The retina contains two types of photoreceptor cells, the rods and 
cones. Because the light-sensing portion of the photoreceptor cells faces the back of 
the retina, the light must travel through several layers of cells before it is detected. 
Photopigment proteins (G-protein coupled receptors) in the plasma membrane of the 
photoreceptors contain retinal, a derivative of vitamin A that changes its conformation 
in response to a photon of light (Fig. 2). The change in conformation of retinal affects 
the conformation of the photopigment protein which starts a signal transduction 
cascade. The signal transduction cascade reduces the amount of cGMP which causes 
a cGMP-gated cation channel to close (Fig. 2). This hyperpolarizes the photoreceptor 
cell and eventually results in signaling to the central nervous system. 
    
Rods. Photoreceptor rod cells express rhodopsin photopigment protein and are 
very sensitive to light. As a result, they are used in night vision. Many rod photoreceptor 
cells bind a single bipolar cell. This convergence of signals translates into low 
resolution vision during conditions of low illumination. 
 
Cones. Photoreceptor cone cells express one of three different photopigment 
proteins called opsins. Cones are less sensitive to light and so are used in conditions of 
high levels of illumination. Bipolar cells bind only one cone cell so there is high 
resolution vision with cones. The three different opsins that are expressed by the three 
types of cones bind retinal in unique ways which leads to absorption of light at different 
wavelengths. The three opsins are sensitive to red, blue or green wavelengths of light.  
For instance, red light from a red object primarily hyperpolarizes cones expressing red-
sensitive opsin. This activates red bipolar cells and ganglion cells. Colors other than 
red, blue, or green are perceived when combinations of different cones are stimulated. 
For instance, we perceive yellow when the red and green cones are both stimulated. 
 
 
Figure 2. The steps of light detection by photoreceptor cells. image by Jason J. from 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phototransduction.png (modified), Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 Unported license 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
4
2. Hearing and the vestibular system 
 
Sound. Sound waves cause vibration of air molecules so that the molecules 
alternate between being compressed and expanding. The amplitude of the difference 
between the high and low pressure of air molecules determines the volume of the sound 
(measured as decibels, dB). The frequency of the changes between high and low 
pressure determines the pitch of the sound (measured as Hertz, cycles per second). 
 
Sound transmission. 
The outer ear, which consists 
of the pinna and external 
auditory canal, amplify and 
direct the sound to the 
middle ear (Fig. 3). The 
middle ear is an air filled 
cavity with three bones, the 
malleus, incus, and stapes. 
The sound hits and deforms 
the tympanic membrane 
between the outer and middle 
ear (Fig. 3). The three bones 
of the middle ear respond to 
the deformation of the 
tympanic membrane and 
amplify the vibration to the 
oval window on the cochlea 
of the inner ear. Because the 
oval window is much smaller 
than the tympanic membrane, 
the vibrations are amplified. 
This is important because in 
the inner ear, fluid is used to 
transmit the sound (Fig. 4). 
 
Cochlea. The cochlea 
contains the receptor cells for 
sound which are located in a 
central fluid-filled cavity called 
the cochlear duct. The 
cochlear duct is bordered by 
two additional fluid-filled 
cavities that vibrate in 
response to deformation of 
the oval window (Fig. 4).  Sound travels down the scala vestibuli after deformation of 
the oval window and then travels down the scala tympani and ends at the round 
window (Fig. 4). During this process the basilar membrane of the cochlear duct 
vibrates (Fig. 5).  
Figure 4. The anatomy of the cochlea. image by Dick Lyon 
(modified), http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cochlea.svg, 
public domain 
Figure 3. Anatomy of the ear. image by Dan Pickard (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HumanEar.jpg, public 
domain 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
5
 
Organ of Corti. Within 
the cochlear duct, sitting on 
the basilar membrane is the 
organ of Corti, which contains 
the hair cells that serve as the 
receptor cells for sound. 
Stereocilia of the hair cells 
are embedded in  
a tectorial membrane. As the 
basilar membrane bounces up 
and down, the stereocilia  
bend (Fig. 5).  Bending the 
stereocilia on the hair cells 
opens stretch-sensitive K+ 
channels and K+ enters the 
cells due to the composition of 
the surrounding fluid. K+ entry 
depolarizes the hair cell and 
neurotransmitter is released.  
Bending in the other direction 
hyperpolarizes the cell and 
inhibits neurotransmitter 
release. After a hair cell activates the afferent neuron, axons from these neurons join to 
form the cochlear nerve. The region of the basilar membrane along the length of the 
cochlea that vibrates the most correlates with the frequency of the sound. As a result, 
the sensation of pitch is determined by which portion of the basilar membrane is 
activated. The louder the sound, the more vibration and the greater frequency of action 
potentials produced in the afferent neurons.  
 
Balance 
 
The portions of the inner ear that 
sense movement of the head are called 
the vestibular system. The 
semicircular canals detect rotation of 
the head while the otolith organs 
detect linear movement of the head 
(Fig. 6). 
 
 
Semicircular canals. There are 
three semicircular canals in the inner 
ear that allow detection of head rotation 
along three perpendicular axes – 
nodding the head, shaking the head, 
and tipping the ear towards the shoulder 
(Fig. 6). Each canal contains hair cells 
Figure 5. The Organ of Corti. image by Oarih (modified), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cochlea-
crosssection.png, Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported 
license 
Figure 6. The vestibular system of the inner ear. 
image from The Effects of Space Flight on the 
Human Vestibular System, an online educational 
article by the U.S. government’s National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vestibular_or
gans-_canals,_otolith,_cochlea.jpg, public domain 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
           ©copyright Jennifer Carbrey 
 
 
6
that move with the head as it rotates around a certain axis. Because the fluid remains 
stationary, it bends the steriocilia of the hair cells which causes release of 
neurotransmitter similar to hair cells of the auditory system. 
 
 
Otolith organs. The otolith organs contain sheets of hair cells that have calcium 
carbonate crystals, called otoliths, embedded in gel that surrounds the stereocilia of 
the hair cells. Since the otoliths are heavier than the fluid around the hair cells, they 
remain stationary and pull on the stereocilia during linear movements. The utricle 
contains hair cells that point straight up in a standing postion and respond to horizontal 
linear acceleration. The saccule contains hair cells that are oriented at a 90 degree 
angle compared to those of the utricle (Fig. 6). This allows them to detect up and down 
motions. 
 
3. Chemical senses 
 
Chemoreceptors all bind chemicals but they differ in their specificity. Taste buds 
in the tongue and odor receptors in the nose bind chemicals in food and air, 
respectively. There are other chemoreceptors such as those in the carotid arteries that 
sense the levels of blood gases and neurons in the brain that sense the osmolarity of 
blood.  
 
Taste 
Taste ligands dissolved in saliva bind to chemoreceptors on taste buds. Receptor 
binding raises intracellular Ca++ causing the release of neurotransmitters and 
producing graded potentials. This leads to the initiation of action potentials in the 
postsynaptic neuron. Taste buds can detect chemicals that can be categorized into five 
different flavors: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami. Each type of chemical is detected 
by different receptors. Each taste bud responds primarily to one flavor at low 
concentrations and two or three at higher concentrations.  
 
Smell 
 
Odors in the air are detected by chemoreceptors of olfactory neurons. The 
olfactory neuron serves as the receptor cell as well as the afferent neuron. Binding of an 
odorant receptor leads to activation of signal transduction pathways that open cation 
channels and lead to graded potentials. Each odorant binds a combination of odorant 
receptors that are specific for different parts of the molecule. It is the combination of 
activated receptors that leads to our perception of a smell of a particular substance. 
  

