The DESIGN
of EVERYDAY
THINGS
DON
NORMAN
R E V I S E D  &  E X PA N D E D  E D I T I O N

THE
DESIGN
OF EVERYDAY
THINGS

ALSO BY 
DON NORMAN
TEXTBOOKS
Memory and Attention: An Introduction to 
Human Information Processing. 
First edition, 1969; second edition 1976
Human Information Processing. 
(with Peter Lindsay: first edition, 1972; second edition 1977)
SCIENTIFIC MONOGRAPHS
Models of Human Memory 
(edited, 1970)
Explorations in Cognition 
(with David E. Rumelhart and the LNR Research Group, 1975)
Perspectives on Cognitive Science
(edited, 1981)
User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on 
Human-Computer Interaction 
(edited with Steve Draper, 1986)
TRADE BOOKS
Learning and Memory, 1982
The Psychology of Everyday Things, 1988
The Design of Everyday Things
1990 and 2002 (paperbacks of The Psychology of Everyday Things 
with new prefaces)
The Design of Everyday Things
Revised and Expanded Edition, 2013
Turn Signals Are the Facial Expressions of Automobiles, 1992
Things That Make Us Smart, 1993
The Invisible Computer: Why Good Products Can Fail, the Personal 
Computer Is So Complex, and Information Appliances Are the 
Answer, 1998
Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things, 2004
The Design of Future Things, 2007
A Comprehensive Strategy for Better Reading: Cognition and 
Emotion, 2010
(with Masanori Okimoto; my essays, with commentary in Japanese, used 
for teaching English as a second language to Japanese speakers)
Living with Complexity, 2011
CD-ROM
First person: Donald A. Norman. Defending Human Attributes 
in the Age of the Machine, 1994

THE
DESIGN
OF EVERYDAY
THINGS
R EV ISED A N D EX PA N DED EDI T ION
Don Norman
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New York

Copyright © 201 3 by Don Norman
Published by Basic Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part 
of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without 
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books, 
250 West 57th Street, 15th Floor, New York, New York 10107.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for 
bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and 
other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special 
Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut 
Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, 
ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Norman, Donald A.
[Psychology of everyday things]
 
 
The design of everyday things / Don Norman.—Revised 
 
and expanded edition.
 
 
   pages cm
 
 
ISBN 978-0-465-05065-9 (pbk.)—ISBN 978-0-465-00394-5 
 
(ebook) 1. Industrial design—Psychological aspects. 2. Human 
 
engineering. I. Title.
 
TS171.4.N67      2013
 
745.2001'9—dc23
2013024417
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

For Julie


 
 
vii
CONTENTS
  
Preface to the Revised Edition 
xi
 1  
The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
1
 
The Complexity of Modern Devices,  4
 
Human-Centered Design,  8
 
Fundamental Principles of Interaction,  10
 
The System Image,  31
 
The Paradox of Technology,  32
 
The Design Challenge,  34
 2 
The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
37
 
How People Do Things: The Gulfs of Execution
 
 
and Evaluation,  38
 
The Seven Stages of Action,  40
 
Human Thought: Mostly Subconscious,  44
 
Human Cognition and Emotion,  49
 
The Seven Stages of Action and the 
 
 
Three Levels of Processing,  55
 
People as Storytellers,  56
 
Blaming the Wrong Things,  59
 
Falsely Blaming Yourself,  65
 
The Seven Stages of Action: 
 
 
Seven Fundamental Design Principles, 71

viii 
Contents
 3 
Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
74
 
Precise Behavior from Imprecise Knowledge,  75
 
Memory Is Knowledge in the Head,  86
 
The Structure of Memory,  91
 
Approximate Models: Memory in the 
 
 
Real World,  100
 
Knowledge in the Head, 105
 
The Tradeoff Between Knowledge in the World  
 
 
and in the Head,  109
 
Memory in Multiple Heads, Multiple Devices,  111
 
Natural Mapping,  113
 
Culture and Design: Natural Mappings Can  
 
 
Vary with Culture,  118
 4  
 Knowing What to Do: Constraints, 
123 
Discoverability, and Feedback
 
Four Kinds of Constraints: Physical, Cultural,  
 
 
Semantic, and Logical,  125
 
Applying Affordances, Signifiers, and 
 
 
Constraints to Everyday Objects,  132
 
Constraints That Force the Desired Behavior,  141
 
Conventions, Constraints, and Affordances,  145
 
The Faucet: A Case History of Design,  150
 
Using Sound as Signifiers,  155
 5 
Human Error? No, Bad Design 
162
 
Understanding Why There Is Error,  163
 
Deliberate Violations,  169
 
Two Types of Errors: Slips and Mistakes,  170
 
The Classification of Slips,  173
 
The Classification of Mistakes,  179
 
Social and Institutional Pressures,  186
 
Reporting Error,  191
 
Detecting Error,  194
 
Designing for Error,  198
 
When Good Design Isn’t Enough,  210
 
Resilience Engineering,  211
 
The Paradox of Automation,  213
 
Design Principles for Dealing with Error,  215

 
Contents 
ix
 6 
Design Thinking 
217
 
Solving the Correct Problem,  218
 
The Double-Diamond Model of Design,  220
 
The Human-Centered Design Process,  221
 
What I Just Told You? It Doesn’t Really Work  
 
 
That Way,  236
 
The Design Challenge,  239
 
Complexity Is Good; It Is Confusion 
 
 
That Is Bad,  247
 
Standardization and Technology,  248
 
Deliberately Making Things Difficult,  255
 
Design: Developing Technology for People,  257
 7 
Design in the World of Business 
258
 
Competitive Forces,  259
 
New Technologies Force Change,  264
 
How Long Does It Take to Introduce a 
 
 
New Product?,  268
 
Two Forms of Innovation: Incremental 
 
 
and Radical,  279
 
The Design of Everyday Things: 1988–2038,  282
 
The Future of Books,  288
 
The Moral Obligations of Design,  291
 
Design Thinking and Thinking About Design,  293
  
Acknowledgments 
299
  
General Readings and Notes 
305
  
References 
321
  
Index 
331


 
 
xi
PREFACE TO 
THE REVISED EDITION
In the first edition of this book, then called POET, The Psychology 
of Everyday Things, I started with these lines: “This is the book I 
always wanted to write, except I didn’t know it.” Today I do know 
it, so I simply say, “This is the book I always wanted to write.”
This is a starter kit for good design. It is intended to be enjoy-
able and informative for everyone: everyday people, technical peo-
ple, designers, and nondesigners. One goal is to turn readers into 
great observers of the absurd, of the poor design that gives rise 
to so many of the problems of modern life, especially of modern 
technology. It will also turn them into observers of the good, of 
the ways in which thoughtful designers have worked to make our 
lives easier and smoother. Good design is actually a lot harder to 
notice than poor design, in part because good designs fit our needs 
so well that the design is invisible, serving us without drawing 
attention to itself. Bad design, on the other hand, screams out its 
inadequacies, making itself very noticeable.
Along the way I lay out the fundamental principles required 
to eliminate problems, to turn our everyday stuff into enjoyable 
products that provide pleasure and satisfaction. The combination 
of good observation skills and good design principles is a powerful 

xii 
Preface to the Revised Edition
tool, one that everyone can use, even people who are not profes-
sional designers. Why? Because we are all designers in the sense 
that all of us deliberately design our lives, our rooms, and the way 
we do things. We can also design workarounds, ways of overcom-
ing the flaws of existing devices. So, one purpose of this book is to 
give back your control over the products in your life: to know how 
to select usable and understandable ones, to know how to fix those 
that aren’t so usable or understandable.
The first edition of the book has lived a long and healthy life. Its 
name was quickly changed to Design of Everyday Things (DOET) 
to make the title less cute and more descriptive. DOET has been 
read by the general public and by designers. It has been assigned 
in courses and handed out as required readings in many compa-
nies. Now, more than twenty years after its release, the book is 
still popular. I am delighted by the response and by the number 
of people who correspond with me about it, who send me further 
examples of thoughtless, inane design, plus occasional examples 
of superb design. Many readers have told me that it has changed 
their lives, making them more sensitive to the problems of life and 
to the needs of people. Some changed their careers and became 
designers because of the book. The response has been amazing.
Why a Revised Edition?
In the twenty-five years that have passed since the first edition 
of the book, technology has undergone massive change. Neither 
cell phones nor the Internet were in widespread usage when I 
wrote the book. Home networks were unheard of. Moore’s law 
proclaims that the power of computer processors doubles roughly 
every two years. This means that today’s computers are five thou-
sand times more powerful than the ones available when the book 
was first written.
Although the fundamental design principles of The Design of 
Everyday Things are still as true and as important as when the first 
edition was written, the examples were badly out of date. “What 
is a slide projector?” students ask. Even if nothing else was to be 
changed, the examples had to be updated.

 
Preface to the Revised Edition xiii
The principles of effective design also had to be brought up to 
date. Human-centered design (HCD) has emerged since the first 
edition, partially inspired by that book. This current edition has 
an entire chapter devoted to the HCD process of product devel-
opment. The first edition of the book focused upon making prod-
ucts understandable and usable. The total experience of a product 
covers much more than its usability: aesthetics, pleasure, and fun 
play critically important roles. There was no discussion of plea-
sure, enjoyment, or emotion. Emotion is so important that I wrote 
an entire book, Emotional Design, about the role it plays in design. 
These issues are also now included in this edition.
My experiences in industry have taught me about the com-
plexities of the real world, how cost and schedules are critical, 
the need to pay attention to competition, and the importance of 
multi disciplinary teams. I learned that the successful product has 
to appeal to customers, and the criteria they use to determine what 
to purchase may have surprisingly little overlap with the aspects 
that are important during usage. The best products do not always 
succeed. Brilliant new technologies might take decades to become 
accepted. To understand products, it is not enough to understand 
design or technology: it is critical to understand business.
What Has Changed?
For readers familiar with the earlier edition of this book, here is a 
brief review of the changes.
What has changed? Not much. Everything.
When I started, I assumed that the basic principles were still 
true, so all I needed to do was update the examples. But in the 
end, I rewrote everything. Why? Because although all the princi-
ples still applied, in the twenty-five years since the first edition, 
much has been learned. I also now know which parts were diffi-
cult and therefore need better explanations. In the interim, I also 
wrote many articles and six books on related topics, some of which 
I thought important to include in the revision. For example, the 
original book says nothing of what has come to be called user 
experience (a term that I was among the first to use, when in the 

xiv Preface to the Revised Edition
early 1990s, the group I headed at Apple called itself “the User 
Experience Architect’s Office”). This needed to be here.
Finally, my exposure to industry taught me much about the way 
products actually get deployed, so I added considerable infor-
mation about the impact of budgets, schedules, and competitive 
pressures. When I wrote the original book, I was an academic re-
searcher. Today, I have been an industry executive (Apple, HP, and 
some startups), a consultant to numerous companies, and a board 
member of companies. I had to include my learnings from these 
experiences.
Finally, one important component of the original edition was 
its brevity. The book could be read quickly as a basic, general 
introduction. I kept that feature unchanged. I tried to delete as 
much as I added to keep the total size about the same (I failed). 
The book is meant to be an introduction: advanced discussions of 
the topics, as well as a large number of important but more ad-
vanced topics, have been left out to maintain the compactness. The 
previous edition lasted from 1988 to 2013. If the new edition is to 
last as long, 2013 to 2038, I had to be careful to choose examples 
that would not be dated twenty-five years from now. As a result, 
I have tried not to give specific company examples. After all, who 
remembers the companies of twenty-five years ago? Who can 
predict what new companies will arise, what existing companies 
will disappear, and what new technologies will arise in the next 
twenty-five years? The one thing I can predict with certainty is that 
the principles of human psychology will remain the same, which 
means that the design principles here, based on psychology, on the 
nature of human cognition, emotion, action, and interaction with 
the world, will remain unchanged.
Here is a brief summary of the changes, chapter by chapter.
Chapter 1: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things
Signifiers are the most important addition to the chapter, a con-
cept first introduced in my book Living with Complexity. The first 
edition had a focus upon affordances, but although affordances 

 
Preface to the Revised Edition 
xv
make sense for interaction with physical objects, they are con-
fusing when dealing with virtual ones. As a result, affordances 
have created much confusion in the world of design. Affor-
dances define what actions are possible. Signifiers specify how 
people discover those possibilities: signifiers are signs, percep-
tible signals of what can be done. Signifiers are of far more im-
portance to designers than are affordances. Hence, the extended 
treatment.
I added a very brief section on HCD, a term that didn’t yet exist 
when the first edition was published, although looking back, we 
see that the entire book was about HCD.
Other than that, the chapter is the same, and although all the 
photographs and drawings are new, the examples are pretty much 
the same.
Chapter 2: The Psychology of Everyday Actions
The chapter has one major addition to the coverage in the first edi-
tion: the addition of emotion. The seven-stage model of action has 
proven to be influential, as has the three-level model of processing 
(introduced in my book Emotional Design). In this chapter I show 
the interplay between these two, show that different emotions 
arise at the different stages, and show which stages are primarily 
located at each of the three levels of processing (visceral, for the 
elementary levels of motor action performance and perception; be-
havioral, for the levels of action specification and initial interpre-
tation of the outcome; and reflective, for the development of goals, 
plans, and the final stage of evaluation of the outcome).
Chapter 3: Knowledge in the Head and in the World
Aside from improved and updated examples, the most important 
addition to this chapter is a section on culture, which is of special 
importance to my discussion of “natural mappings.” What seems 
natural in one culture may not be in another. The section examines 
the way different cultures view time—the discussion might sur-
prise you.

xvi Preface to the Revised Edition
Chapter. 4: Knowing What to Do: 
Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback
Few substantive changes. Better examples. The elaboration of forc-
ing functions into two kinds: lock-in and lockout. And a section 
on destination control elevators, illustrating how change can be 
extremely disconcerting, even to professionals, even if the change 
is for the better.
Chapter 5: Human Error? No, Bad Design
The basics are unchanged, but the chapter itself has been heavily 
revised. I update the classification of errors to fit advances since 
the publication of the first edition. In particular, I now divide slips 
into two main categories—action-based and memory lapses; and 
mistakes into three categories—rule-based, knowledge-based, 
and memory lapses. (These distinctions are now common, but I 
introduce a slightly different way to treat memory lapses.)
Although the multiple classifications of slips provided in the 
first edition are still valid, many have little or no implications for 
design, so they have been eliminated from the revision. I provide 
more design-relevant examples. I show the relationship of the clas-
sification of errors, slips, and mistakes to the seven-stage model of 
action, something new in this revision.
The chapter concludes with a quick discussion of the difficulties 
posed by automation (from my book The Design of Future Things) 
and what I consider the best new approach to deal with design 
so as to either eliminate or minimize human error: resilience 
engineering.
Chapter 6: Design Thinking
This chapter is completely new. I discuss two views of human-
centered design: the British Design Council’s double-diamond 
model and the traditional HCD iteration of observation, ide-
ation, prototyping, and testing. The first diamond is the diver-
gence, followed by convergence, of possibilities to determine 
the appropriate problem. The second diamond is a divergence-
convergence to determine an appropriate solution. I introduce 

 
Preface to the Revised Edition xvii
activity-centered design as a more appropriate variant of human-
centered design in many circumstances. These sections cover 
the theory.
The chapter then takes a radical shift in position, starting with a 
section entitled “What I Just Told You? It Doesn’t Really Work That 
Way.” Here is where I introduce Norman’s Law: The day the prod-
uct team is announced, it is behind schedule and over its budget.
I discuss challenges of design within a company, where sched-
ules, budgets, and the competing requirements of the different 
divisions all provide severe constraints upon what can be accom-
plished. Readers from industry have told me that they welcome 
these sections, which capture the real pressures upon them.
The chapter concludes with a discussion of the role of standards 
(modified from a similar discussion in the earlier edition), plus 
some more general design guidelines.
Chapter 7: Design in the World of Business
This chapter is also completely new, continuing the theme started 
in Chapter 6 of design in the real world. Here I discuss “featuritis,” 
the changes being forced upon us through the invention of new 
technologies, and the distinction between incremental and radical 
innovation. Everyone wants radical innovation, but the truth is, 
most radical innovations fail, and even when they do succeed, it 
can take multiple decades before they are accepted. Radical innova-
tion, therefore, is relatively rare: incremental innovation is common.
The techniques of human-centered design are appropriate to in-
cremental innovation: they cannot lead to radical innovations.
The chapter concludes with discussions of the trends to come, 
the future of books, the moral obligations of design, and the rise of 
small, do-it-yourself makers that are starting to revolutionize the 
way ideas are conceived and introduced into the marketplace: 
“the rise of the small,” I call it.
Summary
With the passage of time, the psychology of people stays the same, 
but the tools and objects in the world change. Cultures change. 

xviii Preface to the Revised Edition
Technologies change. The principles of design still hold, but the 
way they get applied needs to be modified to account for new ac-
tivities, new technologies, new methods of communication and 
interaction. The Psychology of Everyday Things was appropriate for 
the twentieth century: The Design of Everyday Things is for the 
twenty-first.
Don Norman
Silicon Valley, California
www.jnd.org

 
 
1
THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
OF EVERYDAY 
THINGS
If I were placed in the cockpit of a modern jet airliner, 
my inability to perform well would neither surprise nor 
bother me. But why should I have trouble with doors 
and light switches, water faucets and stoves? “Doors?” I 
can hear the reader saying. “You have trouble opening doors?” Yes. 
I push doors that are meant to be pulled, pull doors that should be 
pushed, and walk into doors that neither pull nor push, but slide. 
Moreover, I see others having the same troubles—unnecessary 
troubles. My problems with doors have become so well known 
that confusing doors are often called “Norman doors.” Imagine 
becoming famous for doors that don’t work right. I’m pretty sure 
that’s not what my parents planned for me. (Put “Norman doors” 
into your favorite search engine—be sure to include the quote 
marks: it makes for fascinating reading.)
How can such a simple thing as a door be so confusing? A door 
would seem to be about as simple a device as possible. There is not 
much you can do to a door: you can open it or shut it. Suppose you 
are in an office building, walking down a corridor. You come to a 
door. How does it open? Should you push or pull, on the left or the 
right? Maybe the door slides. If so, in which direction? I have seen 
doors that slide to the left, to the right, and even up into the ceiling. 
C H A P T E R  O N E

2 
The Design of Everyday Things
The design of the door should indicate how to work it without any 
need for signs, certainly without any need for trial and error.
A friend told me of the time he got trapped in the doorway of a 
post office in a European city. The entrance was an imposing row 
of six glass swinging doors, followed immediately by a second, 
identical row. That’s a standard design: it helps reduce the airflow 
and thus maintain the indoor temperature of the building. There 
was no visible hardware: obviously the doors could swing in ei-
ther direction: all a person had to do was push the side of the door 
and enter.
My friend pushed on one of the outer doors. It swung inward, 
and he entered the building. Then, before he could get to the next 
row of doors, he was distracted and turned around for an instant. 
He didn’t realize it at the time, but he had moved slightly to the 
right. So when he came to the next door and pushed it, nothing 
happened. “Hmm,” he thought, “must be locked.” So he pushed 
the side of the adjacent door. Nothing. Puzzled, my friend decided 
to go outside again. He turned around and pushed against the 
side of a door. Nothing. He pushed the adjacent door. Nothing. 
The door he had just entered no longer worked. He turned around 
once more and tried the inside doors again. Nothing. Concern, 
then mild panic. He was trapped! Just then, a group of people on 
the other side of the entranceway (to my friend’s right) passed eas-
ily through both sets of doors. My friend hurried over to follow 
their path.
FIGURE 1.1. Coffeepot for Masochists. The 
French artist Jacques Carelman in his series of 
books Catalogue d’objets introuvables (Catalog of 
unfindable objects) provides delightful examples 
of everyday things that are deliberately unwork-
able, outrageous, or otherwise ill-formed. One 
of my favorite items is what he calls “coffeepot for 
masochists.” The photograph shows a copy given 
to me by collegues at the University of California, 
San Diego. It is one of my treasured art objects. 
(Photograph by Aymin Shamma for the author.)

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
3
How could such a thing happen? A swinging door has two sides. 
One contains the supporting pillar and the hinge, the other is un-
supported. To open the door, you must push or pull on the unsup-
ported edge. If you push on the hinge side, nothing happens. In 
my friend’s case, he was in a building where the designer aimed 
for beauty, not utility. No distracting lines, no visible pillars, no vis-
ible hinges. So how can the ordinary user know which side to push 
on? While distracted, my friend had moved toward the (invisible) 
supporting pillar, so he was pushing the doors on the hinged side. 
No wonder nothing happened. Attractive doors. Stylish. Probably 
won a design prize.
Two of the most important characteristics of good design are dis-
coverability and understanding. Discoverability: Is it possible to even 
figure out what actions are possible and where and how to per-
form them? Understanding: What does it all mean? How is the 
product supposed to be used? What do all the different controls 
and settings mean?
The doors in the story illustrate what happens when discoverabil-
ity fails. Whether the device is a door or a stove, a mobile phone 
or a nuclear power plant, the relevant components must be visible, 
and they must communicate the correct message: What actions 
are possible? Where and how should they be done? With doors 
that push, the designer must provide signals that naturally indi-
cate where to push. These need not destroy the aesthetics. Put a 
vertical plate on the side to be pushed. Or make the supporting 
pillars visible. The vertical plate and supporting pillars are natural 
signals, naturally interpreted, making it easy to know just what to 
do: no labels needed.
With complex devices, discoverability and understanding re-
quire the aid of manuals or personal instruction. We accept this 
if the device is indeed complex, but it should be unnecessary for 
simple things. Many products defy understanding simply because 
they have too many functions and controls. I don’t think that sim-
ple home appliances—stoves, washing machines, audio and tele-
vision sets—should look like Hollywood’s idea of a spaceship 
control room. They already do, much to our consternation. Faced 

4 
The Design of Everyday Things
with a bewildering array of controls and displays, we simply mem-
orize one or two fixed settings to approximate what is desired.
In England I visited a home with a fancy new Italian washer-
dryer combination, with super-duper multisymbol controls, all to 
do everything anyone could imagine doing with the washing and 
drying of clothes. The husband (an engineering psychologist) said 
he refused to go near it. The wife (a physician) said she had simply 
memorized one setting and tried to ignore the rest. I asked to see 
the manual: it was just as confusing as the device. The whole pur-
pose of the design is lost.
The Complexity of Modern Devices
All artificial things are designed. Whether it is the layout of fur-
niture in a room, the paths through a garden or forest, or the in-
tricacies of an electronic device, some person or group of people 
had to decide upon the layout, operation, and mechanisms. Not 
all designed things involve physical structures. Services, lectures, 
rules and procedures, and the organizational structures of busi-
nesses and governments do not have physical mechanisms, but 
their rules of operation have to be designed, sometimes informally, 
sometimes precisely recorded and specified.
But even though people have designed things since prehistoric 
times, the field of design is relatively new, divided into many areas 
of specialty. Because everything is designed, the number of areas is 
enormous, ranging from clothes and furniture to complex control 
rooms and bridges. This book covers everyday things, focusing on 
the interplay between technology and people to ensure that the 
products actually fulfill human needs while being understand-
able and usable. In the best of cases, the products should also be 
delightful and enjoyable, which means that not only must the re-
quirements of engineering, manufacturing, and ergonomics be sat-
isfied, but attention must be paid to the entire experience, which 
means the aesthetics of form and the quality of interaction. The 
major areas of design relevant to this book are industrial design, 
interaction design, and experience design. None of the fields is 
well defined, but the focus of the efforts does vary, with industrial 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
5
designers emphasizing form and material, interactive designers 
emphasizing understandability and usability, and experience de-
signers emphasizing the emotional impact. Thus:
Industrial design: The professional service of creating and developing 
concepts and specifications that optimize the function, value, and 
appearance of products and systems for the mutual benefit of both 
user and manufacturer (from the Industrial Design Society of America’s 
website).
Interaction design: The focus is upon how people interact with tech-
nology. The goal is to enhance people’s understanding of what can be 
done, what is happening, and what has just occurred. Interaction de-
sign draws upon principles of psychology, design, art, and emotion 
to ensure a positive, enjoyable experience.
Experience design: The practice of designing products, processes, ser-
vices, events, and environments with a focus placed on the quality 
and enjoyment of the total experience.
Design is concerned with how things work, how they are con-
trolled, and the nature of the interaction between people and 
technology. When done well, the results are brilliant, pleasurable 
products. When done badly, the products are unusable, leading to 
great frustration and irritation. Or they might be usable, but force 
us to behave the way the product wishes rather than as we wish.
Machines, after all, are conceived, designed, and constructed by 
people. By human standards, machines are pretty limited. They 
do not maintain the same kind of rich history of experiences that 
people have in common with one another, experiences that enable 
us to interact with others because of this shared understanding. 
Instead, machines usually follow rather simple, rigid rules of be-
havior. If we get the rules wrong even slightly, the machine does 
what it is told, no matter how insensible and illogical. People are 
imaginative and creative, filled with common sense; that is, a lot of 
valuable knowledge built up over years of experience. But instead 
of capitalizing on these strengths, machines require us to be precise 
and accurate, things we are not very good at. Machines have no 

6 
The Design of Everyday Things
leeway or common sense. Moreover, many of the rules followed 
by a machine are known only by the machine and its designers.
When people fail to follow these bizarre, secret rules, and the 
machine does the wrong thing, its operators are blamed for not 
understanding the machine, for not following its rigid specifica-
tions. With everyday objects, the result is frustration. With complex 
devices and commercial and industrial processes, the resulting 
difficulties can lead to accidents, injuries, and even deaths. It is 
time to reverse the situation: to cast the blame upon the machines 
and their design. It is the machine and its design that are at fault. It 
is the duty of machines and those who design them to understand 
people. It is not our duty to understand the arbitrary, meaningless 
dictates of machines.
The reasons for the deficiencies in human-machine interaction 
are numerous. Some come from the limitations of today’s technol-
ogy. Some come from self-imposed restrictions by the designers, 
often to hold down cost. But most of the problems come from a 
complete lack of understanding of the design principles necessary 
for effective human-machine interaction. Why this deficiency? Be-
cause much of the design is done by engineers who are experts 
in technology but limited in their understanding of people. “We 
are people ourselves,” they think, “so we understand people.” But 
in fact, we humans are amazingly complex. Those who have not 
studied human behavior often think it is pretty simple. Engineers, 
moreover, make the mistake of thinking that logical explanation is 
sufficient: “If only people would read the instructions,” they say, 
“everything would be all right.”
Engineers are trained to think logically. As a result, they come to 
believe that all people must think this way, and they design their 
machines accordingly. When people have trouble, the engineers 
are upset, but often for the wrong reason. “What are these people 
doing?” they will wonder. “Why are they doing that?” The prob-
lem with the designs of most engineers is that they are too logical. 
We have to accept human behavior the way it is, not the way we 
would wish it to be.

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
7
I used to be an engineer, focused upon technical requirements, 
quite ignorant of people. Even after I switched into psychology 
and cognitive science, I still maintained my engineering emphasis 
upon logic and mechanism. It took a long time for me to realize 
that my understanding of human behavior was relevant to my in-
terest in the design of technology. As I watched people struggle 
with technology, it became clear that the difficulties were caused 
by the technology, not the people.
I was called upon to help analyze the American nuclear power 
plant accident at Three Mile Island (the island name comes from 
the fact that it is located on a river, three miles south of Middle-
town in the state of Pennsylvania). In this incident, a rather simple 
mechanical failure was misdiagnosed. This led to several days of 
difficulties and confusion, total destruction of the reactor, and a 
very close call to a severe radiation release, all of which brought 
the American nuclear power industry to a complete halt. The op-
erators were blamed for these failures: “human error” was the im-
mediate analysis. But the committee I was on discovered that the 
plant’s control rooms were so poorly designed that error was inevi-
table: design was at fault, not the operators. The moral was simple: 
we were designing things for people, so we needed to understand 
both technology and people. But that’s a difficult step for many 
engineers: machines are so logical, so orderly. If we didn’t have 
people, everything would work so much better. Yup, that’s how I 
used to think.
My work with that committee changed my view of design. To-
day, I realize that design presents a fascinating interplay of tech-
nology and psychology, that the designers must understand both. 
Engineers still tend to believe in logic. They often explain to me 
in great, logical detail, why their designs are good, powerful, and 
wonderful. “Why are people having problems?” they wonder. 
“You are being too logical,” I say. “You are designing for people the 
way you would like them to be, not for the way they really are.”
When the engineers object, I ask whether they have ever made 
an error, perhaps turning on or off the wrong light, or the wrong 

8 
The Design of Everyday Things
stove burner. “Oh yes,” they say, “but those were errors.” That’s 
the point: even experts make errors. So we must design our ma-
chines on the assumption that people will make errors. (Chapter 5 
provides a detailed analysis of human error.)
Human-Centered Design
People are frustrated with everyday things. From the ever-increasing 
complexity of the automobile dashboard, to the increasing auto-
mation in the home with its internal networks, complex music, 
video, and game systems for entertainment and communication, 
and the increasing automation in the kitchen, everyday life some-
times seems like a never-ending fight against confusion, continued 
errors, frustration, and a continual cycle of updating and maintain-
ing our belongings.
In the multiple decades that have elapsed since the first edition 
of this book was published, design has gotten better. There are now 
many books and courses on the topic. But even though much has 
improved, the rapid rate of technology change outpaces the ad-
vances in design. New technologies, new applications, and new 
methods of interaction are continually arising and evolving. New 
industries spring up. Each new development seems to repeat the 
mistakes of the earlier ones; each new field requires time before 
it, too, adopts the principles of good design. And each new inven-
tion of technology or interaction technique requires experimenta-
tion and study before the principles of good design can be fully 
integrated into practice. So, yes, things are getting better, but as a 
result, the challenges are ever present.
The solution is human-centered design (HCD), an approach 
that puts human needs, capabilities, and behavior first, then de-
signs to accommodate those needs, capabilities, and ways of be-
having. Good design starts with an understanding of psychology 
and technology. Good design requires good communication, espe-
cially from machine to person, indicating what actions are possible, 
what is happening, and what is about to happen. Communica-
tion is especially important when things go wrong. It is relatively 
easy to design things that work smoothly and harmoniously as 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
9
long as things go right. But as soon as there is a problem or a mis-
understanding, the problems arise. This is where good design 
is essential. Designers need to focus their attention on the cases 
where things go wrong, not just on when things work as planned. 
Actually, this is where the most satisfaction can arise: when some-
thing goes wrong but the machine highlights the problems, then 
the person understands the issue, takes the proper actions, and the 
problem is solved. When this happens smoothly, the collaboration 
of person and device feels wonderful.
Human-centered design is a design philosophy. It means start-
ing with a good understanding of people and the needs that the 
design is intended to meet. This understanding comes about pri-
marily through observation, for people themselves are often un-
aware of their true needs, even unaware of the difficulties they are 
encountering. Getting the specification of the thing to be defined 
is one of the most difficult parts of the design, so much so that the 
HCD principle is to avoid specifying the problem as long as pos-
sible but instead to iterate upon repeated approximations. This is 
done through rapid tests of ideas, and after each test modifying the 
approach and the problem definition. The results can be products 
that truly meet the needs of people. Doing HCD within the rigid 
time, budget, and other constraints of industry can be a challenge: 
Chapter 6 examines these issues.
Where does HCD fit into the earlier discussion of the several dif-
ferent forms of design, especially the areas called industrial, inter-
action, and experience design? These are all compatible. HCD is a 
philosophy and a set of procedures, whereas the others are areas of 
focus (see Table 1.1). The philosophy and procedures of HCD add 
Experience design
Industrial design 
These are areas of focus
Interaction design
Human-centered design 
 The process that ensures that the 
designs match the needs and capa-
bilities of the people for whom they 
are intended
TABLE 1.1. The Role of HCD and Design Specializations

10 
The Design of Everyday Things
deep consideration and study of human needs to the design pro-
cess, whatever the product or service, whatever the major focus.
Fundamental Principles of Interaction
Great designers produce pleasurable experiences. Experience: note 
the word. Engineers tend not to like it; it is too subjective. But when 
I ask them about their favorite automobile or test equipment, they 
will smile delightedly as they discuss the fit and finish, the sensa-
tion of power during acceleration, their ease of control while shift-
ing or steering, or the wonderful feel of the knobs and switches on 
the instrument. Those are experiences.
Experience is critical, for it determines how fondly people re-
member their interactions. Was the overall experience positive, or 
was it frustrating and confusing? When our home technology be-
haves in an uninterpretable fashion we can become confused, frus-
trated, and even angry—all strong negative emotions. When there 
is understanding it can lead to a feeling of control, of mastery, and 
of satisfaction or even pride—all strong positive emotions. Cog-
nition and emotion are tightly intertwined, which means that the 
designers must design with both in mind.
When we interact with a product, we need to figure out how to 
work it. This means discovering what it does, how it works, and 
what operations are possible: discoverability. Discoverability re-
sults from appropriate application of five fundamental psycholog-
ical concepts covered in the next few chapters: affordances, signifiers, 
constraints, mappings, and feedback. But there is a sixth principle, 
perhaps most important of all: the conceptual model of the system. 
It is the conceptual model that provides true understanding. So 
I now turn to these fundamental principles, starting with affor-
dances, signifiers, mappings, and feedback, then moving to con-
ceptual models. Constraints are covered in Chapters 3 and 4.
AFFORDANCES
We live in a world filled with objects, many natural, the rest artifi-
cial. Every day we encounter thousands of objects, many of them 
new to us. Many of the new objects are similar to ones we already 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
11
know, but many are unique, yet we manage quite well. How do we 
do this? Why is it that when we encounter many unusual natural 
objects, we know how to interact with them? Why is this true with 
many of the artificial, human-made objects we encounter? The an-
swer lies with a few basic principles. Some of the most important 
of these principles come from a consideration of affordances.
The term affordance refers to the relationship between a physi-
cal object and a person (or for that matter, any interacting agent, 
whether animal or human, or even machines and robots). An affor-
dance is a relationship between the properties of an object and the 
capabilities of the agent that determine just how the object could 
possibly be used. A chair affords (“is for”) support and, therefore, 
affords sitting. Most chairs can also be carried by a single per-
son (they afford lifting), but some can only be lifted by a strong 
person or by a team of people. If young or relatively weak people 
cannot lift a chair, then for these people, the chair does not have 
that affordance, it does not afford lifting.
The presence of an affordance is jointly determined by the qual-
ities of the object and the abilities of the agent that is interacting. 
This relational definition of affordance gives considerable difficulty 
to many people. We are used to thinking that properties are asso-
ciated with objects. But affordance is not a property. An affordance 
is a relationship. Whether an affordance exists depends upon the 
properties of both the object and the agent.
Glass affords transparency. At the same time, its physical struc-
ture blocks the passage of most physical objects. As a result, glass 
affords seeing through and support, but not the passage of air or 
most physical objects (atomic particles can pass through glass). 
The blockage of passage can be considered an anti-affordance—the 
prevention of interaction. To be effective, affordances and anti-
affordances have to be discoverable—perceivable. This poses a 
difficulty with glass. The reason we like glass is its relative invis-
ibility, but this aspect, so useful in the normal window, also hides 
its anti-affordance property of blocking passage. As a result, birds 
often try to fly through windows. And every year, numerous peo-
ple injure themselves when they walk (or run) through closed glass 

12 
The Design of Everyday Things
doors or large picture windows. If an affordance or anti-affordance 
cannot be perceived, some means of signaling its presence is re-
quired: I call this property a signifier (discussed in the next section).
The notion of affordance and the insights it provides originated 
with J. J. Gibson, an eminent psychologist who provided many 
advances to our understanding of human perception. I had in-
teracted with him over many years, sometimes in formal confer-
ences and seminars, but most fruitfully over many bottles of beer, 
late at night, just talking. We disagreed about almost everything. 
I was an engineer who became a cognitive psychologist, trying to 
understand how the mind works. He started off as a Gestalt psy-
chologist, but then developed an approach that is today named 
after him: Gibsonian psychology, an ecological approach to percep-
tion. He argued that the world contained the clues and that people 
simply picked them up through “direct perception.” I argued that 
nothing could be direct: the brain had to process the information 
arriving at the sense organs to put together a coherent interpreta-
tion. “Nonsense,” he loudly proclaimed; “it requires no interpreta-
tion: it is directly perceived.” And then he would put his hand to 
his ears, and with a triumphant flourish, turn off his hearing aids: 
my counterarguments would fall upon deaf ears—literally.
When I pondered my question—how do people know how to act 
when confronted with a novel situation—I realized that a large 
part of the answer lay in Gibson’s work. He pointed out that all the 
senses work together, that we pick up information about the world 
by the combined result of all of them. “Information pickup” was one 
of his favorite phrases, and Gibson believed that the combined in-
formation picked up by all of our sensory apparatus—sight, sound, 
smell, touch, balance, kinesthetic, acceleration, body position—
determines our perceptions without the need for internal pro-
cessing or cognition. Although he and I disagreed about the role 
played by the brain’s internal processing, his brilliance was in fo-
cusing attention on the rich amount of information present in the 
world. Moreover, the physical objects conveyed important infor-
mation about how people could interact with them, a property he 
named “affordance.”

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
13
Affordances exist even if they are not visible. For designers, their 
visibility is critical: visible affordances provide strong clues to the 
operations of things. A flat plate mounted on a door affords push-
ing. Knobs afford turning, pushing, and pulling. Slots are for in-
serting things into. Balls are for throwing or bouncing. Perceived 
affordances help people figure out what actions are possible with-
out the need for labels or instructions. I call the signaling compo-
nent of affordances signifiers.
SIGNIFIERS
Are affordances important to designers? The first edition of this 
book introduced the term affordances to the world of design. The 
design community loved the concept and affordances soon prop-
agated into the instruction and writing about design. I soon found 
mention of the term everywhere. Alas, the term became used in 
ways that had nothing to do with the original.
Many people find affordances difficult to understand because 
they are relationships, not properties. Designers deal with fixed 
properties, so there is a temptation to say that the property is an 
affordance. But that is not the only problem with the concept of 
affordances.
Designers have practical problems. They need to know how to 
design things to make them understandable. They soon discov-
ered that when working with the graphical designs for electronic 
displays, they needed a way to designate which parts could be 
touched, slid upward, downward, or sideways, or tapped upon. 
The actions could be done with a mouse, stylus, or fingers. Some 
systems responded to body motions, gestures, and spoken words, 
with no touching of any physical device. How could designers de-
scribe what they were doing? There was no word that fit, so they 
took the closest existing word—affordance. Soon designers were 
saying such things as, “I put an affordance there,” to describe why 
they displayed a circle on a screen to indicate where the person 
should touch, whether by mouse or by finger. “No,” I said, “that is not 
an affordance. That is a way of communicating where the touch 
should be. You are communicating where to do the touching: the 

14 
The Design of Everyday Things
affordance of touching exists on the entire screen: you are trying to 
signify where the touch should take place. That’s not the same thing 
as saying what action is possible.”
Not only did my explanation fail to satisfy the design commu-
nity, but I myself was unhappy. Eventually I gave up: designers 
needed a word to describe what they were doing, so they chose 
affordance. What alternative did they have? I decided to provide a 
better answer: signifiers. Affordances determine what actions are 
possible. Signifiers communicate where the action should take place. 
We need both.
People need some way of understanding the product or service 
they wish to use, some sign of what it is for, what is happening, 
and what the alternative actions are. People search for clues, for 
any sign that might help them cope and understand. It is the sign 
that is important, anything that might signify meaningful informa-
tion. Designers need to provide these clues. What people need, and 
what designers must provide, are signifiers. Good design requires, 
among other things, good communication of the purpose, struc-
ture, and operation of the device to the people who use it. That is 
the role of the signifier.
The term signifier has had a long and illustrious career in the ex-
otic field of semiotics, the study of signs and symbols. But just as 
I appropriated affordance to use in design in a manner somewhat 
different than its inventor had intended, I use signifier in a some-
what different way than it is used in semiotics. For me, the term 
signifier refers to any mark or sound, any perceivable indicator that 
communicates appropriate behavior to a person.
Signifiers can be deliberate and intentional, such as the sign 
push on a door, but they may also be accidental and unintentional, 
such as our use of the visible trail made by previous people walk-
ing through a field or over a snow-covered terrain to determine 
the best path. Or how we might use the presence or absence of 
people waiting at a train station to determine whether we have 
missed the train. (I explain these ideas in more detail in my book 
Living with Complexity.)

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
15
FIGURE 1.2. Problem Doors: Signifiers Are Needed. Door hardware 
can signal whether to push or pull without signs, but the hardware of the 
two doors in the upper photo, A, are identical even though one should be 
pushed, the other pulled. The flat, ribbed horizontal bar has the obvious 
perceived affordance of pushing, but as the signs indicate, the door on the 
left is to be pulled, the one on the right is to be pushed. In the bottom pair of 
photos, B and C, there are no visible signifiers or affordances. How does one 
know which side to push? Trial and error. When external signifiers—signs—
have to be added to something as simple as a door, it indicates bad design. 
(Photographs by the author.)
The signifier is an important communication device to the recipi-
ent, whether or not communication was intended. It doesn’t matter 
whether the useful signal was deliberately placed or whether it is 
incidental: there is no necessary distinction. Why should it matter 
whether a flag was placed as a deliberate clue to wind direction (as 
is done at airports or on the masts of sailboats) or was there as an 
A.
B.
C.

16 
The Design of Everyday Things
advertisement or symbol of pride in one’s country (as is done on 
public buildings). Once I interpret a flag’s motion to indicate wind 
direction, it does not matter why it was placed there.
Consider a bookmark, a deliberately placed signifier of one’s place 
in reading a book. But the physical nature of books also makes a 
bookmark an accidental signifier, for its placement also indicates 
how much of the book remains. Most readers have learned to use 
this accidental signifier to aid in their enjoyment of the reading. 
With few pages left, we know the end is near. And if the reading is 
torturous, as in a school assignment, one can always console one-
self by knowing there are “only a few more pages to get through.” 
Electronic book readers do not have the physical structure of paper 
books, so unless the software designer deliberately provides a clue, 
they do not convey any signal about the amount of text remaining.
FIGURE 1.3. Sliding Doors: Seldom Done Well. Sliding doors are seldom signified 
properly. The top two photographs show the sliding door to the toilet on an Amtrak 
train in the United States. The handle clearly signifies “pull,” but in fact, it needs to be 
rotated and the door slid to the right. The owner of the store in Shanghai, China, Photo 
C, solved the problem with a sign. “don’t push!” it says, in both English and Chinese. 
Amtrak’s toilet door could have used a similar kind of sign. (Photographs by the author.) 
A.
B.
C.

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
17
Whatever their nature, planned or accidental, signifiers provide 
valuable clues as to the nature of the world and of social activities. 
For us to function in this social, technological world, we need to 
develop internal models of what things mean, of how they operate. 
We seek all the clues we can find to help in this enterprise, and 
in this way, we are detectives, searching for whatever guidance 
we might find. If we are fortunate, thoughtful designers provide 
the clues for us. Otherwise, we must use our own creativity and 
imagination.
FIGURE 1.4. The Sink That Would Not Drain: Where Signifiers Fail. I washed my 
hands in my hotel sink in London, but then, as shown in Photo A, was left with the 
question of how to empty the sink of the dirty water. I searched all over for a control: 
none. I tried prying open the sink stopper with a spoon (Photo B): failure. I finally left 
my hotel room and went to the front desk to ask for instructions. (Yes, I actually did.) 
“Push down on the stopper,” I was told. Yes, it worked (Photos C and D). But how was 
anyone to ever discover this? And why should I have to put my clean hands back into 
the dirty water to empty the sink? The problem here is not just the lack of signifier, it is 
the faulty decision to produce a stopper that requires people to dirty their clean hands 
to use it. (Photographs by the author.)
A.
B.
C.
D.

18 
The Design of Everyday Things
Affordances, perceived affordances, and signifiers have much in 
common, so let me pause to ensure that the distinctions are clear.
Affordances represent the possibilities in the world for how an 
agent (a person, animal, or machine) can interact with something. 
Some affordances are perceivable, others are invisible. Signifiers 
are signals. Some signifiers are signs, labels, and drawings placed 
in the world, such as the signs labeled “push,” “pull,” or “exit” 
on doors, or arrows and diagrams indicating what is to be acted 
upon or in which direction to gesture, or other instructions. Some 
signifiers are simply the perceived affordances, such as the han-
dle of a door or the physical structure of a switch. Note that some 
perceived affordances may not be real: they may look like doors 
or places to push, or an impediment to entry, when in fact they 
are not. These are misleading signifiers, oftentimes accidental but 
sometimes purposeful, as when trying to keep people from doing 
actions for which they are not qualified, or in games, where one of 
the challenges is to figure out what is real and what is not.
FIGURE 1.5. Accidental Affordances 
Can Become Strong Signifiers. This 
wall, at the Industrial Design department 
of KAIST, in Korea, provides an anti-
affordance, preventing people from falling 
down the stair shaft. Its top is flat, an ac-
cidental by-product of the design. But flat 
surfaces afford support, and as soon as one 
person discovers it can be used to dispose 
of empty drink containers, the discarded 
container becomes a signifier, telling others 
that it is permissible to discard their items 
there. (Photographs by the author.)
A.
C.
B.

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
19
My favorite example of a misleading signifier is a row of ver-
tical pipes across a service road that I once saw in a public park. 
The pipes obviously blocked cars and trucks from driving on that 
road: they were good examples of anti-affordances. But to my great 
surprise, I saw a park vehicle simply go through the pipes. Huh? I 
walked over and examined them: the pipes were made of rubber, 
so vehicles could simply drive right over them. A very clever sig-
nifier, signaling a blocked road (via an apparent anti-affordance) 
to the average person, but permitting passage for those who knew.
To summarize:
• Affordances are the possible interactions between people and the en-
vironment. Some affordances are perceivable, others are not.
• Perceived affordances often act as signifiers, but they can be ambiguous.
• Signifiers signal things, in particular what actions are possible and 
how they should be done. Signifiers must be perceivable, else they 
fail to function.
In design, signifiers are more important than affordances, for 
they communicate how to use the design. A signifier can be words, 
a graphical illustration, or just a device whose perceived affor-
dances are unambiguous. Creative designers incorporate the sig-
nifying part of the design into a cohesive experience. For the most 
part, designers can focus upon signifiers.
Because affordances and signifiers are fundamentally important 
principles of good design, they show up frequently in the pages of 
this book. Whenever you see hand-lettered signs pasted on doors, 
switches, or products, trying to explain how to work them, what to 
do and what not to do, you are also looking at poor design.
A F FORDA NC ES A ND SIGNIF IERS: A CON V ERSAT ION
A designer approaches his mentor. He is working on a system that 
recommends restaurants to people, based upon their preferences 
and those of their friends. But in his tests, he discovered that peo-
ple never used all of the features. “Why not?” he asks his mentor.
(With apologies to Socrates.)

20 
The Design of Everyday Things
DESIGNER
I’m frustrated; people aren’t using 
our application properly.
The screen shows the restaurant 
that we recommend. It matches their 
preferences, and their friends like 
it as well. If they want to see other 
recommendations, all they have to 
do is swipe left or right. To learn 
more about a place, just swipe up for 
a menu or down to see if any friends 
are there now. People seem to find 
the other recommendations, but not 
the menus or their friends? I don’t 
understand.
I don’t know. Should I add some 
affordances? Suppose I put an arrow 
on each edge and add a label saying 
what they do.
Yes, you have a point. But the affor-
dances weren’t visible. I made them 
visible.
Yes, isn’t that what I said?
Oh, I see. But then why do designers 
care about affordances? Perhaps 
we should focus our attention on 
signifiers.
Oh. Now I understand my confusion. 
Yes, a signifier is what signifies. It 
is a sign. Now it seems perfectly 
obvious.
MENTOR
Can you tell me about it?
Why do you think this might be?
That is very nice. But why do you 
call these affordances? They could 
already do the actions. Weren’t the 
affordances already there?
Very true. You added a signal of 
what to do.
Not quite—you called them affor-
dances even though they afford 
nothing new: they signify what to do 
and where to do it. So call them by 
their right name: “signifiers.”
You speak wisely. Communication is 
a key to good design. And a key to 
communication is the signifier.
Profound ideas are always obvious 
once they are understood.
MAPPING
Mapping is a technical term, borrowed from mathematics, mean-
ing the relationship between the elements of two sets of things. 
Suppose there are many lights in the ceiling of a classroom or au-
ditorium and a row of light switches on the wall at the front of the 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
21
room. The mapping of switches to lights specifies which switch 
controls which light.
Mapping is an important concept in the design and layout of 
controls and displays. When the mapping uses spatial correspon-
dence between the layout of the controls and the devices being 
controlled, it is easy to determine how to use them. In steering a 
car, we rotate the steering wheel clockwise to cause the car to turn 
right: the top of the wheel moves in the same direction as the car. 
Note that other choices could have been made. In early cars, steer-
ing was controlled by a variety of devices, including tillers, han-
dlebars, and reins. Today, some vehicles use joysticks, much as in a 
computer game. In cars that used tillers, steering was done much 
as one steers a boat: move the tiller to the left to turn to the right. 
Tractors, construction equipment such as bulldozers and cranes, 
and military tanks that have tracks instead of wheels use separate 
controls for the speed and direction of each track: to turn right, the 
left track is increased in speed, while the right track is slowed or 
even reversed. This is also how a wheelchair is steered.
All of these mappings for the control of vehicles work because 
each has a compelling conceptual model of how the operation of 
the control affects the vehicle. Thus, if we speed up the left wheel 
of a wheelchair while stopping the right wheel, it is easy to imag-
ine the chair’s pivoting on the right wheel, circling to the right. In 
FIGURE 1.6. Signifiers on a Touch Screen. 
The arrows and icons are signifiers: they pro-
vide signals about the permissible operations 
for this restaurant guide. Swiping left or right 
brings up new restaurant recommendations. 
Swiping up reveals the menu for the restau-
rant being displayed; swiping down, friends 
who recommend the restaurant.

22 
The Design of Everyday Things
a small boat, we can understand the tiller by realizing that pushing 
the tiller to the left causes the ship’s rudder to move to the right 
and the resulting force of the water on the rudder slows down the 
right side of the boat, so that the boat rotates to the right. It doesn’t 
matter whether these conceptual models are accurate: what mat-
ters is that they provide a clear way of remembering and under-
standing the mappings. The relationship between a control and 
its results is easiest to learn wherever there is an understandable 
mapping between the controls, the actions, and the intended result.
Natural mapping, by which I mean taking advantage of spatial 
analogies, leads to immediate understanding. For example, to move 
an object up, move the control up. To make it easy to determine 
which control works which light in a large room or auditorium, 
arrange the controls in the same pattern as the lights. Some natural 
mappings are cultural or biological, as in the universal standard 
that moving the hand up signifies more, moving it down signifies 
less, which is why it is appropriate to use vertical position to rep-
resent intensity or amount. Other natural mappings follow from 
the principles of perception and allow for the natural grouping or 
patterning of controls and feedback. Groupings and proximity 
are important principles from Gestalt psychology that can be used 
to map controls to function: related controls should be grouped to-
gether. Controls should be close to the item being controlled.
Note that there are many mappings that feel “natural” but in fact 
are specific to a particular culture: what is natural for one culture 
is not necessarily natural for another. In Chapter 3, I discuss how 
FIGURE 1.7. Good Mapping: Automobile Seat 
Adjustment Control. This is an excellent example of 
natural mapping. The control is in the shape of the 
seat itself: the mapping is straightforward. To move 
the front edge of the seat higher, lift up on the front 
part of the button. To make the seat back recline, 
move the button back. The same principle could be 
applied to much more common objects. This partic-
ular control is from Mercedes-Benz, but this form of 
mapping is now used by many automobile compa-
nies. (Photograph by the author.)

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
23
different cultures view time, which has important implications for 
some kinds of mappings.
A device is easy to use when the set of possible actions is visi-
ble, when the controls and displays exploit natural mappings. The 
principles are simple but rarely incorporated into design. Good de-
sign takes care, planning, thought, and an understanding of how 
people behave.
FEEDBACK
Ever watch people at an elevator repeatedly push the Up button, 
or repeatedly push the pedestrian button at a street crossing? Ever 
drive to a traffic intersection and wait an inordinate amount of 
time for the signals to change, wondering all the time whether the 
detection circuits noticed your vehicle (a common problem with 
bicycles)? What is missing in all these cases is feedback: some way 
of letting you know that the system is working on your request.
Feedback—communicating the results of an action—is a well-
known concept from the science of control and information theory. 
Imagine trying to hit a target with a ball when you cannot see the 
target. Even as simple a task as picking up a glass with the hand re-
quires feedback to aim the hand properly, to grasp the glass, and to  
lift it. A misplaced hand will spill the contents, too hard a grip will 
break the glass, and too weak a grip will allow it to fall. The human 
nervous system is equipped with numerous feedback mechanisms, 
including visual, auditory, and touch sensors, as well as vestibular 
and proprioceptive systems that monitor body position and mus-
cle and limb movements. Given the importance of feedback, it is 
amazing how many products ignore it.
Feedback must be immediate: even a delay of a tenth of a second 
can be disconcerting. If the delay is too long, people often give up, 
going off to do other activities. This is annoying to the people, but 
it can also be wasteful of resources when the system spends con-
siderable time and effort to satisfy the request, only to find that the 
intended recipient is no longer there. Feedback must also be infor-
mative. Many companies try to save money by using inexpensive 
lights or sound generators for feedback. These simple light flashes 

24 
The Design of Everyday Things
or beeps are usually more annoying than useful. They tell us that 
something has happened, but convey very little information about 
what has happened, and then nothing about what we should do 
about it. When the signal is auditory, in many cases we cannot 
even be certain which device has created the sound. If the signal 
is a light, we may miss it unless our eyes are on the correct spot 
at the correct time. Poor feedback can be worse than no feedback 
at all, because it is distracting, uninformative, and in many cases 
irritating and anxiety-provoking.
Too much feedback can be even more annoying than too little. 
My dishwasher likes to beep at three a.m. to tell me that the wash 
is done, defeating my goal of having it work in the middle of the 
night so as not to disturb anyone (and to use less expensive elec-
tricity). But worst of all is inappropriate, uninterpretable feedback. 
The irritation caused by a “backseat driver” is well enough known 
that it is the staple of numerous jokes. Backseat drivers are often 
correct, but their remarks and comments can be so numerous and 
continuous that instead of helping, they become an irritating dis-
traction. Machines that give too much feedback are like backseat 
drivers. Not only is it distracting to be subjected to continual flash-
ing lights, text announcements, spoken voices, or beeps and boops, 
but it can be dangerous. Too many announcements cause people to 
ignore all of them, or wherever possible, disable all of them, which 
means that critical and important ones are apt to be missed. Feed-
back is essential, but not when it gets in the way of other things, 
including a calm and relaxing environment.
Poor design of feedback can be the result of decisions aimed at 
reducing costs, even if they make life more difficult for people. 
Rather than use multiple signal lights, informative displays, or 
rich, musical sounds with varying patterns, the focus upon cost 
reduction forces the design to use a single light or sound to convey 
multiple types of information. If the choice is to use a light, then 
one flash might mean one thing; two rapid flashes, something else. 
A long flash might signal yet another state; and a long flash fol-
lowed by a brief one, yet another. If the choice is to use a sound, 
quite often the least expensive sound device is selected, one that 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
25
can only produce a high-frequency beep. Just as with the lights, 
the only way to signal different states of the machine is by beeping 
different patterns. What do all these different patterns mean? How 
can we possibly learn and remember them? It doesn’t help that 
every different machine uses a different pattern of lights or beeps, 
sometimes with the same patterns meaning contradictory things 
for different machines. All the beeps sound alike, so it often isn’t 
even possible to know which machine is talking to us.
Feedback has to be planned. All actions need to be confirmed, 
but in a manner that is unobtrusive. Feedback must also be prior-
itized, so that unimportant information is presented in an unob-
trusive fashion, but important signals are presented in a way that 
does capture attention. When there are major emergencies, then 
even important signals have to be prioritized. When every device 
is signaling a major emergency, nothing is gained by the result-
ing cacophony. The continual beeps and alarms of equipment can 
be dangerous. In many emergencies, workers have to spend valu-
able time turning off all the alarms because the sounds interfere 
with the concentration required to solve the problem. Hospital op-
erating rooms, emergency wards. Nuclear power control plants. 
Airplane cockpits. All can become confusing, irritating, and life-
endangering places because of excessive feedback, excessive alarms, 
and incompatible message coding. Feedback is essential, but it has 
to be done correctly. Appropriately.
CONCEPTUAL MODELS
A conceptual model is an explanation, usually highly simplified, 
of how something works. It doesn’t have to be complete or even 
accurate as long as it is useful. The files, folders, and icons you see 
displayed on a computer screen help people create the conceptual 
model of documents and folders inside the computer, or of apps 
or applications residing on the screen, waiting to be summoned. In 
fact, there are no folders inside the computer—those are effective 
conceptualizations designed to make them easier to use. Some-
times these depictions can add to the confusion, however. When 
reading e-mail or visiting a website, the material appears to be on 

26 
The Design of Everyday Things
the device, for that is where it is displayed and manipulated. But 
in fact, in many cases the actual material is “in the cloud,” located 
on some distant machine. The conceptual model is of one, coherent 
image, whereas it may actually consist of parts, each located on 
different machines that could be almost anywhere in the world. 
This simplified model is helpful for normal usage, but if the net-
work connection to the cloud services is interrupted, the result can 
be confusing. Information is still on their screen, but users can no 
longer save it or retrieve new things: their conceptual model offers 
no explanation. Simplified models are valuable only as long as the 
assumptions that support them hold true.
There are often multiple conceptual models of a product or de-
vice. People’s conceptual models for the way that regenerative 
braking in a hybrid or electrically powered automobile works are 
quite different for average drivers than for technically sophisti-
cated drivers, different again for whoever must service the system, 
and yet different again for those who designed the system.
Conceptual models found in technical manuals and books for 
technical use can be detailed and complex. The ones we are con-
cerned with here are simpler: they reside in the minds of the peo-
ple who are using the product, so they are also “mental models.” 
Mental models, as the name implies, are the conceptual models in 
people’s minds that represent their understanding of how things 
work. Different people may hold different mental models of the 
same item. Indeed, a single person might have multiple models of 
the same item, each dealing with a different aspect of its opera-
tion: the models can even be in conflict.
Conceptual models are often inferred from the device itself. Some 
models are passed on from person to person. Some come from 
manuals. Usually the device itself offers very little assistance, so 
the model is constructed by experience. Quite often these models 
are erroneous, and therefore lead to difficulties in using the device.
The major clues to how things work come from their perceived 
structure—in particular from signifiers, affordances, constraints, 
and mappings. Hand tools for the shop, gardening, and the house 
tend to make their critical parts sufficiently visible that concep-

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
27
tual models of their operation and function are readily derived. 
Consider a pair of scissors: you can see that the number of possi-
ble actions is limited. The holes are clearly there to put something 
into, and the only logical things that will fit are fingers. The holes 
are both affordances—they allow the fingers to be inserted—and 
signifiers—they indicate where the fingers are to go. The sizes of 
the holes provide constraints to limit the possible fingers: a big 
hole suggests several fingers; a small hole, only one. The mapping 
between holes and fingers—the set of possible operations—is sig-
nified and constrained by the holes. Moreover, the operation is not 
sensitive to finger placement: if you use the wrong fingers (or the 
wrong hand), the scissors still work, although not as comfortably. 
You can figure out the scissors because their operating parts are 
visible and the implications clear. The conceptual model is obvious, 
and there is effective use of signifiers, affordances, and constraints.
What happens when the device does not suggest a good concep-
tual model? Consider my digital watch with five buttons: two along 
the top, two along the bottom, and one on the left side (Figure 1.8). 
What is each button for? How would you set the time? There is no 
way to tell—no evident relationship between the operating controls 
and the functions, no constraints, no apparent mappings. Moreover, 
the buttons have multiple ways of being used. Two of the buttons 
do different things when pushed quickly or when kept depressed 
for several seconds. Some operations require simultaneous depres-
sion of several of the buttons. The only way to tell how to work the 
watch is to read the manual, over and over again. With the scissors, 
moving the handle makes the blades move. The watch provides no 
FIGURE 1.8. Junghans Mega 1000 Digital Radio 
Controlled Watch. There is no good conceptual model 
for understanding the operation of my watch. It has five 
buttons with no hints as to what each one does. And yes, 
the buttons do different things in their different modes. 
But it is a very nice-looking watch, and always has the 
exact time because it checks official radio time stations. 
(The top row of the display is the date: Wednesday, Feb-
ruary 20, the eighth week of the year.) (Photograph by the 
author.)

28 
The Design of Everyday Things
visible relationship between the buttons and the possible actions, 
no discernible relationship between the actions and the end results. 
I really like the watch: too bad I can’t remember all the functions.
Conceptual models are valuable in providing understanding, in 
predicting how things will behave, and in figuring out what to do 
when things do not go as planned. A good conceptual model allows 
us to predict the effects of our actions. Without a good model, we op-
erate by rote, blindly; we do operations as we were told to do them; 
we can’t fully appreciate why, what effects to expect, or what to do 
if things go wrong. As long as things work properly, we can manage. 
When things go wrong, however, or when we come upon a novel 
situation, then we need a deeper understanding, a good model.
For everyday things, conceptual models need not be very com-
plex. After all, scissors, pens, and light switches are pretty simple 
devices. There is no need to understand the underlying physics or 
chemistry of each device we own, just the relationship between 
the controls and the outcomes. When the model presented to us is 
inadequate or wrong (or, worse, nonexistent), we can have difficul-
ties. Let me tell you about my refrigerator.
I used to own an ordinary, two-compartment refrigerator—nothing 
very fancy about it. The problem was that I couldn’t set the tem-
perature properly. There were only two things to do: adjust the 
temperature of the freezer compartment and adjust the tempera-
FIGURE 1.9. Refrigerator Controls. Two compartments—
fresh food and freezer—and two controls (in the fresh food 
unit). Your task: Suppose the freezer is too cold, the fresh food 
section just right. How would you adjust the controls so as to 
make the freezer warmer and keep the fresh food the same? 
(Photograph by the author.)

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
29
ture of the fresh food compartment. And there were two controls, 
one labeled “freezer,” the other “refrigerator.” What’s the problem?
Oh, perhaps I’d better warn you. The two controls are not inde-
pendent. The freezer control also affects the fresh food tempera-
ture, and the fresh food control also affects the freezer. Moreover, 
the manual warns that one should “always allow twenty-four (24) 
hours for the temperature to stabilize whether setting the controls 
for the first time or making an adjustment.”
It was extremely difficult to regulate the temperature of my old 
refrigerator. Why? Because the controls suggest a false conceptual 
model. Two compartments, two controls, which implies that each 
control is responsible for the temperature of the compartment that 
carries its name: this conceptual model is shown in Figure 1.10A. It 
is wrong. In fact, there is only one thermostat and only one cooling 
mechanism. One control adjusts the thermostat setting, the other 
the relative proportion of cold air sent to each of the two compart-
ments of the refrigerator. This is why the two controls interact: this 
conceptual model is shown in Figure 1.10B. In addition, there must 
be a temperature sensor, but there is no way of knowing where it 
is located. With the conceptual model suggested by the controls, 
FIGURE 1.10. Two Conceptual Models for a Refrigerator. The conceptual model 
A is provided by the system image of the refrigerator as gleaned from the controls. 
Each control determines the temperature of the named part of the refrigerator. This 
means that each compartment has its own temperature sensor and cooling unit. This is 
wrong. The correct conceptual model is shown in B. There is no way of knowing where 
the temperature sensor is located so it is shown outside the refrigerator. The freezer 
control determines the freezer temperature (so is this where the sensor is located?). 
The refrigerator control determines how much of the cold air goes to the freezer and 
how much to the refrigerator.
A.
B.

30 
The Design of Everyday Things
adjusting the temperatures is almost impossible and always frus-
trating. Given the correct model, life would be much easier.
Why did the manufacturer suggest the wrong conceptual model? 
We will never know. In the twenty-five years since the publication 
of the first edition of this book, I have had many letters from people 
thanking me for explaining their confusing refrigerator, but never 
any communication from the manufacturer (General Electric). Per-
haps the designers thought the correct model was too complex, 
that the model they were giving was easier to understand. But with 
the wrong conceptual model, it was impossible to set the controls. 
And even though I am convinced I knew the correct model, I still 
couldn’t accurately adjust the temperatures because the refrigera-
tor design made it impossible to discover which control was for the 
temperature sensor, which for the relative proportion of cold air, 
and in which compartment the sensor was located. The lack of im-
mediate feedback for the actions did not help: it took twenty-four 
hours to see whether the new setting was appropriate. I shouldn’t 
have to keep a laboratory notebook and do controlled experiments 
just to set the temperature of my refrigerator.
I am happy to say that I no longer own that refrigerator. In-
stead I have one that has two separate controls, one in the fresh 
food compartment, one in the freezer compartment. Each control 
is nicely calibrated in degrees and labeled with the name of the 
compartment it controls. The two compartments are independent: 
setting the temperature in one has no effect on the temperature in 
the other. This solution, although ideal, does cost more. But far less 
expensive solutions are possible. With today’s inexpensive sensors 
and motors, it should be possible to have a single cooling unit with 
a motor-controlled valve controlling the relative proportion of cold 
air diverted to each compartment. A simple, inexpensive computer 
chip could regulate the cooling unit and valve position so that the 
temperatures in the two compartments match their targets. A bit 
more work for the engineering design team? Yes, but the results 
would be worth it. Alas, General Electric is still selling refrigerators 
with the very same controls and mechanisms that cause so much 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
31
confusion. The photograph in Figure 1.9 is from a contemporary 
refrigerator, photographed in a store while preparing this book.
The System Image
People create mental models of themselves, others, the environ-
ment, and the things with which they interact. These are concep-
tual models formed through experience, training, and instruction. 
These models serve as guides to help achieve our goals and in un-
derstanding the world.
How do we form an appropriate conceptual model for the de-
vices we interact with? We cannot talk to the designer, so we rely 
upon whatever information is available to us: what the device 
looks like, what we know from using similar things in the past, 
what was told to us in the sales literature, by salespeople and ad-
vertisements, by articles we may have read, by the product website 
and instruction manuals. I call the combined information available 
to us the system image. When the system image is incoherent or in-
appropriate, as in the case of the refrigerator, then the user cannot 
easily use the device. If it is incomplete or contradictory, there will 
be trouble.
As illustrated in Figure 1.11, the designer of the product and the 
person using the product form somewhat disconnected vertices of 
a triangle. The designer’s conceptual model is the designer’s con-
ception of the product, occupying one vertex of the triangle. The 
product itself is no longer with the designer, so it is isolated as a 
second vertex, perhaps sitting on the user’s kitchen counter. The 
system image is what can be perceived from the physical struc-
ture that has been built (including documentation, instructions, 
signifiers, and any information available from websites and help 
lines). The user’s conceptual model comes from the system image, 
through interaction with the product, reading, searching for online 
information, and from whatever manuals are provided. The de-
signer expects the user’s model to be identical to the design model, 
but because designers cannot communicate directly with users, the 
entire burden of communication is on the system image.

32 
The Design of Everyday Things
Figure 1.11 indicates why communication is such an important 
aspect of good design. No matter how brilliant the product, if peo-
ple cannot use it, it will receive poor reviews. It is up to the de-
signer to provide the appropriate information to make the product 
understandable and usable. Most important is the provision of a 
good conceptual model that guides the user when thing go wrong. 
With a good conceptual model, people can figure out what has 
happened and correct the things that went wrong. Without a good 
model, they struggle, often making matters worse.
Good conceptual models are the key to understandable, enjoy-
able products: good communication is the key to good conceptual 
models.
The Paradox of Technology
Technology offers the potential to make life easier and more en-
joyable; each new technology provides increased benefits. At the 
same time, added complexities increase our difficulty and frustra-
tion with technology. The design problem posed by technological 
advances is enormous. Consider the wristwatch. A few decades 
ago, watches were simple. All you had to do was set the time and 
keep the watch wound. The standard control was the stem: a knob 
at the side of the watch. Turning the knob would wind the spring 
that provided power to the watch movement. Pulling out the knob 
and turning it rotated the hands. The operations were easy to learn 
and easy to do. There was a reasonable relationship between the 
FIGURE 1.11. The Designer’s Model, 
the User’s Model, and the System Im-
age. The designer’s conceptual model is 
the designer’s conception of the look, feel, 
and operation of a product. The system 
image is what can be derived from the 
physical structure that has been built 
(including documentation). The user’s 
mental model is developed through in-
teraction with the product and the system 
image. Designers expect the user’s model 
to be identical to their own, but because 
they cannot communicate directly with 
the user, the burden of communication is 
with the system image.

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
33
turning of the knob and the resulting turning of the hands. The 
design even took into account human error. In its normal position, 
turning the stem wound the mainspring of the clock. The stem had 
to be pulled before it would engage the gears for setting the time. 
Accidental turns of the stem did no harm.
Watches in olden times were expensive instruments, manu-
factured by hand. They were sold in jewelry stores. Over time, 
with the introduction of digital technology, the cost of watches 
decreased rapidly, while their accuracy and reliability increased. 
Watches became tools, available in a wide variety of styles and 
shapes and with an ever-increasing number of functions. Watches 
were sold everywhere, from local shops to sporting goods stores 
to electronic stores. Moreover, accurate clocks were incorporated in 
many appliances, from phones to musical keyboards: many people 
no longer felt the need to wear a watch. Watches became inexpen-
sive enough that the average person could own multiple watches. 
They became fashion accessories, where one changed the watch 
with each change in activity and each change of clothes.
In the modern digital watch, instead of winding the spring, we 
change the battery, or in the case of a solar-powered watch, ensure 
that it gets its weekly dose of light. The technology has allowed 
more functions: the watch can give the day of the week, the month, 
and the year; it can act as a stopwatch (which itself has several 
functions), a countdown timer, and an alarm clock (or two); it has 
the ability to show the time for different time zones; it can act as 
a counter and even as a calculator. My watch, shown in Figure 
1.8, has many functions. It even has a radio receiver to allow it to 
set its time with official time stations around the world. Even so, 
it is far less complex than many that are available. Some watches 
have built-in compasses and barometers, accelerometers, and tem-
perature gauges. Some have GPS and Internet receivers so they 
can display the weather and news, e-mail messages, and the lat-
est from social networks. Some have built-in cameras. Some work 
with buttons, knobs, motion, or speech. Some detect gestures. The 
watch is no longer just an instrument for telling time: it has become 
a platform for enhancing multiple activities and lifestyles.

34 
The Design of Everyday Things
The added functions cause problems: How can all these func-
tions fit into a small, wearable size? There are no easy answers. 
Many people have solved the problem by not using a watch. They 
use their phone instead. A cell phone performs all the functions 
much better than the tiny watch, while also displaying the time.
Now imagine a future where instead of the phone replacing 
the watch, the two will merge, perhaps worn on the wrist, per-
haps on the head like glasses, complete with display screen. The 
phone, watch, and components of a computer will all form one 
unit. We will have flexible displays that show only a tiny amount 
of information in their normal state, but that can unroll to consid-
erable size. Projectors will be so small and light that they can be 
built into watches or phones (or perhaps rings and other jewelry), 
projecting their images onto any convenient surface. Or perhaps 
our devices won’t have displays, but will quietly whisper the re-
sults into our ears, or simply use whatever display happens to be 
available: the display in the seatback of cars or airplanes, hotel 
room televisions, whatever is nearby. The devices will be able to 
do many useful things, but I fear they will also frustrate: so many 
things to control, so little space for controls or signifiers. The ob-
vious solution is to use exotic gestures or spoken commands, but 
how will we learn, and then remember, them? As I discuss later, 
the best solution is for there to be agreed upon standards, so we 
need learn the controls only once. But as I also discuss, agreeing 
upon these is a complex process, with many competing forces hin-
dering rapid resolution. We will see.
The same technology that simplifies life by providing more 
functions in each device also complicates life by making the device 
harder to learn, harder to use. This is the paradox of technology 
and the challenge for the designer.
The Design Challenge
Design requires the cooperative efforts of multiple disciplines. The 
number of different disciplines required to produce a successful 
product is staggering. Great design requires great designers, but 
that isn’t enough: it also requires great management, because the 

 
one: The Psychopathology of Everyday Things 
35
hardest part of producing a product is coordinating all the many, 
separate disciplines, each with different goals and priorities. Each 
discipline has a different perspective of the relative importance of 
the many factors that make up a product. One discipline argues 
that it must be usable and understandable, another that it must be 
attractive, yet another that it has to be affordable. Moreover, the de-
vice has to be reliable, be able to be manufactured and serviced. It 
must be distinguishable from competing products and superior in 
critical dimensions such as price, reliability, appearance, and the 
functions it provides. Finally, people have to actually purchase 
it. It doesn’t matter how good a product is if, in the end, nobody 
uses it.
Quite often each discipline believes its distinct contribution to 
be most important: “Price,” argues the marketing representative, 
“price plus these features.” “Reliable,” insist the engineers. “We 
have to be able to manufacture it in our existing plants,” say the 
manufacturing representatives. “We keep getting service calls,” 
say the support people; “we need to solve those problems in the 
design.” “You can’t put all that together and still have a reasonable 
product,” says the design team. Who is right? Everyone is right. 
The successful product has to satisfy all these requirements.
The hard part is to convince people to understand the view-
points of the others, to abandon their disciplinary viewpoint and 
to think of the design from the viewpoints of the person who buys 
the product and those who use it, often different people. The view-
point of the business is also important, because it does not matter 
how wonderful the product is if not enough people buy it. If a 
product does not sell, the company must often stop producing it, 
even if it is a great product. Few companies can sustain the huge 
cost of keeping an unprofitable product alive long enough for its 
sales to reach profitability—with new products, this period is usu-
ally measured in years, and sometimes, as with the adoption of 
high-definition television, decades.
Designing well is not easy. The manufacturer wants something 
that can be produced economically. The store wants something 
that will be attractive to its customers. The purchaser has several 

36 
The Design of Everyday Things
demands. In the store, the purchaser focuses on price and appear-
ance, and perhaps on prestige value. At home, the same person 
will pay more attention to functionality and usability. The repair 
service cares about maintainability: how easy is the device to take 
apart, diagnose, and service? The needs of those concerned are 
different and often conflict. Nonetheless, if the design team has 
representatives from all the constituencies present at the same 
time, it is often possible to reach satisfactory solutions for all 
the needs. It is when the disciplines operate independently of one 
another that major clashes and deficiencies occur. The challenge 
is to use the principles of human-centered design to produce pos-
itive results, products that enhance lives and add to our pleasure 
and enjoyment. The goal is to produce a great product, one that is 
successful, and that customers love. It can be done.

 
 
37
C H A P T E R  T W O
THE PSYCHOLOGY 
OF EVERYDAY 
ACTIONS
During my family’s stay in England, we rented a furnished house while 
the owners were away. One day, our landlady returned to the house 
to get some personal papers. She walked over to the old, metal filing 
cabinet and attempted to open the top drawer. It wouldn’t open. She 
pushed it forward and backward, right and left, up and down, without 
success. I offered to help. I wiggled the drawer. Then I twisted the front 
panel, pushed down hard, and banged the front with the palm of one 
hand. The cabinet drawer slid open. “Oh,” she said, “I’m sorry. I am so 
bad at mechanical things.” No, she had it backward. It is the mechanical 
thing that should be apologizing, perhaps saying, “I’m sorry. I am so 
bad with people.”
My landlady had two problems. First, although she had 
a clear goal (retrieve some personal papers) and even 
a plan for achieving that goal (open the top drawer of 
the filing cabinet, where those papers are kept), once 
that plan failed, she had no idea of what to do. But she also had a 
second problem: she thought the problem lay in her own lack of 
ability: she blamed herself, falsely.
How was I able to help? First, I refused to accept the false accu-
sation that it was the fault of the landlady: to me, it was clearly a 
fault in the mechanics of the old filing cabinet that prevented the 
drawer from opening. Second, I had a conceptual model of how 
the cabinet worked, with an internal mechanism that held the door 
shut in normal usage, and the belief that the drawer mechanism 
was probably out of alignment. This conceptual model gave me 
a plan: wiggle the drawer. That failed. That caused me    to modify 

38 
The Design of Everyday Things
my plan: wiggling may have been appropriate but not forceful 
enough, so I resorted to brute force to try to twist the cabinet back 
into its proper alignment. This felt good to me—the cabinet drawer 
moved slightly—but it still didn’t open. So I resorted to the most 
powerful tool employed by experts the world around—I banged 
on the cabinet. And yes, it opened. In my mind, I decided (without 
any evidence) that my hit had jarred the mechanism sufficiently to 
allow the drawer to open.
This example highlights the themes of this chapter. First, how do 
people do things? It is easy to learn a few basic steps to perform 
operations with our technologies (and yes, even filing cabinets are 
technology). But what happens when things go wrong? How do 
we detect that they aren’t working, and then how do we know 
what to do? To help understand this, I first delve into human psy-
chology and a simple conceptual model of how people select and 
then evaluate their actions. This leads the discussion to the role of 
understanding (via a conceptual model) and of emotions: pleasure 
when things work smoothly and frustration when our plans are 
thwarted. Finally, I conclude with a summary of how the lessons 
of this chapter translate into principles of design.
How People Do Things: 
The Gulfs of Execution and Evaluation
When people use something, they face two gulfs: the Gulf of Exe-
cution, where they try to figure out how it operates, and the Gulf 
of Evaluation, where they try to figure out what happened (Fig-
ure 2.1). The role of the designer is to help people bridge the 
two gulfs.
In the case of the filing cabinet, there were visible elements that 
helped bridge the Gulf of Execution when everything was work-
ing perfectly. The drawer handle clearly signified that it should be 
pulled and the slider on the handle indicated how to release the 
catch that normally held the drawer in place. But when these oper-
ations failed, there then loomed a big gulf: what other operations 
could be done to open the drawer?

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
39
The Gulf of Evaluation 
was easily bridged, at first. 
That is, the catch was re-
leased, the drawer handle 
pulled, yet nothing hap-
pened. The lack of action 
signified a failure to reach 
the goal. But when other 
operations were tried, such 
as my twisting and pull-
ing, the filing cabinet pro-
vided no more information 
about whether I was get-
ting closer to the goal.
The Gulf of Evaluation 
reflects the amount of ef-
fort that the person must 
make to interpret the phys-
ical state of the device and to determine how well the expectations 
and intentions have been met. The gulf is small when the device 
provides information about its state in a form that is easy to get, 
is easy to interpret, and matches the way the person thinks about 
the system. What are the major design elements that help bridge the 
Gulf of Evaluation? Feedback and a good conceptual model.
The gulfs are present for many devices. Interestingly, many peo-
ple do experience difficulties, but explain them away by blaming 
themselves. In the case of things they believe they should be capa-
ble of using—water faucets, refrigerator temperature controls, stove 
tops—they simply think, “I’m being stupid.” Alternatively, for com-
plicated-looking devices—sewing machines, washing machines, 
digital watches, or almost any digital controls—they simply give up, 
deciding that they are incapable of understanding them. Both expla-
nations are wrong. These are the things of everyday household use. 
None of them has a complex underlying structure. The difficulties 
reside in their design, not in the people attempting to use them.
FIGURE 2.1. The Gulfs of Execution and Eval-
uation. When people encounter a device, they 
face two gulfs: the Gulf of Execution, where they 
try to figure out how to use it, and the Gulf of 
Evaluation, where they try to figure out what 
state it is in and whether their actions got them 
to their goal.

40 
The Design of Everyday Things
How can the designer help bridge the two gulfs? To answer that 
question, we need to delve more deeply into the psychology of 
human action. But the basic tools have already been discussed: 
We bridge the Gulf of Execution through the use of signifiers, con-
straints, mappings, and a conceptual model. We bridge the Gulf of 
Evaluation through the use of feedback and a conceptual model.
The Seven Stages of Action
There are two parts to an action: executing the action and then 
evaluating the results: doing and interpreting. Both execution and 
evaluation require understanding: how the item works and what 
results it produces. Both execution and evaluation can affect our 
emotional state.
Suppose I am sitting in my armchair, reading a book. It is dusk, 
and the light is getting dimmer and dimmer. My current activity 
is reading, but that goal is starting to fail because of the decreasing 
illumination. This realization triggers a new goal: get more light. 
How do I do that? I have many choices. I could open the curtains, 
move so that I sit where there is more light, or perhaps turn on a 
nearby light. This is the planning stage, determining which of the 
many possible plans of action to follow. But even when I decide 
to turn on the nearby light, I still have to determine how to get it 
done. I could ask someone to do it for me, I could use my left hand 
or my right. Even after I have decided upon a plan, I still have to 
specify how I will do it. Finally, I must execute—do—the action. 
When I am doing a frequent act, one for which I am quite experi-
enced and skilled, most of these stages are subconscious. When I 
am still learning how to do it, determining the plan, specifying the 
sequence, and interpreting the result are conscious.
Suppose I am driving in my car and my action plan requires me 
to make a left turn at a street intersection. If I am a skilled driver, 
I don’t have to give much conscious attention to specify or per-
form the action sequence. I think “left” and smoothly execute the 
required action sequence. But if I am just learning to drive, I have 
to think about each separate component of the action. I must ap-
ply the brakes and check for cars behind and around me, cars and 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
41
pedestrians in front of me, 
and whether there are traf-
fic signs or signals that I 
have to obey. I must move 
my feet back and forth be-
tween pedals and my hands 
to the turn signals and back 
to the steering wheel (while 
I try to remember just how 
my instructor told me I 
should position my hands 
while making a turn), and 
my visual attention is di-
vided among all the activ-
ity around me, sometimes 
looking directly, some-
times rotating my head, 
and sometimes using the rear- and side-view mirrors. To the skilled 
driver, it is all easy and straightforward. To the beginning driver, 
the task seems impossible.
The specific actions bridge the gap between what we would 
like to have done (our goals) and all possible physical actions to 
achieve those goals. After we specify what actions to make, we 
must actually do them—the stages of execution. There are three 
stages of execution that follow from the goal: plan, specify, and 
perform (the left side of Figure 2.2). Evaluating what happened has 
three stages: first, perceiving what happened in the world; second, 
trying to make sense of it (interpreting it); and, finally, comparing 
what happened with what was wanted (the right side of Figure 2.2).
There we have it. Seven stages of action: one for goals, three for 
execution, and three for evaluation (Figure 2.2).
1. Goal (form the goal) 
5. Perceive (the state of the world)
2. Plan (the action) 
6. Interpret (the perception)
3. Specify (an action sequence) 7. Compare (the outcome with the goal)
4. Perform (the action sequence)
FIGURE 2.2. The Seven Stages of the Action 
Cycle. Putting all the stages together yields the 
three stages of execution (plan, specify, and per-
form), three stages of evaluation (perceive, in-
terpret, and compare), and, of course, the goal: 
seven stages in all.

42 
The Design of Everyday Things
The seven-stage action cycle is simplified, but it provides a use-
ful framework for understanding human action and for guiding 
design. It has proven to be helpful in designing interaction. Not all 
of the activity in the stages is conscious. Goals tend to be, but even 
they may be subconscious. We can do many actions, repeatedly 
cycling through the stages while being blissfully unaware that we 
are doing so. It is only when we come across something new or 
reach some impasse, some problem that disrupts the normal flow 
of activity, that conscious attention is required.
Most behavior does not require going through all stages in se-
quence; however, most activities will not be satisfied by single ac-
tions. There must be numerous sequences, and the whole activity 
may last hours or even days. There are multiple feedback loops 
in which the results of one activity are used to direct further ones, in 
which goals lead to subgoals, and plans lead to subplans. There are 
activities in which goals are forgotten, discarded, or reformulated.
Let’s go back to my act of turning on the light. This is a case of 
event-driven behavior: the sequence starts with the world, caus-
ing evaluation of the state and the formulation of a goal. The trig-
ger was an environmental event: the lack of light, which made 
reading difficult. This led to a violation of the goal of reading, so 
it led to a subgoal—get more light. But reading was not the high-
level goal. For each goal, one has to ask, “Why is that the goal?” 
Why was I reading? I was trying to prepare a meal using a new 
recipe, so I needed to reread it before I started. Reading was thus 
a subgoal. But cooking was itself a subgoal. I was cooking in or-
der to eat, which had the goal of satisfying my hunger. So the 
hierarchy of goals is roughly: satisfy hunger; eat; cook; read cook-
book; get more light. This is called a root cause analysis: asking 
“Why?” until the ultimate, fundamental cause of the activity is 
reached.
The action cycle can start from the top, by establishing a new 
goal, in which case we call it goal-driven behavior. In this situ-
ation, the cycle starts with the goal and then goes through the 
three stages of execution. But the action cycle can also start from 
the bottom, triggered by some event in the world, in which case we 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
43
call it either data-driven or event-driven behavior. In this situation, 
the cycle starts with the environment, the world, and then goes 
through the three stages of evaluation.
For many everyday tasks, goals and intentions are not well spec-
ified: they are opportunistic rather than planned. Opportunistic 
actions are those in which the behavior takes advantage of circum-
stances. Rather than engage in extensive planning and analysis, we 
go about the day’s activities and do things as opportunities arise. 
Thus, we may not have planned to try a new café or to ask a question 
of a friend. Rather, we go through the day’s activities, and if we find 
ourselves near the café or encountering the friend, then we allow the 
opportunity to trigger the appropriate activity. Otherwise, we might 
never get to that café or ask our friend the question. For crucial 
tasks we make special efforts to ensure that they get done. Oppor-
tunistic actions are less precise and certain than specified goals and 
intentions, but they result in less mental effort, less inconvenience, 
and perhaps more interest. Some of us adjust our lives around the 
expectation of opportunities. And sometimes, even for goal-driven 
behavior, we try to create world events that will ensure that the 
sequence gets completed. For example, sometimes when I must do 
an important task, I ask someone to set a deadline for me. I use the 
approach of that deadline to trigger the work. It may only be a few 
hours before the deadline that I actually get to work and do the job, 
but the important point is that it does get done. This self-triggering 
of external drivers is fully compatible with the seven-stage analysis.
The seven stages provide a guideline for developing new prod-
ucts or services. The gulfs are obvious places to start, for either gulf, 
whether of execution or evaluation, is an opportunity for product 
enhancement. The trick is to develop observational skills to detect 
them. Most innovation is done as an incremental enhancement of 
existing products. What about radical ideas, ones that introduce 
new product categories to the marketplace? These come about by 
reconsidering the goals, and always asking what the real goal is: 
what is called the root cause analysis.
Harvard Business School marketing professor Theodore Levitt 
once pointed out, “People don’t want to buy a quarter-inch drill. 

44 
The Design of Everyday Things
They want a quarter-inch hole!” Levitt’s example of the drill im-
plying that the goal is really a hole is only partially correct, how-
ever. When people go to a store to buy a drill, that is not their real 
goal. But why would anyone want a quarter-inch hole? Clearly 
that is an intermediate goal. Perhaps they wanted to hang shelves 
on the wall. Levitt stopped too soon.
Once you realize that they don’t really want the drill, you realize 
that perhaps they don’t really want the hole, either: they want to 
install their bookshelves. Why not develop methods that don’t re-
quire holes? Or perhaps books that don’t require bookshelves. (Yes, 
I know: electronic books, e-books.)
Human Thought: Mostly Subconscious
Why do we need to know about the human mind? Because things 
are designed to be used by people, and without a deep under-
standing of people, the designs are apt to be faulty, difficult to 
use, difficult to understand. That is why it is useful to consider the 
seven stages of action. The mind is more difficult to comprehend 
than actions. Most of us start by believing we already understand 
both human behavior and the human mind. After all, we are all hu-
man: we have all lived with ourselves all of our lives, and we like 
to think we understand ourselves. But the truth is, we don’t. Most 
of human behavior is a result of subconscious processes. We are 
unaware of them. As a result, many of our beliefs about how peo-
ple behave—including beliefs about ourselves—are wrong. That is 
why we have the multiple social and behavioral sciences, with a 
good dash of mathematics, economics, computer science, informa-
tion science, and neuroscience.
Consider the following simple experiment. Do all three steps:
1. Wiggle the second finger of your hand.
2. Wiggle the third finger of the same hand.
3. Describe what you did differently those two times.
On the surface, the answer seems simple: I thought about mov-
ing my fingers and they moved. The difference is that I thought 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
45
about a different finger each time. Yes, that’s true. But how did that 
thought get transmitted into action, into the commands that caused 
different muscles in the arm to control the tendons that wiggled 
the fingers? This is completely hidden from consciousness.
The human mind is immensely complex, having evolved over 
a long period with many specialized structures. The study of the 
mind is the subject of multiple disciplines, including the behav-
ioral and social sciences, cognitive science, neuroscience, philos-
ophy, and the information and computer sciences. Despite many 
advances in our understanding, much still remains mysterious, yet 
to be learned. One of the mysteries concerns the nature of and dis-
tinction between those activities that are conscious and those that 
are not. Most of the brain’s operations are subconscious, hidden 
beneath our awareness. It is only the highest level, what I call re-
flective, that is conscious.
Conscious attention is necessary to learn most things, but after 
the initial learning, continued practice and study, sometimes for 
thousands of hours over a period of years, produces what psychol-
ogists call “overlearning,” Once skills have been overlearned, per-
formance appears to be effortless, done automatically, with little or 
no awareness. For example, answer these questions:
What is the phone number of a friend?
What is Beethoven’s phone number?
What is the capital of:
 • Brazil?
 • Wales?
 • The United States?
 • Estonia?
Think about how you answered these questions. The answers 
you knew come immediately to mind, but with no awareness of 
how that happened. You simply “know” the answer. Even the ones 
you got wrong came to mind without any awareness. You might 
have been aware of some doubt, but not of how the name entered 
your consciousness. As for the countries for which you didn’t 

46 
The Design of Everyday Things
know the answer, you probably knew you didn’t know those im-
mediately, without effort. Even if you knew you knew, but couldn’t 
quite recall it, you didn’t know how you knew that, or what was 
happening as you tried to remember.
You might have had trouble with the phone number of a friend 
because most of us have turned over to our technology the job 
of remembering phone numbers. I don’t know anybody’s phone 
number—I barely remember my own. When I wish to call some-
one, I just do a quick search in my contact list and have the tele-
phone place the call. Or I just push the “2” button on the phone 
for a few seconds, which autodials my home. Or in my auto, I can 
simply speak: “Call home.” What’s the number? I don’t know: my 
technology knows. Do we count our technology as an extension 
of our memory systems? Of our thought processes? Of our mind?
What about Beethoven’s phone number? If I asked my computer, 
it would take a long time, because it would have to search all the 
people I know to see whether any one of them was Beethoven. 
But you immediately discarded the question as nonsensical. You 
don’t personally know Beethoven. And anyway, he is dead. Be-
sides, he died in the early 1800s and the phone wasn’t invented 
until the late 1800s. How do we know what we do not know so 
rapidly? Yet some things that we do know can take a long time to 
retrieve. For example, answer this:
In the house you lived in three houses ago, as you entered the front door, 
was the doorknob on the left or right?
Now you have to engage in conscious, reflective problem solv-
ing, first to retrieve just which house is being talked about, and 
then what the correct answer is. Most people can determine the 
house, but have difficulty answering the question because they can 
readily imagine the doorknob on both sides of the door. The way to 
solve this problem is to imagine doing some activity, such as walk-
ing up to the front door while carrying heavy packages with both 
hands: how do you open the door? Alternatively, visualize yourself 
inside the house, rushing to the front door to open it for a visitor. 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
47
Usually one of these imagined scenarios provides the answer. But 
note how different the memory retrieval for this question was from 
the retrieval for the others. All these questions involved long-term 
memory, but in very different ways. The earlier questions were 
memory for factual information, what is called declarative memory. 
The last question could have been answered factually, but is usu-
ally most easily answered by recalling the activities performed to 
open the door. This is called procedural memory. I return to a discus-
sion of human memory in Chapter 3.
Walking, talking, reading. Riding a bicycle or driving a car. Sing-
ing. All of these skills take considerable time and practice to mas-
ter, but once mastered, they are often done quite automatically. For 
experts, only especially difficult or unexpected situations require 
conscious attention.
Because we are only aware of the reflective level of conscious 
processing, we tend to believe that all human thought is con-
scious. But it isn’t. We also tend to believe that thought can be 
separated from emotion. This is also false. Cognition and emo-
tion cannot be separated. Cognitive thoughts lead to emotions: 
emotions drive cognitive thoughts. The brain is structured to act 
upon the world, and every action carries with it expectations, and 
these expectations drive emotions. That is why much of language 
is based on physical metaphors, why the body and its interaction 
with the environment are essential components of human thought.
Emotion is highly underrated. In fact, the emotional system is 
a powerful information processing system that works in tandem 
with cognition. Cognition attempts to make sense of the world: 
emotion assigns value. It is the emotional system that determines 
whether a situation is safe or threatening, whether something that 
is happening is good or bad, desirable or not. Cognition provides 
understanding: emotion provides value judgments. A human with-
out a working emotional system has difficulty making choices. A 
human without a cognitive system is dysfunctional.
Because much human behavior is subconscious—that is, it oc-
curs without conscious awareness—we often don’t know what we 
are about to do, say, or think until after we have done it. It’s as 

48 
The Design of Everyday Things
if we had two minds: the subconscious and the conscious, which 
don’t always talk to each other. Not what you have been taught? 
True, nonetheless. More and more evidence is accumulating that 
we use logic and reason after the fact, to justify our decisions to 
ourselves (to our conscious minds) and to others. Bizarre? Yes, but 
don’t protest: enjoy it.
Subconscious thought matches patterns, finding the best possible 
match of one’s past experience to the current one. It proceeds rap-
idly and automatically, without effort. Subconscious processing is 
one of our strengths. It is good at detecting general trends, at recog-
nizing the relationship between what we now experience and what 
has happened in the past. And it is good at generalizing, at making 
predictions about the general trend, based on few examples. But 
subconscious thought can find matches that are inappropriate or 
wrong, and it may not distinguish the common from the rare. Sub-
conscious thought is biased toward regularity and structure, and it 
is limited in formal power. It may not be capable of symbolic ma-
nipulation, of careful reasoning through a sequence of steps.
Conscious thought is quite different. It is slow and labored. 
Here is where we slowly ponder decisions, think through alter-
natives, compare different choices. Conscious thought considers 
first this approach, then that—comparing, rationalizing, finding 
explanations. Formal logic, mathematics, decision theory: these are 
the tools of conscious thought. Both conscious and subconscious 
modes of thought are powerful and essential aspects of human life. 
Both can provide insightful leaps and creative moments. And both 
are subject to errors, misconceptions, and failures.
Emotion interacts with cognition biochemically, bathing the brain 
with hormones, transmitted either through the bloodstream or 
through ducts in the brain, modifying the behavior of brain cells. 
Hormones exert powerful biases on brain operation. Thus, in tense, 
threatening situations, the emotional system triggers the release of 
hormones that bias the brain to focus upon relevant parts of the 
environment. The muscles tense in preparation for action. In calm, 
nonthreatening situations, the emotional system triggers the release 
of hormones that relax the muscles and bias the brain toward explo-

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
49
ration and creativity. Now the brain is more apt to notice changes in 
the environment, to be distracted by events, and to piece together 
events and knowledge that might have seemed unrelated earlier.
A positive emotional state is ideal for creative thought, but it is 
not very well suited for getting things done. Too much, and we call 
the person scatterbrained, flitting from one topic to another, unable 
to finish one thought before another comes to mind. A brain in a 
negative emotional state provides focus: precisely what is needed 
to maintain attention on a task and finish it. Too much, however, 
and we get tunnel vision, where people are unable to look beyond 
their narrow point of view. Both the positive, relaxed state and the 
anxious, negative, and tense state are valuable and powerful tools 
for human creativity and action. The extremes of both states, how-
ever, can be dangerous.
Human Cognition and Emotion
The mind and brain are complex entities, still the topic of con-
siderable scientific research. One valuable explanation of the lev-
els of processing within the brain, applicable to both cognitive 
and emotional processing, is to think of three different levels of 
processing, each quite different from the other, but all working 
together in concert. Although this is a gross oversimplification 
of the actual processing, it is a good enough approximation to 
provide guidance in understanding human behavior. The approach 
I use here comes from my book Emotional Design. There, I suggested 
Subconscious 
Conscious
Fast 
Slow
Automatic 
Controlled
Multiple resources 
Limited resources
Controls skilled behavior 
 Invoked for novel situations: when 
learning, when in danger, when 
things go wrong
TABLE 2.1. Subconscious and Conscious Systems of Cognition

50 
The Design of Everyday Things
that a useful approximate model of human cognition and emotion 
is to consider three levels of processing: visceral, behavioral, and 
reflective.
THE VISCERAL LEVEL
The most basic level of processing is called visceral. This is some-
times referred to as “the lizard brain.” All people have the same ba-
sic visceral responses. These are part of the basic protective mech-
anisms of the human affective system, making quick judgments 
about the environment: good or bad, safe or dangerous. The visceral 
system allows us to respond quickly and subconsciously, without 
conscious awareness or control. 
The basic biology of the visceral 
system minimizes its ability to 
learn. Visceral learning takes 
place primarily by sensitization 
or desensitization through such 
mechanisms as adaptation and 
classical conditioning. Visceral 
responses are fast and automatic. 
They give rise to the startle reflex 
for novel, unexpected events; for 
such genetically programmed 
behavior as fear of heights, dis-
like of the dark or very noisy 
environments, dislike of bitter 
tastes and the liking of sweet tastes, and so on. Note that the visceral 
level responds to the immediate present and produces an affective 
state, relatively unaffected by context or history. It simply assesses 
the situation: no cause is assigned, no blame, and no credit.
The visceral level is tightly coupled to the body’s musculature—
the motor system. This is what causes animals to fight or flee, or to 
relax. An animal’s (or person’s) visceral state can often be read by 
analyzing the tension of the body: tense means a negative state; re-
laxed, a positive state. Note, too, that we often determine our own 
body state by noting our own musculature. A common self-report 
FIGURE 2.3. Three Levels of Process-
ing: Visceral, Behavioral, and Reflective. 
Visceral and behavioral levels are subcon-
scious and the home of basic emotions. 
The reflective level is where conscious 
thought and decision-making reside, as 
well as the highest level of emotions.

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
51
might be something like, “I was tense, my fists clenched, and I 
was sweating.”
Visceral responses are fast and completely subconscious. They 
are sensitive only to the current state of things. Most scientists do 
not call these emotions: they are precursors to emotion. Stand at 
the edge of a cliff and you will experience a visceral response. Or 
bask in the warm, comforting glow after a pleasant experience, 
perhaps a nice meal.
For designers, the visceral response is about immediate per-
ception: the pleasantness of a mellow, harmonious sound or the 
jarring, irritating scratch of fingernails on a rough surface. Here 
is where the style matters: appearances, whether sound or sight, 
touch or smell, drive the visceral response. This has nothing to do 
with how usable, effective, or understandable the product is. It is 
all about attraction or repulsion. Great designers use their aesthetic 
sensibilities to drive these visceral responses.
Engineers and other logical people tend to dismiss the visceral 
response as irrelevant. Engineers are proud of the inherent qual-
ity of their work and dismayed when inferior products sell better 
“just because they look better.” But all of us make these kinds of 
judgments, even those very logical engineers. That’s why they love 
some of their tools and dislike others. Visceral responses matter.
THE BEHAVIORAL LEVEL
The behavioral level is the home of learned skills, triggered by sit-
uations that match the appropriate patterns. Actions and analyses 
at this level are largely subconscious. Even though we are usually 
aware of our actions, we are often unaware of the details. When we 
speak, we often do not know what we are about to say until our 
conscious mind (the reflective part of the mind) hears ourselves 
uttering the words. When we play a sport, we are prepared for ac-
tion, but our responses occur far too quickly for conscious control: 
it is the behavioral level that takes control.
When we perform a well-learned action, all we have to do is 
think of the goal and the behavioral level handles all the details: 
the conscious mind has little or no awareness beyond creating the 

52 
The Design of Everyday Things
desire to act. It’s actually interesting to keep trying it. Move the left 
hand, then the right. Stick out your tongue, or open your mouth. 
What did you do? You don’t know. All you know is that you 
“willed” the action and the correct thing happened. You can even 
make the actions more complex. Pick up a cup, and then with the 
same hand, pick up several more items. You automatically adjust 
the fingers and the hand’s orientation to make the task possible. 
You only need to pay conscious attention if the cup holds some liq-
uid that you wish to avoid spilling. But even in that case, the actual 
control of the muscles is beneath conscious perception: concentrate 
on not spilling and the hands automatically adjust.
For designers, the most critical aspect of the behavioral level is 
that every action is associated with an expectation. Expect a positive 
outcome and the result is a positive affective response (a “posi-
tive valence,” in the scientific literature). Expect a negative outcome 
and the result is a negative affective response (a negative valence): 
dread and hope, anxiety and anticipation. The information in the 
feedback loop of evaluation confirms or disconfirms the expecta-
tions, resulting in satisfaction or relief, disappointment or frustration.
Behavioral states are learned. They give rise to a feeling of con-
trol when there is good understanding and knowledge of results, 
and frustration and anger when things do not go as planned, and 
especially when neither the reason nor the possible remedies are 
known. Feedback provides reassurance, even when it indicates a 
negative result. A lack of feedback creates a feeling of lack of con-
trol, which can be unsettling. Feedback is critical to managing ex-
pectations, and good design provides this. Feedback—knowledge 
of results—is how expectations are resolved and is critical to learn-
ing and the development of skilled behavior.
Expectations play an important role in our emotional lives. This 
is why drivers tense when trying to get through an intersection be-
fore the light turns red, or students become highly anxious before 
an exam. The release of the tension of expectation creates a sense of 
relief. The emotional system is especially responsive to changes in 
states—so an upward change is interpreted positively even if it is 
only from a very bad state to a not-so-bad state, just as a change is 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
53
interpreted negatively even if it is from an extremely positive state 
to one only somewhat less positive.
THE REFLECTIVE LEVEL
The reflective level is the home of conscious cognition. As a conse-
quence, this is where deep understanding develops, where reason-
ing and conscious decision-making take place. The visceral and 
behavioral levels are subconscious and, as a result, they respond 
rapidly, but without much analysis. Reflection is cognitive, deep, 
and slow. It often occurs after the events have happened. It is a re-
flection or looking back over them, evaluating the circumstances, 
actions, and outcomes, often assessing blame or responsibility. The 
highest levels of emotions come from the reflective level, for it is 
here that causes are assigned and where predictions of the future 
take place. Adding causal elements to experienced events leads to 
such emotional states as guilt and pride (when we assume our-
selves to be the cause) and blame and praise (when others are 
thought to be the cause). Most of us have probably experienced the 
extreme highs and lows of anticipated future events, all imagined 
by a runaway reflective cognitive system but intense enough to 
create the physiological responses associated with extreme anger 
or pleasure. Emotion and cognition are tightly intertwined.
DESIGN MUST TAKE PLACE AT ALL LEVELS: 
VISCERAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND REFLECTIVE
To the designer, reflection is perhaps the most important of the 
levels of processing. Reflection is conscious, and the emotions 
produced at this level are the most protracted: those that assign 
agency and cause, such as guilt and blame or praise and pride. Re-
flective responses are part of our memory of events. Memories last 
far longer than the immediate experience or the period of usage, 
which are the domains of the visceral and behavioral levels. It is 
reflection that drives us to recommend a product, to recommend 
that others use it—or perhaps to avoid it.
Reflective memories are often more important than reality. If 
we have a strongly positive visceral response but disappointing 

54 
The Design of Everyday Things
usability problems at the behavioral level, when we reflect back 
upon the product, the reflective level might very well weigh the 
positive response strongly enough to overlook the severe behav-
ioral difficulties (hence the phrase, “Attractive things work bet-
ter”). Similarly, too much frustration, especially toward the ending 
stage of use, and our reflections about the experience might over-
look the positive visceral qualities. Advertisers hope that the strong 
reflective value associated with a well-known, highly prestigious 
brand might overwhelm our judgment, despite a frustrating expe-
rience in using the product. Vacations are often remembered with 
fondness, despite the evidence from diaries of repeated discomfort 
and anguish.
All three levels of processing work together. All play essential 
roles in determining a person’s like or dislike of a product or ser-
vice. One nasty experience with a service provider can spoil all 
future experiences. One superb experience can make up for past 
deficiencies. The behavioral level, which is the home of interaction, 
is also the home of all expectation-based emotions, of hope and joy, 
frustration and anger. Understanding arises at a combination of 
the behavioral and reflective levels. Enjoyment requires all three. 
Designing at all three levels is so important that I devote an entire 
book to the topic, Emotional Design.
In psychology, there has been a long debate about which hap-
pens first: emotion or cognition. Do we run and flee because some 
event happened that made us afraid? Or are we afraid because 
our conscious, reflective mind notices that we are running? The 
three-level analysis shows that both of these ideas can be correct. 
Sometimes the emotion comes first. An unexpected loud noise can 
cause automatic visceral and behavioral responses that make us 
flee. Then, the reflective system observes itself fleeing and deduces 
that it is afraid. The actions of running and fleeing occur first and 
set off the interpretation of fear.
But sometimes cognition occurs first. Suppose the street where 
we are walking leads to a dark and narrow section. Our reflective 
system might conjure numerous imagined threats that await us. 
At some point, the imagined depiction of potential harm is large 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
55
enough to trigger the behavioral system, causing us to turn, run, and 
flee. Here is where the cognition sets off the fear and the action.
Most products do not cause fear, running, or fleeing, but badly 
designed devices can induce frustration and anger, a feeling of 
helplessness and despair, and possibly even hate. Well-designed 
devices can induce pride and enjoyment, a feeling of being in con-
trol and pleasure—possibly even love and attachment. Amuse-
ment parks are experts at balancing the conflicting responses of 
the emotional stages, providing rides and fun houses that trigger 
fear responses from the visceral and behavioral levels, while all 
the time providing reassurance at the reflective level that the park 
would never subject anyone to real danger.
All three levels of processing work together to determine a per-
son’s cognitive and emotional state. High-level reflective cognition 
can trigger lower-level emotions. Lower-level emotions can trigger 
higher-level reflective cognition.
The Seven Stages of Action 
and the Three Levels of Processing
The stages of action can readily be associated with the three differ-
ent levels of processing, as shown in Figure 2.4. At the lowest level 
are the visceral levels of calmness or anxiety when approaching a 
task or evaluating the state of the world. Then, in the middle level, 
are the behavioral ones driven by expectations on the execution 
side—for example, hope and fear—and emotions driven by the 
confirmation of those expectations on the evaluation side—for ex-
ample, relief or despair. At the highest level are the reflective emo-
tions, ones that assess the results in terms of the presumed causal 
agents and the consequences, both immediate and long-term. Here 
is where satisfaction and pride occur, or perhaps blame and anger.
One important emotional state is the one that accompanies com-
plete immersion into an activity, a state that the social scientist 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi has labeled “flow.” Csikszentmihalyi 
has long studied how people interact with their work and play, 
and how their lives reflect this intermix of activities. When in the 
flow state, people lose track of time and the outside environment. 

56 
The Design of Everyday Things
They are at one with the task 
they are performing. The task, 
moreover, is at just the proper 
level of difficulty: difficult 
enough to provide a challenge 
and require continued atten-
tion, but not so difficult that it 
invokes frustration and anxiety.
Csikszentmihalyi’s work 
shows how the behavioral 
level creates a powerful set of 
emotional responses. Here, the 
subconscious expectations es-
tablished by the execution side 
of the action cycle set up emo-
tional states dependent upon 
those expectations. When the 
results of our actions are eval-
uated against expectations, the 
resulting emotions affect our 
feelings as we continue through 
the many cycles of action. An easy task, far below our skill level, makes 
it so easy to meet expectations that there is no challenge. Very little or 
no processing effort is required, which leads to apathy or boredom. A 
difficult task, far above our skill, leads to so many failed expectations 
that it causes frustration, anxiety, and helplessness. The flow state oc-
curs when the challenge of the activity just slightly exceeds our skill 
level, so full attention is continually required. Flow requires that the 
activity be neither too easy nor too difficult relative to our level of skill. 
The constant tension coupled with continual progress and success can 
be an engaging, immersive experience sometimes lasting for hours.
People as Storytellers
Now that we have explored the way that actions get done and the 
three different levels of processing that integrate cognition and 
emotion, we are ready to look at some of the implications.
FIGURE 2.4. Levels of Processing and the 
Stages of the Action Cycle. Visceral response is 
at the lowest level: the control of simple muscles 
and sensing the state of the world and body. The 
behavioral level is about expectations, so it is sen-
sitive to the expectations of the action sequence 
and then the interpretations of the feedback. The 
reflective level is a part of the goal- and plan-set-
ting activity as well as affected by the comparison 
of expectations with what has actually happened.

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
57
People are innately disposed to look for causes of events, to form 
explanations and stories. That is one reason storytelling is such 
a persuasive medium. Stories resonate with our experiences and 
provide examples of new instances. From our experiences and the 
stories of others we tend to form generalizations about the way 
people behave and things work. We attribute causes to events, and 
as long as these cause-and-effect pairings make sense, we accept 
them and use them for understanding future events. Yet these 
causal attributions are often erroneous. Sometimes they implicate 
the wrong causes, and for some things that happen, there is no 
single cause; rather, a complex chain of events that all contribute 
to the result: if any one of the events would not have occurred, the 
result would be different. But even when there is no single causal 
act, that doesn’t stop people from assigning one. 
Conceptual models are a form of story, resulting from our predis-
position to find explanations. These models are essential in helping 
us understand our experiences, predict the outcome of our actions, 
and handle unexpected occurrences. We base our models on what-
ever knowledge we have, real or imaginary, naive or sophisticated.
Conceptual models are often constructed from fragmentary evi-
dence, with only a poor understanding of what is happening, and 
with a kind of naive psychology that postulates causes, mecha-
nisms, and relationships even where there are none. Some faulty 
models lead to the frustrations of everyday life, as in the case of my 
unsettable refrigerator, where my conceptual model of its opera-
tion (see again Figure 1.10A) did not correspond to reality (Figure 
1.10B). Far more serious are faulty models of such complex sys-
tems as an industrial plant or passenger airplane. Misunderstand-
ing there can lead to devastating accidents.
Consider the thermostat that controls room heating and cooling 
systems. How does it work? The average thermostat offers almost 
no evidence of its operation except in a highly roundabout man-
ner. All we know is that if the room is too cold, we set a higher 
temperature into the thermostat. Eventually we feel warmer. Note 
that the same thing applies to the temperature control for almost 
any device whose temperature is to be regulated. Want to bake a 

58 
The Design of Everyday Things
cake? Set the oven thermostat and the oven goes to the desired 
temperature.
If you are in a cold room, in a hurry to get warm, will the room 
heat more quickly if you turn the thermostat to its maximum set-
ting? Or if you want the oven to reach its working temperature 
faster, should you turn the temperature dial all the way to maxi-
mum, then turn it down once the desired temperature is reached? 
Or to cool a room most quickly, should you set the air conditioner 
thermostat to its lowest temperature setting?
If you think that the room or oven will cool or heat faster if the 
thermostat is turned all the way to the maximum setting, you are 
wrong—you hold an erroneous folk theory of the heating and cool-
ing system. One commonly held folk theory of the working of a 
thermostat is that it is like a valve: the thermostat controls how 
much heat (or cold) comes out of the device. Hence, to heat or cool 
something most quickly, set the thermostat so that the device is on 
maximum. The theory is reasonable, and there exist devices that 
operate like this, but neither the heating or cooling equipment for a 
home nor the heating element of a traditional oven is one of them.
In most homes, the thermostat is just an on-off switch. Moreover, 
most heating and cooling devices are either fully on or fully off: 
all or nothing, with no in-between states. As a result, the thermo-
stat turns the heater, oven, or air conditioner completely on, at full 
power, until the temperature setting on the thermostat is reached. 
Then it turns the unit completely off. Setting the thermostat at 
one extreme cannot affect how long it takes to reach the desired 
temperature. Worse, because this bypasses the automatic shutoff 
when the desired temperature is reached, setting it at the extremes 
invariably means that the temperature overshoots the target. If 
people were uncomfortably cold or hot before, they will become 
uncomfortable in the other direction, wasting considerable energy 
in the process.
But how are you to know? What information helps you under-
stand how the thermostat works? The design problem with the 
refrigerator is that there are no aids to understanding, no way of 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
59
forming the correct conceptual model. In fact, the information 
provided misleads people into forming the wrong, quite inap-
propriate model.
The real point of these examples is not that some people have er-
roneous beliefs; it is that everyone forms stories (conceptual mod-
els) to explain what they have observed. In the absence of external 
information, people can let their imagination run free as long as 
the conceptual models they develop account for the facts as they 
perceive them. As a result, people use their thermostats inappro-
priately, causing themselves unnecessary effort, and often resulting 
in large temperature swings, thus wasting energy, which is both a 
needless expense and bad for the environment. (Later in this chap-
ter, page 69, I provide an example of a thermostat that does pro-
vide a useful conceptual model.)
Blaming the Wrong Things
People try to find causes for events. They tend to assign a causal re-
lation whenever two things occur in succession. If some unexpected 
event happens in my home just after I have taken some action, I am 
apt to conclude that it was caused by that action, even if there really 
was no relationship between the two. Similarly, if I do something ex-
pecting a result and nothing happens, I am apt to interpret this lack 
of informative feedback as an indication that I didn’t do the action 
correctly: the most likely thing to do, therefore, is to repeat the action, 
only with more force. Push a door and it fails to open? Push again, 
harder. With electronic devices, if the feedback is delayed sufficiently, 
people often are led to conclude that the press wasn’t recorded, so 
they do the same action again, sometimes repeatedly, unaware that 
all of their presses were recorded. This can lead to unintended results. 
Repeated presses might intensify the response much more than was 
intended. Alternatively, a second request might cancel the previous 
one, so that an odd number of pushes produces the desired result, 
whereas an even number leads to no result.
The tendency to repeat an action when the first attempt fails 
can be disastrous. This has led to numerous deaths when people 

60 
The Design of Everyday Things
tried to escape a burning building by attempting to push open exit 
doors that opened inward, doors that should have been pulled. As 
a result, in many countries, the law requires doors in public places 
to open outward, and moreover to be operated by so-called panic 
bars, so that they automatically open when people, in a panic to 
escape a fire, push their bodies against them. This is a great appli-
cation of appropriate affordances: see the door in Figure 2.5.
Modern systems try hard to provide feedback within 0.1 second 
of any operation, to reassure the user that the request was received. 
This is especially important if the operation will take considerable 
time. The presence of a filling hourglass or rotating clock hands is 
a reassuring sign that work is in progress. When the delay can be 
predicted, some systems provide time estimates as well as progress 
bars to indicate how far along the task has gone. More systems 
should adopt these sensible displays to provide timely and mean-
ingful feedback of results.
Some studies show it is wise to underpredict—that is, to say an 
operation will take longer than it actually will. When the system 
computes the amount of time, it can compute the range of possible 
FIGURE 2.5. Panic Bars on Doors. People fleeing a fire would die if they en-
countered exit doors that opened inward, because they would keep trying to push 
them outward, and when that failed, they would push harder. The proper design, 
now required by law in many places, is to change the design of doors so that they 
open when pushed. Here is one example: an excellent design strategy for dealing 
with real behavior by the use of the proper affordances coupled with a graceful 
signifier, the black bar, which indicates where to push. (Photograph by author at the 
Ford Design Center, Northwestern University.)

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
61
times. In that case it ought to display the range, or if only a single 
value is desirable, show the slowest, longest value. That way, the 
expectations are liable to be exceeded, leading to a happy result.
When it is difficult to determine the cause of a difficulty, where 
do people put the blame? Often people will use their own concep-
tual models of the world to determine the perceived causal rela-
tionship between the thing being blamed and the result. The word 
perceived is critical: the causal relationship does not have to exist; 
the person simply has to think it is there. Sometimes the result is 
to attribute cause to things that had nothing to do with the action.
Suppose I try to use an everyday thing, but I can’t. Who is at 
fault: me or the thing? We are apt to blame ourselves, especially if 
others are able to use it. Suppose the fault really lies in the device, 
so that lots of people have the same problems. Because everyone 
perceives the fault to be his or her own, nobody wants to admit 
to having trouble. This creates a conspiracy of silence, where the 
feelings of guilt and helplessness among people are kept hidden.
Interestingly enough, the common tendency to blame ourselves 
for failures with everyday objects goes against the normal attribu-
tions we make about ourselves and others. Everyone sometimes 
acts in a way that seems strange, bizarre, or simply wrong and 
inappropriate. When we do this, we tend to attribute our behavior 
to the environment. When we see others do it, we tend to attribute 
it to their personalities.
Here is a made-up example. Consider Tom, the office terror. To-
day, Tom got to work late, yelled at his colleagues because the of-
fice coffee machine was empty, then ran to his office and slammed 
the door shut. “Ah,” his colleagues and staff say to one another, 
“there he goes again.”
Now consider Tom’s point of view. “I really had a hard day,” Tom 
explains. “I woke up late because my alarm clock failed to go off: I 
didn’t even have time for my morning coffee. Then I couldn’t find 
a parking spot because I was late. And there wasn’t any coffee in 
the office machine; it was all out. None of this was my fault—I had 
a run of really bad events. Yes, I was a bit curt, but who wouldn’t 
be under the same circumstances?”

62 
The Design of Everyday Things
Tom’s colleagues don’t have access to his inner thoughts or to his 
morning’s activities. All they see is that Tom yelled at them simply 
because the office coffee machine was empty. This reminds them of 
another similar event. “He does that all the time,” they conclude, 
“always blowing up over the most minor things.” Who is correct? 
Tom or his colleagues? The events can be seen from two differ-
ent points of view with two different interpretations: common re-
sponses to the trials of life or the result of an explosive, irascible 
personality.
It seems natural for people to blame their own misfortunes on 
the environment. It seems equally natural to blame other people’s 
misfortunes on their personalities. Just the opposite attribution, by 
the way, is made when things go well. When things go right, peo-
ple credit their own abilities and intelligence. The onlookers do 
the reverse. When they see things go well for someone else, they 
sometimes credit the environment, or luck.
In all such cases, whether a person is inappropriately accepting 
blame for the inability to work simple objects or attributing be-
havior to environment or personality, a faulty conceptual model is 
at work.
LEARNED HELPLESSNESS
The phenomenon called learned helplessness might help explain the 
self-blame. It refers to the situation in which people experience re-
peated failure at a task. As a result, they decide that the task cannot 
be done, at least not by them: they are helpless. They stop trying. 
If this feeling covers a group of tasks, the result can be severe diffi-
culties coping with life. In the extreme case, such learned helpless-
ness leads to depression and to a belief that the individuals cannot 
cope with everyday life at all. Sometimes all it takes to get such a 
feeling of helplessness are a few experiences that accidentally turn 
out bad. The phenomenon has been most frequently studied as a 
precursor to the clinical problem of depression, but I have seen it 
happen after a few bad experiences with everyday objects.
Do common technology and mathematics phobias result from 
a kind of learned helplessness? Could a few instances of failure 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
63
in what appear to be straightforward situations generalize to ev-
ery technological object, every mathematics problem? Perhaps. In 
fact, the design of everyday things (and the design of mathematics 
courses) seems almost guaranteed to cause this. We could call this 
phenomenon taught helplessness.
When people have trouble using technology, especially when 
they perceive (usually incorrectly) that nobody else is having the 
same problems, they tend to blame themselves. Worse, the more 
they have trouble, the more helpless they may feel, believing that 
they must be technically or mechanically inept. This is just the op-
posite of the more normal situation where people blame their own 
difficulties on the environment. This false blame is especially ironic 
because the culprit here is usually the poor design of the technol-
ogy, so blaming the environment (the technology) would be com-
pletely appropriate.
Consider the normal mathematics curriculum, which continues 
relentlessly on its way, each new lesson assuming full knowledge 
and understanding of all that has passed before. Even though each 
point may be simple, once you fall behind it is hard to catch up. 
The result: mathematics phobia—not because the material is diffi-
cult, but because it is taught so that difficulty in one stage hinders 
further progress. The problem is that once failure starts, it is soon 
generalized by self-blame to all of mathematics. Similar processes 
are at work with technology. The vicious cycle starts: if you fail 
at something, you think it is your fault. Therefore you think you 
can’t do that task. As a result, next time you have to do the task, 
you believe you can’t, so you don’t even try. The result is that you 
can’t, just as you thought.
You’re trapped in a self-fulfilling prophecy.
POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY
Just as we learn to give up after repeated failure, we can learn op-
timistic, positive responses to life. For years, psychologists focused 
upon the gloomy story of how people failed, on the limits of hu-
man abilities, and on psychopathologies—depression, mania, para-
noia, and so on. But the twenty-first century sees a new approach: 

64 
The Design of Everyday Things
to focus upon a positive psychology, a culture of positive thinking, 
of feeling good about oneself. In fact, the normal emotional state 
of most people is positive. When something doesn’t work, it can 
be considered an interesting challenge, or perhaps just a positive 
learning experience.
We need to remove the word failure from our vocabulary, replac-
ing it instead with learning experience. To fail is to learn: we learn 
more from our failures than from our successes. With success, sure, 
we are pleased, but we often have no idea why we succeeded. With 
failure, it is often possible to figure out why, to ensure that it will 
never happen again.
Scientists know this. Scientists do experiments to learn how the 
world works. Sometimes their experiments work as expected, but 
often they don’t. Are these failures? No, they are learning expe-
riences. Many of the most important scientific discoveries have 
come from these so-called failures.
Failure can be such a powerful learning tool that many designers 
take pride in their failures that happen while a product is still in 
development. One design firm, IDEO, has it as a creed: “Fail often, 
fail fast,” they say, for they know that each failure teaches them a 
lot about what to do right. Designers need to fail, as do research-
ers. I have long held the belief—and encouraged it in my students 
and employees—that failures are an essential part of exploration 
and creativity. If designers and researchers do not sometimes fail, it 
is a sign that they are not trying hard enough—they are not think-
ing the great creative thoughts that will provide breakthroughs in 
how we do things. It is possible to avoid failure, to always be safe. 
But that is also the route to a dull, uninteresting life.
The designs of our products and services must also follow this 
philosophy. So, to the designers who are reading this, let me give 
some advice:
• Do not blame people when they fail to use your products properly.
•  Take people’s difficulties as signifiers of where the product can be 
improved.

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
65
•  Eliminate all error messages from electronic or computer systems. 
Instead, provide help and guidance.
•  Make it possible to correct problems directly from help and guidance 
messages. Allow people to continue with their task: Don’t impede 
progress—help make it smooth and continuous. Never make people 
start over.
•  Assume that what people have done is partially correct, so if it is 
inappropriate, provide the guidance that allows them to correct the 
problem and be on their way.
• Think positively, for yourself and for the people you interact with.
Falsely Blaming Yourself
I have studied people making errors—sometimes serious ones—
with mechanical devices, light switches and fuses, computer op-
erating systems and word processors, even airplanes and nuclear 
power plants. Invariably people feel guilty and either try to hide 
the error or blame themselves for “stupidity” or “clumsiness.” I 
often have difficulty getting permission to watch: nobody likes to 
be observed performing badly. I point out that the design is faulty 
and that others make the same errors, yet if the task appears sim-
ple or trivial, people still blame themselves. It is almost as if they 
take perverse pride in thinking of themselves as mechanically 
incompetent.
I once was asked by a large computer company to evaluate a 
brand-new product. I spent a day learning to use it and trying 
it out on various problems. In using the keyboard to enter data, it 
was necessary to differentiate between the Return key and the En-
ter key. If the wrong key was pressed, the last few minutes’ work 
was irrevocably lost.
I pointed out this problem to the designer, explaining that I, 
myself, had made the error frequently and that my analyses indi-
cated that this was very likely to be a frequent error among users. 
The designer’s first response was: “Why did you make that error? 
Didn’t you read the manual?” He proceeded to explain the differ-
ent functions of the two keys.

66 
The Design of Everyday Things
“Yes, yes,” I explained, “I understand the two keys, I simply confuse 
them. They have similar functions, are located in similar locations on 
the keyboard, and as a skilled typist, I often hit Return automatically, 
without thought. Certainly others have had similar problems.”
“Nope,” said the designer. He claimed that I was the only per-
son who had ever complained, and the company’s employees had 
been using the system for many months. I was skeptical, so we 
went together to some of the employees and asked them whether 
they had ever hit the Return key when they should have hit Enter. 
And did they ever lose their work as a result?
“Oh, yes,” they said, “we do that a lot.”
Well, how come nobody ever said anything about it? After all, 
they were encouraged to report all problems with the system. The 
reason was simple: when the system stopped working or did some-
thing strange, they dutifully reported it as a problem. But when 
they made the Return versus Enter error, they blamed themselves. 
After all, they had been told what to do. They had simply erred.
The idea that a person is at fault when something goes wrong is 
deeply entrenched in society. That’s why we blame others and even 
ourselves. Unfortunately, the idea that a person is at fault is imbed-
ded in the legal system. When major accidents occur, official courts 
of inquiry are set up to assess the blame. More and more often the 
blame is attributed to “human error.” The person involved can 
be fined, punished, or fired. Maybe training procedures are revised. 
The law rests comfortably. But in my experience, human error usually 
is a result of poor design: it should be called system error. Humans 
err continually; it is an intrinsic part of our nature. System design 
should take this into account. Pinning the blame on the person may 
be a comfortable way to proceed, but why was the system ever de-
signed so that a single act by a single person could cause calamity? 
Worse, blaming the person without fixing the root, underlying cause 
does not fix the problem: the same error is likely to be repeated by 
someone else. I return to the topic of human error in Chapter 5.
Of course, people do make errors. Complex devices will always 
require some instruction, and someone using them without in-
struction should expect to make errors and to be confused. But 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
67
designers should take special pains to make errors as cost-free as 
possible. Here is my credo about errors:
Eliminate the term human error. Instead, talk about communica-
tion and interaction: what we call an error is usually bad commu-
nication or interaction. When people collaborate with one anoth-
er, the word error is never used to characterize another person’s 
utterance. That’s because each person is trying to understand 
and respond to the other, and when something is not understood 
or seems inappropriate, it is questioned, clarified, and the collab-
oration continues. Why can’t the interaction between a person 
and a machine be thought of as collaboration?
Machines are not people. They can’t communicate and under-
stand the same way we do. This means that their designers have 
a special obligation to ensure that the behavior of machines is un-
derstandable to the people who interact with them. True collabo-
ration requires each party to make some effort to accommodate 
and understand the other. When we collaborate with machines, it 
is people who must do all the accommodation. Why shouldn’t the 
machine be more friendly? The machine should accept normal hu-
man behavior, but just as people often subconsciously assess the 
accuracy of things being said, machines should judge the quality of 
information given it, in this case to help its operators avoid griev-
ous errors because of simple slips (discussed in Chapter 5). Today, 
we insist that people perform abnormally, to adapt themselves to 
the peculiar demands of machines, which includes always giving 
precise, accurate information. Humans are particularly bad at this, 
yet when they fail to meet the arbitrary, inhuman requirements of 
machines, we call it human error. No, it is design error.
Designers should strive to minimize the chance of inappro-
priate actions in the first place by using affordances, signifiers, 
good mapping, and constraints to guide the actions. If a person 
performs an inappropriate action, the design should maximize 
the chance that this can be discovered and then rectified. This 
requires good, intelligible feedback coupled with a simple, clear 
conceptual model. When people understand what has happened, 
what state the system is in, and what the most appropriate set of 
actions is, they can perform their activities more effectively.

68 
The Design of Everyday Things
People are not machines. Machines don’t have to deal with 
continual interruptions. People are subjected to continual inter-
ruptions. As a result, we are often bouncing back and forth be-
tween tasks, having to recover our place, what we were doing, 
and what we were thinking when we return to a previous task. 
No wonder we sometimes forget our place when we return to the 
original task, either skipping or repeating a step, or imprecisely 
retaining the information we were about to enter.
Our strengths are in our flexibility and creativity, in coming up 
with solutions to novel problems. We are creative and imaginative, 
not mechanical and precise. Machines require precision and accu-
racy; people don’t. And we are particularly bad at providing precise 
and accurate inputs. So why are we always required to do so? Why 
do we put the requirements of machines above those of people?
When people interact with machines, things will not always 
go smoothly. This is to be expected. So designers should antici-
pate this. It is easy to design devices that work well when every-
thing goes as planned. The hard and necessary part of design is to 
make things work well even when things do not go as planned.
HOW TECHNOLOGY CAN ACCOMMODATE HUMAN BEHAVIOR
In the past, cost prevented many manufacturers from providing 
useful feedback that would assist people in forming accurate 
conceptual models. The cost of color displays large and flexible 
enough to provide the required information was prohibitive for 
small, inexpensive devices. But as the cost of sensors and displays 
has dropped, it is now possible to do a lot more.
Thanks to display screens, telephones are much easier to use than 
ever before, so my extensive criticisms of phones found in the earlier 
edition of this book have been removed. I look forward to great im-
provements in all our devices now that the importance of these de-
sign principles are becoming recognized and the enhanced quality 
and lower costs of displays make it possible to implement the ideas.
PROV IDING A CONC EP T UAL MODEL FOR A HOME T HER MOSTAT
My thermostat, for example (designed by Nest Labs), has a colorful 
display that is normally off, turning on only when it senses that I 

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
69
am nearby. Then it provides me with the current temperature of 
the room, the temperature to which it is set, and whether it is heat-
ing or cooling the room (the background color changes from black 
when it is neither heating nor cooling, to orange while heating, or 
to blue while cooling). It learns my daily patterns, so it changes 
temperature automatically, lowering it at bedtime, raising it again 
in the morning, and going into “away” mode when it detects that 
nobody is in the house. All the time, it explains what it is doing. 
Thus, when it has to change the room temperature substantially 
(either because someone has entered a manual change or because 
it has decided that it is now time to switch), it gives a prediction: 
“Now 75°, will be 72° in 20 minutes.” In addition, Nest can be con-
nected wirelessly to smart devices that allow for remote operation 
of the thermostat and also for larger screens to provide a detailed 
analysis of its performance, aiding the home occupant’s develop-
ment of a conceptual model both of Nest and also of the home’s en-
ergy consumption. Is Nest perfect? No, but it marks improvement 
in the collaborative interaction of people and everyday things.
FIGURE 2.6. A Thermostat with an Explicit Concep-
tual Model. This thermostat, manufactured by Nest Labs, 
helps people form a good conceptual model of its opera-
tion. Photo A shows the thermostat. The background, blue, 
indicates that it is now cooling the home. The current tem-
perature is 75°F (24°C) and the target temperature is 72°F 
(22°C), which it expects to reach in 20 minutes. Photo B 
shows its use of a smart phone to deliver a summary of its 
settings and the home’s energy use. Both A and B combine 
to help the home dweller develop conceptual models of 
the thermostat and the home’s energy consumption. (Pho-
tographs courtesy of Nest Labs, Inc.)
A.
B.

70 
The Design of Everyday Things
EN T ER ING DAT ES, T IMES, A ND T ELEPHONE N U MBERS
Many machines are programmed to be very fussy about the form 
of input they require, where the fussiness is not a requirement of 
the machine but due to the lack of consideration for people in the 
design of the software. In other words: inappropriate program-
ming. Consider these examples.
Many of us spend hours filling out forms on computers—forms 
that require names, dates, addresses, telephone numbers, mone-
tary sums, and other information in a fixed, rigid format. Worse, 
often we are not even told the correct format until we get it wrong. 
Why not figure out the variety of ways a person might fill out a 
form and accommodate all of them? Some companies have done 
excellent jobs at this, so let us celebrate their actions.
Consider Microsoft’s calendar program. Here, it is possible to 
specify dates any way you like: “November 23, 2015,” “23 Nov. 
15,” or “11.23.15.” It even accepts phrases such as “a week from 
Thursday,” “tomorrow,” “a week from tomorrow,” or “yesterday.” 
Same with time. You can enter the time any way you want: “3:45 
PM,” “15.35,” “an hour,” “two and one-half hours.” Same with 
telephone numbers: Want to start with a + sign (to indicate the code 
for international dialing)? No problem. Like to separate the num-
ber fields with spaces, dashes, parentheses, slashes, periods? No 
problem. As long as the program can decipher the date, time, or 
telephone number into a legal format, it is accepted. I hope the 
team that worked on this got bonuses and promotions.
Although I single out Microsoft for being the pioneer in accept-
ing a wide variety of formats, it is now becoming standard prac-
tice. By the time you read this, I would hope that every program 
would permit any intelligible format for names, dates, phone num-
bers, street addresses, and so on, transforming whatever is entered 
into whatever form the internal programming needs. But I predict 
that even in the twenty-second century, there will still be forms 
that require precise accurate (but arbitrary) formats for no reason 
except the laziness of the programming team. Perhaps in the years 
that pass between this book’s publication and when you are read-

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
71
ing this, great improvements will have been made. If we are all 
lucky, this section will be badly out of date. I hope so.
The Seven Stages of Action: 
Seven Fundamental Design Principles
The seven-stage model of the action cycle can be a valuable de-
sign tool, for it provides a basic checklist of questions to ask. In 
general, each stage of action requires its own special design strate-
gies and, in turn, provides its own opportunity for disaster. Figure 
2.7 summarizes the questions:
1. What do I want to accomplish?
2.  What are the alternative action sequences?
3.  What action can I do now?
4.  How do I do it?
5.  What happened?
6.  What does it mean?
7.  Is this okay? Have I accomplished my goal?
Anyone using a product should always be able to determine the 
answers to all seven questions. This puts the burden on the designer 
F IGU R E 2 .7. 
The Seven 
Stages of Action as Design 
Aids. Each of the seven stages 
indicates a place where the 
person using the system has a 
question. The seven questions 
pose seven design themes. 
How should the design con-
vey the information required 
to answer the user’s question? 
Through appropriate con-
straint and mappings, signi-
fiers and conceptual models, 
feedback and visibility. The 
information that helps answer 
questions of execution (doing) 
is feedforward. The information 
that aids in understanding 
what has happened is feedback.

72 
The Design of Everyday Things
to ensure that at each stage, the product provides the information 
required to answer the question. 
The information that helps answer questions of execution (do-
ing) is feedforward. The information that aids in understanding 
what has happened is feedback. Everyone knows what feedback is. 
It helps you know what happened. But how do you know what 
you can do? That’s the role of feedforward, a term borrowed from 
control theory.
Feedforward is accomplished through appropriate use of signi-
fiers, constraints, and mappings. The conceptual model plays an 
important role. Feedback is accomplished through explicit infor-
mation about the impact of the action. Once again, the conceptual 
model plays an important role.
Both feedback and feedforward need to be presented in a form that 
is readily interpreted by the people using the system. The presenta-
tion has to match how people view the goal they are trying to achieve 
and their expectations. Information must match human needs.
The insights from the seven stages of action lead us to seven fun-
damental principles of design:
1.  Discoverability. It is possible to determine what actions are possible 
and the current state of the device.
2.  Feedback. There is full and continuous information about the results 
of actions and the current state of the product or service. After an 
action has been executed, it is easy to determine the new state.
3.  Conceptual model. The design projects all the information needed 
to create a good conceptual model of the system, leading to under-
standing and a feeling of control. The conceptual model enhances 
both discoverability and evaluation of results.
4.  Affordances. The proper affordances exist to make the desired ac-
tions possible.
5.  Signifiers. Effective use of signifiers ensures discoverability and that 
the feedback is well communicated and intelligible.
6.  Mappings. The relationship between controls and their actions fol-
lows the principles of good mapping, enhanced as much as possible 
through spatial layout and temporal contiguity.

 
two: The Psychology of Everyday Actions 
73
7.  Constraints. Providing physical, logical, semantic, and cultural con-
straints guides actions and eases interpretation.
The next time you can’t immediately figure out the shower con-
trol in a hotel room or have trouble using an unfamiliar television 
set or kitchen appliance, remember that the problem is in the de-
sign. Ask yourself where the problem lies. At which of the seven 
stages of action does it fail? Which design principles are deficient?
But it is easy to find fault: the key is to be able to do things 
better. Ask yourself how the difficulty came about. Realize that 
many different groups of people might have been involved, each 
of which might have had intelligent, sensible reasons for their ac-
tions. For example, a troublesome bathroom shower was designed 
by people who were unable to know how it would be installed, 
then the shower controls might have been selected by a building 
contractor to fit the home plans provided by yet another person. 
Finally, a plumber, who may not have had contact with any of the 
other people, did the installation. Where did the problems arise? It 
could have been at any one (or several) of these stages. The result 
may appear to be poor design, but it may actually arise from poor 
communication.
One of my self-imposed rules is, “Don’t criticize unless you can 
do better.” Try to understand how the faulty design might have 
occurred: try to determine how it could have been done otherwise. 
Thinking about the causes and possible fixes to bad design should 
make you better appreciate good design. So, the next time you 
come across a well-designed object, one that you can use smoothly 
and effortlessly on the first try, stop and examine it. Consider how 
well it masters the seven stages of action and the principles of de-
sign. Recognize that most of our interactions with products are ac-
tually interactions with a complex system: good design requires 
consideration of the entire system to ensure that the requirements, 
intentions, and desires at each stage are faithfully understood and 
respected at all the other stages.

74 
C H A P T E R  T H R E E
C h a p t e r  T h r e e
KNOWLEDGE 
IN THE 
HEAD AND IN 
THE WORLD
A friend kindly let me borrow his car, an older, classic Saab. Just before 
I was about to leave, I found a note waiting for me: “I should have 
mentioned that to get the key out of the ignition, the car needs to be in 
reverse.” The car needs to be in reverse! If I hadn’t seen the note, I never 
could have figured that out. There was no visible cue in the car: the 
knowledge needed for this trick had to reside in the head. If the driver 
lacks that knowledge, the key stays in the ignition forever.
Every day we are confronted by numerous objects, 
devices, and services, each of which requires us to 
behave or act in some particular manner. Overall, we 
manage quite well. Our knowledge is often quite in-
complete, ambiguous, or even wrong, but that doesn’t matter: we 
still get through the day just fine. How do we manage? We com-
bine knowledge in the head with knowledge in the world. Why 
combine? Because neither alone will suffice.
It is easy to demonstrate the faulty nature of human knowledge 
and memory. The psychologists Ray Nickerson and Marilyn Adams 
showed that people do not remember what common coins look 
like (Figure 3.1). Even though the example is for the American one-
cent piece, the penny, the finding holds true for currencies across 
the world. But despite our ignorance of the coins’ appearance, we 
use our money properly.
Why the apparent discrepancy between the precision of behavior 
and the imprecision of knowledge? Because not all of the knowl-

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
75
edge required for precise behavior has to be in the head. It can be 
distributed—partly in the head, partly in the world, and partly in 
the constraints of the world.
Precise Behavior from Imprecise Knowledge
Precise behavior can emerge from imprecise knowledge for four 
reasons:
1.  Knowledge is both in the head and in the world. Technically, 
knowledge can only be in the head, because knowledge requires in-
terpretation and understanding, but once the world’s structure has 
been interpreted and understood, it counts as knowledge. Much of 
the knowledge a person needs to do a task can be derived from the 
information in the world. Behavior is determined by combining the 
knowledge in the head with that in the world. For this chapter, I will 
use the term “knowledge” for both what is in the head and what is 
in the world. Although technically imprecise, it simplifies the discus-
sion and understanding.
FIGURE 3.1. Which Is the US One-Cent Coin, the Penny? Fewer than half of the 
American college students who were given this set of drawings and asked to select the 
correct image could do so. Pretty bad performance, except that the students, of course, 
have no difficulty using the money. In normal life, we have to distinguish between the 
penny and other coins, not among several versions of one denomination. Although 
this is an old study using American coins, the results still hold true today using coins 
of any currency. (From Nickerson & Adams, 1979, Cognitive Psychology, 11 (3). Reproduced with 
permission of Academic Press via Copyright Clearance Center.)

76 
The Design of Everyday Things
2.  Great precision is not required. Precision, accuracy, and complete-
ness of knowledge are seldom required. Perfect behavior results if 
the combined knowledge in the head and in the world is sufficient to 
distinguish an appropriate choice from all others.
3.  Natural constraints exist in the world. The world has many nat-
ural, physical constraints that restrict the possible behavior: such 
things as the order in which parts can go together and the ways 
by which an object can be moved, picked up, or otherwise manip-
ulated. This is knowledge in the world. Each object has physical 
features—projections, depressions, screw threads, appendages—
that limit its relationships with other objects, the operations that 
can be performed on it, what can be attached to it, and so on.
4.  Knowledge of cultural constraints and conventions exists in the 
head. Cultural constraints and conventions are learned artificial re-
strictions on behavior that reduce the set of likely actions, in many 
cases leaving only one or two possibilities. This is knowledge in the 
head. Once learned, these constraints apply to a wide variety of cir-
cumstances.
Because behavior can be guided by the combination of internal 
and external knowledge and constraints, people can minimize the 
amount of material they must learn, as well as the completeness, 
precision, accuracy, or depth of the learning. They also can delib-
erately organize the environment to support behavior. This is how 
nonreaders can hide their inability, even in situations where their 
job requires reading skills. People with hearing deficits (or with 
normal hearing but in noisy environments) learn to use other cues. 
Many of us manage quite well when in novel, confusing situations 
where we do not know what is expected of us. How do we do this? 
We arrange things so that we do not need to have complete knowl-
edge or we rely upon the knowledge of the people around us, 
copying their behavior or getting them to do the required actions. 
It is actually quite amazing how often it is possible to hide one’s 
ignorance, to get by without understanding or even much interest.
Although it is best when people have considerable knowledge and 
experience using a particular product—knowledge in the head—

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
77
the designer can put sufficient cues into the design—knowledge 
in the world—that good performance results even in the absence 
of previous knowledge. Combine the two, knowledge in the head 
and in the world, and performance is even better. How can the 
designer put knowledge into the device itself?
Chapters 1 and 2 introduced a wide range of fundamental design 
principles derived from research on human cognition and emotion. 
This chapter shows how knowledge in the world combines with 
knowledge in the head. Knowledge in the head is knowledge in 
the human memory system, so this chapter contains a brief review 
of the critical aspects of memory necessary for the design of usable 
products. I emphasize that for practical purposes, we do not need 
to know the details of scientific theories but simpler, more general, 
useful approximations. Simplified models are the key to successful 
application. The chapter concludes with a discussion of how natu-
ral mappings present information in the world in a manner readily 
interpreted and usable.
KNOWLEDGE IS IN THE WORLD
Whenever knowledge needed to do a task is readily available in 
the world, the need for us to learn it diminishes. For example, we 
lack knowledge about common coins, even though we recognize 
them just fine (Figure 3.1). In knowing what our currency looks 
like, we don’t need to know all the details, simply sufficient knowl-
edge to distinguish one value of currency from another. Only a 
small minority of people must know enough to distinguish coun-
terfeit from legitimate money.
Or consider typing. Many typists have not memorized the key-
board. Usually each key is labeled, so nontypists can hunt and peck 
letter by letter, relying on knowledge in the world and minimizing 
the time required for learning. The problem is that such typing is 
slow and difficult. With experience, of course, hunt-and-peckers 
learn the positions of many of the letters on the keyboard, even 
without instruction, and typing speed increases notably, quickly 
surpassing handwriting speeds and, for some, reaching quite re-
spectable rates. Peripheral vision and the feel of the keyboard 

78 
The Design of Everyday Things
provide some knowledge about key locations. Frequently used 
keys become completely learned, infrequently used keys are not 
learned well, and the other keys are partially learned. But as long 
as a typist needs to watch the keyboard, the speed is limited. The 
knowledge is still mostly in the world, not in the head.
If a person needs to type large amounts of material regularly, fur-
ther investment is worthwhile: a course, a book, or an interactive 
program. The important thing is to learn the proper placement of 
fingers on the keyboard, to learn to type without looking, to get 
knowledge about the keyboard from the world into the head. It 
takes a few weeks to learn the system and several months of prac-
tice to become expert. But the payoff for all this effort is increased 
typing speed, increased accuracy, and decreased mental load and 
effort at the time of typing.
We only need to remember sufficient knowledge to let us get our 
tasks done. Because so much knowledge is available in the envi-
ronment, it is surprising how little we need to learn. This is one 
reason people can function well in their environment and still be 
unable to describe what they do.
People function through their use of two kinds of knowledge: 
knowledge of and knowledge how. Knowledge of—what psychol-
ogists call declarative knowledge—includes the knowledge of facts 
and rules. “Stop at red traffic lights.” “New York City is north of 
Rome.” “China has twice as many people as India.” “To get the 
key out of the ignition of a Saab car, the gearshift must be in re-
verse.” Declarative knowledge is easy to write and to teach. Note 
that knowledge of the rules does not mean they are followed. The 
drivers in many cities are often quite knowledgeable about the of-
ficial driving regulations, but they do not necessarily obey them. 
Moreover, the knowledge does not have to be true. New York City 
is actually south of Rome. China has only slightly more people 
than India (roughly 10 percent). People may know many things: 
that doesn’t mean they are true.
Knowledge how—what psychologists call procedural knowledge—
is the knowledge that enables a person to be a skilled musician, 
to return a serve in tennis, or to move the tongue properly when 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
79
saying the phrase “frightening witches.” Procedural knowledge is 
difficult or impossible to write down and difficult to teach. It is 
best taught by demonstration and best learned through practice. 
Even the best teachers cannot usually describe what they are do-
ing. Procedural knowledge is largely subconscious, residing at the 
behavioral level of processing.
Knowledge in the world is usually easy to come by. Signifiers, 
physical constraints, and natural mappings are all perceivable cues 
that act as knowledge in the world. This type of knowledge occurs 
so commonly that we take it for granted. It is everywhere: the lo-
cations of letters on a keyboard; the lights and labels on controls 
that remind us of their purpose and give information about the 
current state of the device. Industrial equipment is replete with 
signal lights, indicators, and other reminders. We make extensive 
use of written notes. We place items in specific locations as remind-
ers. In general, people structure their environment to provide a 
considerable amount of the knowledge required for something to 
be remembered.
Many organize their lives spatially in the world, creating a pile 
here, a pile there, each indicating some activity to be done, some 
event in progress. Probably everybody uses such a strategy to 
some extent. Look around you at the variety of ways people ar-
range their rooms and desks. Many styles of organization are pos-
sible, but invariably the physical layout and visibility of the items 
convey information about relative importance.
WHEN PRECISION IS UNEXPECTEDLY REQUIRED
Normally, people do not need precision in their judgments. All that 
is needed is the combination of knowledge in the world and in the 
head that makes decisions unambiguous. Everything works just 
fine unless the environment changes so that the combined knowl-
edge is no longer sufficient: this can lead to havoc. At least three 
countries discovered this fact the hard way: the United States, 
when it introduced the Susan B. Anthony one-dollar coin; Great 
Britain, a one-pound coin (before the switch to decimal currency); 
and France, a ten-franc coin (before the conversion to the common 

80 
The Design of Everyday Things
European currency, the euro). The US dollar coin was confused 
with the existing twenty-five-cent piece (the quarter), and the Brit-
ish pound coin with the then five-pence piece that had the same 
diameter. Here is what happened in France:
PARIS With a good deal of fanfare, the French government released the 
new 10-franc coin (worth a little more than $1.50) on Oct. 22 [1986]. 
The public looked at it, weighed it, and began confusing it so quickly 
with the half-franc coin (worth only 8 cents) that a crescendo of fury 
and ridicule fell on both the government and the coin.
Five weeks later, Minister of Finance Edouard Balladur suspended 
circulation of the coin. Within another four weeks, he canceled it 
altogether.
In retrospect, the French decision seems so foolish that it is hard to 
fathom how it could have been made. After much study, designers came 
up with a silver-colored coin made of nickel and featuring a modernistic 
drawing by artist Joaquim Jimenez of a Gallic rooster on one side and 
of Marianne, the female symbol of the French republic, on the other. 
The coin was light, sported special ridges on its rim for easy reading by 
electronic vending machines and seemed tough to counterfeit.
But the designers and bureaucrats were obviously so excited by their 
creation that they ignored or refused to accept the new coin’s similar-
ity to the hundreds of millions of silver-colored, nickel-based half-franc 
coins in circulation [whose] size and weight were perilously simi-
lar. (Stanley Meisler. Copyright © 1986, Los Angeles Times. Reprinted with 
permission.)
The confusions probably occurred because the users of coins had 
already formed representations in their memories that were only 
sufficiently precise to distinguish among the coins that they were 
accustomed to using. Psychological research suggests that people 
maintain only partial descriptions of the things to be remembered. 
In the three examples of new coins introduced in the United States, 
Great Britain, and France, the descriptions formed to distinguish 
among national currency were not precise enough to distinguish be-
tween a new coin and at least one of the old coins.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
81
Suppose I keep all my notes in a small red notebook. If this is 
my only notebook, I can describe it simply as “my notebook.” If I 
buy several more notebooks, the earlier description will no longer 
work. Now I must identify the first one as small or red, or maybe both 
small and red, whichever allows me to distinguish it from the oth-
ers. But what if I acquire several small red notebooks? Now I must 
find some other means of describing the first book, adding to the 
richness of the description and to its ability to discriminate among 
the several similar items. Descriptions need discriminate only 
among the choices in front of me, but what works for one purpose 
may not for another.
Not all similar-looking items cause confusion. In updating this 
edition of the book, I searched to see whether there might be more 
recent examples of coin confusions. I found this interesting item on 
the website Wikicoins.com:
Someday, a leading psychologist may weigh in on one of the perplexing 
questions of our time: if the American public was constantly confusing 
the Susan B. Anthony dollar with the roughly similar-sized quarter, how 
come they weren’t also constantly confusing the $20 bill with the identi-
cal-sized $1 bill? (James A. Capp, “Susan B. Anthony Dollar,” at www.wiki
coins.com. Retrieved May 29, 2012)
Here is the answer. Why not any confusion? We learn to dis-
criminate among things by looking for distinguishing features. In 
the United States, size is one major way of distinguishing among 
coins, but not among paper money. With paper money, all the bills 
are the same size, so Americans ignore size and look at the printed 
numbers and images. Hence, we often confuse similar-size Amer-
ican coins but only seldom confuse similar-size American bills. 
But people who come from a country that uses size and color of 
their paper money to distinguish among the amounts (for exam-
ple, Great Britain or any country that uses the euro) have learned 
to use size and color to distinguish among paper money and 
therefore are invariably confused when dealing with bills from 
the United States.

82 
The Design of Everyday Things
More confirmatory evidence comes from the fact that although 
long-term residents of Britain complained that they confused the 
one-pound coin with the five-pence coin, newcomers (and chil-
dren) did not have the same confusion. This is because the long-
term residents were working with their original set of descriptions, 
which did not easily accommodate the distinctions between these 
two coins. Newcomers, however, started off with no preconcep-
tions and therefore formed a set of descriptions to distinguish 
among all the coins; in this situation, the one-pound coin offered 
no particular problem. In the United States, the Susan B. Anthony 
dollar coin never became popular and is no longer being made, so 
the equivalent observations cannot be made.
What gets confused depends heavily upon history: the aspects 
that have allowed us to distinguish among the objects in the past. 
When the rules for discrimination change, people can become con-
fused and make errors. With time, they will adjust and learn to 
discriminate just fine and may even forget the initial period of con-
fusion. The problem is that in many circumstances, especially one 
as politically charged as the size, shape, and color of currency, the 
public’s outrage prevents calm discussion and does not allow for 
any adjustment time.
Consider this as an example of design principles interacting with 
the messy practicality of the real world. What appears good in prin-
ciple can sometimes fail when introduced to the world. Sometimes, 
bad products succeed and good products fail. The world is complex.
CONSTRAINTS SIMPLIFY MEMORY
Before widespread literacy, and especially before the advent of 
sound recording devices, performers traveled from village to vil-
lage, reciting epic poems thousands of lines long. This tradition 
still exists in some societies. How do people memorize such volu-
minous amounts of material? Do some people have huge amounts 
of knowledge in their heads? Not really. It turns out that external 
constraints exert control over the permissible choice of words, thus 
dramatically reducing the memory load. One of the secrets comes 
from the powerful constraints of poetry.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
83
Consider the constraints of rhyming. If you wish to rhyme one 
word with another, there are usually a lot of alternatives. But if 
you must have a word with a particular meaning to rhyme with 
another, the joint constraints of meaning and rhyme can cause a 
dramatic reduction in the number of possible candidates, some-
times reducing a large set to a single choice. Sometimes there are 
no candidates at all. This is why it is much easier to memorize 
poetry than to create poems. Poems come in many different forms, 
but all have formal restrictions on their construction. The ballads 
and tales told by the traveling storytellers used multiple poetic 
constraints, including rhyme, rhythm, meter, assonance, allitera-
tion, and onomatopoeia, while also remaining consistent with the 
story being told.
Consider these two examples:
One. I am thinking of three words: one means “a mythical being,” 
the second is “the name of a building material,” and the third is “a unit 
of time.” What words do I have in mind?
Two. This time look for rhyming words. I am thinking of three 
words: one rhymes with “post,” the second with “eel,” and the third 
with “ear.” What words am I thinking of? (From Rubin & Wallace, 1989.)
In both examples, even though you might have found answers, they 
were not likely to be the same three that I had in mind. There sim-
ply are not enough constraints. But suppose I now tell you that the 
words I seek are the same in both tasks: What is a word that means 
a mythical being and rhymes with “post”? What word is the name 
of a building material and rhymes with “eel”? And what word is a 
unit of time and rhymes with “ear”? Now the task is easy: the joint 
specification of the words completely constrains the selection. When 
the psychologists David Rubin and Wanda Wallace studied these 
examples in their laboratory, people almost never got the correct 
meanings or rhymes for the first two tasks, but most people correctly 
answered, “ghost,” “steel,” and “year” in the combined task.
The classic study of memory for epic poetry was done by Albert 
Bates Lord. In the mid-1900s he traveled throughout the former 

84 
The Design of Everyday Things
Yugoslavia (now a number of separate, independent countries) 
and found people who still followed the oral tradition. He demon-
strated that the “singer of tales,” the person who learns epic poems 
and goes from village to village reciting them, is really re-creating 
them, composing poetry on the fly in such a way that it obeys the 
rhythm, theme, story line, structure, and other characteristics of 
the poem. This is a prodigious feat, but it is not an example of rote 
memory.
The power of multiple constraints allows one singer to listen to 
another singer tell a lengthy tale once, and then after a delay of 
a few hours or a day, to recite “the same song, word for word, 
and line for line.” In fact, as Lord points out, the original and new 
recitations are not the same word for word, but both teller and 
listener perceive them as the same, even when the second version 
was twice as long as the first. They are the same in the ways that 
matter to the listener: they tell the same story, express the same 
ideas, and follow the same rhyme and meter. They are the same in 
all senses that matter to the culture. Lord shows just how the com-
bination of memory for poetics, theme, and style combines with 
cultural structures into what he calls a “formula” for producing a 
poem perceived as identical to earlier recitations.
The notion that someone should be able to recite word for word 
is relatively modern. Such a notion can be held only after printed 
texts become available; otherwise who could judge the accuracy of 
a recitation? Perhaps more important, who would care?
All this is not to detract from the feat. Learning and reciting an 
epic poem, such as Homer’s Odyssey and Iliad, is clearly difficult 
even if the singer is re-creating it: there are twenty-seven thousand 
lines of verse in the combined written version. Lord points out that 
this length is excessive, probably produced only during the spe-
cial circumstances in which Homer (or some other singer) dictated 
the story slowly and repetitively to the person who first wrote it 
down. Normally the length would be varied to accommodate the 
whims of the audience, and no normal audience could sit through 
twenty-seven thousand lines. But even at one-third the size, nine 
thousand lines, being able to recite the poem is impressive: at one 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
85
second per line, the verses would take two and one-half hours to 
recite. It is impressive even allowing for the fact that the poem is 
re-created as opposed to memorized, because neither the singer 
nor the audience expect word-for-word accuracy (nor would either 
have any way of verifying that).
Most of us do not learn epic poems. But we do make use of strong 
constraints that serve to simplify what must be retained in memory. 
Consider an example from a completely different domain: taking 
apart and reassembling a mechanical device. Typical items in the 
home that an adventuresome person might attempt to repair in-
clude a door lock, toaster, and washing machine. The device is apt 
to have tens of parts. What has to be remembered to be able to put 
the parts together again in a proper order? Not as much as might 
appear from an initial analysis. In the extreme case, if there are ten 
parts, there are 10! (ten factorial) different ways in which to reas-
semble them—a little over 3.5 million alternatives.
But few of these possibilities are possible: there are numerous 
physical constraints on the ordering. Some pieces must be assem-
bled before it is even possible to assemble the others. Some pieces 
are physically constrained from fitting into the spots reserved for 
others: bolts must fit into holes of an appropriate diameter and 
depth; nuts and washers must be paired with bolts and screws 
of appropriate sizes; and washers must always be put on before 
nuts. There are even cultural constraints: we turn screws clock-
wise to tighten, counterclockwise to loosen; the heads of screws 
tend to go on the visible part (front or top) of a piece, bolts on the 
less visible part (bottom, side, or interior); wood screws and ma-
chine screws look different and are inserted into different kinds 
of materials. In the end, the apparently large number of decisions 
is reduced to only a few choices that should have been learned 
or otherwise noted during the disassembly. The constraints by 
themselves are often not sufficient to determine the proper reas-
sembly of the device—mistakes do get made—but the constraints 
reduce the amount that must be learned to a reasonable quantity. 
Constraints are powerful tools for the designer: they are exam-
ined in detail in Chapter 4.

86 
The Design of Everyday Things
Memory Is Knowledge in the Head
An old Arabic folk tale, “‘Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,” tells 
how the poor woodcutter ‘Ali Baba discovered the secret cave of a 
band of thieves. ‘Ali Baba overheard the thieves entering the cave 
and learned the secret phrase that opened the cave: “Open Sim-
sim.” (Simsim means “sesame” in Persian, so many versions of the 
story translate the phrase as “Open Sesame.”) ‘Ali Baba’s brother-
in-law, Kasim, forced him to reveal the secret. Kasim then went to 
the cave.
When he reached the entrance of the cavern, he pronounced the words, 
Open Simsim!
The door immediately opened, and when he was in, closed on him. In 
examining the cave he was greatly astonished to find much more riches 
than he had expected from ‘Ali Baba’s relation.
He quickly laid at the door of the cavern as many bags of gold as his 
ten mules could carry, but his thoughts were now so full of the great 
riches he should possess, that he could not think of the necessary words 
to make the door open. Instead of Open Simsim! he said Open Barley! 
and was much amazed to find that the door remained shut. He named 
several sorts of grain, but still the door would not open.
Kasim never expected such an incident, and was so alarmed at the 
danger he was in that the more he endeavoured to remember the word 
Simsim the more his memory was confounded, and he had as much 
forgotten it as if he had never heard it mentioned.
Kasim never got out. The thieves returned, cut off Kasim’s head, and 
quartered his body. (From Colum’s 1953 edition of The Arabian Nights.)
Most of us will not get our head cut off if we fail to remember a 
secret code, but it can still be very hard to recall the code. It is one 
thing to have to memorize one or two secrets: a combination, or 
a password, or the secret to opening a door. But when the num-
ber of secret codes gets too large, memory fails. There seems to 
be a conspiracy, one calculated to destroy our sanity by overload-
ing our memory. Many codes, such as postal codes and telephone 
numbers, exist primarily to make life easier for machines and their 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
87
designers without any consideration of the burden placed upon 
people. Fortunately, technology has now permitted most of us 
to avoid having to remember this arbitrary knowledge but to let 
our technology do it for us: phone numbers, addresses and postal 
codes, Internet and e-mail addresses are all retrievable automati-
cally, so we no longer have to learn them. Security codes, however, 
are a different matter, and in the never-ending, escalating battle 
between the white hats and the black, the good guys and the bad, 
the number of different arbitrary codes we must remember or spe-
cial security devices we must carry with us continues to escalate in 
both number and complexity.
Many of these codes must be kept secret. There is no way that 
we can learn all those numbers or phrases. Quick: what magical 
command was Kasim trying to remember to open the cavern door?
How do most people cope? They use simple passwords. Studies 
show that five of the most common passwords are: “password,” 
“123456,” “12345678,” “qwerty,” and “abc123.” All of these are 
clearly selected for easy remembering and typing. All are therefore 
easy for a thief or mischief-maker to try. Most people (including 
me) have a small number of passwords that they use on as many 
different sites as possible. Even security professionals admit to this, 
thereby hypocritically violating their own rules.
Many of the security requirements are unnecessary, and need-
lessly complex. So why are they required? There are many rea-
sons. One is that there are real problems: criminals impersonate 
identities to steal people’s money and possessions. People invade 
others’ privacy, for nefarious or even harmless purposes. Profes-
sors and teachers need to safeguard examination questions and 
grades. For companies and nations, it is important to maintain se-
crets. There are lots of reasons to keep things behind locked doors 
or password-protected walls. The problem, however, is the lack of 
proper understanding of human abilities.
We do need protection, but most of the people who enforce 
the security requirements at schools, businesses, and govern-
ment are technologists or possibly law-enforcement officials. 
They understand crime, but not human behavior. They believe 

88 
The Design of Everyday Things
that “strong” passwords, ones difficult to guess, are required, 
and that they must be changed frequently. They do not seem 
to recognize that we now need so many passwords—even easy 
ones—that it is difficult to remember which goes with which re-
quirement. This creates a new layer of vulnerability.
The more complex the password requirements, the less secure 
the system. Why? Because people, unable to remember all these 
combinations, write them down. And then where do they store this 
private, valuable knowledge? In their wallet, or taped under the 
computer keyboard, or wherever it is easy to find, because it is so 
frequently needed. So a thief only has to steal the wallet or find the 
list and then all secrets are known. Most people are honest, con-
cerned workers. And it is these individuals that complex security 
systems impede the most, preventing them from getting their work 
done. As a result, it is often the most dedicated employee who vio-
lates the security rules and weakens the overall system.
When I was doing the research for this chapter, I found numer-
ous examples of secure passwords that force people to use insecure 
memory devices for them. One post on the “Mail Online” forum of 
the British Daily Mail newspaper described the technique:
When I used to work for the local government organisation we HAD 
TO change our Passwords every three months. To ensure I could 
remember it, I used to write it on a Post-It note and stick it above 
my desk.
How can we remember all these secret things? Most of us can’t, 
even with the use of mnemonics to make some sense of nonsensi-
cal material. Books and courses on improving memory can work, 
but the methods are laborious to learn and need continual practice 
to maintain. So we put the memory in the world, writing things 
down in books, on scraps of paper, even on the backs of our hands. 
But we disguise them to thwart would-be thieves. That creates an-
other problem: How do we disguise the items, how do we hide 
them, and how do we remember what the disguise was or where 
we put it? Ah, the foibles of memory.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
89
Where should you hide something so that nobody else will find 
it? In unlikely places, right? Money is hidden in the freezer; jew-
elry in the medicine cabinet or in shoes in the closet. The key to 
the front door is hidden under the mat or just below the window 
ledge. The car key is under the bumper. The love letters are in a 
flower vase. The problem is, there aren’t that many unlikely places 
in the home. You may not remember where the love letters or keys 
are hidden, but your burglar will. Two psychologists who exam-
ined the issue described the problem this way:
There is often a logic involved in the choice of unlikely places. For exam-
ple, a friend of ours was required by her insurance company to acquire 
a safe if she wished to insure her valuable gems. Recognizing that she 
might forget the combination to the safe, she thought carefully about 
where to keep the combination. Her solution was to write it in her per-
sonal phone directory under the letter S next to “Mr. and Mrs. Safe,” as 
if it were a telephone number. There is a clear logic here: Store numer-
ical information with other numerical information. She was appalled, 
however, when she heard a reformed burglar on a daytime television 
talk show say that upon encountering a safe, he always headed for the 
phone directory because many people keep the combination there. (From 
Winograd & Soloway, 1986, “On Forgetting the Locations of Things Stored in 
Special Places.” Reprinted with permission.)
All the arbitrary things we need to remember add up to unwit-
ting tyranny. It is time for a revolt. But before we revolt, it is impor-
tant to know the solution. As noted earlier, one of my self-imposed 
rules is, “Never criticize unless you have a better alternative.” In 
this case, it is not clear what the better system might be.
Some things can only be solved by massive cultural changes, 
which probably means they will never be solved. For example, 
take the problem of identifying people by their names. People’s 
names evolved over many thousands of years, originally simply 
to distinguish people within families and groups who lived to-
gether. The use of multiple names (given names and surnames) 
is relatively recent, and even those do not distinguish one person 

90 
The Design of Everyday Things
from all the seven billion in the world. Do we write the given name 
first, or the surname? It depends upon what country you are in. 
How many names does a person have? How many characters in 
a name? What characters are legitimate? For example, can a name 
include a digit? (I know people who have tried to use such names 
as “h3nry.” I know of a company named “Autonom3.”)
How does a name translate from one alphabet to another? Some 
of my Korean friends have given names that are identical when 
written in the Korean alphabet, Hangul, but that are different 
when transliterated into English.
Many people change their names when they get married or 
divorced, and in some cultures, when they pass significant life 
events. A quick search on the Internet reveals multiple questions 
from people in Asia who are confused about how to fill out Amer-
ican or European passport forms because their names don’t corre-
spond to the requirements.
And what happens when a thief steals a person’s identity, mas-
querading as the other individual, using his or her money and 
credit? In the United States, these identity thieves can also apply 
for income tax rebates and get them, and when the legitimate tax-
payers try to get their legitimate refund, they are told they already 
received it.
I once attended a meeting of security experts that was held at 
the corporate campus of Google. Google, like most corporations, 
is very protective of its processes and advanced research projects, 
so most of the buildings were locked and guarded. Attendees of 
the security meeting were not allowed access (except those who 
worked at Google, of course). Our meetings were held in a con-
ference room in the public space of an otherwise secure building. 
But the toilets were all located inside a secure area. How did we 
manage? These world-famous, leading authorities on security fig-
ured out a solution: They found a brick and used it to prop open 
the door leading into the secure area. So much for security: Make 
something too secure, and it becomes less secure.
How do we solve these problems? How do we guarantee peo-
ple’s access to their own records, bank accounts, and computer 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
91
systems? Almost any scheme you can imagine has already been 
proposed, studied, and found to have defects. Biometric markers 
(iris or retina patterns, fingerprints, voice recognition, body type, 
DNA)? All can be forged or the systems’ databases manipulated. 
Once someone manages to fool the system, what recourse is there? 
It isn’t possible to change biometric markers, so once they point to 
the wrong person, changes are extremely difficult to make.
The strength of a password is actually pretty irrelevant because 
most passwords are obtained through “key loggers” or are stolen. 
A key logger is software hidden within your computer system that 
records what you type and sends it to the bad guys. When computer 
systems are broken into, millions of passwords might get stolen, and 
even if they are encrypted, the bad guys can often decrypt them. In 
both these cases, however secure the password, the bad guys know 
what it is.
The safest methods require multiple identifiers, the most com-
mon schemes requiring at least two different kinds: “something 
you have” plus “something you know.” The “something you have” 
is often a physical identifier, such as a card or key, perhaps even 
something implanted under the skin or a biometric identifier, such 
as fingerprints or patterns of the eye’s iris. The “something you 
know” would be knowledge in the head, most likely something 
memorized. The memorized item doesn’t have to be as secure as to-
day’s passwords because it wouldn’t work without the “something 
you have.” Some systems allow for a second, alerting password, so 
that if the bad guys try to force someone to enter a password into 
a system, the individual would use the alerting one, which would 
warn the authorities of an illegal entry.
Security poses major design issues, ones that involve complex 
technology as well as human behavior. There are deep, fundamental 
difficulties. Is there a solution? No, not yet. We will probably be stuck 
with these complexities for a long time.
The Structure of Memory
Say aloud the numbers 1, 7, 4, 2, 8. Next, without looking back, repeat 
them. Try again if you must, perhaps closing your eyes, the better 

92 
The Design of Everyday Things
to “hear” the sound still echoing in mental activity. Have someone 
read a random sentence to you. What were the words? The memory of 
the just present is available immediately, clear and complete, without 
mental effort.
What did you eat for dinner three days ago? Now the feeling is dif-
ferent. It takes time to recover the answer, which is neither as clear nor 
as complete a remembrance as that of the just present, and the recovery 
is likely to require considerable mental effort. Retrieval of the past dif-
fers from retrieval of the just present. More effort is required, less clarity 
results. Indeed, the “past” need not be so long ago. Without looking 
back, what were those digits? For some people, this retrieval now takes 
time and effort. (From Learning and Memory, Norman, 1982.)
Psychologists distinguish between two major classes of memory: 
short-term or working memory, and long-term memory. The two 
are quite different, with different implications for design.
SHORT-TERM OR WORKING MEMORY
Short-term or working memory (STM) retains the most recent ex-
periences or material that is currently being thought about. It is the 
memory of the just present. Information is retained automatically 
and retrieved without effort; but the amount of information that 
can be retained this way is severely limited. Something like five to 
seven items is the limit of STM, with the number going to ten or 
twelve if the material is continually repeated, what psychologists 
call “rehearsing.”
Multiply 27 times 293 in your head. If you try to do it the same 
way you would with paper and pencil, you will almost definitely 
be unable to hold all the digits and intervening answers within 
STM. You will fail. The traditional method of multiplying is opti-
mized for paper and pencil. There is no need to minimize the bur-
den on working memory because the numbers written on the paper 
serve this function (knowledge in the world), so the burden on 
STM, on knowledge in the head, is quite limited. There are ways 
of doing mental multiplication, but the methods are quite different 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
93
from those using paper and pencil and require considerable train-
ing and practice.
Short-term memory is invaluable in the performance of everyday 
tasks, in letting us remember words, names, phrases, and parts 
of tasks: hence its alternative name, working memory. But the ma-
terial being maintained in STM is quite fragile. Get distracted by 
some other activity and, poof, the stuff in STM disappears. It is ca-
pable of holding a postal code or telephone number from the time 
you look it up until the time it is used—as long as no distractions 
occur. Nine- or ten-digit numbers give trouble, and when the num-
ber starts to exceed that—don’t bother. Write it down. Or divide 
the number into several shorter segments, transforming the long 
number into meaningful chunks.
Memory experts use special techniques, called mnemonics, to 
remember amazingly large amounts of material, often after only 
a single exposure. One method is to transform the digits into 
meaningful segments (one famous study showed how an athlete 
thought of digit sequences as running times, and after refining 
the method over a long period, could learn incredibly long se-
quences at one glance). One traditional method used to encode 
long sequences of digits is to first transform each digit into a 
consonant, then transform the consonant sequence into a memo-
rable phrase. A standard table of conversions of digits to conso-
nants has been around for hundreds of years, cleverly designed 
to be easy to learn because the consonants can be derived from 
the shape of the digits. Thus, “1” is translated into “t” (or the 
similar-sounding “d”), “2” becomes “n,” “3” becomes “m,” “4” is 
“r,” and “5” becomes “L” (as in the Roman numeral for 50). The 
full table and the mnemonics for learning the pairings are read-
ily found on the Internet by searching for “number-consonant 
mnemonic.”
Using the number-consonant transformation, the string 
4194780135092770 translates into the letters rtbrkfstmlspncks, 
which in turn may become, “A hearty breakfast meal has pan-
cakes.” Most people are not experts at retaining long arbitrary 

94 
The Design of Everyday Things
strings of anything, so although it is interesting to observe memory 
wizards, it would be wrong to design systems that assumed this 
level of proficiency.
The capacity of STM is surprisingly difficult to measure, because 
how much can be retained depends upon the familiarity of the 
material. Retention, moreover, seems to be of meaningful items, 
rather than of some simpler measure such as seconds or individual 
sounds or letters. Retention is affected by both time and the num-
ber of items. The number of items is more important than time, 
with each new item decreasing the likelihood of remembering all 
of the preceding items. The capacity is items because people can 
remember roughly the same number of digits and words, and al-
most the same number of simple three- to five-word phrases. How 
can this be? I suspect that STM holds something akin to a pointer 
to an already encoded item in long-term memory, which means 
the memory capacity is the number of pointers it can keep. This 
would account for the fact that the length or complexity of the item 
has little impact—simply the number of items. It doesn’t neatly 
account for the fact that we make acoustical errors in STM, unless 
the pointers are held in a kind of acoustical memory. This remains 
an open topic for scientific exploration.
The traditional measures of STM capacity range from five to 
seven, but from a practical point of view, it is best to think of it as 
holding only three to five items. Does that seem too small a num-
ber? Well, when you meet a new person, do you always remember 
his or her name? When you have to dial a phone number, do you 
have to look at it several times while entering the digits? Even mi-
nor distractions can wipe out the stuff we are trying to hold on to 
in STM.
What are the design implications? Don’t count on much being 
retained in STM. Computer systems often enhance people’s frus-
tration when things go wrong by presenting critical information 
in a message that then disappears from the display just when the 
person wishes to make use of the information. So how can people 
remember the critical information? I am not surprised when peo-
ple hit, kick, or otherwise attack their computers.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
95
I have seen nurses write down critical medical information 
about their patients on their hands because the critical informa-
tion would disappear if the nurse was distracted for a moment by 
someone asking a question. The electronic medical records systems 
automatically log out users when the system does not appear to 
be in use. Why the automatic logouts? To protect patient privacy. 
The cause may be well motivated, but the action poses severe chal-
lenges to nurses who are continually being interrupted in their 
work by physicians, co-workers, or patient requests. While they 
are attending to the interruption, the system logs them out, so 
they have to start over again. No wonder these nurses wrote down 
the knowledge, although this then negated much of the value of 
the computer system in minimizing handwriting errors. But what 
else were they to do? How else to get at the critical information? 
They couldn’t remember it all: that’s why they had computers.
The limits on our short-term memory systems caused by inter-
fering tasks can be mitigated by several techniques. One is through 
the use of multiple sensory modalities. Visual information does 
not much interfere with auditory, actions do not interfere much 
with either auditory or written material. Haptics (touch) is also 
minimally interfering. To maximize efficiency of working memory 
it is best to present different information over different modali-
ties: sight, sound, touch (haptics), hearing, spatial location, and 
gestures. Automobiles should use auditory presentation of driv-
ing instructions and haptic vibration of the appropriate side of the 
driver’s seat or steering wheel to warn when drivers leave their 
lanes, or when there are other vehicles to the left or right, so as 
not to interfere with the visual processing of driving information. 
Driving is primarily visual, so the use of auditory and haptic mo-
dalities minimizes interference with the visual task.
LONG-TERM MEMORY
Long-term memory (LTM) is memory for the past. As a rule, it 
takes time for information to get into LTM and time and effort to 
get it out again. Sleep seems to play an important role in strength-
ening the memories of each day’s experiences. Note that we do 

96 
The Design of Everyday Things
not remember our experiences as an exact recording; rather, as 
bits and pieces that are reconstructed and interpreted each time 
we recover the memories, which means they are subject to all the 
distortions and changes that the human explanatory mechanism 
imposes upon life. How well we can ever recover experiences and 
knowledge from LTM is highly dependent upon how the material 
was interpreted in the first place. What is stored in LTM under one 
interpretation probably cannot be found later on when sought un-
der some other interpretation. As for how large the memory is, no-
body really knows: giga- or tera-items. We don’t even know what 
kinds of units should be used. Whatever the size, it is so large as 
not to impose any practical limit.
The role of sleep in the strengthening of LTM is still not well un-
derstood, but there are numerous papers investigating the topic. 
One possible mechanism is that of rehearsal. It has long been 
known that rehearsal of material—mentally reviewing it while still 
active in working memory (STM)—is an important component of 
the formation of long-term memory traces. “Whatever makes you 
rehearse during sleep is going to determine what you remember 
later, and conversely, what you’re going to forget,” said Professor 
Ken Paller of Northwestern University, one of the authors of a re-
cent study on the topic (Oudiette, Antony, Creery, and Paller, 2013). 
But although rehearsal in sleep strengthens memories, it might 
also falsify them: “Memories in our brain are changing all of the 
time. Sometimes you improve memory storage by rehearsing all 
the details, so maybe later you remember better—or maybe worse 
if you’ve embellished too much.”
Remember how you answered this question from Chapter 2?
In the house you lived in three houses ago, as you entered the front door, 
was the doorknob on the left or right?
For most people, the question requires considerable effort just to 
recall which house is involved, plus one of the special techniques 
described in Chapter 2 for putting yourself back at the scene and 
reconstructing the answer. This is an example of procedural mem-

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
97
ory, a memory for how we do things, as opposed to declarative 
memory, the memory for factual information. In both cases, it can 
take considerable time and effort to get to the answer. Moreover, 
the answer is not directly retrieved in a manner analogous to the 
way we read answers from books or websites. The answer is a re-
construction of the knowledge, so it is subject to biases and dis-
tortions. Knowledge in memory is meaningful, and at the time of 
retrieval, a person might subject it to a different meaningful inter-
pretation than is wholly accurate.
A major difficulty with LTM is in organization. How do we find 
the things we are trying to remember? Most people have had the 
“tip of the tongue” experience when trying to remember a name 
or word: there is a feeling of knowing, but the knowledge is not 
consciously available. Sometime later, when engaged in some 
other, different activity, the name may suddenly pop into the 
conscious mind. The way by which people retrieve the needed 
knowledge is still unknown, but probably involves some form 
of pattern-matching mechanism coupled with a confirmatory pro-
cess that checks for consistency with the required knowledge. This 
is why when you search for a name but continually retrieve the 
wrong name, you know it is wrong. Because this false retrieval im-
pedes the correct retrieval, you have to turn to some other activity 
to allow the subconscious memory retrieval process to reset itself.
Because retrieval is a reconstructive process, it can be erroneous. 
We may reconstruct events the way we would prefer to remember 
them, rather than the way we experienced them. It is relatively 
easy to bias people so that they form false memories, “remember-
ing” events in their lives with great clarity, even though they never 
occurred. This is one reason that eyewitness testimony in courts of 
law is so problematic: eyewitnesses are notoriously unreliable. A 
huge number of psychological experiments show how easy it is to 
implant false memories into people’s minds so convincingly that 
people refuse to admit that the memory is of an event that never 
happened.
Knowledge in the head is actually knowledge in memory: inter-
nal knowledge. If we examine how people use their memories and 

98 
The Design of Everyday Things
how they retrieve knowledge, we discover a number of categories. 
Two are important for us now:
1.  Memory for arbitrary things. The items to be retained seem arbi-
trary, with no meaning and no particular relationship to one another 
or to things already known.
2.  Memory for meaningful things. The items to be retained form 
meaningful relationships with themselves or with other things al-
ready known.
MEMORY FOR ARBITRARY AND MEANINGFUL THINGS
Arbitrary knowledge can be classified as the simple remembering 
of things that have no underlying meaning or structure. A good 
example is the memory of the letters of the alphabet and their or-
dering, the names of people, and foreign vocabulary, where there 
appears to be no obvious structure to the material. This also ap-
plies to the learning of the arbitrary key sequences, commands, 
gestures, and procedures of much of our modern technology: This 
is rote learning, the bane of modern existence.
Some things do require rote learning: the letters of the alphabet, for 
example, but even here we add structure to the otherwise mean-
ingless list of words, turning the alphabet into a song, using the 
natural constraints of rhyme and rhythm to create some structure.
Rote learning creates problems. First, because what is being 
learned is arbitrary, the learning is difficult: it can take con-
siderable time and effort. Second, when a problem arises, the 
memorized sequence of actions gives no hint of what has gone 
wrong, no suggestion of what might be done to fix the problem. 
Although some things are appropriate to learn by rote, most are 
not. Alas, it is still the dominant method of instruction in many 
school systems, and even for much adult training. This is how 
some people are taught to use computers, or to cook. It is how we 
have to learn to use some of the new (poorly designed) gadgets 
of our technology.
We learn arbitrary associations or sequences by artificially pro-
viding structure. Most books and courses on methods for improv-

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
99
ing memory (mnemonics) use a variety of standard methods for 
providing structure, even for things that might appear completely 
arbitrary, such as grocery lists, or matching the names of people to 
their appearance. As we saw in the discussion of these methods for 
STM, even strings of digits can be remembered if they can be asso-
ciated with meaningful structures. People who have not received 
this training or who have not invented some methods themselves 
often try to manufacture some artificial structure, but these are of-
ten rather unsatisfactory, which is why the learning is so bad.
Most things in the world have a sensible structure, which tre-
mendously simplifies the memory task. When things make sense, 
they correspond to knowledge that we already have, so the new 
material can be understood, interpreted, and integrated with pre-
viously acquired material. Now we can use rules and constraints 
to help understand what things go together. Meaningful structure 
can organize apparent chaos and arbitrariness.
Remember the discussion of conceptual models in Chapter 1? 
Part of the power of a good conceptual model lies in its ability to 
provide meaning to things. Let’s look at an example to show how 
a meaningful interpretation transforms an apparently arbitrary 
task into a natural one. Note that the appropriate interpretation 
may not at first be obvious; it, too, is knowledge and has to be 
discovered.
A Japanese colleague, Professor Yutaka Sayeki of the University 
of Tokyo, had difficulty remembering how to use the turn signal 
switch on his motorcycle’s left handlebar. Moving the switch for-
ward signaled a right turn; backward, a left turn. The meaning of 
the switch was clear and unambiguous, but the direction in which 
it should be moved was not. Sayeki kept thinking that because 
the switch was on the left handlebar, pushing it forward should 
signal a left turn. That is, he was trying to map the action “push 
the left switch forward” to the intention “turn left,” which was 
wrong. As a result, he had trouble remembering which switch di-
rection should be used for which turning direction. Most motor-
cycles have the turn-signal switch mounted differently, rotated 
90 degrees, so that moving it left signals a left turn; moving it 

100 The Design of Everyday Things
right, a right turn. This mapping is easy to learn (it is an example 
of a natural mapping, discussed at the end of this chapter). But the 
turn switch on Sayeki’s motorcycle moved forward and back, not 
left and right. How could he learn it?
Sayeki solved the problem by reinterpreting the action. Consider 
the way the handlebars of the motorcycle turn. For a left turn, the 
left handlebar moves backward. For a right turn, the left handlebar 
moves forward. The required switch movements exactly paralleled 
the handlebar movements. If the task is conceptualized as signal-
ing the direction of motion of the handlebars rather than the direc-
tion of the motorcycle, the switch motion can be seen to mimic the 
desired motion; finally we have a natural mapping.
When the motion of the switch seemed arbitrary, it was difficult to 
remember. Once Professor Sayeki had invented a meaningful relation-
ship, he found it easy to remember the proper switch operation. (Ex-
perienced riders will point out that this conceptual model is wrong: to 
turn a bike, one first steers in the opposite direction of the turn. This is 
discussed as Example 3 in the next section, “Approximate Models.”)
The design implications are clear: provide meaningful struc-
tures. Perhaps a better way is to make memory unnecessary: put 
the required information in the world. This is the power of the 
traditional graphical user interface with its old-fashioned menu 
structure. When in doubt, one could always examine all the menu 
items until the desired one was found. Even systems that do not 
use menus need to provide some structure: appropriate constraints 
and forcing functions, natural good mapping, and all the tools of 
feedforward and feedback. The most effective way of helping peo-
ple remember is to make it unnecessary.
Approximate Models: Memory in the Real World
Conscious thinking takes time and mental resources. Well-learned 
skills bypass the need for conscious oversight and control: con-
scious control is only required for initial learning and for dealing 
with unexpected situations. Continual practice automates the 
action cycle, minimizing the amount of conscious thinking and 
problem-solving required to act. Most expert, skilled behavior 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
101
works this way, whether it is playing tennis or a musical instru-
ment, or doing mathematics and science. Experts minimize the 
need for conscious reasoning. Philosopher and mathematician Al-
fred North Whitehead stated this principle over a century ago:
It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copy-books and by 
eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should culti-
vate the habit of thinking of what we are doing. The precise opposite is 
the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important 
operations which we can perform without thinking about them. (Alfred 
North Whitehead, 1911.)
One way to simplify thought is to use simplified models, ap-
proximations to the true underlying state of affairs. Science deals 
in truth, practice deals with approximations. Practitioners don’t 
need truth: they need results relatively quickly that, although in-
accurate, are “good enough” for the purpose to which they will be 
applied. Consider these examples:
EXAMPLE 1: CONVERTING TEMPERATURES 
BETWEEN FAHRENHEIT AND CELSIUS
It is now 55°F outside my home in California. What temperature is 
it in Celsius? Quick, do it in your head without using any technol-
ogy: What is the answer?
I am sure all of you remember the conversion equation: 
°C = (°F–32) × 5 / 9
Plug in 55 for °F, and ºC = (55–32) × 5 / 9 = 12.8°. But most people 
can’t do this without pencil and paper because there are too many 
intermediate numbers to maintain in STM.
Want a simpler way? Try this approximation—you can do it in 
your head, there is no need for paper or pencil:
°C = (°F–30) / 2
Plug in 55 for °F, and ºC = (55–30) / 2 = 12.5º. Is the equation an 
exact conversion? No, but the approximate answer of 12.5 is close 

102 The Design of Everyday Things
enough to the correct value of 12.8. After all, I simply wanted to 
know whether I should wear a sweater. Anything within 5ºF of the 
real value would work for this purpose.
Approximate answers are often good enough, even if technically 
wrong. This simple approximation method for temperature con-
version is “good enough” for temperatures in the normal range 
of interior and outside temperatures: it is within 3ºF (or 1.7ºC) in 
the range of –5° to 25ºC (20° to 80ºF). It gets further off at lower or 
higher temperatures, but for everyday use, it is wonderful. Ap-
proximations are good enough for practical use.
EXAMPLE 2: A MODEL OF SHORT-TERM MEMORY
Here is an approximate model for STM:
There are five memory slots in short-term memory. Each time a new 
item is added, it occupies a slot, knocking out whatever was there 
beforehand.
Is this model true? No, not a single memory researcher in the 
entire world believes this to be an accurate model of STM. But it is 
good enough for applications. Make use of this model, and your 
designs will be more usable.
EXAMPLE 3: STEERING A MOTORCYCLE
In the preceding section, we learned how Professor Sayeki mapped 
the turning directions of his motorcycle to his turn signals, enabling 
him to remember their correct usage. But there, I also pointed out 
that the conceptual model was wrong.
Why is the conceptual model for steering a motorcycle useful 
even though it is wrong? Steering a motorcycle is counterintuitive: 
to turn to the left, the handlebars must first be turned to the right. 
This is called countersteering, and it violates most people’s concep-
tual models. Why is this true? Shouldn’t we rotate the handlebars 
left to turn the bike left? The most important component of turning 
a two-wheeled vehicle is lean: when the bike is turning left, the 
rider is leaning to the left. Countersteering causes the rider to lean 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 103
properly: when the handlebars are turned to the right, the resulting 
forces upon the rider cause the body to lean left. This weight shift 
then causes the bike to turn left.
Experienced riders often do the correct operations subcon-
sciously, unaware that they start a turn by rotating the handlebars 
opposite from the intended direction, thus violating their own 
conceptual models. Motorcycle training courses have to conduct 
special exercises to convince riders that this is what they are doing.
You can test this counterintuitive concept on a bicycle or motor-
cycle by getting up to a comfortable speed, placing the palm of the 
hand on the end of the left handlebar, and gently pushing it forward. 
The handlebars and front wheel will turn to the right and the body 
will lean to the left, resulting in the bike—and the handlebars—
turning to the left.
Professor Sayeki was fully aware of this contradiction between 
his mental scheme and reality, but he wanted his memory aid to 
match his conceptual model. Conceptual models are powerful ex-
planatory devices, useful in a variety of circumstances. They do 
not have to be accurate as long as they lead to the correct behavior 
in the desired situation.
EXAMPLE 4: “GOOD ENOUGH” ARITHMETIC
Most of us can’t multiply two large numbers in our head: we forget 
where we are along the way. Memory experts can multiply two 
large numbers quickly and effortlessly in their heads, amazing au-
diences with their skills. Moreover, the numbers come out left to 
right, the way we use them, not right to left, as we write them while 
laboriously using pencil and paper to compute the answers. These 
experts use special techniques that minimize the load on working 
memory, but they do so at the cost of having to learn numerous 
special methods for different ranges and forms of problems.
Isn’t this something we should all learn? Why aren’t school 
systems teaching this? My answer is simple: Why bother? I can 
estimate the answer in my head with reasonable accuracy, often 
good enough for the purpose. When I need precision and accuracy, 
well, that’s what calculators are for.

104 The Design of Everyday Things
Remember my earlier example, to multiply 27 times 293 in your 
head? Why would anyone need to know the precise answer? 
an approximate answer is good enough, and pretty easy to get. 
Change 27 to 30, and 293 to 300: 30 × 300 = 9,000 (3 × 3 = 9, and 
add back the three zeros). The accurate answer is 7,911, so the es-
timate of 9,000 is only 14 percent too large. In many instances, this 
is good enough. Want a bit more accuracy? We changed 27 to 30 
to make the multiplication easier. That’s 3 too large. So subtract 
3 × 300 from the answer (9,000 – 900). Now we get 8,100, which is 
accurate within 2 percent.
It is rare that we need to know the answers to complex arithmetic 
problems with great precision: almost always, a rough estimate is 
good enough. When precision is required, use a calculator. That’s 
what machines are good for: providing great precision. For most 
purposes, estimates are good enough. Machines should focus on 
solving arithmetic problems. People should focus on higher-level 
issues, such as the reason the answer was needed.
Unless it is your ambition to become a nightclub performer and 
amaze people with great skills of memory, here is a simpler way 
to dramatically enhance both memory and accuracy: write things 
down. Writing is a powerful technology: why not use it? Use a pad 
of paper, or the back of your hand. Write it or type it. Use a phone 
or a computer. Dictate it. This is what technology is for.
The unaided mind is surprisingly limited. It is things that make 
us smart. Take advantage of them.
SCIENTIFIC THEORY VERSUS EVERYDAY PRACTICE
Science strives for truth. As a result, scientists are always debating, 
arguing, and disagreeing with one another. The scientific method 
is one of debate and conflict. Only ideas that have passed through 
the critical examination of multiple other scientists survive. This 
continual disagreement often seems strange to the nonscientist, for 
it appears that scientists don’t know anything. Select almost any 
topic, and you will discover that scientists who work in that area 
are continually disagreeing.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 105
But the disagreements are illusory. That is, most scientists usu-
ally agree about the broad details: their disagreements are often 
about tiny details that are important for distinguishing between 
two competing theories, but that might have very little impact in 
the real world of practice and applications.
In the real, practical world, we don’t need absolute truth: ap-
proximate models work just fine. Professor Sayeki’s simplified 
conceptual model of steering his motorcycle enabled him to re-
member which way to move the switches for his turn signals; 
the simplified equation for temperature conversion and the sim-
plified model of approximate arithmetic enabled “good enough” 
answers in the head. The simplified model of STM provides 
useful design guidance, even if it is scientifically wrong. Each of 
these approximations is wrong, yet all are valuable in minimizing 
thought, resulting in quick, easy results whose accuracy is “good 
enough.”
Knowledge in the Head
Knowledge in the world, external knowledge, is a valuable tool 
for remembering, but only if it is available at the right place, at the 
right time, in the appropriate situation. Otherwise, we must use 
knowledge in the head, in the mind. A folk saying captures this 
situation well: “Out of sight, out of mind.” Effective memory uses 
all the clues available: knowledge in the world and in the head, 
combining world and mind. We have already seen how the com-
bination allows us to function quite well in the world even though 
either source of knowledge, by itself, is insufficient.
HOW PILOTS REMEMBER WHAT 
AIR-TRAFFIC CONTROL TELLS THEM
Airplane pilots have to listen to commands from air-traffic control 
delivered at a rapid pace, and then respond accurately. Their lives 
depend upon being able to follow the instructions accurately. One 
website, discussing the problem, gave this example of instructions 
to a pilot about to take off for a flight:

106 The Design of Everyday Things
Frasca 141, cleared to Mesquite airport, via turn left heading 090, radar 
vectors to Mesquite airport. Climb and maintain 2,000. Expect 3,000 
10 minutes after departure. Departure frequency 124.3, squawk 5270.
(Typical Air traffic control sequence, usually spoken extremely rapidly. 
Text from “ATC Phraseology,” on numerous websites, with no credit for 
originator.)
“How can we remember all that,” asked one novice pilot, “when 
we are trying to focus on taking off?” Good question. Taking off 
is a busy, dangerous procedure with a lot going on, both inside 
and outside the airplane. How do pilots remember? Do they have 
superior memories?
Pilots use three major techniques:
1. They write down the critical information.
2.  They enter it into their equipment as it is told to them, so minimal 
memory is required.
3. They remember some of it as meaningful phrases.
Although to the outside observer, all the instructions and num-
bers seem random and confusing, to the pilots they are familiar 
names, familiar numbers. As one respondent pointed out, those 
are common numbers and a familiar pattern for a takeoff. “Frasca 
141” is the name of the airplane, announcing the intended recipient 
of these instructions. The first critical item to remember is to turn 
left to a compass direction of 090, then climb to an altitude of 2,000 
feet. Write those two numbers down. Enter the radio frequency 
124.3 into the radio as you hear it—but most of the time this fre-
quency is known in advance, so the radio is probably already set 
to it. All you have to do is look at it and see that it is set properly. 
Similarly, setting the “squawk box to 5270” is the special code the 
airplane sends whenever it is hit by a radar signal, identifying the 
airplane to the air-traffic controllers. Write it down, or set it into 
the equipment as it is being said. As for the one remaining item, 
“Expect 3,000 10 minutes after departure,” nothing need be done. 
This is just reassurance that in ten minutes, Frasca 141 will proba-

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
107
bly be advised to climb to 3,000 feet, but if so, there will be a new 
command to do so.
How do pilots remember? They transform the new knowledge 
they have just received into memory in the world, sometimes by 
writing, sometimes by using the airplane’s equipment.
The design implication? The easier it is to enter the information 
into the relevant equipment as it is heard, the less chance of mem-
ory error. The air-traffic control system is evolving to help. The 
instructions from the air-traffic controllers will be sent digitally, 
so that they can remain displayed on a screen as long as the pilot 
wishes. The digital transmission also makes it easy for automated 
equipment to set itself to the correct parameters. Digital transmis-
sion of the controller’s commands has some disadvantages, however. 
Other aircraft will not hear the commands, which reduces pilot 
awareness of what all the airplanes in the vicinity are going to do. 
Researchers in air-traffic control and aviation safety are looking 
into these issues. Yes, it’s a design issue.
REMINDING: PROSPECTIVE MEMORY
The phrases prospective memory or memory for the future might sound 
counterintuitive, or perhaps like the title of a science-fiction novel, 
but to memory researchers, the first phrase simply denotes the task 
of remembering to do some activity at a future time. The second 
phrase denotes planning abilities, the ability to imagine future sce-
narios. Both are closely related.
Consider reminding. Suppose you have promised to meet some 
friends at a local café on Wednesday at three thirty in the after-
noon. The knowledge is in your head, but how are you going to 
remember it at the proper time? You need to be reminded. This is 
a clear instance of prospective memory, but your ability to provide 
the required cues involves some aspect of memory for the future as 
well. Where will you be Wednesday just before the planned meet-
ing? What can you think of now that will help you remember then?
There are many strategies for reminding. One is simply to keep 
the knowledge in your head, trusting yourself to recall it at the 

108 The Design of Everyday Things
critical time. If the event is important enough, you will have no 
problem remembering it. It would be quite strange to have to set a 
calendar alert to remind yourself, “Getting married at 3 PM.”
Relying upon memory in the head is not a good technique for 
commonplace events. Ever forget a meeting with friends? It hap-
pens a lot. Not only that, but even if you might remember the 
appointment, will you remember all the details, such as that you 
intended to loan a book to one of them? Going shopping, you may 
remember to stop at the store on the way home, but will you re-
member all the items you were supposed to buy?
If the event is not personally important and several days away, it 
is wise to transfer some of the burden to the world: notes, calendar 
reminders, special cell phone or computer reminding services. You 
can ask friends to remind you. Those of us with assistants put the 
burden on them. They, in turn, write notes, enter events on calen-
dars, or set alarms on their computer systems.
Why burden other people when we can put the burden on 
the thing itself? Do I want to remember to take a book to a col-
league? I put the book someplace where I cannot fail to see it when 
I leave the house. A good spot is against the front door so that I 
can’t leave without tripping over it. Or I can put my car keys on it, 
so when I leave, I am reminded. Even if I forget, I can’t drive away 
without the keys. (Better yet, put the keys under the book, else I 
might still forget the book.)
There are two different aspects to a reminder: the signal and the 
message. Just as in doing an action we can distinguish between 
knowing what can be done and knowing how to do it, in reminding 
we must distinguish between the signal—knowing that something 
is to be remembered, and the message—remembering the infor-
mation itself. Most popular reminding methods typically provide 
only one or the other of these two critical aspects. The famous “tie 
a string around your finger” reminder provides only the signal. It 
gives no hint of what is to be remembered. Writing a note to yourself 
provides only the message; it doesn’t remind you ever to look at it. 
The ideal reminder has to have both components: the signal that 
something is to be remembered, and then the message of what it is.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 109
The signal that something is to be remembered can be a suffi-
cient memory cue if it occurs at the correct time and place. Being 
reminded too early or too late is just as useless as having no re-
minder. But if the reminder comes at the correct time or location, 
the environmental cue can suffice to provide enough knowledge to 
aid retrieval of the to-be-remembered item. Time-based reminders 
can be effective: the bing of my cell phone reminds me of the next 
appointment. Location-based reminders can be effective in giving 
the cue at the precise place where it will be needed. All the knowl-
edge needed can reside in the world, in our technology.
The need for timely reminders has created loads of products that 
make it easier to put the knowledge in the world—timers, diaries, 
calendars. The need for electronic reminders is well known, as the 
proliferation of apps for smart phones, tablets, and other portable 
devices attests. Yet surprisingly in this era of screen-based devices, 
paper tools are still enormously popular and effective, as the num-
ber of paper-based diaries and reminders indicates.
The sheer number of different reminder methods also indicates 
that there is indeed a great need for assistance in remembering, but 
that none of the many schemes and devices is completely satisfac-
tory. After all, if any one of them was, then we wouldn’t need so 
many. The less effective ones would disappear and new schemes 
would not continually be invented.
The Tradeoff Between Knowledge 
in the World and in the Head
Knowledge in the world and knowledge in the head are both es-
sential in our daily functioning. But to some extent we can choose 
to lean more heavily on one or the other. That choice requires a 
tradeoff—gaining the advantages of knowledge in the world 
means losing the advantages of knowledge in the head (Table 3.1).
Knowledge in the world acts as its own reminder. It can help 
us recover structures that we otherwise would forget. Knowledge 
in the head is efficient: no search and interpretation of the envi-
ronment is required. The tradeoff is that to use our knowledge in 
the head, we have to be able to store and retrieve it, which might 

110 The Design of Everyday Things
require considerable amounts of learning. Knowledge in the world 
requires no learning, but can be more difficult to use. And it relies 
heavily upon the continued physical presence of the knowledge; 
change the environment and the knowledge might be lost. Perfor-
mance relies upon the physical stability of the task environment.
As we just discussed, reminders provide a good example of the 
relative tradeoffs between knowledge in the world versus in 
the head. Knowledge in the world is accessible. It is self-reminding. 
It is always there, waiting to be seen, waiting to be used. That is 
why we structure our offices and our places of work so carefully. 
We put piles of papers where they can be seen, or if we like a clean 
desk, we put them in standardized locations and teach ourselves 
(knowledge in the head) to look in these standard places routinely. 
We use clocks and calendars and notes. Knowledge in the mind 
Knowledge in the World  
Knowledge in the Head
Information is readily and easily  
Material in working memory is read- 
available whenever perceivable. 
ily available. Otherwise considerable  
 
search and effort may be required.
Interpretation substitutes for  
Requires learning, which can be
learning. How easy it is to interpret  
considerable. Learning is made 
knowledge in the world depends  
easier if there is meaning or
upon the skill of the designer. 
structure to the material or if there  
 
is a good conceptual model.
Slowed by the need to find and  
Can be efficient, especially if so
interpret the knowledge. 
well-learned that it is automated.
Ease of use at first encounter is high. 
Ease of use at first encounter is low.
Can be ugly and inelegant,  
Nothing needs to be visible, which
especially if there is a need to  
gives more freedom to the designer.
maintain a lot of knowledge. This  
This leads to cleaner, more pleas-
can lead to clutter. Here is where the  ing appearance—at the cost of ease
skills of the graphics and industrial  
of use at first encounter, learning,
designer play major roles. 
and remembering.
TABLE 3.1. Tradeoffs Between Knowledge in the World and in the Head

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
111
is ephemeral: here now, gone later. We can’t count on something 
being present in mind at any particular time, unless it is triggered 
by some external event or unless we deliberately keep it in mind 
through constant repetition (which then prevents us from having 
other conscious thoughts). Out of sight, out of mind.
As we move away from many physical aids, such as printed 
books and magazines, paper notes, and calendars, much of what 
we use today as knowledge in the world will become invisible. Yes, 
it will all be available on display screens, but unless the screens 
always show this material, we will have added to the burden of 
memory in the head. We may not have to remember all the details 
of the information stored away for us, but we will have to remem-
ber that it is there, that it needs to be redisplayed at the appropriate 
time for use or for reminding.
Memory in Multiple Heads, Multiple Devices
If knowledge and structure in the world can combine with knowl-
edge in the head to enhance memory performance, why not use 
the knowledge in multiple heads, or in multiple devices?
Most of us have experienced the power of multiple minds in 
remembering things. You are with a group of friends trying to re-
member the name of a movie, or perhaps a restaurant, and failing. 
But others try to help. The conversation goes something like this:
“That new place where they grill meat”
“Oh, the Korean barbecue on Fifth Street?”
“No, not Korean, South American, um,“
“Oh, yeah, Brazilian, it’s what’s its name?”
“Yes, that’s the one!”
“Pampas something.”
“Yes, Pampas Chewy. Um, Churry, um,”
“Churrascaria. Pampas Churrascaria.”
How many people are involved? It could be any number, but the 
point is that each adds their bit of knowledge, slowly constraining 
the choices, recalling something that no single one of them could 

112 The Design of Everyday Things
have done alone. Daniel Wegner, a Harvard professor of psychol-
ogy, has called this “transactive memory.”
Of course, we often turn to technological aids to answer our 
questions, reaching for our smart devices to search our electronic 
resources and the Internet. When we expand from seeking aids 
from other people to seeking aids from our technologies, which 
Wegner labels as “cybermind,” the principle is basically the same. 
The cybermind doesn’t always produce the answer, but it can 
produce sufficient clues so that we can generate the answer. Even 
where the technology produces the answer, it is often buried in a 
list of potential answers, so we have to use our own knowledge—
or the knowledge of our friends—to determine which of the poten-
tial items is the correct one.
What happens when we rely too much upon external knowledge, 
be it knowledge in the world, knowledge of friends, or knowledge 
provided by our technology? On the one hand, there no such thing 
as “too much.” The more we learn to use these resources, the bet-
ter our performance. External knowledge is a powerful tool for 
enhanced intelligence. On the other hand, external knowledge is 
often erroneous: witness the difficulties of trusting online sources 
and the controversies that arise over Wikipedia entries. It doesn’t 
matter where our knowledge comes from. What matters is the 
quality of the end result.
In an earlier book, Things That Make Us Smart, I argued that it 
is this combination of technology and people that creates super-
powerful beings. Technology does not make us smarter. People 
do not make technology smart. It is the combination of the two, 
the person plus the artifact, that is smart. Together, with our tools, 
we are a powerful combination. On the other hand, if we are sud-
denly without these external devices, then we don’t do very well. 
In many ways, we do become less smart.
Take away their calculator, and many people cannot do arith-
metic. Take away a navigation system, and people can no longer 
get around, even in their own cities. Take away a phone’s or com-
puter’s address book, and people can no longer reach their friends 
(in my case, I can no longer remember my own phone number). 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
113
Without a keyboard, I can’t write. Without a spelling corrector, I 
can’t spell.
What does all of this mean? Is this bad or good? It is not a new 
phenomenon. Take away our gas supply and electrical service and 
we might starve. Take away our housing and clothes and we might 
freeze. We rely on commercial stores, transportation, and gov-
ernment services to provide us with the essentials for living. Is 
this bad?
The partnership of technology and people makes us smarter, 
stronger, and better able to live in the modern world. We have 
become reliant on the technology and we can no longer function 
without it. The dependence is even stronger today than ever before, 
including mechanical, physical things such as housing, clothing, 
heating, food preparation and storage, and transportation. Now 
this range of dependencies is extended to information services as 
well: communication, news, entertainment, education, and social 
interaction. When things work, we are informed, comfortable, and 
effective. When things break, we may no longer be able to function. 
This dependence upon technology is very old, but every decade, 
the impact covers more and more activities.
Natural Mapping
Mapping, a topic from Chapter 1, provides a good example of 
the power of combining knowledge in the world with that in the 
head. Did you ever turn the wrong burner of a stove on or off? 
You would think that doing it correctly would be an easy task. 
A simple control turns the burner on, controls the temperature, 
and allows the burner to be turned off. In fact, the task appears to 
be so simple that when people do it wrong, which happens more 
frequently than you might have thought, they blame themselves: 
“How could I be so stupid as to do this simple task wrong?” they 
think to themselves. Well, it isn’t so simple, and it is not their fault: 
even as simple a device as the everyday kitchen stove is frequently 
badly designed, in a way that guarantees the errors.
Most stoves have only four burners and four controls in one-
to-one correspondence. Why is it so hard to remember four things? 

114 The Design of Everyday Things
In principle, it should be easy to remember the relationship be-
tween the controls and the burners. In practice, however, it is al-
most impossible. Why? Because of the poor mappings between the 
controls and the burners. Look at Figure 3.2, which depicts four 
possible mappings between the four burners and controls. Figures 
3.2A and B show how not to map one dimension onto two. Figures 
3.2C and D show two ways of doing it properly: arrange the con-
trols in two dimensions (C) or stagger the burners (D) so they can 
be ordered left to right.
BACK
FRONT
BACK
FRONT
BACK
FRONT
BACK
FRONT
FIGURE 3.2. Mappings of Stove Controls with Burners. With the tradi-
tional arrangement of stove burners shown in Figures A and B, the burners 
are arranged in a rectangle and the controls in a linear line. Usually there 
is a partial natural mapping, with the left two controls operating the left 
burners and the right two controls operating the right burners. Even so, 
there are four possible mappings of controls to burners, all four of which 
are used on commercial stoves. The only way to  know which control 
works which burner is to read the labels. But if the controls were also in a 
rectangle (Figure C) or the burners staggered (Figure D), no labels would 
be needed. Learning would be easy; errors would be reduced.
A.
C.
B.
D.

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
115
To make matters worse, stove manufacturers cannot agree upon 
what the mapping should be. If all stoves used the same arrange-
ment of controls, even if it is unnatural, everyone could learn it 
once and forever after get things right. As the legend of Figure 
3.2 points out, even if the stove manufacturer is nice enough to 
ensure that each pair of controls operates the pair of burners on its 
side, there are still four possible mappings. All four are in common 
use. Some stoves arrange the controls in a vertical line, giving even 
more possible mappings. Every stove seems to be different. Even 
different stoves from the same manufacturer differ. No wonder 
people have trouble, leading their food to go uncooked, and in the 
worst cases, leading to fire.
Natural mappings are those where the relationship between the 
controls and the object to be controlled (the burners, in this case) 
is obvious. Depending upon circumstances, natural mappings will 
employ spatial cues. Here are three levels of mapping, arranged in 
decreasing effectiveness as memory aids:
•  Best mapping: Controls are mounted directly on the item to be con-
trolled.
•   Second-best mapping: Controls are as close as possible to the object 
to be controlled.
•  Third-best mapping: Controls are arranged in the same spatial con-
figuration as the objects to be controlled.
In the ideal and second-best cases, the mappings are indeed clear 
and unambiguous.
Want excellent examples of natural mapping? Consider gesture-
controlled faucets, soap dispensers, and hand dryers. Put your 
hands under the faucet or soap dispenser and the water or soap 
appears. Wave your hand in front of the paper towel dispenser 
and out pops a new towel, or in the case of blower-controlled 
hand dryers, simply put your hands beneath or into the dryer 
and the drying air turns on. Mind you, although the mappings of 
these devices are appropriate, they do have problems. First, they 
often lack signifiers, hence they lack discoverability. The controls 

116 The Design of Everyday Things
are often invisible, so we sometimes put our hands under faucets 
expecting to receive water, but wait in vain: these are mechan-
ical faucets that require handle turning. Or the water turns on 
and then stops, so we wave our hands up and down, hoping to 
find the precise location where the water turns on. When I wave 
my hand in front of the towel dispenser but get no towel, I do 
not know whether this means the dispenser is broken or out of 
towels; or that I did the waving wrong, or in the wrong place; or 
that maybe this doesn’t work by gesture, but I must push, pull, 
or turn something. The lack of signifiers is a real drawback. These 
devices aren’t perfect, but at least they got the mapping right.
In the case of stove controls, it is obviously not possible to put 
the controls directly on the burners. In most cases, it is also dan-
gerous to put the controls adjacent to the burners, not only for fear 
of burning the person using the stove, but also because it would 
interfere with the placement of cooking utensils. Stove controls are 
usually situated on the side, back, or front panel of the stove, in 
which case they ought to be arranged in spatial harmony with the 
burners, as in Figures 3.2 C and D.
With a good natural mapping, the relationship of the controls to 
the burner is completely contained in the world; the load on hu-
man memory is much reduced. With a bad mapping, however, a 
burden is placed upon memory, leading to more mental effort and 
a higher chance of error. Without a good mapping, people new to 
the stove cannot readily determine which burner goes with which 
control and even frequent users will still occasionally err.
Why do stove designers insist on arranging the burners in a 
two-dimensional rectangular pattern, and the controls in a one-
dimensional row? We have known for roughly a century just 
how bad such an arrangement is. Sometimes the stove comes 
with clever little diagrams to indicate which control works which 
burner. Sometimes there are labels. But the proper natural map-
ping requires no diagrams, no labels, and no instructions.
The irony about stove design is that it isn’t hard to do right. Text-
books of ergonomics, human factors, psychology, and industrial 
engineering have been demonstrating both the problems and the 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
117
solutions for over fifty years. Some stove manufacturers do use 
good designs. Oddly, sometimes the best and the worst designs are 
manufactured by the same companies and are illustrated side by 
side in their catalogs. Why do users still purchase stoves that cause 
so much trouble? Why not revolt and refuse to buy them unless the 
controls have an intelligent relationship to the burners?
The problem of the stovetop may seem trivial, but similar map-
ping problems exist in many situations, including commercial and 
industrial settings, where selecting the wrong button, dial, or lever 
can lead to major economic impact or even fatalities.
In industrial settings good mapping is of special importance, 
whether it is a remotely piloted airplane, a large building crane 
where the operator is at a distance from the objects being manip-
ulated, or even in an automobile where the driver might wish to 
control temperature or windows while driving at high speeds or in 
crowded streets. In these cases, the best controls usually are spatial 
mappings of the controls to the items being controlled. We see this 
done properly in most automobiles where the driver can operate 
the windows through switches that are arranged in spatial corre-
spondence to the windows.
Usability is not often thought about during the purchasing pro-
cess. Unless you actually test a number of units in a realistic envi-
ronment, doing typical tasks, you are not likely to notice the ease or 
difficulty of use. If you just look at something, it appears straight-
forward enough, and the array of wonderful features seems to be 
a virtue. You may not realize that you won’t be able to figure out 
how to use those features. I urge you to test products before you buy 
them. Before purchasing a new stovetop, pretend you are cooking 
a meal. Do it right there in the store. Do not be afraid to make mis-
takes or ask stupid questions. Remember, any problems you have 
are probably the design’s fault, not yours.
A major obstacle is that often the purchaser is not the user. Ap-
pliances may be in a home when people move in. In the office, the 
purchasing department orders equipment based upon such factors 
as price, relationships with the supplier, and perhaps reliability: 
usability is seldom considered. Finally, even when the purchaser 

118 The Design of Everyday Things
is the end user, it is sometimes necessary to trade off one desirable 
feature for an undesirable one. In the case of my family’s stove, 
we did not like the arrangement of controls, but we bought the 
stove anyway: we traded off the layout of the burner controls for 
another design feature that was more important to us and available 
only from one manufacturer. But why should we have to make a 
tradeoff? It wouldn’t be hard for all stove manufacturers to use 
natural mappings, or at the least, to standardize their mappings.
Culture and Design: 
Natural Mappings Can Vary with Culture
I was in Asia, giving a talk. My computer was connected to a pro-
jector and I was given a remote controller for advancing through 
the illustrations for my talk. This one had two buttons, one above 
the other. The title was already displayed on the screen, so when I 
started, all I had to do was to advance to the first photograph in my 
presentation, but when I pushed the upper button, to my amaze-
ment I went backward through my illustrations, not forward.
“How could this happen?” I wondered. To me, top means forward; 
bottom, backward. The mapping is clear and obvious. If the buttons 
had been side by side, then the control would have been ambigu-
ous: which comes first, right or left? This controller appeared to use 
an appropriate mapping of top and bottom. Why was it working 
backward? Was this yet another example of poor design?
I decided to ask the audience. I showed them the controller and 
asked: “To get to my next picture, which button should I push, the 
top or the bottom?” To my great surprise, the audience was split in 
their responses. Many thought that it should be the top button, just 
as I had thought. But a large number thought it should be the bottom.
What’s the correct answer? I decided to ask this question to my 
audiences around the world. I discovered that they, too, were split 
in their opinions: some people firmly believe that it is the top but-
ton and some, just as firmly, believe it is the bottom button. Every-
one is surprised to learn that someone else might think differently.
I was puzzled until I realized that this was a point-of-view prob-
lem, very similar to the way different cultures view time. In some 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
119
cultures, time is represented mentally as if it were a road stretching 
out ahead of the person. As a person moves through time, the per-
son moves forward along the time line. Other cultures use the same 
representation, except now it is the person who is fixed and it is 
time that moves: an event in the future moves toward the person.
This is precisely what was happening with the controller. Yes, 
the top button does cause something to move forward, but the 
question is, what is moving? Some people thought that the person 
would move through the images, other people thought the images 
would move. People who thought that they moved through the 
images wanted the top button to indicate the next one. People who 
thought it was the illustrations that moved would get to the next 
image by pushing the bottom button, causing the images to move 
toward them.
Some cultures represent the time line vertically: up for the future, 
down for the past. Other cultures have rather different views. For 
example, does the future lie ahead or behind? To most of us, the 
question makes no sense: of course, the future lies ahead—the past 
is behind us. We speak this way, discussing the “arrival” of the fu-
ture; we are pleased that many unfortunate events of the past have 
been “left behind.”
But why couldn’t the past be in front of us and the future be-
hind? Does that sound strange? Why? We can see what is in front 
of us, but not what is behind, just as we can remember what hap-
pened in the past, but we can’t remember the future. Not only that, 
but we can remember recent events much more clearly than long-
past events, captured neatly by the visual metaphor in which the 
past lines up before us, the most recent events being the closest 
so that they are clearly perceived (remembered), with long-past 
events far in the distance, remembered and perceived with diffi-
culty. Still sound weird? This is how the South American Indian 
group, the Aymara, represent time. When they speak of the future, 
they use the phrase back days and often gesture behind them. Think 
about it: it is a perfectly logical way to view the world.
If time is displayed along a horizontal line, does it go from left to 
right or right to left? Either answer is correct because the choice is 

120 The Design of Everyday Things
arbitrary, just as the choice of whether text should be strung along 
the page from left to right or right to left is arbitrary. The choice of 
text direction also corresponds to people’s preference for time di-
rection. People whose native language is Arabic or Hebrew prefer 
time to flow from right to left (the future being toward the left), 
whereas those who use a left-to-right writing system have time 
flowing in the same direction, so the future is to the right.
But wait: I’m not finished. Is the time line relative to the person 
or relative to the environment? In some Australian Aborigine socie-
ties, time moves relative to the environment based on the direction 
in which the sun rises and sets. Give people from this community 
a set of photographs structured in time (for example, photographs 
of a person at different ages or a child eating some food) and ask 
them to order the photographs in time. People from technological 
cultures would order the pictures from left to right, most recent 
photo to the right or left, depending upon how their printed lan-
guage was written. But people from these Australian communities 
would order them east to west, most recent to the west. If the per-
son were facing south, the photo would be ordered left to right. If 
the person were facing north, the photos would be ordered right to 
left. If the person were facing west, the photos would be ordered 
along a vertical line extending from the body outward, outwards 
being the most recent. And, of course, were the person facing east, 
the photos would also be on a line extending out from the body, 
but with the most recent photo closest to the body.
The choice of metaphor dictates the proper design for interac-
tion. Similar issues show up in other domains. Consider the stan-
dard problem of scrolling the text in a computer display. Should 
the scrolling control move the text or the window? This was a 
fierce debate in the early years of display terminals, long before the 
development of modern computer systems. Eventually, there was 
mutual agreement that the cursor arrow keys—and then, later on, 
the mouse—would follow the moving window metaphor. Move 
the window down to see more text at the bottom of the screen. 
What this meant in practice is that to see more text at the bottom 
of the screen, move the mouse down, which moves the window 

 
three: Knowledge in the Head and in the World 
121
down, so that the text moves up: the mouse and the text move 
in opposite directions. With the moving text metaphor, the mouse 
and the text move in the same directions: move the mouse up and 
the text moves up. For over two decades, everyone moved the 
scrollbars and mouse down in order to make the text move up.
But then smart displays with touch-operated screens arrived. 
Now it was only natural to touch the text with the fingers and 
move it up, down, right, or left directly: the text moved in the same 
direction as the fingers. The moving text metaphor became prev-
alent. In fact, it was no longer thought of as a metaphor: it was 
real. But as people switched back and forth between traditional 
computer systems that used the moving window metaphor and 
touch-screen systems that used the moving text model, confusion 
reigned. As a result, one major manufacturer of both computers 
and smart screens, Apple, switched everything to the moving text 
model, but no other company followed Apple’s lead. As I write 
this, the confusion still exists. How will it end? I predict the de-
mise of the moving window metaphor: touch-screens and control 
pads will dominate, which will cause the moving text model to 
take over. All systems will move the hands or controls in the same 
direction as they wish the screen images to move. Predicting tech-
nology is relatively easy compared to predictions of human behav-
ior, or in this case, the adoption of societal conventions. Will this 
prediction be true? You will be able to judge for yourself.
Similar issues occurred in aviation with the pilot’s attitude indi-
cator, the display that indicates the airplane’s orientation (roll or 
bank and pitch). The instrument shows a horizontal line to indicate 
the horizon with a silhouette of an airplane seen from behind. If 
the wings are level and on a line with the horizon, the airplane 
is flying in level flight. Suppose the airplane turns to the left, 
so it banks (tilts) left. What should the display look like? Should 
it show a left-tilting airplane against a fixed horizon, or a fixed 
airplane against a right-tilting horizon? The first is correct from the 
viewpoint of someone watching the airplane from behind, where 
the horizon is always horizontal: this type of display is called 
outside-in. The second is correct from the viewpoint of the pilot, 

122 The Design of Everyday Things
where the airplane is always stable and fixed in position, so that 
when the airplane banks, the horizon tilts: this type of display is 
called inside-out.
In all these cases, every point of view is correct. It all depends 
upon what you consider to be moving. What does all this mean for 
design? What is natural depends upon point of view, the choice 
of metaphor, and therefore, the culture. The design difficulties 
occur when there is a switch in metaphors. Airplane pilots have 
to undergo training and testing before they are allowed to switch 
from one set of instruments (those with an outside-in metaphor, for 
example) to the other (those with the inside-out metaphor). When 
countries decided to switch which side of the road cars would 
drive on, the temporary confusion that resulted was dangerous. 
(Most places that switched moved from left-side driving to right-
side, but a few, notably Okinawa, Samoa, and East Timor, switched 
from right to left.) In all these cases of convention switches, people 
eventually adjusted. It is possible to break convention and switch 
metaphors, but expect a period of confusion until people adapt to 
the new system.

 
 123
C H A P T E R  F O U R
KNOWING WHAT 
TO DO: CONSTRAINTS, 
DISCOVERABILITY, 
AND FEEDBACK
How do we determine how to operate something that 
we have never seen before? We have no choice but to 
combine knowledge in the world with that in the head. 
Knowledge in the world includes perceived affordances 
and signifiers, the mappings between the parts that appear to 
be controls or places to manipulate and the resulting actions, 
and the physical constraints that limit what can be done. 
Knowledge in the head includes conceptual models; cultural, 
semantic, and logical constraints on behavior; and analogies 
between the current situation and previous experiences with 
other situations. Chapter 3 was devoted to a discussion of how 
we acquire knowledge and use it. There, the major emphasis 
was upon the knowledge in the head. This chapter focuses 
upon the knowledge in the world: how designers can provide 
the critical information that allows people to know what to do, 
even when experiencing an unfamiliar device or situation.
Let me illustrate with an example: building a motorcycle 
from a Lego set (a children’s construction toy). The Lego mo-
torcycle shown in Figure 4.1 has fifteen pieces, some rather spe-
cialized. Of those fifteen pieces, only two pairs are alike—two 
rectangles with the word police on them, and the two hands of 

124 The Design of Everyday Things
the policeman. Other pieces match one another in size and shape 
but are different colors. So, a number of the pieces are physically 
interchangeable—that is, the physical constraints are not sufficient 
to identify where they go—but the appropriate role for every single 
piece of the motorcycle is still unambiguously determined. How? 
By combining cultural, semantic, and logical constraints with the 
physical ones. As a result, it is possible to construct the motorcycle 
without any instructions or assistance.
In fact, I did the experiment. I asked people to put together the 
parts; they had never seen the finished structure and were not even 
told that it was a motorcycle (although it didn’t take them long to 
figure this out). Nobody had any difficulty.
The visible affordances of the pieces were important in determin-
ing just how they fit together. The cylinders and holes character-
istic of Lego suggested the major construction rule. The sizes and 
shapes of the parts suggested their operation. Physical constraints 
limited what parts would fit together. Cultural and semantic con-
straints provided strong restrictions on what would make sense 
for all but one of the remaining pieces, and with just one piece left 
and only one place it could possibly go, simple logic dictated the 
FIGURE 4.1. Lego Motorcycle. The toy Lego motorcycle is shown assembled (A) and 
in pieces (B). It has fifteen pieces so cleverly constructed that even an adult can put 
them together. The design exploits constraints to specify just which pieces fit where. 
Physical constraints limit alternative placements. Cultural and semantic constraints pro-
vide the necessary clues for further decisions. For example, cultural constraints dictate 
the placement of the three lights (red, blue, and yellow) and semantic constraints stop 
the user from putting the head backward on the body or the pieces labeled “police” 
upside down.
A.
B.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 125
placement. These four classes of constraints—physical, cultural, 
semantic, and logical—seem to be universal, appearing in a wide 
variety of situations.
Constraints are powerful clues, limiting the set of possible ac-
tions. The thoughtful use of constraints in design lets people read-
ily determine the proper course of action, even in a novel situation.
Four Kinds of Constraints: 
Physical, Cultural, Semantic, and Logical
PHYSICAL CONSTRAINTS
Physical limitations constrain possible operations. Thus, a large 
peg cannot fit into a small hole. With the Lego motorcycle, the 
windshield would fit in only one place. The value of physical con-
straints is that they rely upon properties of the physical world for 
their operation; no special training is necessary. With the proper 
use of physical constraints, there should be only a limited number 
of possible actions—or, at least, desired actions can be made obvi-
ous, usually by being especially salient.
Physical constraints are made more effective and useful if they are 
easy to see and interpret, for then the set of actions is restricted be-
fore anything has been done. Otherwise, a physical constraint pre-
vents a wrong action from succeeding only after it has been tried.
The traditional cylindrical battery, Figure 4.2A, lacks sufficient 
physical constraints. It can be put into battery compartments in 
two orientations: one that is correct, the other of which can damage 
the equipment. The instructions in Figure 4.2B show that polarity 
is important, yet the inferior signifiers inside the battery compart-
ment makes it very difficult to determine the proper orientation 
for the batteries.
Why not design a battery with which it would be impossible to 
make an error: use physical constraints so that the battery will fit 
only if properly oriented. Alternatively, design the battery or the 
electrical contacts so that orientation doesn’t matter.
Figure 4.3 shows a battery that has been designed so that orien-
tation is irrelevant. Both ends of the battery are identical, with the 

126 The Design of Everyday Things
positive and negative terminals for the battery being its center and 
middle rings, respectively. The contact for the positive polarity is 
designed so it contacts only the center ring. Similarly, the contact 
for negative polarity touches only the middle ring. Although this 
seems to solve the problem, I have only seen this one example of 
such a battery: they are not widely available or used.
Another alternative is to invent battery contacts that allow our 
existing cylindrical batteries to be inserted in either orientation yet 
still work properly: Microsoft has invented this kind of contact, 
which it calls InstaLoad, and is attempting to convince equipment 
manufacturers to use it.
A third alternative is to design the shape of the battery so that 
it can fit in only one way. Most plug-in components do this well, 
using shapes, notches, and protrusions to constrain insertion 
 FIGURE 4.2. Cylindrical Battery: Where Constraints Are Needed. Figure A shows 
the traditional cylindrical battery that requires correct orientation in the slot to work 
properly (and to avoid damaging the equipment). But look at Figure B, which shows 
where two batteries are to be installed. The instructions from the manual are shown as 
an overlay to the photograph. They seem simple, but can you see into the dark recess to 
figure out which end of each battery goes where? Nope. The lettering is black against 
black: slightly raised shapes in the dark plastic.
 FIGURE 4.3. Making Battery Orientation 
Irrelevant. This photograph shows a battery 
whose orientation doesn’t matter; it can be 
inserted into the equipment in either possi-
ble direction. How? Each end of the battery 
has the same three concentric rings, with the 
center one on both ends being the “plus” ter-
minal and the middle one being the “minus” 
terminal.
A.
B.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 127
to a single orientation. So why can’t our everyday batteries be 
the same?
Why does inelegant design persist for so long? This is called the 
legacy problem, and it will come up several times in this book. Too 
many devices use the existing standard—that is the legacy. If the 
symmetrical cylindrical battery were changed, there would also 
have to be a major change in a huge number of products. The new 
batteries would not work in older equipment, nor the old batteries 
in new equipment. Microsoft’s design of contacts would allow us 
to continue to use the same batteries we are used to, but the prod-
ucts would have to switch to the new contacts. Two years after Mi-
crosoft’s introduction of InstaLoad, despite positive press, I could 
find no products that use them—not even Microsoft products.
Locks and keys suffer from a similar problem. Although it is usu-
ally easy to distinguish the smooth top part of a key from its jagged 
underside, it is difficult to tell from the lock just which orienta-
tion of the key is required, especially in dark environments. Many 
electrical and electronic plugs and sockets have the same problem. 
Although they do have physical constraints to prevent improper 
insertion, it is often extremely difficult to perceive their correct ori-
entation, especially when keyholes and electronic sockets are in 
difficult-to-reach, dimly lit locations. Some devices, such as USB 
plugs, are constrained, but the constraint is so subtle that it takes 
much fussing and fumbling to find the correct orientation. Why 
aren’t all these devices orientation insensitive?
It is not difficult to design keys and plugs that work regardless of 
how they are inserted. Automobile keys that are insensitive to the 
orientation have long existed, but not all manufacturers use them. 
Similarly, many electrical connectors are insensitive to orientation, 
but again, only a few manufacturers use them. Why the resistance? 
Some of it results from the legacy concerns about the expense of 
massive change. But much seems to be a classic example of cor-
porate thinking: “This is the way we have always done things. We 
don’t care about the customer.” It is, of course, true that difficulty 
in inserting keys, batteries, or plugs is not a big enough issue to 
affect the decision of whether to purchase something, but still, the 

128 The Design of Everyday Things
lack of attention to customer needs on even simple things is often 
symptomatic of larger issues that have greater impact. 
Note that a superior solution would be to solve the fundamental 
need—solving the root need. After all, we don’t really care about 
keys and locks: what we need is some way of ensuring that only 
authorized people can get access to whatever is being locked. 
Instead of redoing the shapes of physical keys, make them irrel-
evant. Once this is recognized, a whole set of solutions present 
themselves: combination locks that do not require keys, or key-
less locks that can be operated only by authorized people. One 
method is through possession of an electronic wireless device, 
such as the identification badges that unlock doors when they 
are moved close to a sensor, or automobile keys that can stay in 
the pocket or carrying case. Biometric devices could identify the 
person through face or voice recognition, fingerprints, or other 
biometric measures, such as iris patterns. This approach is dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, page 91.
CULTURAL CONSTRAINTS
Each culture has a set of allowable actions for social situations. 
Thus, in our own culture we know how to behave in a restaurant—
even one we have never been to before. This is how we manage 
to cope when our host leaves us alone in a strange room, at a 
strange party, with strange people. And this is why we sometimes 
feel frustrated, so incapable of action, when we are confronted 
with a restaurant or group of people from an unfamiliar culture, 
where our normally accepted behavior is clearly inappropriate and 
frowned upon. Cultural issues are at the root of many of the prob-
lems we have with new machines: there are as yet no universally 
accepted conventions or customs for dealing with them.
Those of us who study these things believe that guidelines for 
cultural behavior are represented in the mind by schemas, knowl-
edge structures that contain the general rules and information nec-
essary for interpreting situations and for guiding behavior. In some 
stereotypical situations (for example, in a restaurant), the schemas 
may be very specialized. Cognitive scientists Roger Schank and 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 129
Bob Abelson proposed that in these cases we follow “scripts” that 
can guide the sequence of behavior. The sociologist Erving Goff-
man calls the social constraints on acceptable behavior “frames,” 
and he shows how they govern behavior even when a person is in 
a novel situation or novel culture. Danger awaits those who delib-
erately violate the frames of a culture.
The next time you are in an elevator, try violating cultural norms 
and see how uncomfortable that makes you and the other people 
in the elevator. It doesn’t take much: Stand facing the rear. Or look 
directly at some of the passengers. In a bus or streetcar, give your 
seat to the next athletic-looking person you see (the act is especially 
effective if you are elderly, pregnant, or disabled).
In the case of the Lego motorcycle of Figure 4.1, cultural con-
straints determine the locations of the three lights of the motor-
cycle, which are otherwise physically interchangeable. Red is the 
culturally defined standard for a brake light, which is placed in 
the rear. And a police vehicle often has a blue flashing light on top. 
As for the yellow piece, this is an interesting example of cultural 
change: few people today remember that yellow used to be a stan-
dard headlight color in Europe and a few other locations (Lego 
comes from Denmark). Today, European and North American stan-
dards require white headlights. As a result, figuring out that the 
yellow piece represents a headlight on the front of the motorcycle 
is no longer as easy as it used to be. Cultural constraints are likely 
to change with time.
SEMANTIC CONSTRAINTS
Semantics is the study of meaning. Semantic constraints are those 
that rely upon the meaning of the situation to control the set of 
possible actions. In the case of the motorcycle, there is only one 
meaningful location for the rider, who must sit facing forward. The 
purpose of the windshield is to protect the rider’s face, so it must 
be in front of the rider. Semantic constraints rely upon our knowl-
edge of the situation and of the world. Such knowledge can be a 
powerful and important clue. But just as cultural constraints can 
change with time, so, too, can semantic ones. Extreme sports push 

130 The Design of Everyday Things
the boundaries of what we think of as meaningful and sensible. 
New technologies change the meanings of things. And creative 
people continually change how we interact with our technologies 
and one another. When cars become fully automated, communi-
cating among themselves with wireless networks, what will be the 
meaning of the red lights on the rear of the auto? That the car is 
braking? But for whom would the signal be intended? The other 
cars would already know. The red light would become meaning-
less, so it could either be removed or it could be redefined to indi-
cate some other condition. The meanings of today may not be the 
meanings of the future.
LOGICAL CONSTRAINTS
The blue light of the Lego motorcycle presents a special problem. 
Many people had no knowledge that would help, but after all the 
other pieces had been placed on the motorcycle, there was only 
one piece left, only one possible place to go. The blue light was 
logically constrained.
Logical constraints are often used by home dwellers who under-
take repair jobs. Suppose you take apart a leaking faucet to replace 
a washer, but when you put the faucet together again, you discover 
a part left over. Oops, obviously there was an error: the part should 
have been installed. This is an example of a logical constraint.
The natural mappings discussed in Chapter 3 work by provid-
ing logical constraints. There are no physical or cultural principles 
here; rather, there is a logical relationship between the spatial or 
functional layout of components and the things that they affect or 
are affected by. If two switches control two lights, the left switch 
should work the left light; the right switch, the right light. If the 
orientation of the lights and the switches differ, the natural map-
ping is destroyed. 
CULTURAL NORMS, CONVENTIONS, AND STANDARDS
Every culture has its own conventions. Do you kiss or shake hands 
when meeting someone? If kissing, on which cheek, and how many 
times? Is it an air kiss or an actual one? Or perhaps you bow, junior 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
131
person first, and lowest. Or raise hands, or perhaps press them to-
gether. Sniff? It is possible to spend a fascinating hour on the In-
ternet exploring the different forms of greetings used by different 
cultures. It is also amusing to watch the consternation when people 
from more cool, formal countries first encounter people from warm-
hearted, earthy countries, as one tries to bow and shake hands and 
the other tries to hug and kiss even total strangers. It is not so amus-
ing to be one of those people: being hugged or kissed while trying 
to shake hands or bow. Or the other way around. Try kissing some-
one’s cheek three times (left, right, left) when the person expects 
only one. Or worse, where he or she expects a handshake. Violation 
of cultural conventions can completely disrupt an interaction.
Conventions are actually a form of cultural constraint, usually 
associated with how people behave. Some conventions determine 
what activities should be done; others prohibit or discourage ac-
tions. But in all cases, they provide those knowledgeable of the 
culture with powerful constraints on behavior.
Sometimes these conventions are codified into international stan-
dards, sometimes into laws, and sometimes both. In the early days 
of heavily traveled streets, whether by horses and buggies or by 
automobiles, congestion and accidents arose. Over time, conven-
tions developed about which side of the road to drive on, with dif-
ferent conventions in different countries. Who had precedence at 
crossings? The first person to get there? The vehicle or person on 
the right, or the person with the highest social status? All of these 
conventions have applied at one time or another. Today, worldwide 
standards govern many traffic situations: Drive on only one side of 
the street. The first car into an intersection has precedence. If both 
arrive at the same time, the car on the right (or left) has precedence. 
When merging traffic lanes, alternate cars—one from that lane, 
then one from this. The last rule is more of an informal convention: 
it is not part of any rule book that I am aware of, and although it 
is very nicely obeyed in the California streets on which I drive, the 
very concept would seem strange in some parts of the world.
Sometimes conventions clash. In Mexico, when two cars ap-
proach a narrow, one-lane bridge from opposite directions, if a car 

132 The Design of Everyday Things
blinks its headlights, it means, “I got here first and I’m going over 
the bridge.” In England, if a car blinks its lights, it means, “I see 
you: please go first.” Either signal is equally appropriate and use-
ful, but not if the two drivers follow different conventions. Imagine 
a Mexican driver meeting an English driver in some third country. 
(Note that driving experts warn against using headlight blinks as 
signals because even within any single country, either interpreta-
tion is held by many drivers, none of whom imagines someone else 
might have the opposite interpretation.)
Ever get embarrassed at a formal dinner party where there ap-
pear to be dozens of utensils at each place setting? What do you 
do? Do you drink that nice bowl of water or is it for dipping your 
fingers to clean them? Do you eat a chicken drumstick or slice of 
pizza with your fingers or with a knife and fork?
Do these issues matter? Yes, they do. Violate conventions and 
you are marked as an outsider. A rude outsider, at that.
Applying Affordances, Signifiers, and 
Constraints to Everyday Objects
Affordances, signifiers, mappings, and constraints can simplify our 
encounters with everyday objects. Failure to properly deploy these 
cues leads to problems.
THE PROBLEM WITH DOORS
In Chapter 1 we encountered the sad story of my friend who was 
trapped between sets of glass doors at a post office, trapped be-
cause there were no clues to the doors’ operation. To operate a 
door, we have to find the side that opens and the part to be manip-
ulated; in other words, we need to figure out what to do and where 
to do it. We expect to find some visible signal, a signifier, for the 
correct operation: a plate, an extension, a hollow, an indentation—
something that allows the hand to touch, grasp, turn, or fit into. 
This tells us where to act. The next step is to figure out how: we 
must determine what operations are permitted, in part by using 
the signifiers, in part guided by constraints.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 133
Doors come in amazing variety. Some open only if a button is 
pushed, and some don’t indicate how to open at all, having nei-
ther buttons, nor hardware, nor any other sign of their opera-
tion. The door might be operated with a foot pedal. Or maybe it 
is voice operated, and we must speak the magic phrase (“Open 
Simsim!”). In addition, some doors have signs on them, to pull, 
push, slide, lift, ring a bell, insert a card, type a password, smile, 
rotate, bow, dance, or, perhaps, just ask. Somehow, when a device 
as simple as a door has to have a sign telling you whether to pull, 
push, or slide, then it is a failure, poorly designed.
Consider the hardware for an unlocked door. It need not have 
any moving parts: it can be a fixed knob, plate, handle, or groove. 
Not only will the proper hardware operate the door smoothly, but 
it will also indicate just how the door is to be operated: it will in-
corporate clear and unambiguous clues—signifiers. Suppose the 
door opens by being pushed. The easiest way to indicate this is to 
have a plate at the spot where the pushing should be done.
Flat plates or bars can clearly and unambiguously signify both 
the proper action and its location, for their affordances constrain 
the possible actions to that of pushing. Remember the discussion 
of the fire door and its panic bar in Chapter 2 (Figure 2.5, page 60)? 
The panic bar, with its large horizontal surface, often with a sec-
ondary color on the part intended to be pushed, provides a good 
example of an unambiguous signifier. It very nicely constrains 
improper behavior when panicked people press against the door 
as they attempt to flee a fire. The best push bars offer both visible 
affordances that act as physical constraints on the action, and also 
a visible signifier, thereby unobtrusively specifying what to do and 
where to do it.
Some doors have appropriate hardware, well placed. The outside 
door handles of most modern automobiles are excellent examples 
of design. The handles are often recessed receptacles that simul-
taneously indicate the place and mode of action. Horizontal slits 
guide the hand into a pulling position; vertical slits signal a sliding 
motion. Strangely enough, the inside door handles for automobiles 

134 The Design of Everyday Things
tell a different story. Here, the designer has faced a different kind 
of problem, and the appropriate solution has not yet been found. 
As a result, although the outside door handles of cars are often 
excellent, the inside ones are often difficult to find, hard to figure 
out how to operate, and awkward to use.
From my experience, the worst offenders are cabinet doors. It 
is sometimes not even possible to determine where the doors are, 
let alone whether and how they are slid, lifted, pushed, or pulled. 
The focus on aesthetics may blind the designer (and the purchaser) 
to the lack of usability. A particularly frustrating design is that of 
the cabinet door that opens outward by being pushed inward. The 
push releases the catch and energizes a spring, so that when the hand 
is taken away, the door springs open. It’s a very clever design, but 
most puzzling to the first-time user. A plate would be the appropri-
ate signal, but designers do not wish to mar the smooth surface of 
the door. One of the cabinets in my home has one of these latches 
in its glass door. Because the glass affords visibility of the shelves 
inside, it is obvious that there is no room for the door to open inward; 
therefore, to push the door seems contradictory. New and infre-
quent users of this door usually reject pushing and open it by pull-
ing, which often requires them to use fingernails, knife blades, or 
more ingenious methods to pry it open. A similar, counterintuitive 
type of design was the source of my difficulties in emptying the 
dirty water from my sink in a London hotel (Figure 1.4, page 17).
Appearances deceive. I have seen people trip and fall when 
they attempted to push open a door that worked automatically, 
the door opening inward just as they attempted to push against 
it. On most subway trains, the doors open automatically at each 
station. Not so in Paris. I watched someone on the Paris Métro 
try to get off the train and fail. When the train came to his station, 
he got up and stood patiently in front of the door, waiting for it 
to open. It never opened. The train simply started up again and 
went on to the next station. In the Métro, you have to open the 
doors yourself by pushing a button, or depressing a lever, or slid-
ing them (depending upon which kind of car you happen to be 
on). In some transit systems, the passenger is supposed to operate 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 135
the door, but in others this is forbidden. The frequent traveler is 
continually confronted with this kind of situation: the behavior 
that is appropriate in one place is inappropriate in another, even 
in situations that appear to be identical. Known cultural norms 
can create comfort and harmony. Unknown norms can lead to dis-
comfort and confusion.
THE PROBLEM WITH SWITCHES
When I give talks, quite often my first demonstration needs no 
preparation. I can count on the light switches of the room or au-
ditorium to be unmanageable. “Lights, please,” someone will say. 
Then fumble, fumble, fumble. Who knows where the switches are 
and which lights they control? The lights seem to work smoothly 
only when a technician is hired to sit in a control room somewhere, 
turning them on and off.
The switch problems in an auditorium are annoying, but similar 
problems in industry could be dangerous. In many control rooms, 
row upon row of identical-looking switches confront the operators. 
How do they avoid the occasional error, confusion, or accidental 
bumping against the wrong control? Or mis-aim? They don’t. For-
tunately, industrial settings are usually pretty robust. A few errors 
every now and then are not important—usually.
One type of popular small airplane has identical-looking switches 
for flaps and for landing gear, right next to one another. You might 
be  surprised to learn how many pilots, while on the ground, have 
decided to raise the flaps and instead raised the wheels. This very 
expensive error happened frequently enough that the National 
Transportation Safety Board wrote a report about it. The analysts 
politely pointed out that the proper design principles to avoid these 
errors had been known for fifty years. Why were these design 
errors still being made?
Basic switches and controls should be relatively simple to de-
sign well. But there are two fundamental difficulties. The first is 
to determine what type of device they control; for example, flaps 
or landing gear. The second is the mapping problem, discussed 
extensively in Chapters 1 and 3; for example, when there are many 

136 The Design of Everyday Things
lights and an array of switches, which switch controls which light?
The switch problem becomes serious only where there are many 
of them. It isn’t a problem in situations with one switch, and it is 
only a minor problem where there are two switches. But the dif-
ficulties mount rapidly with more than two switches at the same 
location. Multiple switches are more likely to appear in offices, au-
ditoriums, and industrial locations than in homes. 
With complex installations, where there are numerous lights and 
switches, the light controls seldom fit the needs of the situation. 
When I give talks, I need a way to dim the light hitting the pro-
jection screen so that images are visible, but keep enough light on 
the audience so that they can take notes (and I can monitor their 
reaction to the talk). This kind of control is seldom provided. Elec-
tricians are not trained to do task analyses.
Whose fault is this? Probably nobody’s. Blaming a person is sel-
dom appropriate or useful, a point I return to in Chapter 5. The 
problem is probably due to the difficulties of coordinating the dif-
ferent professions involved in installing light controls.
FIGURE 4.4. Incomprehensible Light Switches. Banks of switches like this are not 
uncommon in homes. There is no obvious mapping between the switches and the 
lights being controlled. I once had a similar panel in my home, although with only 
six switches. Even after years of living in the house, I could never remember which to 
use, so I simply put all the switches either up (on) or down (off). How did I solve the 
problem? See Figure 4.5.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 137
I once lived in a wonderful house on the cliffs of Del Mar, Cal-
ifornia, designed for us by two young, award-winning architects. 
The house was wonderful, and the architects proved their worth 
by the spectacular placement of the house and the broad windows 
that overlooked the ocean. But they liked spare, neat, modern design 
to a fault. Inside the house were, among other things, neat rows of 
light switches: A horizontal row of four identical switches in the 
front hall, a vertical column of six identical switches in the living 
room. “You will get used to it,” the architects assured us when 
we complained. We never did. Figure 4.4 shows an eight-switch 
bank that I found in a home I was visiting. Who could remember 
what each does? My home only had six switches, and that was bad 
enough. (Photographs of the switch plate from my Del Mar home 
are no longer available.)
The lack of clear communication among the people and organi-
zations constructing parts of a system is perhaps the most common 
cause of complicated, confusing designs. A usable design starts 
with careful observations of how the tasks being supported are 
actually performed, followed by a design process that results in a 
good fit to the actual ways the tasks get performed. The technical 
name for this method is task analysis. The name for the entire pro-
cess is human-centered design (HCD), discussed in Chapter 6.
The solutions to the problem posed by my Del Mar home require 
the natural mappings described in Chapter 3. With six light switches 
mounted in a one-dimensional array, vertically on the wall, there is 
no way they can map naturally to the two-dimensional, horizontal 
placement of the lights in the ceiling. Why place the switches flat 
against the wall? Why not redo things? Why not place the switches 
horizontally, in exact analogy to the things being controlled, with 
a two-dimensional layout so that the switches can be placed on a 
floor plan of the building in exact correspondence to the areas that 
they control? Match the layout of the lights with the layout of the 
switches: the principle of natural mapping. You can see the result 
in Figure 4.5. We mounted a floor plan of the living room on a plate 
and oriented it to match the room. Switches were placed on the 
floor plan so that each switch was located in the area controlled 

138 The Design of Everyday Things
by that switch. The plate was mounted with a slight tilt from the 
horizontal to make it easy to see and to make the mapping clear: 
had the plate been vertical, the mapping would still be ambiguous. 
The plate was tilted rather than horizontal to discourage people 
(us or visitors) from placing objects, such as cups, on the plate: an 
example of an anti-affordance. (We further simplified operations 
by moving the sixth switch to a different location where its mean-
ing was clear and it did not confuse, because it stood alone.)
It is unnecessarily difficult to implement this spatial mapping 
of switches to lights: the required parts are not available. I had to 
hire a skilled technician to construct the wall-mounted box and 
install the special switches and control equipment. Builders and 
electricians need standardized components. Today, the switch 
boxes that are available to electricians are organized as rectangu-
lar boxes meant to hold a long, linear string of switches and to 
be mounted horizontally or vertically on the wall. To produce the 
appropriate spatial array, we would need a two-dimensional struc-
ture that could be mounted parallel to the floor, where the switches 
would be mounted on the top of the box, on the horizontal surface. 
The switch box should have a matrix of supports so that there can 
be free, relatively unrestricted placement of the switches in what-
ever pattern best suits the room. Ideally the box would use small 
switches, perhaps low-voltage switches that would control a sepa-
rately mounted control structure that takes care of the lights (which 
is what I did in my home). Switches and lights could communicate 
 FIGURE 4.5. A Natural Mapping of Light 
Switches to Lights. This is how I mapped 
five switches to the lights in my living 
room. I placed small toggle switches that 
fit onto a plan of the home’s living room, 
balcony, and hall, with each switch placed 
where the light was located. The X by the 
center switch indicates where this panel 
was located. The surface was tilted to make 
it easier to relate it to the horizontal ar-
rangement of the lights, and the slope pro-
vided a natural anti-affordance, preventing 
people from putting coffee cups and drink 
containers on the controls.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 139
wirelessly instead of through the traditional home wiring cables. 
Instead of the standardized light plates for today’s large, bulky 
switches, the plates should be designed for small holes appropri-
ate to the small switches, combined with a way of inserting a floor 
plan on to the switch cover.
My suggestion requires that the switch box stick out from the 
wall, whereas today’s boxes are mounted so that the switches are 
flush with the wall. But these new switch boxes wouldn’t have to 
stick out. They could be placed in indented openings in the walls: 
just as there is room inside the wall for the existing switch boxes, 
there is also room for an indented horizontal surface. Or the 
switches could be mounted on a little pedestal.
As a side note, in the decades that have passed since the first edi-
tion of this book was published, the section on natural mappings 
and the difficulties with light switches has received a very popular 
reception. Nonetheless, there are no commercial tools available 
to make it easy to implement these ideas in the home. I once tried 
to convince the CEO of the company whose smart home devices I 
had used to implement the controls of Figure 4.5, to use the idea. 
“Why not manufacture the components to make it easy for people 
to do this,” I suggested. I failed.
Someday, we will get rid of the hard-wired switches, which re-
quire excessive runs of electrical cable, add to the cost and diffi-
culties of home construction, and make remodeling of electrical 
circuits extremely difficult and time consuming. Instead, we will 
use Internet or wireless signals to connect switches to the devices 
to be controlled. In this way, controls could be located anywhere. 
They could be reconfigured or moved. We could have multiple con-
trols for the same item, some in our phones or other portable de-
vices. I can control my home thermostat from anywhere in the 
world: why can’t I do the same with my lights? Some of the nec-
essary technology does exist today in specialty shops and custom 
builders, but they will not come into widespread usage until ma-
jor manufacturers make the necessary components and traditional 
electricians become comfortable with installing them. The tools for 
creating switch configurations that use good mapping principles 

140 The Design of Everyday Things
could become standard and easy to apply. It will happen, but it 
may take considerable time.
Alas, like many things that change, new technologies will 
bring virtues and deficits. The controls are apt to be through 
touch-sensitive screens, allowing excellent natural mapping to the 
spatial layouts involved, but lacking the physical affordances of 
physical switches. They can’t be operated with the side of the arm 
or the elbow while trying to enter a room, hands loaded with pack-
ages or cups of coffee. Touch screens are fine if the hands are free. 
Perhaps cameras that recognize gestures will do the job.
ACTIVITY-CENTERED CONTROLS
Spatial mapping of switches is not always appropriate. In many 
cases it is better to have switches that control activities: activity-
centered control. Many auditoriums in schools and companies 
have computer-based controls, with switches labeled with such 
phrases as “video,” “computer,” “full lights,” and “lecture.” When 
carefully designed, with a good, detailed analysis of the activi-
ties to be supported, the mapping of controls to activities works 
extremely well: video requires a dark auditorium plus control of 
sound level and controls to start, pause, and stop the presentation. 
Projected images require a dark screen area with enough light in 
the auditorium so people can take notes. Lectures require some 
stage lights so the speaker can be seen. Activity-based controls are 
excellent in theory, but the practice is difficult to get right. When it 
is done badly, it creates difficulties.
A related but wrong approach is to be device-centered rather 
than activity-centered. When they are device-centered, different 
control screens cover lights, sound, computer, and video projec-
tion. This requires the lecturer to go to one screen to adjust the 
light, a different screen to adjust sound levels, and yet a different 
screen to advance or control the images. It is a horrible cognitive 
interruption to the flow of the talk to go back and forth among the 
screens, perhaps to pause the video in order to make a comment 
or answer a question. Activity-centered controls anticipate this need 
and put light, sound level, and projection controls all in one location.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
141
I once used an activity-centered control, setting it to present my 
photographs to the audience. All worked well until I was asked a 
question. I paused to answer it, but wanted to raise the room lights 
so I could see the audience. No, the activity of giving a talk with 
visually presented images meant that room lights were fixed at a 
dim setting. When I tried to increase the light intensity, this took 
me out of “giving a talk” activity, so I did get the light to where I 
wanted it, but the projection screen also went up into the ceiling 
and the projector was turned off. The difficulty with activity-based 
controllers is handling the exceptional cases, the ones not thought 
about during design.
Activity-centered controls are the proper way to go, if the ac-
tivities are carefully selected to match actual requirements. But 
even in these cases, manual controls will still be required because 
there will always be some new, unexpected demand that requires 
idiosyncratic settings. As my example demonstrates, invoking 
the manual settings should not cause the current activity to be 
canceled.
Constraints That Force the Desired Behavior
FORCING FUNCTIONS
Forcing functions are a form of physical constraint: situations in 
which the actions are constrained so that failure at one stage pre-
vents the next step from happening. Starting a car has a forcing 
function associated with it—the driver must have some physical 
object that signifies permission to use the car. In the past, it was a 
physical key to unlock the car doors and also to be placed into the 
ignition switch, which allowed the key to turn on the electrical sys-
tem and, if rotated to its extreme position, to activate the engine.
Today’s cars have many means of verifying permission. Some still 
require a key, but it can stay in one’s pocket or carrying case. More 
and more, the key is not required and is replaced by a card, phone, 
or some physical token that can communicate with the car. As long 
as only authorized people have the card (which is, of course, the 
same for keys), everything works fine. Electric or hybrid vehicles 

142 The Design of Everyday Things
do not need to start the engines prior to moving the car, but the 
procedures are still similar: drivers must authenticate themselves 
by having a physical item in their possession. Because the vehicle 
won’t start without the authentication proved by possession of the 
key, it is a forcing function.
Forcing functions are the extreme case of strong constraints that 
can prevent inappropriate behavior. Not every situation allows 
such strong constraints to operate, but the general principle can be 
extended to a wide variety of situations. In the field of safety engi-
neering, forcing functions show up under other names, in partic-
ular as specialized methods for the prevention of accidents. Three 
such methods are interlocks, lock-ins, and lockouts.
INTERLOCKS
An interlock forces operations to take place in proper sequence. 
Microwave ovens and devices with interior exposure to high volt-
age use interlocks as forcing functions to prevent people from 
opening the door of the oven or disassembling the devices without 
first turning off the electric power: the interlock disconnects the 
power the instant the door is opened or the back is removed. In 
automobiles with automatic transmissions, an interlock prevents 
the transmission from leaving the Park position unless the car’s 
brake pedal is depressed.
Another form of interlock is the “dead man’s switch” in nu-
merous safety settings, especially for the operators of trains, lawn 
mowers, chainsaws, and many recreational vehicles. In Britain, 
these are called the “driver’s safety device.” Many require that the 
operator hold down a spring-loaded switch to enable operation of 
the equipment, so that if the operator dies (or loses control), the 
switch will be released, stopping the equipment. Because some op-
erators bypassed the feature by tying down the control (or placing 
a heavy weight on foot-operated ones), various schemes have been 
developed to determine that the person is really alive and alert. 
Some require a midlevel of pressure; some, repeated depressions 
and releases. Some require responses to queries. But in all cases, 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 143
they are examples of safety-related interlocks to prevent operation 
when the operator is incapacitated.
LOCK-INS
A lock-in keeps an operation active, preventing someone from pre-
maturely stopping it. Standard lock-ins exist on many computer 
applications, where any attempt to exit the application without 
saving work is prevented by a message prompt asking whether 
that is what is really wanted (Figure 4. 6). These are so effective that 
I use them deliberately as my standard way of exiting. Rather than 
saving a file and then exiting the program, I simply exit, knowing 
that I will be given a simple way to save my work. What was once 
created as an error message has become an efficient shortcut.
Lock-ins can be quite literal, as in jail cells or playpens for babies, 
preventing a person from leaving the area.
Some companies try to lock in customers by making all their 
products work harmoniously with one another but be incompati-
ble with the products of their competition. Thus music, videos, or 
electronic books purchased from one company may be played or 
read on music and video players and e-book readers made by that 
company, but will fail with similar devices from other manufactur-
ers. The goal is to use design as a business strategy: the consistency 
within a given manufacturer means once people learn the system, 
they will stay with it and hesitate to change. The confusion when 
using a different company’s system further prevents customers from 
 FIGURE 4.6 A Lock-In Forcing Function. This lock-in makes it difficult 
to exit a program without either saving the work or consciously saying 
not to. Notice that it is politely configured so that the desired operation 
can be taken right from the message.

144 The Design of Everyday Things
changing systems. In the end, the people who must use multiple 
systems lose. Actually, everyone loses, except for the one manufac-
turer whose products dominate.
LOCKOUTS
Whereas a lock-in keeps someone in a space or prevents an action 
until the desired operations have been done, a lockout prevents 
someone from entering a space that is dangerous, or prevents an 
event from occurring. A good example of a lockout is found in 
stairways of public buildings, at least in the United States (Figure 
4.7). In cases of fire, people have a tendency to flee in panic, down 
the stairs, down, down, down, past the ground floor and into the 
basement, where they might be trapped. The solution (required by 
the fire laws) is not to allow simple passage from the ground floor 
to the basement.
Lockouts are usually used for safety reasons. Thus, small chil-
dren are protected by baby locks on cabinet doors, covers for elec-
tric outlets, and specialized caps on containers for drugs and toxic 
substances. The pin that prevents a fire extinguisher from being 
activated until it is removed is a lockout forcing function to pre-
vent accidental discharge.
 FIGURE 4.7. A Lockout Forcing Function for Fire Exit. 
The gate, placed at the ground floor of stairways, prevents 
people who might be rushing down the stairs to escape a 
fire from continuing into the basement areas, where they 
might get trapped.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 145
Forcing functions can be a nuisance in normal usage. The result 
is that many people will deliberately disable the forcing func-
tion, thereby negating its safety feature. The clever designer has 
to minimize the nuisance value while retaining the safety feature 
of the forcing function that guards against the occasional tragedy. 
The gate in Figure 4.7 is a clever compromise: sufficient restraint 
to make people realize they are leaving the ground floor, but not 
enough of an impediment to normal behavior that people will 
prop open the gate.
Other useful devices make use of a forcing function. In some 
public restrooms, a pull-down shelf is placed inconveniently on 
the wall just behind the cubicle door, held in a vertical position by 
a spring. You lower the shelf to the horizontal position, and the 
weight of a package or handbag keeps it there. The shelf’s position 
is a forcing function. When the shelf is lowered, it blocks the door 
fully. So to get out of the cubicle, you have to remove whatever is 
on the shelf and raise it out of the way. Clever design.
Conventions, Constraints, and Affordances
In Chapter 1 we learned of the distinctions between affordances, 
perceived affordances, and signifiers. Affordances refer to the po-
tential actions that are possible, but these are easily discoverable 
only if they are perceivable: perceived affordances. It is the sig-
nifier component of the perceived affordance that allows people 
to determine the possible actions. But how does one go from the 
perception of an affordance to understanding the potential action? 
In many cases, through conventions.
A doorknob has the perceived affordance of graspability. But 
knowing that it is the doorknob that is used to open and close 
doors is learned: it is a cultural aspect of the design that knobs, 
handles, and bars, when placed on doors, are intended to enable 
the opening and shutting of those doors. The same devices on 
fixed walls would have a different interpretation: they might offer 
support, for example, but certainly not the possibility of opening 
the wall. The interpretation of a perceived affordance is a cultural 
convention.

146 The Design of Everyday Things
CONVENTIONS ARE CULTURAL CONSTRAINTS
Conventions are a special kind of cultural constraint. For exam-
ple, the means by which people eat is subject to strong cultural 
constraints and conventions. Different cultures use different eat-
ing utensils. Some eat primarily with the fingers and bread. Some 
use elaborate serving devices. The same is true of almost every 
aspect of behavior imaginable, from the clothes that are worn; 
to the way one addresses elders, equals, and inferiors; and even 
to the order in which people enter or exit a room. What is consid-
ered correct and proper in one culture may be considered impo-
lite in another.
Although conventions provide valuable guidance for novel sit-
uations, their existence can make it difficult to enact change: con-
sider the story of destination-control elevators.
WHEN CONVENTIONS CHANGE: 
THE CASE OF DESTINATION-CONTROL ELEVATORS
Operating the common elevator seems like a no-brainer. Press the but-
ton, get in the box, go up or down, get out. But we’ve been encountering 
and documenting an array of curious design variations on this simple 
interaction, raising the question: Why? (From Portigal & Norvaisas, 2011.)
This quotation comes from two design professionals who were 
so offended by a change in the controls for an elevator system that 
they wrote an entire article of complaint.
What could possibly cause such an offense? Was it really bad de-
sign or, as the authors suggest, a completely unnecessary change to 
an otherwise satisfactory system? Here is what happened: the au-
thors had encountered a new convention for elevators called “Ele-
vator Destination Control.” Many people (including me) consider 
it superior to the one we are all used to. Its major disadvantage is 
that it is different. It violates customary convention. Violations of 
convention can be very disturbing. Here is the history.
When “modern” elevators were first installed in buildings in 
the late 1800s, they always had a human operator who controlled 
the speed and direction of the elevator, stopped at the appropri-

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
147
ate floors, and opened and shut the doors. People would enter the 
elevator, greet the operator, and state which floor they wished to 
travel to. When the elevators became automated, a similar con-
vention was followed. People entered the elevator and told the 
elevator what floor they were traveling to by pushing the appro-
priately marked button inside the elevator.
This is a pretty inefficient way of doing things. Most of you have 
probably experienced a crowded elevator where every person 
seems to want to go to a different floor, which means a slow trip for 
the people going to the higher floors. A destination-control eleva-
tor system groups passengers, so that those going to the same floor 
are asked to use the same elevator and the passenger load is dis-
tributed to maximize efficiency. Although this kind of grouping 
is only sensible for buildings that have a large number of elevators, 
that would cover any large hotel, office, or apartment building.
In the traditional elevator, passengers stand in the elevator hall-
way and indicate whether they wish to travel up or down. When an 
elevator arrives going in the appropriate direction, they get in and 
use the keypad inside the elevator to indicate their destination 
floor. As a result, five people might get into the same elevator each 
wanting a different floor. With destination control, the destination 
keypads are located in the hallway outside the elevators and there 
are no keypads inside the elevators (Figure 4.8A and D). People 
are directed to whichever elevator will most efficiently reach their 
floor. Thus, if there were five people desiring elevators, they might 
be assigned to five different elevators. The result is faster trips for 
everyone, with a minimum of stops. Even if people are assigned to 
elevators that are not the next to arrive, they will get to their desti-
nations faster than if they took earlier elevators. 
Destination control was invented in 1985, but the first commer-
cial installation didn’t appear until 1990 (in Schindler elevators). 
Now, decades later, it is starting to appear more frequently as de-
velopers of tall buildings discover that destination control yields 
better service to passengers, or equal service with fewer elevators.
Horrors! As Figure 4.8D confirms, there are no controls inside the 
elevator to specify a floor. What if passengers change their minds 

148 The Design of Everyday Things
 FIGURE 4.8. Destination-Control Elevators. In a destination-
control system, the desired destination floor is entered into the control 
panel outside the elevators (A and B). After entering the destination 
floor into B, the display directs the traveler to the appropriate elevator, 
as shown in C, where “32” has been entered as the desired floor destina-
tion, and the person is directed to elevator “L” (the first elevator on the 
left, in A). There is no way to specify the floor from inside the elevator: 
Inside, the controls are only to open and shut the doors and an alarm (D). 
This is a much more efficient design, but confusing to people used to the 
more conventional system. (Photographs by the author.)
A.
B.
D.
C.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 149
and wish to get off at a different floor? (Even my editor at Basic 
Books complained about this in a marginal note.) What then? What 
do you do in a regular elevator when you decide you really want 
to get off at the sixth floor just as the elevator passes the seventh 
floor? It’s simple: just get off at the next stop and go to the destina-
tion control box in the elevator hall, and specify the intended floor.
PEOPLE’S RESPONSES TO CHANGES IN CONVENTIONS
People invariably object and complain whenever a new approach 
is introduced into an existing array of products and systems. Con-
ventions are violated: new learning is required. The merits of the 
new system are irrelevant: it is the change that is upsetting. The 
destination control elevator is only one of many such examples. 
The metric system provides a powerful example of the difficulties 
in changing people’s conventions. 
The metric scale of measurement is superior to the English scale 
of units in almost every dimension: it is logical, easy to learn, 
and easy to use in computations. Today, over two centuries have 
passed since the metric system was developed by the French in 
the 1790s, yet three countries still resist its use: the United States, 
Liberia, and Myanmar. Even Great Britain has mostly switched, so 
the only major country left that uses the older English system of 
units is the United States. Why haven’t we switched? The change 
is too upsetting for the people who have to learn the new system, 
and the initial cost of purchasing new tools and measuring devices 
seems excessive. The learning difficulties are nowhere as complex 
as purported, and the cost would be relatively small because the 
metric system is already in wide use, even in the United States.
Consistency in design is virtuous. It means that lessons learned 
with one system transfer readily to others. On the whole, consis-
tency is to be followed. If a new way of doing things is only slightly 
better than the old, it is better to be consistent. But if there is to be 
a change, everybody has to change. Mixed systems are confusing 
to everyone. When a new way of doing things is vastly superior 
to another, then the merits of change outweigh the difficulty of 

150 The Design of Everyday Things
change. Just because something is different does not mean it is bad. 
If we only kept to the old, we could never improve.
The Faucet: 
A Case History of Design
It may be hard to believe that an everyday water faucet could need 
an instruction manual. I saw one, this time at the meeting of the 
British Psychological Society in Sheffield, England. The partici-
pants were lodged in dormitories. Upon checking into Ranmoor 
House, each guest was given a pamphlet that provided useful infor-
mation: where the churches were, the times of meals, the location of 
the post office, and how to work the taps (faucets). “The taps on the 
washhand basin are operated by pushing down gently.”
When it was my turn to speak at the conference, I asked the audi-
ence about those taps. How many had trouble using them? Polite, 
restrained tittering from the audience. How many tried to turn the 
handle? A large show of hands. How many had to seek help? A few 
honest folks raised their hands. Afterward, one woman came up to 
me and said that she had given up and walked the halls until she 
found someone who could explain the taps to her. A simple sink, a 
simple-looking faucet. But it looks as if it should be turned, not 
pushed. If you want the faucet to be pushed, make it look as if it 
should be pushed. (This, of course, is similar to the problem I had 
emptying the water from the sink in my hotel, described in Chapter 1.)
Why is such a simple, standard item as a water faucet so diffi-
cult to get right? The person using a faucet cares about two things: 
water temperature and rate of flow. But water enters the faucet 
through two pipes, hot and cold. There is a conflict between the 
human need for temperature and flow and the physical structure 
of hot and cold.
There are several ways to deal with this:
•  Control both hot and cold water: Two controls, one for hot water, 
the other cold.
•  Control only temperature: One control, where rate of flow is fixed. 
Rotating the control from its fixed position turns on the water at 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
151
some predetermined rate of flow, with the temperature controlled by 
the knob position.
•  Control only amount: One control, where temperature is fixed, with 
rate of flow controlled by the knob position.
•  On-off. One control turns the water on and off. This is how gesture-
controlled faucets work: moving the hand under or away from 
the spout turns the water on or off, at a fixed temperature and rate 
of flow.
•  Control temperature and rate of flow. Use two separate controls, one 
for water temperature, the other for flow rate. (I have never encoun-
tered this solution.)
•  One control for temperature and rate: Have one integrated con-
trol, where movement in one direction controls the temperature and 
movement in a different direction controls the amount.
Where there are two controls, one for hot water and one for cold, 
there are four mapping problems;
•  Which knob controls the hot, which the cold?
•  How do you change the temperature without affecting the rate of 
flow?
•  How do you change the flow without affecting the temperature?
•  Which direction increases water flow?
The mapping problems are solved through cultural conventions, 
or constraints. It is a worldwide convention that the left faucet 
should be hot; the right, cold. It is also a universal convention that 
screw threads are made to tighten with clockwise turning, loosen 
with counterclockwise. You turn off a faucet by tightening a screw 
thread (tightening a washer against its seat), thereby shutting off 
the flow of water. So clockwise turning shuts off the water, counter-
clockwise turns it on.
Unfortunately, the constraints do not always hold. Most of 
the English people I asked were not aware that left/hot, right/
cold was a convention; it is violated too often to be considered a 
convention in England. But the convention isn’t universal in the 

152 The Design of Everyday Things
United States, either. I once experienced shower controls that were 
placed vertically: Which one controlled the hot water, the top fau-
cet or the bottom?
If the two faucet handles are round knobs, clockwise rotation 
of either should decrease volume. However, if each faucet has a 
single “blade” as its handle, then people don’t think they are ro-
tating the handles: they think that they are pushing or pulling. To 
maintain consistency, pulling either faucet should increase volume, 
even though this means rotating the left faucet counterclockwise 
and the right one clockwise. Although rotation direction is incon-
sistent, pulling and pushing is consistent, which is how people 
conceptualize their actions.
Alas, sometimes clever people are too clever for our good. Some 
well-meaning plumbing designers have decided that consistency 
should be ignored in favor of their own, private brand of psy-
chology. The human body has mirror-image symmetry, say these 
pseudo-psychologists. So if the left hand moves clockwise, why, 
the right hand should move counterclockwise. Watch out, your 
plumber or architect may install a bathroom fixture whose clock-
wise rotation has a different result with the hot water than with 
the cold.
As you try to control the water temperature, soap running down 
over your eyes, groping to change the water control with one hand, 
soap or shampoo clutched in the other, you are guaranteed to get it 
wrong. If the water is too cold, the groping hand is just as likely to 
make the water colder as to make it scalding hot. 
Whoever invented that mirror-image nonsense should be forced 
to take a shower. Yes, there is some logic to it. To be a bit fair to 
the inventor of the scheme, it works as long as you always use 
two hands to adjust both faucets simultaneously. It fails misera-
bly, however, when one hand is used to alternate between the two 
controls. Then you cannot remember which direction does what. 
Once again, notice that this can be corrected without replacing the 
individual faucets: just replace the handles with blades. It is psy-
chological perceptions that matter—the conceptual model—not 
physical consistency. 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 153
The operation of faucets needs to be standardized so that the 
psychological conceptual model of operation is the same for all 
types of faucets. With the traditional dual faucet controls for hot 
and cold water, the standards should state:
•  When the handles are round, both should rotate in the same direction 
to change water volume.
•  When the handles are single blades, both should be pulled to change 
water volume (which means rotating in opposite directions in the 
faucet itself).
Other configurations of handles are possible. Suppose the han-
dles are mounted on a horizontal axis so that they rotate vertically. 
Then what? Would the answer differ for single blade handles and 
round ones? I leave this as an exercise for the reader.
What about the evaluation problem? Feedback in the use of most 
faucets is rapid and direct, so turning them the wrong way is easy 
to discover and correct. The evaluate-action cycle is easy to traverse. 
As a result, the discrepancy from normal rules is often not noticed—
unless you are in the shower and the feedback occurs when you 
scald or freeze yourself. When the faucets are far removed from the 
spout, as is the case where the faucets are located in the center of 
the bathtub but the spouts high on an end wall, the delay between 
turning the faucets and the change in temperature can be quite long: 
I once timed a shower control to take 5 seconds. This makes setting 
the temperature rather difficult. Turn the faucet the wrong way and 
then dance around inside the shower while the water is scalding 
hot or freezing cold, madly turning the faucet in what you hope is 
the correct direction, hoping the temperature will stabilize quickly. 
Here the problem comes from the properties of fluid flow—it takes 
time for water to travel the 2 meters or so of pipe that might con-
nect the faucets with the spout—so it is not easily remedied. But 
the problem is exacerbated by poor design of the controls.
Now let’s turn to the modern single-spout, single-control fau-
cet. Technology to the rescue. Move the control one way, it ad-
justs temperature. Move it another, it adjusts volume. Hurrah! 

154 The Design of Everyday Things
We control exactly the variables of interest, and the mixing spout 
solves the evaluation problem.
Yes, these new faucets are beautiful. Sleek, elegant, prize win-
ning. Unusable. They solved one set of problems only to create yet 
another. The mapping problems now predominate. The difficulty 
lies in a lack of standardization of the dimensions of control, and 
then, which direction of movement means what? Sometimes there 
is a knob that can be pushed or pulled, rotated clockwise or coun-
terclockwise. But does the push or pull control volume or tempera-
ture? Is a pull more volume or less, hotter temperature or cooler? 
Sometimes there is a lever that moves side to side or forward and 
backward. Once again, which movement is volume, which tem-
perature? And even then, which way is more (or hotter), which is 
less (or cooler)? The perceptually simple one-control faucet still has 
four mapping problems:
• What dimension of control affects the temperature?
• Which direction along that dimension means hotter?
• What dimension of control affects the rate of flow?
• Which direction along that dimension means more?
In the name of elegance, the moving parts sometimes meld in-
visibly into the faucet structure, making it nearly impossible even 
to find the controls, let alone figure out which way they move or 
what they control. And then, different faucet designs use different 
solutions. One-control faucets ought to be superior because they 
control the psychological variables of interest. But because of the 
lack of standardization and awkward design (to call it “awkward” 
is being kind), they frustrate many people so much that they tend 
to be disliked more than they are admired. 
Bath and kitchen faucet design ought to be simple, but can vio-
late many design principles, including:
• Visible affordances and signifiers
• Discoverability
• Immediacy of feedback

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 155
Finally, many violate the principle of desperation:
• If all else fails, standardize.
Standardization is indeed the fundamental principle of desper-
ation: when no other solution appears possible, simply design ev-
erything the same way, so people only have to learn once. If all 
makers of faucets could agree on a standard set of motions to con-
trol amount and temperature (how about up and down to control 
amount—up meaning increase—and left and right to control tem-
perature, left meaning hot?), then we could all learn the standards 
once, and forever afterward use the knowledge for every new fau-
cet we encountered.
If you can’t put the knowledge on the device (that is, knowledge 
in the world), then develop a cultural constraint: standardize what 
has to be kept in the head. And remember the lesson from faucet 
rotation on page 153: The standards should reflect the psychologi-
cal conceptual models, not the physical mechanics.
Standards simplify life for everyone. At the same time, they 
tend to hinder future development. And, as discussed in Chapter 
6, there are often difficult political struggles in finding common 
agreement. Nonetheless, when all else fails, standards are the way 
to proceed.
Using Sound as Signifiers
Sometimes everything that is needed cannot be made visible. Enter 
sound: sound can provide information available in no other way. 
Sound can tell us that things are working properly or that they 
need maintenance or repair. It can even save us from accidents. 
Consider the information provided by:
• The click when the bolt on a door slides home
• The tinny sound when a door doesn’t shut right
• The roaring sound when a car muffler gets a hole
• The rattle when things aren’t secured
• The whistle of a teakettle when the water boils

156 The Design of Everyday Things
• The click when the toast pops up
• The increase in pitch when a vacuum cleaner gets clogged
•  The indescribable change in sound when a complex piece of machin-
ery starts to have problems
Many devices simply beep and burp. These are not natural-
istic sounds; they do not convey hidden information. When 
used properly, a beep can assure you that you’ve pressed a 
button, but the sound is as annoying as informative. Sounds 
should be generated so as to give knowledge about the source. 
They should convey something about the actions that are tak-
ing place, actions that matter to the user but that would other-
wise not be visible. The buzzes, clicks, and hums that you hear 
while a telephone call is being completed are one good example: 
take out those noises and you are less certain that the connec-
tion is being made.
Real, natural sound is as essential as visual information because 
sound tells us about things we can’t see, and it does so while our 
eyes are occupied elsewhere. Natural sounds reflect the complex 
interaction of natural objects: the way one part moves against an-
other; the material of which the parts are made—hollow or solid, 
metal or wood, soft or hard, rough or smooth. Sounds are gener-
ated when materials interact, and the sound tells us whether they 
are hitting, sliding, breaking, tearing, crumbling, or bouncing. Ex-
perienced mechanics can diagnosis the condition of machinery just 
by listening. When sounds are generated artificially, if intelligently 
created using a rich auditory spectrum, with care to provide the 
subtle cues that are informative without being annoying, they can 
be as useful as sounds in the real world.
Sound is tricky. It can annoy and distract as easily as it can aid. 
Sounds that at one’s first encounter are pleasant or cute easily be-
come annoying rather than useful. One of the virtues of sounds 
is that they can be detected even when attention is applied else-
where. But this virtue is also a deficit, for sounds are often intru-
sive. Sounds are difficult to keep private unless the intensity is low 
or earphones are used. This means both that neighbors may be 

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
157
annoyed and that others can monitor your activities. The use of 
sound to convey knowledge is a powerful and important idea, but 
still in its infancy.
Just as the presence of sound can serve a useful role in providing 
feedback about events, the absence of sound can lead to the same 
kinds of difficulties we have already encountered from a lack of 
feedback. The absence of sound can mean an absence of knowl-
edge, and if feedback from an action is expected to come from 
sound, silence can lead to problems.
WHEN SILENCE KILLS
It was a pleasant June day in Munich, Germany. I was picked up at 
my hotel and driven to the country with farmland on either side of 
the narrow, two-lane road. Occasional walkers strode by, and every 
so often a bicyclist passed. We parked the car on the shoulder of 
the road and joined a group of people looking up and down the 
road. “Okay, get ready,” I was told. “Close your eyes and listen.” 
I did so and about a minute later I heard a high-pitched whine, 
accompanied by a low humming sound: an automobile was ap-
proaching. As it came closer, I could hear tire noise. After the car 
had passed, I was asked my judgment of the sound. We repeated 
the exercise numerous times, and each time the sound was differ-
ent. What was going on? We were evaluating sound designs for 
BMW’s new electric vehicles.
Electric cars are extremely quiet. The only sounds they make 
come from the tires, the air, and occasionally, from the high-pitched 
whine of the electronics. Car lovers really like the silence. Pedestri-
ans have mixed feelings, but the blind are greatly concerned. After 
all, the blind cross streets in traffic by relying upon the sounds of 
vehicles. That’s how they know when it is safe to cross. And what 
is true for the blind might also be true for anyone stepping onto 
the street while distracted. If the vehicles don’t make any sounds, 
they can kill. The United States National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration determined that pedestrians are considerably 
more likely to be hit by hybrid or electric vehicles than by those 
that have an internal combustion engine. The greatest danger is 

158 The Design of Everyday Things
when the hybrid or electric vehicles are moving slowly, when they 
are almost completely silent. The sounds of an automobile are im-
portant signifiers of its presence.
Adding sound to a vehicle to warn pedestrians is not a new idea. 
For many years, commercial trucks and construction equipment 
have had to make beeping sounds when backing up. Horns are 
required by law, presumably so that drivers can use them to alert 
pedestrians and other drivers when the need arises, although they 
are often used as a way of venting anger and rage instead. But 
adding a continuous sound to a normal vehicle because it would 
otherwise be too quiet, is a challenge.
What sound would you want? One group of blind people sug-
gested putting some rocks into the hubcaps. I thought this was 
brilliant. The rocks would provide a natural set of cues, rich in 
meaning yet easy to interpret. The car would be quiet until the 
wheels started to turn. Then, the rocks would make natural, contin-
uous scraping sounds at low speeds, change to the pitter-patter of 
falling stones at higher speeds, the frequency of the drops increas-
ing with the speed of the car until the car was moving fast enough 
that the rocks would be frozen against the circumference of the rim, 
silent. Which is fine: the sounds are not needed for fast-moving 
vehicles because then the tire noise is audible. The lack of sound 
when the vehicle was not moving would be a problem, however.
The marketing divisions of automobile manufacturers thought 
that the addition of artificial sounds would be a wonderful brand-
ing opportunity, so each car brand or model should have its own 
unique sound that captured just the car personality the brand 
wished to convey. Porsche added loudspeakers to its electric car pro-
totype to give it the same “throaty growl” as its gasoline-powered 
cars. Nissan wondered whether a hybrid automobile should sound 
like tweeting birds. Some manufacturers thought all cars should 
sound the same, with standardized sounds and sound levels, 
making it easier for everyone to learn how to interpret them. Some 
blind people thought they should sound like cars—you know, gas-
oline engines, following the old tradition that new technologies 
must always copy the old.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 159
Skeuomorphic is the technical term for incorporating old, fa-
miliar ideas into new technologies, even though they no longer 
play a functional role. Skeuomorphic designs are often comfort-
able for traditionalists, and indeed the history of technology 
shows that new technologies and materials often slavishly im-
itate the old for no apparent reason except that is what people 
know how to do. Early automobiles looked like horse-driven 
carriages without the horses (which is also why they were called 
horseless carriages); early plastics were designed to look like 
wood; folders in computer file systems often look the same as 
paper folders, complete with tabs. One way of overcoming the 
fear of the new is to make it look like the old. This practice is 
decried by design purists, but in fact, it has its benefits in eas-
ing the transition from the old to the new. It gives comfort and 
makes learning easier. Existing conceptual models need only be 
modified rather than replaced. Eventually, new forms emerge 
that have no relationship to the old, but the skeuomorphic de-
signs probably helped the transition.
When it came to deciding what sounds the new silent automo-
biles should generate, those who wanted differentiation ruled the 
day, yet everyone also agreed that there had to be some standards. 
It should be possible to determine that the sound is coming from 
an automobile, to identify its location, direction, and speed. No 
sound would be necessary once the car was going fast enough, in 
part because tire noise would be sufficient. Some standardization 
would be required, although with a lot of leeway. International 
standards committees started their procedures. Various countries, 
unhappy with the normally glacial speed of standards agreements 
and under pressure from their communities, started drafting legis-
lation. Companies scurried to develop appropriate sounds, hiring 
experts in psychoacoustics, psychologists, and Hollywood sound 
designers.
The United States National Highway Traffic Safety Administra-
tion issued a set of principles along with a detailed list of require-
ments, including sound levels, spectra, and other criteria. The full 
document is 248 pages. The document states:

160 The Design of Everyday Things
This standard will ensure that blind, visually-impaired, and other pe-
destrians are able to detect and recognize nearby hybrid and electric 
vehicles by requiring that hybrid and electric vehicles emit sound that 
pedestrians will be able to hear in a range of ambient environments and 
contain acoustic signal content that pedestrians will recognize as be-
ing emitted from a vehicle. The proposed standard establishes minimum 
sound requirements for hybrid and electric vehicles when operating un-
der 30 kilometers per hour (km/h) (18 mph), when the vehicle’s starting 
system is activated but the vehicle is stationary, and when the vehicle 
is operating in reverse. The agency chose a crossover speed of 30 km/h 
because this was the speed at which the sound levels of the hybrid and 
electric vehicles measured by the agency approximated the sound levels 
produced by similar internal combustion engine vehicles. (Department 
of Transportation, 2013.)
As I write this, sound designers are still experimenting. The au-
tomobile companies, lawmakers, and standards committees are 
still at work. Standards are not expected until 2014 or later, and 
then it will take considerable time to be deployed to the millions of 
vehicles across the world.
What principles should be used for the design sounds of elec-
tric vehicles (including hybrids)? The sounds have to meet sev-
eral criteria:
•  Alerting. The sound will indicate the presence of an electric vehicle.
•  Orientation. The sound will make it possible to determine where the 
vehicle is located, a rough idea of its speed, and whether it is moving 
toward or away from the listener.
•  Lack of annoyance. Because these sounds will be heard frequently 
even in light traffic and continually in heavy traffic, they must not be 
annoying. Note the contrast with sirens, horns, and backup signals, 
all of which are intended to be aggressive warnings. Such sounds 
are deliberately unpleasant, but because they are infrequent and for 
relatively short duration, they are acceptable. The challenge faced by 
electric vehicle sounds is to alert and orient, not annoy.

 
four: Knowing What to Do: Constraints, Discoverability, and Feedback 
161
•  Standardization versus individualization. Standardization is nec-
essary to ensure that all electric vehicle sounds can readily be in-
terpreted. If they vary too much, novel sounds might confuse the 
listener. Individualization has two functions: safety and marketing. 
From a safety point of view, if there were many vehicles present on 
the street, individualization would allow vehicles to be tracked. This 
is especially important at crowded intersections. From a marketing 
point of view, individualization can ensure that each brand of electric 
vehicle has its own unique characteristic, perhaps matching the qual-
ity of the sound to the brand image. 
Stand still on a street corner and listen carefully to the vehicles 
around you. Listen to the silent bicycles and to the artificial sounds 
of electric cars. Do the cars meet the criteria? After years of trying 
to make cars run more quietly, who would have thought that one 
day we would spend years of effort and tens of millions of dollars 
to add sound?

C H A P T E R  F I V E
162 
HUMAN ERROR? 
NO, BAD DESIGN
Most industrial accidents are caused by human error: 
estimates range between 75 and 95 percent. How is it 
that so many people are so incompetent? Answer: They 
aren’t. It’s a design problem.
If the number of accidents blamed upon human error were 1 to 
5 percent, I might believe that people were at fault. But when the 
percentage is so high, then clearly other factors must be involved. 
When something happens this frequently, there must be another 
underlying factor.
When a bridge collapses, we analyze the incident to find the 
causes of the collapse and reformulate the design rules to ensure 
that form of accident will never happen again. When we discover 
that electronic equipment is malfunctioning because it is responding 
to unavoidable electrical noise, we redesign the circuits to be more 
tolerant of the noise. But when an accident is thought to be caused 
by people, we blame them and then continue to do things just as 
we have always done.
Physical limitations are well understood by designers; mental 
limitations are greatly misunderstood. We should treat all failures 
in the same way: find the fundamental causes and redesign the 
system so that these can no longer lead to problems. We design 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 163
equipment that requires people to be fully alert and attentive for 
hours, or to remember archaic, confusing procedures even if they 
are only used infrequently, sometimes only once in a lifetime. We 
put people in boring environments with nothing to do for hours on 
end, until suddenly they must respond quickly and accurately. Or 
we subject them to complex, high-workload environments, where 
they are continually interrupted while having to do multiple tasks 
simultaneously. Then we wonder why there is failure.
Even worse is that when I talk to the designers and administra-
tors of these systems, they admit that they too have nodded off 
while supposedly working. Some even admit to falling asleep for 
an instant while driving. They admit to turning the wrong stove 
burners on or off in their homes, and to other small but signifi-
cant errors. Yet when their workers do this, they blame them for 
“human error.” And when employees or customers have similar 
issues, they are blamed for not following the directions properly, 
or for not being fully alert and attentive.
Understanding Why There Is Error
Error occurs for many reasons. The most common is in the nature 
of the tasks and procedures that require people to behave in un-
natural ways—staying alert for hours at a time, providing precise, 
accurate control specifications, all the while multitasking, doing 
several things at once, and subjected to multiple interfering activ-
ities. Interruptions are a common reason for error, not helped by 
designs and procedures that assume full, dedicated attention yet 
that do not make it easy to resume operations after an interruption. 
And finally, perhaps the worst culprit of all, is the attitude of peo-
ple toward errors. 
When an error causes a financial loss or, worse, leads to an injury 
or death, a special committee is convened to investigate the cause 
and, almost without fail, guilty people are found. The next step 
is to blame and punish them with a monetary fine, or by firing or 
jailing them. Sometimes a lesser punishment is proclaimed: make 
the guilty parties go through more training. Blame and punish; 
blame and train. The investigations and resulting punishments feel 

164 The Design of Everyday Things
good: “We caught the culprit.” But it doesn’t cure the problem: the 
same error will occur over and over again. Instead, when an error 
happens, we should determine why, then redesign the product 
or the procedures being followed so that it will never occur again 
or, if it does, so that it will have minimal impact.
ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS
Root cause analysis is the name of the game: investigate the acci-
dent until the single, underlying cause is found. What this ought to 
mean is that when people have indeed made erroneous decisions 
or actions, we should determine what caused them to err. This is 
what root cause analysis ought to be about. Alas, all too often it 
stops once a person is found to have acted inappropriately.
Trying to find the cause of an accident sounds good but it is 
flawed for two reasons. First, most accidents do not have a single 
cause: there are usually multiple things that went wrong, multiple 
events that, had any one of them not occurred, would have pre-
vented the accident. This is what James Reason, the noted British 
authority on human error, has called the “Swiss cheese model of 
accidents” (shown in Figure 5.3 of this chapter on page 208, and 
discussed in more detail there).
Second, why does the root cause analysis stop as soon as a hu-
man error is found? If a machine stops working, we don’t stop the 
analysis when we discover a broken part. Instead, we ask: “Why 
did the part break? Was it an inferior part? Were the required spec-
ifications too low? Did something apply too high a load on the 
part?” We keep asking questions until we are satisfied that we 
understand the reasons for the failure: then we set out to remedy 
them. We should do the same thing when we find human error: 
We should discover what led to the error. When root cause analysis 
discovers a human error in the chain, its work has just begun: now 
we apply the analysis to understand why the error occurred, and 
what can be done to prevent it.
One of the most sophisticated airplanes in the world is the US 
Air Force’s F-22. However, it has been involved in a number of 
accidents, and pilots have complained that they suffered oxygen 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 165
deprivation (hypoxia). In 2010, a crash destroyed an F-22 and 
killed the pilot. The Air Force investigation board studied the inci-
dent and two years later, in 2012, released a report that blamed the 
accident on pilot error: “failure to recognize and initiate a timely 
dive recovery due to channelized attention, breakdown of visual 
scan and unrecognized spatial distortion.”
In 2013, the Inspector General’s office of the US Department of 
Defense reviewed the Air Force’s findings, disagreeing with the as-
sessment. In my opinion, this time a proper root cause analysis was 
done. The Inspector General asked “why sudden incapacitation or 
unconsciousness was not considered a contributory factor.” The Air 
Force, to nobody’s surprise, disagreed with the criticism. They ar-
gued that they had done a thorough review and that their conclu-
sion “was supported by clear and convincing evidence.” Their only 
fault was that the report “could have been more clearly written.”
It is only slightly unfair to parody the two reports this way:
Air Force: It was pilot error—the pilot failed to take corrective action.
Inspector General: That’s because the pilot was probably unconscious.
Air Force: So you agree, the pilot failed to correct the problem.
THE FIVE WHYS
Root cause analysis is intended to determine the underlying cause 
of an incident, not the proximate cause. The Japanese have long 
followed a procedure for getting at root causes that they call the 
“Five Whys,” originally developed by Sakichi Toyoda and used by 
the Toyota Motor Company as part of the Toyota Production Sys-
tem for improving quality. Today it is widely deployed. Basically, 
it means that when searching for the reason, even after you have 
found one, do not stop: ask why that was the case. And then ask 
why again. Keep asking until you have uncovered the true under-
lying causes. Does it take exactly five? No, but calling the proce-
dure “Five Whys” emphasizes the need to keep going even after a 
reason has been found. Consider how this might be applied to the 
analysis of the F-22 crash:

166 The Design of Everyday Things
Five Whys
Question 
Answer
Q1: Why did the plane crash? 
Because it was in an uncontrolled   
 
dive.
Q2: Why didn’t the pilot recover from the dive? 
Because the pilot failed to initiate a   
 
timely recovery.
Q3: Why was that? 
Because he might have been 
 
unconscious (or oxygen deprived).
Q4: Why was that? 
We don’t know. We need to find out.
Etc.
The Five Whys of this example are only a partial analysis. For 
example, we need to know why the plane was in a dive (the report 
explains this, but it is too technical to go into here; suffice it to say 
that it, too, suggests that the dive was related to a possible oxygen 
deprivation).
The Five Whys do not guarantee success. The question why is 
ambiguous and can lead to different answers by different investi-
gators. There is still a tendency to stop too soon, perhaps when the 
limit of the investigator’s understanding has been reached. It also 
tends to emphasize the need to find a single cause for an incident, 
whereas most complex events have multiple, complex causal fac-
tors. Nonetheless, it is a powerful technique.
The tendency to stop seeking reasons as soon as a human error 
has been found is widespread. I once reviewed a number of acci-
dents in which highly trained workers at an electric utility com-
pany had been electrocuted when they contacted or came too close 
to the high-voltage lines they were servicing. All the investigat-
ing committees found the workers to be at fault, something even 
the workers (those who had survived) did not dispute. But when 
the committees were investigating the complex causes of the in-
cidents, why did they stop once they found a human error? Why 
didn’t they keep going to find out why the error had occurred, 
what circumstances had led to it, and then, why those circum-
stances had happened? The committees never went far enough to 
find the deeper, root causes of the accidents. Nor did they consider 
redesigning the systems and procedures to make the incidents 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
167
either impossible or far less likely. When people err, change the 
system so that type of error will be reduced or eliminated. When 
complete elimination is not possible, redesign to reduce the impact.
It wasn’t difficult for me to suggest simple changes to procedures 
that would have prevented most of the incidents at the utility com-
pany. It had never occurred to the committee to think of this. The 
problem is that to have followed my recommendations would 
have meant changing the culture from an attitude among the field 
workers that “We are supermen: we can solve any problem, repair 
the most complex outage. We do not make errors.” It is not possi-
ble to eliminate human error if it is thought of as a personal failure 
rather than as a sign of poor design of procedures or equipment. 
My report to the company executives was received politely. I was 
even thanked. Several years later I contacted a friend at the com-
pany and asked what changes they had made. “No changes,” he 
said. “And we are still injuring people.”
One big problem is that the natural tendency to blame someone 
for an error is even shared by those who made the error, who 
often agree that it was their fault. People do tend to blame them-
selves when they do something that, after the fact, seems inex-
cusable. “I knew better,” is a common comment by those who 
have erred. But when someone says, “It was my fault, I knew 
better,” this is not a valid analysis of the problem. That doesn’t 
help prevent its recurrence. When many people all have the same 
problem, shouldn’t another cause be found? If the system lets you 
make the error, it is badly designed. And if the system induces 
you to make the error, then it is really badly designed. When I 
turn on the wrong stove burner, it is not due to my lack of knowl-
edge: it is due to poor mapping between controls and burners. 
Teaching me the relationship will not stop the error from recur-
ring: redesigning the stove will.
We can’t fix problems unless people admit they exist. When 
we blame people, it is then difficult to convince organizations to 
restructure the design to eliminate these problems. After all, if a 
person is at fault, replace the person. But seldom is this the case: 
usually the system, the procedures, and social pressures have led 

168 The Design of Everyday Things
to the problems, and the problems won’t be fixed without address-
ing all of these factors.
Why do people err? Because the designs focus upon the require-
ments of the system and the machines, and not upon the re-
quirements of people. Most machines require precise commands 
and guidance, forcing people to enter numerical information per-
fectly. But people aren’t very good at great precision. We frequently 
make errors when asked to type or write sequences of numbers 
or letters. This is well known: so why are machines still being de-
signed that require such great precision, where pressing the wrong 
key can lead to horrendous results?
People are creative, constructive, exploratory beings. We are par-
ticularly good at novelty, at creating new ways of doing things, 
and at seeing new opportunities. Dull, repetitive, precise require-
ments fight against these traits. We are alert to changes in the en-
vironment, noticing new things, and then thinking about them 
and their implications. These are virtues, but they get turned into 
negative features when we are forced to serve machines. Then we 
are punished for lapses in attention, for deviating from the tightly 
prescribed routines.
A major cause of error is time stress. Time is often critical, es-
pecially in such places as manufacturing or chemical processing 
plants and hospitals. But even everyday tasks can have time pres-
sures. Add environmental factors, such as poor weather or heavy 
traffic, and the time stresses increase. In commercial establish-
ments, there is strong pressure not to slow the processes, because 
doing so would inconvenience many, lead to significant loss of 
money, and, in a hospital, possibly decrease the quality of patient 
care. There is a lot of pressure to push ahead with the work even 
when an outside observer would say it was dangerous to do so. 
In many industries, if the operators actually obeyed all the proce-
dures, the work would never get done. So we push the boundaries: 
we stay up far longer than is natural. We try to do too many tasks 
at the same time. We drive faster than is safe. Most of the time we 
manage okay. We might even be rewarded and praised for our he-

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 169
roic efforts. But when things go wrong and we fail, then this same 
behavior is blamed and punished.
Deliberate Violations
Errors are not the only type of human failures. Sometimes peo-
ple knowingly take risks. When the outcome is positive, they are 
often rewarded. When the result is negative, they might be pun-
ished. But how do we classify these deliberate violations of known, 
proper behavior? In the error literature, they tend to be ignored. In 
the accident literature, they are an important component.
Deliberate deviations play an important role in many accidents. 
They are defined as cases where people intentionally violate pro-
cedures and regulations. Why do they happen? Well, almost every 
one of us has probably deliberately violated laws, rules, or even 
our own best judgment at times. Ever go faster than the speed 
limit? Drive too fast in the snow or rain? Agree to do some hazard-
ous act, even while privately thinking it foolhardy to do so?
In many industries, the rules are written more with a goal toward 
legal compliance than with an understanding of the work require-
ments. As a result, if workers followed the rules, they couldn’t get 
their jobs done. Do you sometimes prop open locked doors? Drive 
with too little sleep? Work with co-workers even though you are ill 
(and might therefore be infectious)?
Routine violations occur when noncompliance is so frequent that 
it is ignored. Situational violations occur when there are special cir-
cumstances (example: going through a red light “because no other 
cars were visible and I was late”). In some cases, the only way to 
complete a job might be to violate a rule or procedure.
A major cause of violations is inappropriate rules or procedures 
that not only invite violation but encourage it. Without the viola-
tions, the work could not be done. Worse, when employees feel it 
necessary to violate the rules in order to get the job done and, as a 
result, succeed, they will probably be congratulated and rewarded. 
This, of course, unwittingly rewards noncompliance. Cultures that 
encourage and commend violations set poor role models.

170 The Design of Everyday Things
Although violations are a form of error, these are organizational 
and societal errors, important but outside the scope of the design of 
everyday things. The human error examined here is unintentional: 
deliberate violations, by definition, are intentional deviations that 
are known to be risky, with the potential of doing harm.
Two Types of Errors: Slips and Mistakes
Many years ago, the British psychologist James Reason and I de-
veloped a general classification of human error. We divided human 
error into two major categories: slips and mistakes (Figure 5.1). This 
classification has proved to be of value for both theory and practice. 
It is widely used in the study of error in such diverse areas as indus-
trial and aviation accidents, and medical errors. The discussion gets 
a little technical, so I have kept technicalities to a minimum. This 
topic is of extreme importance to design, so stick with it.
DEFINITIONS: ERRORS, SLIPS, AND MISTAKES
Human error is defined as any deviance from “appropriate” be-
havior. The word appropriate is in quotes because in many circum-
stances, the appropriate behavior is not known or is only deter-
FIGURE 5.1. Classification of 
Errors. Errors have two major 
forms. Slips occur when the goal 
is correct, but the required actions 
are not done properly: the exe-
cution is flawed. Mistakes occur 
when the goal or plan is wrong. 
Slips and mistakes can be further 
divided based upon their under-
lying causes. Memory lapses can 
lead to either slips or mistakes, 
depending upon whether the 
memory failure was at the highest 
level of cognition (mistakes) or at 
lower (subconscious) levels (slips). 
Although deliberate violations of 
procedures are clearly inappropri-
ate behaviors that often lead to ac-
cidents, these are not considered as 
errors (see discussion in text).

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
171
mined after the fact. But still, error is defined as deviance from the 
generally accepted correct or appropriate behavior.
Error is the general term for all wrong actions. There are two ma-
jor classes of error: slips and mistakes, as shown in Figure 5.1; slips 
are further divided into two major classes and mistakes into three. 
These categories of errors all have different implications for design. 
I now turn to a more detailed look at these classes of errors and 
their design implications.
SLIPS
A slip occurs when a person intends to do one action and ends up 
doing something else. With a slip, the action performed is not the 
same as the action that was intended.
There are two major classes of slips: action-based and memory-lapse. 
In action-based slips, the wrong action is performed. In lapses, 
memory fails, so the intended action is not done or its results not 
evaluated. Action-based slips and memory lapses can be further 
classified according to their causes.
Example of an action-based slip. I poured some milk into my coffee 
and then put the coffee cup into the refrigerator. This is the correct 
action applied to the wrong object.
Example of a memory-lapse slip. I forget to turn off the gas burner on 
my stove after cooking dinner. 
MISTAKES
A mistake occurs when the wrong goal is established or the wrong 
plan is formed. From that point on, even if the actions are executed 
properly they are part of the error, because the actions themselves are 
inappropriate—they are part of the wrong plan. With a mistake, the 
action that is performed matches the plan: it is the plan that is wrong.
Mistakes have three major classes: rule-based, knowledge-based, 
and memory-lapse. In a rule-based mistake, the person has appro-
priately diagnosed the situation, but then decided upon an er-
roneous course of action: the wrong rule is being followed. In a 
knowledge-based mistake, the problem is misdiagnosed because 

172 The Design of Everyday Things
of erroneous or incomplete knowledge. Memory-lapse mistakes 
take place when there is forgetting at the stages of goals, plans, 
or evaluation. Two of the mistakes leading to the “Gimli Glider” 
Boeing 767 emergency landing were:
Example of knowledge-based mistake. Weight of fuel was computed 
in pounds instead of kilograms.
Example of memory-lapse mistake. A mechanic failed to complete 
troubleshooting because of distraction.
ERROR AND THE SEVEN STAGES OF ACTION
Errors can be understood through reference to the seven stages 
of the action cycle of Chapter 2 (Figure 5.2). Mistakes are er-
rors in setting the goal or plan, and in comparing results with 
expectations—the higher levels of cognition. Slips happen in 
the execution of a plan, or in the perception or interpretation of 
the outcome—the lower stages. Memory lapses can happen at any 
of the eight transitions between stages, shown by the X’s in Figure 
5.2B. A memory lapse at one of these transitions stops the action 
cycle from proceeding, and so the desired action is not completed.
FIGURE 5.2. Where Slips and Mistakes Originate in the Action Cycle. Figure A 
shows that action slips come from the bottom four stages of the action cycle and mis-
takes from the top three stages. Memory lapses impact the transitions between stages 
(shown by the X’s in Figure B). Memory lapses at the higher levels lead to mistakes, and 
lapses at the lower levels lead to slips.
A.
B.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
173
Slips are the result of subconscious actions getting waylaid en 
route. Mistakes result from conscious deliberations. The same pro-
cesses that make us creative and insightful by allowing us to see 
relationships between apparently unrelated things, that let us leap 
to correct conclusions on the basis of partial or even faulty evi-
dence, also lead to mistakes. Our ability to generalize from small 
amounts of information helps tremendously in new situations; but 
sometimes we generalize too rapidly, classifying a new situation 
as similar to an old one when, in fact, there are significant discrep-
ancies. This leads to mistakes that can be difficult to discover, let 
alone eliminate.
The Classification of Slips
A colleague reported that he went to his car to drive to work. As he 
drove away, he realized that he had forgotten his briefcase, so he turned 
around and went back. He stopped the car, turned off the engine, and 
unbuckled his wristwatch. Yes, his wristwatch, instead of his seatbelt.
The story illustrates both a memory-lapse slip and an action slip. 
The forgetting of the briefcase is a memory-lapse slip. The unbuck-
ling of the wristwatch is an action slip, in this case a combination 
of description-similarity and capture error (described later in this 
chapter).
Most everyday errors are slips. Intending to do one action, you 
find yourself doing another. When a person says something clearly 
and distinctly to you, you “hear” something quite different. The 
study of slips is the study of the psychology of everyday errors—
what Freud called “the psychopathology of everyday life.” Freud 
believed that slips have hidden, dark meanings, but most are ac-
counted for by rather simple mental mechanisms.
An interesting property of slips is that, paradoxically, they tend 
to occur more frequently to skilled people than to novices. Why? 
Because slips often result from a lack of attention to the task. 
Skilled people—experts—tend to perform tasks automatically, un-
der subconscious control. Novices have to pay considerable con-
scious attention, resulting in a relatively low occurrence of slips.

174 The Design of Everyday Things
Some slips result from the similarities of actions. Or an event 
in the world may automatically trigger an action. Sometimes our 
thoughts and actions may remind us of unintended actions, 
which we then perform. There are numerous different kinds of 
action slips, categorized by the underlying mechanisms that give 
rise to them. The three most relevant to design are:
• capture slips
• description-similarity slips
• mode errors
CAPTURE SLIPS
I was using a copying machine, and I was counting the pages. I found 
myself counting, “1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Jack, Queen, King.” I had 
been playing cards recently.
The capture slip is defined as the situation where, instead of the 
desired activity, a more frequently or recently performed one gets 
done instead: it captures the activity. Capture errors require that 
part of the action sequences involved in the two activities be iden-
tical, with one sequence being far more familiar than the other. 
After doing the identical part, the more frequent or more recent 
activity continues, and the intended one does not get done. Sel-
dom, if ever, does the unfamiliar sequence capture the familiar one. 
All that is needed is a lapse of attention to the desired action at 
the critical junction when the identical portions of the sequences 
diverge into the two different activities. Capture errors are, there-
fore, partial memory-lapse errors. Interestingly, capture errors are 
more prevalent in experienced skilled people than in beginners, in 
part because the experienced person has automated the required 
actions and may not be paying conscious attention when the in-
tended action deviates from the more frequent one.
Designers need to avoid procedures that have identical open-
ing steps but then diverge. The more experienced the workers, the 
more likely they are to fall prey to capture. Whenever possible, 
sequences should be designed to differ from the very start.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
175
DESCRIPTION-SIMILARITY SLIPS
A former student reported that one day he came home from jogging, took 
off his sweaty shirt, and rolled it up in a ball, intending to throw it in 
the laundry basket. Instead he threw it in the toilet. (It wasn’t poor aim: 
the laundry basket and toilet were in different rooms.)
In the slip known as a description-similarity slip, the error is to 
act upon an item similar to the target. This happens when the de-
scription of the target is sufficiently vague. Much as we saw in 
Chapter 3, Figure 3.1, where people had difficulty distinguishing 
among different images of money because their internal descrip-
tions did not have sufficient discriminating information, the same 
thing can happen to us, especially when we are tired, stressed, or 
overloaded. In the example that opened this section, both the laun-
dry basket and the toilet bowl are containers, and if the description 
of the target was sufficiently ambiguous, such as “a large enough 
container,” the slip could be triggered.
Remember the discussion in Chapter 3 that most objects don’t 
need precise descriptions, simply enough precision to distinguish 
the desired target from alternatives. This means that a description 
that usually suffices may fail when the situation changes so that 
multiple similar items now match the description. Description-
similarity errors result in performing the correct action on the 
wrong object. Obviously, the more the wrong and right objects 
have in common, the more likely the errors are to occur. Simi-
larly, the more objects present at the same time, the more likely 
the error.
Designers need to ensure that controls and displays for differ-
ent purposes are significantly different from one another. A lineup 
of identical-looking switches or displays is very apt to lead to 
description-similarity error. In the design of airplane cockpits, 
many controls are shape coded so that they both look and feel dif-
ferent from one another: the throttle levers are different from the 
flap levers (which might look and feel like a wing flap), which are 
different from the landing gear control (which might look and feel 
like a wheel).

176 The Design of Everyday Things
MEMORY-LAPSE SLIPS
Errors caused by memory failures are common. Consider these 
examples:
•  Making copies of a document, walking off with the copy, but leaving 
the original inside the machine.
•  Forgetting a child. This error has numerous examples, such as leaving 
a child behind at a rest stop during a car trip, or in the dressing room 
of a department store, or a new mother forgetting her one-month-old 
and having to go to the police for help in finding the baby.
•  Losing a pen because it was taken out to write something, then put 
down while doing some other task. The pen is forgotten in the ac-
tivities of putting away a checkbook, picking up goods, talking to a 
salesperson or friends, and so on. Or the reverse: borrowing a pen, 
using it, and then putting it away in your pocket or purse, even 
though it is someone else’s (this is also a capture error).
•  Using a bank or credit card to withdraw money from an automatic 
teller machine, then walking off without the card, is such a frequent 
error that many machines now have a forcing function: the card must 
be removed before the money will be delivered. Of course, it is then 
possible to walk off without the money, but this is less likely than 
forgetting the card because money is the goal of using the machine. 
Memory lapses are common causes of error. They can lead to 
several kinds of errors: failing to do all of the steps of a procedure; 
repeating steps; forgetting the outcome of an action; or forgetting 
the goal or plan, thereby causing the action to be stopped.
The immediate cause of most memory-lapse failures is interrup-
tions, events that intervene between the time an action is decided 
upon and the time it is completed. Quite often the interference 
comes from the machines we are using: the many steps required 
between the start and finish of the operations can overload the ca-
pacity of short-term or working memory.
There are several ways to combat memory-lapse errors. One is to 
minimize the number of steps; another, to provide vivid reminders 
of steps that need to be completed. A superior method is to use the 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
177
forcing function of Chapter 4. For example, automated teller ma-
chines often require removal of the bank card before delivering the 
requested money: this prevents forgetting the bank card, capital-
izing on the fact that people seldom forget the goal of the activity, 
in this case the money. With pens, the solution is simply to prevent 
their removal, perhaps by chaining public pens to the counter. Not 
all memory-lapse errors lend themselves to simple solutions. In 
many cases the interruptions come from outside the system, where 
the designer has no control.
MODE-ERROR SLIPS
A mode error occurs when a device has different states in which 
the same controls have different meanings: we call these states 
modes. Mode errors are inevitable in anything that has more pos-
sible actions than it has controls or displays; that is, the controls 
mean different things in the different modes. This is unavoidable 
as we add more and more functions to our devices. 
Ever turn off the wrong device in your home entertainment sys-
tem? This happens when one control is used for multiple purposes. 
In the home, this is simply frustrating. In industry, the confusion 
that results when operators believe the system to be in one mode, 
when in reality it is in another, has resulted in serious accidents 
and loss of life.
It is tempting to save money and space by having a single control 
serve multiple purposes. Suppose there are ten different functions 
on a device. Instead of using ten separate knobs or switches—
which would take considerable space, add extra cost, and appear 
intimidatingly complex, why not use just two controls, one to select 
the function, the other to set the function to the desired condition? 
Although the resulting design appears quite simple and easy to 
use, this apparent simplicity masks the underlying complexity of 
use. The operator must always be completely aware of the mode, of 
what function is active. Alas, the prevalence of mode errors shows 
this assumption to be false. Yes, if I select a mode and then imme-
diately adjust the parameters, I am not apt to be confused about 
the state. But what if I select the mode and then get interrupted 

178 The Design of Everyday Things
by other events? Or if the mode is maintained for considerable 
periods? Or, as in the case of the Airbus accident discussed be-
low, the two modes being selected are very similar in control 
and function, but have different operating characteristics, which 
means that the resulting mode error is difficult to discover? 
Sometimes the use of modes is justifiable, such as the need to 
put many controls and displays in a small, restricted space, but 
whatever the reason, modes are a common cause of confusion 
and error.
Alarm clocks often use the same controls and display for setting 
the time of day and the time the alarm should go off, and many 
of us have thereby set one when we meant the other. Similarly, 
when time is displayed on a twelve-hour scale, it is easy to set the 
alarm to go off at seven a.m. only later to discover that the alarm 
had been set for seven p.m. The use of “a.m.” and “p.m.” to distin-
guish times before and after noon is a common source of confu-
sion and error, hence the common use of 24-hour time specification 
throughout most of the world (the major exceptions being North 
America, Australia, India, and the Philippines). Watches with mul-
tiple functions have similar problems, in this case required because 
of the small amount of space available for controls and displays. 
Modes exist in most computer programs, in our cell phones, and 
in the automatic controls of commercial aircraft. A number of se-
rious accidents in commercial aviation can be attributed to mode 
errors, especially in aircraft that use automatic systems (which 
have a large number of complex modes). As automobiles become 
more complex, with the dashboard controls for driving, heating 
and air-conditioning, entertainment, and navigation, modes are 
increasingly common.
An accident with an Airbus airplane illustrates the problem. The 
flight control equipment (often referred to as the automatic pilot) 
had two modes, one for controlling vertical speed, the other for 
controlling the flight path’s angle of descent. In one case, when the 
pilots were attempting to land, the pilots thought that they were 
controlling the angle of descent, whereas they had accidentally 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
179
selected the mode that controlled speed of descent. The number 
(–3.3) that was entered into the system to represent an appropriate 
angle (–3.3º) was too steep a rate of descent when interpreted as 
vertical speed (–3,300 feet/minute: –3.3º would only be –800 feet/
minute). This mode confusion contributed to the resulting fatal ac-
cident. After a detailed study of the accident, Airbus changed the 
display on the instrument so that vertical speed would always be 
displayed with a four-digit number and angle with two digits, thus 
reducing the chance of confusion.
Mode error is really design error. Mode errors are especially 
likely where the equipment does not make the mode visible, so 
the user is expected to remember what mode has been established, 
sometimes hours earlier, during which time many intervening 
events might have occurred. Designers must try to avoid modes, 
but if they are necessary, the equipment must make it obvious 
which mode is invoked. Once again, designers must always com-
pensate for interfering activities.
The Classification of Mistakes
Mistakes result from the choice of inappropriate goals and plans or 
from faulty comparison of the outcome with the goals during eval-
uation. In mistakes, a person makes a poor decision, misclassifies a 
situation, or fails to take all the relevant factors into account. Many 
mistakes arise from the vagaries of human thought, often because 
people tend to rely upon remembered experiences rather than on 
more systematic analysis. We make decisions based upon what is 
in our memory. But as discussed in Chapter 3, retrieval from long-
term memory is actually a reconstruction rather than an accurate 
record. As a result, it is subject to numerous biases. Among other 
things, our memories tend to be biased toward overgeneralization 
of the commonplace and overemphasis of the discrepant.
The Danish engineer Jens Rasmussen distinguished among three 
modes of behavior: skill-based, rule-based, and knowledge-based. 
This three-level classification scheme provides a practical tool that 
has found wide acceptance in applied areas, such as the design of 

180 The Design of Everyday Things
many industrial systems. Skill-based behavior occurs when work-
ers are extremely expert at their jobs, so they can do the everyday, 
routine tasks with little or no thought or conscious attention. The 
most common form of errors in skill-based behavior is slips.
Rule-based behavior occurs when the normal routine is no lon-
ger applicable but the new situation is one that is known, so there 
is already a well-prescribed course of action: a rule. Rules simply 
might be learned behaviors from previous experiences, but in-
cludes formal procedures prescribed in courses and manuals, usu-
ally in the form of “if-then” statements, such as, “If the engine will 
not start, then do [the appropriate action].” Errors with rule-based 
behavior can be either a mistake or a slip. If the wrong rule is se-
lected, this would be a mistake. If the error occurs during the exe-
cution of the rule, it is most likely a slip. 
Knowledge-based procedures occur when unfamiliar events oc-
cur, where neither existing skills nor rules apply. In this case, there 
must be considerable reasoning and problem-solving. Plans might 
be developed, tested, and then used or modified. Here, conceptual 
models are essential in guiding development of the plan and inter-
pretation of the situation.
In both rule-based and knowledge-based situations, the most seri-
ous mistakes occur when the situation is misdiagnosed. As a result, 
an inappropriate rule is executed, or in the case of knowledge-based 
problems, the effort is addressed to solving the wrong problem. In 
addition, with misdiagnosis of the problem comes misinterpreta-
tion of the environment, as well as faulty comparisons of the cur-
rent state with expectations. These kinds of mistakes can be very 
difficult to detect and correct.
RULE-BASED MISTAKES
When new procedures have to be invoked or when simple prob-
lems arise, we can characterize the actions of skilled people as rule-
based. Some rules come from experience; others are formal proce-
dures in manuals or rulebooks, or even less formal guides, such 
as cookbooks for food preparation. In either case, all we must do 
is identify the situation, select the proper rule, and then follow it.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
181
When driving, behavior follows well-learned rules. Is the light 
red? If so, stop the car. Wish to turn left? Signal the intention to 
turn and move as far left as legally permitted: slow the vehicle and 
wait for a safe break in traffic, all the while following the traffic 
rules and relevant signs and lights.
Rule-based mistakes occur in multiple ways:
•   The situation is mistakenly interpreted, thereby invoking the wrong 
goal or plan, leading to following an inappropriate rule.
•  The correct rule is invoked, but the rule itself is faulty, either because 
it was formulated improperly or because conditions are different 
than assumed by the rule or through incomplete knowledge used to 
determine the rule. All of these lead to knowledge-based mistakes.
•  The correct rule is invoked, but the outcome is incorrectly evaluated. 
This error in evaluation, usually rule- or knowledge-based itself, can 
lead to further problems as the action cycle continues.
Example 1:  In 2013, at the Kiss nightclub in Santa Maria, Brazil, pyro-
technics used by the band ignited a fire that killed over 230 people. 
The tragedy illustrates several mistakes. The band made a knowl-
edge-based mistake when they used outdoor flares, which ignited the 
ceiling’s acoustic tiles. The band thought the flares were safe. Many 
people rushed into the rest rooms, mistakenly thinking they were ex-
its: they died. Early reports suggested that the guards, unaware of 
the fire, at first mistakenly blocked people from leaving the building. 
Why? Because nightclub attendees would sometimes leave without 
paying for their drinks.
 The mistake was in devising a rule that did not take account of 
emergencies. A root cause analysis would reveal that the goal was 
to prevent inappropriate exit but still allow the doors to be used in 
an emergency. One solution is doors that trigger alarms when used, 
deterring people trying to sneak out, but allowing exit when needed. 
Example 2: Turning the thermostat of an oven to its maximum tempera-
ture to get it to the proper cooking temperature faster is a mistake 
based upon a false conceptual model of the way the oven works. If 
the person wanders off and forgets to come back and check the oven 

182 The Design of Everyday Things
temperature after a reasonable period (a memory-lapse slip), the im-
proper high setting of the oven temperature can lead to an accident, 
possibly a fire.
Example 3: A driver, unaccustomed to anti-lock brakes, encounters 
an unexpected object in the road on a wet, rainy day. The driver ap-
plies full force to the brakes but the car skids, triggering the anti-lock 
brakes to rapidly turn the brakes on and off, as they are designed to 
do. The driver, feeling the vibrations, believes that it indicates mal-
function and therefore lifts his foot off the brake pedal. In fact, the 
vibration is a signal that anti-lock brakes are working properly. The 
driver’s misevaluation leads to the wrong behavior.
Rule-based mistakes are difficult to avoid and then difficult to 
detect. Once the situation has been classified, the selection of the 
appropriate rule is often straightforward. But what if the classifica-
tion of the situation is wrong? This is difficult to discover because 
there is usually considerable evidence to support the erroneous 
classification of the situation and the choice of rule. In complex 
situations, the problem is too much information: information that 
both supports the decision and also contradicts it. In the face of 
time pressures to make a decision, it is difficult to know which 
evidence to consider, which to reject. People usually decide by tak-
ing the current situation and matching it with something that hap-
pened earlier. Although human memory is quite good at matching 
examples from the past with the present situation, this doesn’t 
mean that the matching is accurate or appropriate. The matching 
is biased by recency, regularity, and uniqueness. Recent events are 
remembered far better than less recent ones. Frequent events 
are remembered through their regularities, and unique events are 
remembered because of their uniqueness. But suppose the current 
event is different from all that has been experienced before: people 
are still apt to find some match in memory to use as a guide. The 
same powers that make us so good at dealing with the common 
and the unique lead to severe error with novel events. 
What is a designer to do? Provide as much guidance as possible 
to ensure that the current state of things is displayed in a coherent 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 183
and easily interpreted format—ideally graphical. This is a difficult 
problem. All major decision makers worry about the complexity 
of real-world events, where the problem is often too much infor-
mation, much of it contradictory. Often, decisions must be made 
quickly. Sometimes it isn’t even clear that there is an incident or 
that a decision is actually being made.
Think of it like this. In your home, there are probably a number 
of broken or misbehaving items. There might be some burnt-out 
lights, or (in my home) a reading light that works fine for a little 
while, then goes out: we have to walk over and wiggle the fluo-
rescent bulb. There might be a leaky faucet or other minor faults 
that you know about but are postponing action to remedy. Now 
consider a major process-control manufacturing plant (an oil refin-
ery, a chemical plant, or a nuclear power plant). These have thou-
sands, perhaps tens of thousands, of valves and gauges, displays 
and controls, and so on. Even the best of plants always has some 
faulty parts. The maintenance crews always have a list of items to 
take care of. With all the alarms that trigger when a problem arises, 
even though it might be minor, and all the everyday failures, how 
does one know which might be a significant indicator of a major 
problem? Every single one usually has a simple, rational explana-
tion, so not making it an urgent item is a sensible decision. In fact, 
the maintenance crew simply adds it to a list. Most of the time, this is 
the correct decision. The one time in a thousand (or even, one time 
in a million) that the decision is wrong makes it the one they will 
be blamed for: how could they have missed such obvious signals? 
Hindsight is always superior to foresight. When the accident in-
vestigation committee reviews the event that contributed to the 
problem, they know what actually happened, so it is easy for them 
to pick out which information was relevant, which was not. This is 
retrospective decision making. But when the incident was taking 
place, the people were probably overwhelmed with far too much 
irrelevant information and probably not a lot of relevant infor-
mation. How were they to know which to attend to and which to 
ignore? Most of the time, experienced operators get things right. 
The one time they fail, the retrospective analysis is apt to condemn 

184 The Design of Everyday Things
them for missing the obvious. Well, during the event, nothing may 
be obvious. I return to this topic later in the chapter.
You will face this while driving, while handling your finances, 
and while just going through your daily life. Most of the unusual 
incidents you read about are not relevant to you, so you can safely 
ignore them. Which things should be paid attention to, which 
should be ignored? Industry faces this problem all the time, as do 
governments. The intelligence communities are swamped with 
data. How do they decide which cases are serious? The public 
hears about their mistakes, but not about the far more frequent 
cases that they got right or about the times they ignored data as not 
being meaningful—and were correct to do so.
If every decision had to be questioned, nothing would ever get 
done. But if decisions are not questioned, there will be major 
mistakes—rarely, but often of substantial penalty.
The design challenge is to present the information about the state 
of the system (a device, vehicle, plant, or activities being moni-
tored) in a way that is easy to assimilate and interpret, as well as to 
provide alternative explanations and interpretations. It is useful 
to question decisions, but impossible to do so if every action—or 
failure to act—requires close attention.
This is a difficult problem with no obvious solution.
KNOWLEDGE-BASED MISTAKES
Knowledge-based behavior takes place when the situation is novel 
enough that there are no skills or rules to cover it. In this case, a 
new procedure must be devised. Whereas skills and rules are con-
trolled at the behavioral level of human processing and are there-
fore subconscious and automatic, knowledge-based behavior is 
controlled at the reflective level and is slow and conscious.
With knowledge-based behavior, people are consciously prob-
lem solving. They are in an unknown situation and do not have 
any available skills or rules that apply directly. Knowledge-based 
behavior is required either when a person encounters an unknown 
situation, perhaps being asked to use some novel equipment, or 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 185
even when doing a familiar task and things go wrong, leading to a 
novel, uninterpretable state.
The best solution to knowledge-based situations is to be found 
in a good understanding of the situation, which in most cases also 
translates into an appropriate conceptual model. In complex cases, 
help is needed, and here is where good cooperative problem-solving 
skills and tools are required. Sometimes, good procedural manuals 
(paper or electronic) will do the job, especially if critical observa-
tions can be used to arrive at the relevant procedures to follow. A 
more powerful approach is to develop intelligent computer sys-
tems, using good search and appropriate reasoning techniques 
(artificial-intelligence decision-making and problem-solving). The 
difficulties here are in establishing the interaction of the people with 
the automation: human teams and automated systems have to be 
thought of as collaborative, cooperative systems. Instead, they are 
often built by assigning the tasks that machines can do to the ma-
chines and leaving the humans to do the rest. This usually means 
that machines do the parts that are easy for people, but when the 
problems become complex, which is precisely when people could 
use assistance, that is when the machines usually fail. (I discuss 
this problem extensively in The Design of Future Things.)
MEMORY-LAPSE MISTAKES
Memory lapses can lead to mistakes if the memory failure leads to 
forgetting the goal or plan of action. A common cause of the lapse 
is an interruption that leads to forgetting the evaluation of the cur-
rent state of the environment. These lead to mistakes, not slips, be-
cause the goals and plans become wrong. Forgetting earlier evalu-
ations often means remaking the decision, sometimes erroneously. 
The design cures for memory-lapse mistakes are the same as for 
memory-lapse slips: ensure that all the relevant information is con-
tinuously available. The goals, plans, and current evaluation of 
the system are of particular importance and should be continually 
available. Far too many designs eliminate all signs of these items 
once they have been made or acted upon. Once again, the designer 

186 The Design of Everyday Things
should assume that people will be interrupted during their activities 
and that they may need assistance in resuming their operations.
Social and Institutional Pressures
A subtle issue that seems to figure in many accidents is social pres-
sure. Although at first it may not seem relevant to design, it has 
strong influence on everyday behavior. In industrial settings, social 
pressures can lead to misinterpretation, mistakes, and accidents. To 
understand human error, it is essential to understand social pressure.
Complex problem-solving is required when one is faced with 
knowledge-based problems. In some cases, it can take teams of peo-
ple days to understand what is wrong and the best ways to respond. 
This is especially true of situations where mistakes have been made 
in the diagnosis of the problem. Once the mistaken diagnosis is 
made, all information from then on is interpreted from the wrong 
point of view. Appropriate reconsiderations might only take place 
during team turnover, when new people come into the situation 
with a fresh viewpoint, allowing them to form different interpreta-
tions of the events. Sometimes just asking one or more of the team 
members to take a few hours’ break can lead to the same fresh anal-
ysis (although it is understandably difficult to convince someone 
who is battling an emergency situation to stop for a few hours).
In commercial installations, the pressure to keep systems run-
ning is immense. Considerable money might be lost if an expen-
sive system is shut down. Operators are often under pressure not 
to do this. The result has at times been tragic. Nuclear power plants 
are kept running longer than is safe. Airplanes have taken off be-
fore everything was ready and before the pilots had received per-
mission. One such incident led to the largest accident in aviation 
history. Although the incident happened in 1977, a long time ago, 
the lessons learned are still very relevant today.
In Tenerife, in the Canary Islands, a KLM Boeing 747 crashed 
during takeoff into a Pan American 747 that was taxiing on the 
same runway, killing 583 people. The KLM plane had not received 
clearance to take off, but the weather was starting to get bad and 
the crew had already been delayed for too long (even being on the 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
187
Canary Islands was a diversion from the scheduled flight—bad 
weather had prevented their landing at their scheduled destina-
tion). And the Pan American flight should not have been on the 
runway, but there was considerable misunderstanding between 
the pilots and the air traffic controllers. Furthermore, the fog was 
coming in so thickly that neither plane’s crew could see the other.
In the Tenerife disaster, time and economic pressures were acting 
together with cultural and weather conditions. The Pan American 
pilots questioned their orders to taxi on the runway, but they con-
tinued anyway. The first officer of the KLM flight voiced minor 
objections to the captain, trying to explain that they were not yet 
cleared for takeoff (but the first officer was very junior to the cap-
tain, who was one of KLM’s most respected pilots). All in all, a ma-
jor tragedy occurred due to a complex mixture of social pressures 
and logical explaining away of discrepant observations.
You may have experienced similar pressure, putting off refuel-
ing or recharging your car until it was too late and you ran out, 
sometimes in a truly inconvenient place (this has happened to me). 
What are the social pressures to cheat on school examinations, or 
to help others cheat? Or to not report cheating by others? Never 
underestimate the power of social pressures on behavior, causing 
otherwise sensible people to do things they know are wrong and 
possibly dangerous.
When I was in training to do underwater (scuba) diving, our in-
structor was so concerned about this that he said he would reward 
anyone who stopped a dive early in favor of safety. People are nor-
mally buoyant, so they need weights to get them beneath the surface. 
When the water is cold, the problem is intensified because divers 
must then wear either wet or dry suits to keep warm, and these 
suits add buoyancy. Adjusting buoyancy is an important part of 
the dive, so along with the weights, divers also wear air vests 
into which they continually add or remove air so that the body is 
close to neutral buoyancy. (As divers go deeper, increased water 
pressure compresses the air in their protective suits and lungs, so 
they become heavier: the divers need to add air to their vests to 
compensate.)

188 The Design of Everyday Things
When divers have gotten into difficulties and needed to get 
to the surface quickly, or when they were at the surface close to 
shore but being tossed around by waves, some drowned because 
they were still being encumbered by their heavy weights. Because the 
weights are expensive, the divers didn’t want to release them. In 
addition, if the divers released the weights and then made it back 
safely, they could never prove that the release of the weights was 
necessary, so they would feel embarrassed, creating self-induced 
social pressure. Our instructor was very aware of the resulting re-
luctance of people to take the critical step of releasing their weights 
when they weren’t entirely positive it was necessary. To counteract 
this tendency, he announced that if anyone dropped the weights 
for safety reasons, he would publicly praise the diver and replace 
the weights at no cost to the person. This was a very persuasive 
attempt to overcome social pressures.
Social pressures show up continually. They are usually difficult 
to document because most people and organizations are reluctant 
to admit these factors, so even if they are discovered in the process 
of the accident investigation, the results are often kept hidden from 
public scrutiny. A major exception is in the study of transportation 
accidents, where the review boards across the world tend to hold 
open investigations. The US National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) is an excellent example of this, and its reports are widely 
used by many accident investigators and researchers of human er-
ror (including me).
Another good example of social pressures comes from yet an-
other airplane incident. In 1982 an Air Florida flight from National 
Airport, Washington, DC, crashed during takeoff into the Four-
teenth Street Bridge over the Potomac River, killing seventy-eight 
people, including four who were on the bridge. The plane should 
not have taken off because there was ice on the wings, but it had al-
ready been delayed for over an hour and a half; this and other fac-
tors, the NTSB reported, “may have predisposed the crew to hurry.” 
The accident occurred despite the first officer’s attempt to warn 
the captain, who was flying the airplane (the captain and first 
officer—sometimes called the copilot—usually alternate flying 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 189
roles on different legs of a trip). The NTSB report quotes the flight 
deck recorder’s documenting that “although the first officer ex-
pressed concern that something ‘was not right’ to the captain four 
times during the takeoff, the captain took no action to reject the 
takeoff.” NTSB summarized the causes this way:
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable 
cause of this accident was the flight crew’s failure to use engine anti-
ice during ground operation and takeoff, their decision to take off with 
snow/ice on the airfoil surfaces of the aircraft, and the captain’s failure 
to reject the takeoff during the early stage when his attention was called 
to anomalous engine instrument readings. (NTSB, 1982.)
Again we see social pressures coupled with time and economic 
forces.
Social pressures can be overcome, but they are powerful and per-
vasive. We drive when drowsy or after drinking, knowing full well 
the dangers, but talking ourselves into believing that we are ex-
empt. How can we overcome these kinds of social problems? Good 
design alone is not sufficient. We need different training; we need 
to reward safety and put it above economic pressures. It helps if 
the equipment can make the potential dangers visible and explicit, 
but this is not always possible. To adequately address social, eco-
nomic, and cultural pressures and to improve upon company pol-
icies are the hardest parts of ensuring safe operation and behavior.
CHECKLISTS
Checklists are powerful tools, proven to increase the accuracy of 
behavior and to reduce error, particularly slips and memory lapses. 
They are especially important in situations with multiple, complex 
requirements, and even more so where there are interruptions. 
With multiple people involved in a task, it is essential that the lines 
of responsibility be clearly spelled out. It is always better to have 
two people do checklists together as a team: one to read the instruc-
tion, the other to execute it. If, instead, a single person executes 
the checklist and then, later, a second person checks the items, the 

190 The Design of Everyday Things
results are not as robust. The person following the checklist, feel-
ing confident that any errors would be caught, might do the steps 
too quickly. But the same bias affects the checker. Confident in the 
ability of the first person, the checker often does a quick, less than 
thorough job.
One paradox of groups is that quite often, adding more people 
to check a task makes it less likely that it will be done right. Why? 
Well, if you were responsible for checking the correct readings on 
a row of fifty gauges and displays, but you know that two peo-
ple before you had checked them and that one or two people who 
come after you will check your work, you might relax, thinking 
that you don’t have to be extra careful. After all, with so many 
people looking, it would be impossible for a problem to exist with-
out detection. But if everyone thinks the same way, adding more 
checks can actually increase the chance of error. A collaboratively 
followed checklist is an effective way to counteract these natural 
human tendencies.
In commercial aviation, collaboratively followed checklists are 
widely accepted as essential tools for safety. The checklist is done 
by two people, usually the two pilots of the airplane (the captain 
and first officer). In aviation, checklists have proven their worth 
and are now required in all US commercial flights. But despite the 
strong evidence confirming their usefulness, many industries still 
fiercely resist them. It makes people feel that their competence is 
being questioned. Moreover, when two people are involved, a ju-
nior person (in aviation, the first officer) is being asked to watch 
over the action of the senior person. This is a strong violation of the 
lines of authority in many cultures.
Physicians and other medical professionals have strongly resisted 
the use of checklists. It is seen as an insult to their professional 
competence. “Other people might need checklists,” they complain, 
“but not me.” Too bad. Too err is human: we all are subject to slips 
and mistakes when under stress, or under time or social pressure, 
or after being subjected to multiple interruptions, each essential 
in its own right. It is not a threat to professional competence to be 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
191
human. Legitimate criticisms of particular checklists are used as an 
indictment against the concept of checklists. Fortunately, checklists 
are slowly starting to gain acceptance in medical situations. When 
senior personnel insist on the use of checklists, it actually enhances 
their authority and professional status. It took decades for check-
lists to be accepted in commercial aviation: let us hope that medi-
cine and other professions will change more rapidly.
Designing an effective checklist is difficult. The design needs to be 
iterative, always being refined, ideally using the human-centered 
design principles of Chapter 6, continually adjusting the list until it 
covers the essential items yet is not burdensome to perform. Many 
people who object to checklists are actually objecting to badly de-
signed lists: designing a checklist for a complex task is best done by 
professional designers in conjunction with subject matter experts.
Printed checklists have one major flaw: they force the steps to 
follow a sequential ordering, even where this is not necessary or 
even possible. With complex tasks, the order in which many oper-
ations are performed may not matter, as long as they are all com-
pleted. Sometimes items early in the list cannot be done at the time 
they are encountered in the checklist. For example, in aviation one 
of the steps is to check the amount of fuel in the plane. But what if 
the fueling operation has not yet been completed when this check-
list item is encountered? Pilots will skip over it, intending to come 
back to it after the plane has been refueled. This is a clear opportu-
nity for a memory-lapse error.
In general, it is bad design to impose a sequential structure to task 
execution unless the task itself requires it. This is one of the ma-
jor benefits of electronic checklists: they can keep track of skipped 
items and can ensure that the list will not be marked as complete 
until all items have been done.
Reporting Error
If errors can be caught, then many of the problems they might lead 
to can often be avoided. But not all errors are easy to detect. More-
over, social pressures often make it difficult for people to admit to 

192 The Design of Everyday Things
their own errors (or to report the errors of others). If people report 
their own errors, they might be fined or punished. Moreover, their 
friends may make fun of them. If a person reports that someone 
else made an error, this may lead to severe personal repercussions. 
Finally, most institutions do not wish to reveal errors made by their 
staff. Hospitals, courts, police systems, utility companies—all are 
reluctant to admit to the public that their workers are capable of 
error. These are all unfortunate attitudes.
The only way to reduce the incidence of errors is to admit their 
existence, to gather together information about them, and thereby 
to be able to make the appropriate changes to reduce their occur-
rence. In the absence of data, it is difficult or impossible to make 
improvements. Rather than stigmatize those who admit to error, 
we should thank those who do so and encourage the reporting. 
We need to make it easier to report errors, for the goal is not to 
punish, but to determine how it occurred and change things so 
that it will not happen again.
CASE STUDY: JIDOKA—HOW TOYOTA HANDLES ERROR
The Toyota automobile company has developed an extremely effi-
cient error-reduction process for manufacturing, widely known as 
the Toyota Production System. Among its many key principles is a 
philosophy called Jidoka, which Toyota says is “roughly translated 
as ‘automation with a human touch.’” If a worker notices some-
thing wrong, the worker is supposed to report it, sometimes even 
stopping the entire assembly line if a faulty part is about to pro-
ceed to the next station. (A special cord, called an andon, stops the 
assembly line and alerts the expert crew.) Experts converge upon 
the problem area to determine the cause. “Why did it happen?” 
“Why was that?” “Why is that the reason?” The philosophy is to 
ask “Why?” as many times as may be necessary to get to the root 
cause of the problem and then fix it so it can never occur again.
As you might imagine, this can be rather discomforting for the 
person who found the error. But the report is expected, and when 
it is discovered that people have failed to report errors, they are 
punished, all in an attempt to get the workers to be honest.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 193
POKA-YOKE: ERROR PROOFING 
Poka-yoke is another Japanese method, this one invented by Shi-
geo Shingo, one of the Japanese engineers who played a major role 
in the development of the Toyota Production System. Poka-yoke 
translates as “error proofing” or “avoiding error.” One of the tech-
niques of poka-yoke is to add simple fixtures, jigs, or devices to 
constrain the operations so that they are correct. I practice this my-
self in my home. One trivial example is a device to help me remem-
ber which way to turn the key on the many doors in the apartment 
complex where I live. I went around with a pile of small, circular, 
green stick-on dots and put them on each door beside its keyhole, 
with the green dot indicating the direction in which the key needed 
to be turned: I added signifiers to the doors. Is this a major error? 
No. But eliminating it has proven to be convenient. (Neighbors 
have commented on their utility, wondering who put them there.)
In manufacturing facilities, poka-yoke might be a piece of wood 
to help align a part properly, or perhaps plates designed with 
asymmetrical screw holes so that the plate could fit in only one po-
sition. Covering emergency or critical switches with a cover to pre-
vent accidental triggering is another poka-yoke technique: this is 
obviously a forcing function. All the poka-yoke techniques involve 
a combination of the principles discussed in this book: affordances, 
signifiers, mapping, and constraints, and perhaps most important 
of all, forcing functions.
NASA’S AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM
US commercial aviation has long had an extremely effective sys-
tem for encouraging pilots to submit reports of errors. The pro-
gram has resulted in numerous improvements to aviation safety. 
It wasn’t easy to establish: pilots had severe self-induced social 
pressures against admitting to errors. Moreover, to whom would 
they report them? Certainly not to their employers. Not even to the 
Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), for then they would probably 
be punished. The solution was to let the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) set up a voluntary accident report-
ing system whereby pilots could submit semi-anonymous reports 

194 The Design of Everyday Things
of errors they had made or observed in others (semi-anonymous 
because pilots put their name and contact information on the re-
ports so that NASA could call to request more information). Once 
NASA personnel had acquired the necessary information, they 
would detach the contact information from the report and mail it 
back to the pilot. This meant that NASA no longer knew who had 
reported the error, which made it impossible for the airline com-
panies or the FAA (which enforced penalties against errors) to find 
out who had submitted the report. If the FAA had independently 
noticed the error and tried to invoke a civil penalty or certificate 
suspension, the receipt of self-report automatically exempted the 
pilot from punishment (for minor infractions).
When a sufficient number of similar errors had been collected, 
NASA would analyze them and issue reports and recommenda-
tions to the airlines and to the FAA. These reports also helped 
the pilots realize that their error reports were valuable tools for 
increasing safety. As with checklists, we need similar systems in 
the field of medicine, but it has not been easy to set up. NASA is a 
neutral body, charged with enhancing aviation safety, but has no 
oversight authority, which helped gain the trust of pilots. There is 
no comparable institution in medicine: physicians are afraid that 
self-reported errors might lead them to lose their license or be sub-
jected to lawsuits. But we can’t eliminate errors unless we know 
what they are. The medical field is starting to make progress, but it 
is a difficult technical, political, legal, and social problem.
Detecting Error
Errors do not necessarily lead to harm if they are discovered 
quickly. The different categories of errors have differing ease of 
discovery. In general, action slips are relatively easy to discover; 
mistakes, much more difficult. Action slips are relatively easy to 
detect because it is usually easy to notice a discrepancy between 
the intended act and the one that got performed. But this detection 
can only take place if there is feedback. If the result of the action is 
not visible, how can the error be detected?

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 195
Memory-lapse slips are difficult to detect precisely because there 
is nothing to see. With a memory slip, the required action is not 
performed. When no action is done, there is nothing to detect. It is 
only when the lack of action allows some unwanted event to occur 
that there is hope of detecting a memory-lapse slip.
Mistakes are difficult to detect because there is seldom anything 
that can signal an inappropriate goal. And once the wrong goal or 
plan is decided upon, the resulting actions are consistent with that 
wrong goal, so careful monitoring of the actions not only fails to de-
tect the erroneous goal, but, because the actions are done correctly, 
can inappropriately provide added confidence to the decision.
Faulty diagnoses of a situation can be surprisingly difficult to 
detect. You might expect that if the diagnosis was wrong, the ac-
tions would turn out to be ineffective, so the fault would be discov-
ered quickly. But misdiagnoses are not random. Usually they are 
based on considerable knowledge and logic. The misdiagnosis is 
usually both reasonable and relevant to eliminating the symptoms 
being observed. As a result, the initial actions are apt to appear ap-
propriate and helpful. This makes the problem of discovery even 
more difficult. The actual error might not be discovered for hours 
or days. 
Memory-lapse mistakes are especially difficult to detect. Just as 
with a memory-lapse slip the absence of something that should 
have been done is always more difficult to detect than the presence 
of something that should not have been done. The difference be-
tween memory-lapse slips and mistakes is that, in the first case, a 
single component of a plan is skipped, whereas in the second, the 
entire plan is forgotten. Which is easier to discover? At this point 
I must retreat to the standard answer science likes to give to ques-
tions of this sort: “It all depends.”
EXPLAINING AWAY MISTAKES
Mistakes can take a long time to be discovered. Hear a noise that 
sounds like a pistol shot and think: “Must be a car’s exhaust back-
firing.” Hear someone yell outside and think: “Why can’t my 

196 The Design of Everyday Things
neighbors be quiet?” Are we correct in dismissing these incidents? 
Most of the time we are, but when we’re not, our explanations can 
be difficult to justify.
Explaining away errors is a common problem in commercial 
accidents. Most major accidents are preceded by warning signs: 
equipment malfunctions or unusual events. Often, there is a series 
of apparently unrelated breakdowns and errors that culminate in 
major disaster. Why didn’t anyone notice? Because no single in-
cident appeared to be serious. Often, the people involved noted 
each problem but discounted it, finding a logical explanation for 
the otherwise deviant observation.
T HE CASE OF T HE W RONG T U R N ON A HIGH WAY
I’ve misinterpreted highway signs, as I’m sure most drivers have. 
My family was traveling from San Diego to Mammoth Lakes, Cal-
ifornia, a ski area about 400 miles north. As we drove, we noticed 
more and more signs advertising the hotels and gambling casinos 
of Las Vegas, Nevada. “Strange,” we said, “Las Vegas always did 
advertise a long way off—there is even a billboard in San Diego—
but this seems excessive, advertising on the road to Mammoth.” 
We stopped for gasoline and continued on our journey. Only later, 
when we tried to find a place to eat supper, did we discover that we 
had missed a turn nearly two hours earlier, before we had stopped 
for gasoline, and that we were actually on the road to Las Vegas, 
not the road to Mammoth. We had to backtrack the entire two-
hour segment, wasting four hours of driving. It’s humorous now; 
it wasn’t then.
Once people find an explanation for an apparent anomaly, they 
tend to believe they can now discount it. But explanations are 
based on analogy with past experiences, experiences that may not 
apply to the current situation. In the driving story, the prevalence 
of billboards for Las Vegas was a signal we should have heeded, 
but it seemed easily explained. Our experience is typical: some 
major industrial incidents have resulted from false explanations of 
anomalous events. But do note: usually these apparent anomalies 
should be ignored. Most of the time, the explanation for their pres-

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 197
ence is correct. Distinguishing a true anomaly from an apparent 
one is difficult.
IN HINDSIGHT, EVENTS SEEM LOGICAL
The contrast in our understanding before and after an event can be 
dramatic. The psychologist Baruch Fischhoff has studied explana-
tions given in hindsight, where events seem completely obvious and 
predictable after the fact but completely unpredictable beforehand.
Fischhoff presented people with a number of situations and 
asked them to predict what would happen: they were correct only 
at the chance level. When the actual outcome was not known by the 
people being studied, few predicted the actual outcome. He then 
presented the same situations along with the actual outcomes to 
another group of people, asking them to state how likely each out-
come was: when the actual outcome was known, it appeared to be 
plausible and likely and other outcomes appeared unlikely.
Hindsight makes events seem obvious and predictable. Foresight 
is difficult. During an incident, there are never clear clues. Many 
things are happening at once: workload is high, emotions and 
stress levels are high. Many things that are happening will turn 
out to be irrelevant. Things that appear irrelevant will turn out 
to be critical. The accident investigators, working with hindsight, 
knowing what really happened, will focus on the relevant infor-
mation and ignore the irrelevant. But at the time the events were 
happening, the operators did not have information that allowed 
them to distinguish one from the other.
This is why the best accident analyses can take a long time to 
do. The investigators have to imagine themselves in the shoes of 
the people who were involved and consider all the information, 
all the training, and what the history of similar past events would 
have taught the operators. So, the next time a major accident oc-
curs, ignore the initial reports from journalists, politicians, and 
executives who don’t have any substantive information but feel 
compelled to provide statements anyway. Wait until the official 
reports come from trusted sources. Unfortunately, this could be 
months or years after the accident, and the public usually wants 

198 The Design of Everyday Things
answers immediately, even if those answers are wrong. Moreover, 
when the full story finally appears, newspapers will no longer con-
sider it news, so they won’t report it. You will have to search for 
the official report. In the United States, the National Transportation 
Safety Board (NTSB) can be trusted. NTSB conducts careful inves-
tigations of all major aviation, automobile and truck, train, ship, 
and pipeline incidents. (Pipelines? Sure: pipelines transport coal, 
gas, and oil.)
Designing for Error
It is relatively easy to design for the situation where everything 
goes well, where people use the device in the way that was in-
tended, and no unforeseen events occur. The tricky part is to de-
sign for when things go wrong.
Consider a conversation between two people. Are errors made? 
Yes, but they are not treated as such. If a person says something 
that is not understandable, we ask for clarification. If a person says 
something that we believe to be false, we question and debate. We 
don’t issue a warning signal. We don’t beep. We don’t give error 
messages. We ask for more information and engage in mutual dia-
logue to reach an understanding. In normal conversations between 
two friends, misstatements are taken as normal, as approximations 
to what was really meant. Grammatical errors, self-corrections, and 
restarted phrases are ignored. In fact, they are usually not even 
detected because we concentrate upon the intended meaning, not 
the surface features.
Machines are not intelligent enough to determine the meaning 
of our actions, but even so, they are far less intelligent than they 
could be. With our products, if we do something inappropriate, 
if the action fits the proper format for a command, the product 
does it, even if it is outrageously dangerous. This has led to tragic 
accidents, especially in health care, where inappropriate design of 
infusion pumps and X-ray machines allowed extreme overdoses 
of medication or radiation to be administered to patients, leading 
to their deaths. In financial institutions, simple keyboard errors 
have led to huge financial transactions, far beyond normal limits. 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 199
Even simple checks for reasonableness would have stopped all of 
these errors. (This is discussed at the end of the chapter under the 
heading “Sensibility Checks.”)
Many systems compound the problem by making it easy to err 
but difficult or impossible to discover error or to recover from it. 
It should not be possible for one simple error to cause widespread 
damage. Here is what should be done:
•  Understand the causes of error and design to minimize those causes.
•  Do sensibility checks. Does the action pass the “common sense” test?
•  Make it possible to reverse actions—to “undo” them—or make it 
harder to do what cannot be reversed.
•  Make it easier for people to discover the errors that do occur, and 
make them easier to correct.
•  Don’t treat the action as an error; rather, try to help the person com-
plete the action properly. Think of the action as an approximation to 
what is desired.
As this chapter demonstrates, we know a lot about errors. Thus, 
novices are more likely to make mistakes than slips, whereas experts 
are more likely to make slips. Mistakes often arise from ambiguous 
or unclear information about the current state of a system, the lack 
of a good conceptual model, and inappropriate procedures. Recall 
that most mistakes result from erroneous choice of goal or plan or 
erroneous evaluation and interpretation. All of these come about 
through poor information provided by the system about the choice 
of goals and the means to accomplish them (plans), and poor-quality 
feedback about what has actually happened.
A major source of error, especially memory-lapse errors, is in-
terruption. When an activity is interrupted by some other event, 
the cost of the interruption is far greater than the loss of the time 
required to deal with the interruption: it is also the cost of resuming 
the interrupted activity. To resume, it is necessary to remember pre-
cisely the previous state of the activity: what the goal was, where 
one was in the action cycle, and the relevant state of the system. 
Most systems make it difficult to resume after an interruption. 

200 The Design of Everyday Things
Most discard critical information that is needed by the user to re-
member the numerous small decisions that had been made, the 
things that were in the person’s short-term memory, to say noth-
ing of the current state of the system. What still needs to be done? 
Maybe I was finished? It is no wonder that many slips and mis-
takes are the result of interruptions.
Multitasking, whereby we deliberately do several tasks simul-
taneously, erroneously appears to be an efficient way of getting a 
lot done. It is much beloved by teenagers and busy workers, but in 
fact, all the evidence points to severe degradation of performance, 
increased errors, and a general lack of both quality and efficiency. 
Doing two tasks at once takes longer than the sum of the times it 
would take to do each alone. Even as simple and common a task 
as talking on a hands-free cell phone while driving leads to seri-
ous degradation of driving skills. One study even showed that cell 
phone usage during walking led to serious deficits: “Cell phone 
users walked more slowly, changed directions more frequently, 
and were less likely to acknowledge other people than individuals 
in the other conditions. In the second study, we found that cell 
phone users were less likely to notice an unusual activity along 
their walking route (a unicycling clown)” (Hyman, Boss, Wise, 
McKenzie, & Caggiano, 2010).
A large percentage of medical errors are due to interruptions. 
In aviation, where interruptions were also determined to be a 
major problem during the critical phases of flying—landing and 
takeoff—the US Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) requires what 
it calls a “Sterile Cockpit Configuration,” whereby pilots are not 
allowed to discuss any topic not directly related to the control of 
the airplane during these critical periods. In addition, the flight at-
tendants are not permitted to talk to the pilots during these phases 
(which has at times led to the opposite error—failure to inform the 
pilots of emergency situations).
Establishing similar sterile periods would be of great benefit to 
many professions, including medicine and other safety-critical 
operations. My wife and I follow this convention in driving: when 
the driver is entering or leaving a high-speed highway, conversa-

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 201
tion ceases until the transition has been completed. Interruptions 
and distractions lead to errors, both mistakes and slips.
Warning signals are usually not the answer. Consider the control 
room of a nuclear power plant, the cockpit of a commercial aircraft, 
or the operating room of a hospital. Each has a large number of 
different instruments, gauges, and controls, all with signals that 
tend to sound similar because they all use simple tone generators 
to beep their warnings. There is no coordination among the instru-
ments, which means that in major emergencies, they all sound at 
once. Most can be ignored anyway because they tell the operator 
about something that is already known. Each competes with the 
others to be heard, interfering with efforts to address the problem.
Unnecessary, annoying alarms occur in numerous situations. 
How do people cope? By disconnecting warning signals, taping 
over warning lights (or removing the bulbs), silencing bells, and 
basically getting rid of all the safety warnings. The problem comes 
after such alarms are disabled, either when people forget to restore 
the warning systems (there are those memory-lapse slips again), or 
if a different incident happens while the alarms are disconnected. 
At that point, nobody notices. Warnings and safety methods must 
be used with care and intelligence, taking into account the tradeoffs 
for the people who are affected.
The design of warning signals is surprisingly complex. They 
have to be loud or bright enough to be noticed, but not so loud or 
bright that they become annoying distractions. The signal has to 
both attract attention (act as a signifier of critical information) and 
also deliver information about the nature of the event that is being 
signified. The various instruments need to have a coordinated re-
sponse, which means that there must be international standards 
and collaboration among the many design teams from different, 
often competing, companies. Although considerable research has 
been directed toward this problem, including the development of 
national standards for alarm management systems, the problem 
still remains in many situations.
More and more of our machines present information through 
speech. But like all approaches, this has both strengths and 

202 The Design of Everyday Things
weaknesses. It allows for precise information to be conveyed, es-
pecially when the person’s visual attention is directed elsewhere. 
But if several speech warnings operate at the same time, or if the 
environment is noisy, speech warnings may not be understood. Or 
if conversations among the users or operators are necessary, speech 
warnings will interfere. Speech warning signals can be effective, 
but only if used intelligently.
DESIGN LESSONS FROM THE STUDY OF ERRORS
Several design lessons can be drawn from the study of errors, one 
for preventing errors before they occur and one for detecting and 
correcting them when they do occur. In general, the solutions fol-
low directly from the preceding analyses.
ADDING CONST R A IN TS TO BLOC K ER RORS
Prevention often involves adding specific constraints to actions. In 
the physical world, this can be done through clever use of shape 
and size. For example, in automobiles, a variety of fluids are re-
quired for safe operation and maintenance: engine oil, transmis-
sion oil, brake fluid, windshield washer solution, radiator coolant, 
battery water, and gasoline. Putting the wrong fluid into a reser-
voir could lead to serious damage or even an accident. Automobile 
manufacturers try to minimize these errors by segregating the fill-
ing points, thereby reducing description-similarity errors. When 
the filling points for fluids that should be added only occasion-
ally or by qualified mechanics are located separately from those 
for fluids used more frequently, the average motorist is unlikely 
to use the incorrect filling points. Errors in adding fluids to the 
wrong container can be minimized by making the openings have 
different sizes and shapes, providing physical constraints against 
inappropriate filling. Different fluids often have different colors so 
that they can be distinguished. All these are excellent ways to min-
imize errors. Similar techniques are in widespread use in hospitals 
and industry. All of these are intelligent applications of constraints, 
forcing functions, and poka-yoke.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 203
Electronic systems have a wide range of methods that could be 
used to reduce error. One is to segregate controls, so that easily 
confused controls are located far from one another. Another is 
to use separate modules, so that any control not directly relevant 
to the current operation is not visible on the screen, but requires 
extra effort to get to.
U NDO
Perhaps the most powerful tool to minimize the impact of errors 
is the Undo command in modern electronic systems, reversing the 
operations performed by the previous command, wherever pos-
sible. The best systems have multiple levels of undoing, so it is 
possible to undo an entire sequence of actions.
Obviously, undoing is not always possible. Sometimes, it is only 
effective if done immediately after the action. Still, it is a power-
ful tool to minimize the impact of error. It is still amazing to me 
that many electronic and computer-based systems fail to provide 
a means to undo even where it is clearly possible and desirable.
CON F IR M AT ION A ND ER ROR M ESSAGES
Many systems try to prevent errors by requiring confirmation be-
fore a command will be executed, especially when the action will 
destroy something of importance. But these requests are usually 
ill-timed because after requesting an operation, people are usu-
ally certain they want it done. Hence the standard joke about such 
warnings:
Person: Delete “my most important file.”
System: Do you want to delete “my most important file”?
Person: Yes.
System: Are you certain?
Person: Yes!
System “My most favorite file” has been deleted.
Person: Oh. Damn.

204 The Design of Everyday Things
The request for confirmation seems like an irritant rather than 
an essential safety check because the person tends to focus upon 
the action rather than the object that is being acted upon. A bet-
ter check would be a prominent display of both the action to be 
taken and the object, perhaps with the choice of “cancel” or “do 
it.” The important point is making salient what the implications of 
the action are. Of course, it is because of errors of this sort that the 
Undo command is so important. With traditional graphical user 
interfaces on computers, not only is Undo a standard command, 
but when files are “deleted,” they are actually simply moved from 
sight and stored in the file folder named “Trash,” so that in the 
above example, the person could open the Trash and retrieve the 
erroneously deleted file.
Confirmations have different implications for slips and mistakes. 
When I am writing, I use two very large displays and a powerful 
computer. I might have seven to ten applications running simul-
taneously. I have sometimes had as many as forty open windows. 
Suppose I activate the command that closes one of the windows, 
which triggers a confirmatory message: did I wish to close the win-
dow? How I deal with this depends upon why I requested that the 
window be closed. If it was a slip, the confirmation required will 
be useful. If it was by mistake, I am apt to ignore it. Consider these 
two examples:
A slip leads me to close the wrong window.
Suppose I intended to type the word We, but instead of typing 
Shift + W for the first character, I typed Command + W (or Con-
trol + W), the keyboard command for closing a window. Because 
I expected the screen to display an uppercase W, when a dialog 
box appeared, asking whether I really wanted to delete the file, I 
would be surprised, which would immediately alert me to the slip. 
I would cancel the action (an alternative thoughtfully provided by 
the dialog box) and retype the Shift + W, carefully this time.
A mistake leads me to close the wrong window.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 205
Now suppose I really intended to close a window. I often use a 
temporary file in a window to keep notes about the chapter I am 
working on. When I am finished with it, I close it without saving its 
contents—after all, I am finished. But because I usually have multi-
ple windows open, it is very easy to close the wrong one. The com-
puter assumes that all commands apply to the active window—the 
one where the last actions had been performed (and which contains 
the text cursor). But if I reviewed the temporary window prior to 
closing it, my visual attention is focused upon that window, and 
when I decide to close it, I forget that it is not the active window 
from the computer’s point of view. So I issue the command to shut 
the window, the computer presents me with a dialog box, asking 
for confirmation, and I accept it, choosing the option not to save 
my work. Because the dialog box was expected, I didn’t bother to 
read it. As a result, I closed the wrong window and worse, did not 
save any of the typing, possibly losing considerable work. Warning 
messages are surprisingly ineffective against mistakes (even nice 
requests, such as the one shown in Chapter 4, Figure 4.6, page 143).
Was this a mistake or a slip? Both. Issuing the “close” command 
while the wrong window was active is a memory-lapse slip. But 
deciding not to read the dialog box and accepting it without saving 
the contents is a mistake (two mistakes, actually).
What can a designer do? Several things:
•  Make the item being acted upon more prominent. That is, change 
the appearance of the actual object being acted upon to be more visi-
ble: enlarge it, or perhaps change its color.
•  Make the operation reversible. If the person saves the content, no 
harm is done except the annoyance of having to reopen the file. If the 
person elects Don’t Save, the system could secretly save the contents, 
and the next time the person opened the file, it could ask whether it 
should restore it to the latest condition.
SENSIBILITY CHECKS
Electronic systems have another advantage over mechanical ones: 
they can check to make sure that the requested operation is sensible.

206 The Design of Everyday Things
It is amazing that in today’s world, medical personnel can ac-
cidentally request a radiation dose a thousand times larger than 
normal and have the equipment meekly comply. In some cases, it 
isn’t even possible for the operator to notice the error.
Similarly, errors in stating monetary sums can lead to disastrous 
results, even though a quick glance at the amount would indicate 
that something was badly off. For example, there are roughly 1,000 
Korean won to the US dollar. Suppose I wanted to transfer $1,000 
into a Korean bank account in won ($1,000 is roughly ₩1,000,000). 
But suppose I enter the Korean number into the dollar field. 
Oops—I’m trying to transfer a million dollars. Intelligent systems 
would take note of the normal size of my transactions, query-
ing if the amount was considerably larger than normal. For me, it 
would query the million-dollar request. Less intelligent systems 
would blindly follow instructions, even though I did not have a 
million dollars in my account (in fact, I would probably be charged 
a fee for overdrawing my account).
Sensibility checks, of course, are also the answer to the serious 
errors caused when inappropriate values are entered into hospital 
medication and X-ray systems or in financial transactions, as dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter.
MINIMIZING SLIPS
Slips most frequently occur when the conscious mind is distracted, 
either by some other event or simply because the action being per-
formed is so well learned that it can be done automatically, without 
conscious attention. As a result, the person does not pay sufficient 
attention to the action or its consequences. It might therefore seem 
that one way to minimize slips is to ensure that people always pay 
close, conscious attention to the acts being done.
Bad idea. Skilled behavior is subconscious, which means it is 
fast, effortless, and usually accurate. Because it is so automatic, we 
can type at high speeds even while the conscious mind is occupied 
composing the words. This is why we can walk and talk while nav-
igating traffic and obstacles. If we had to pay conscious attention 
to every little thing we did, we would accomplish far less in our 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 207
lives. The information processing structures of the brain automat-
ically regulate how much conscious attention is being paid to a 
task: conversations automatically pause when crossing the street 
amid busy traffic. Don’t count on it, though: if too much attention 
is focused on something else, the fact that the traffic is getting dan-
gerous might not be noted.
Many slips can be minimized by ensuring that the actions and 
their controls are as dissimilar as possible, or at least, as physically 
far apart as possible. Mode errors can be eliminated by the simple 
expedient of eliminating most modes and, if this is not possible, 
by making the modes very visible and distinct from one another.
The best way of mitigating slips is to provide perceptible feed-
back about the nature of the action being performed, then very 
perceptible feedback describing the new resulting state, coupled 
with a mechanism that allows the error to be undone. For example, 
the use of machine-readable codes has led to a dramatic reduction 
in the delivery of wrong medications to patients. Prescriptions sent 
to the pharmacy are given electronic codes, so the pharmacist can 
scan both the prescription and the resulting medication to ensure 
they are the same. Then, the nursing staff at the hospital scans both 
the label of the medication and the tag worn around the patient’s 
wrist to ensure that the medication is being given to the correct 
individual. Moreover, the computer system can flag repeated ad-
ministration of the same medication. These scans do increase the 
workload, but only slightly. Other kinds of errors are still possible, 
but these simple steps have already been proven worthwhile.
Common engineering and design practices seem as if they are 
deliberately intended to cause slips. Rows of identical controls or 
meters is a sure recipe for description-similarity errors. Internal 
modes that are not very conspicuously marked are a clear driver 
of mode errors. Situations with numerous interruptions, yet where 
the design assumes undivided attention, are a clear enabler of 
memory lapses—and almost no equipment today is designed to 
support the numerous interruptions that so many situations en-
tail. And failure to provide assistance and visible reminders for 
performing infrequent procedures that are similar to much more 

208 The Design of Everyday Things
frequent ones leads to capture errors, where the more frequent ac-
tions are performed rather than the correct ones for the situation. 
Procedures should be designed so that the initial steps are as dis-
similar as possible.
The important message is that good design can prevent slips and 
mistakes. Design can save lives.
THE SWISS CHEESE MODEL OF 
HOW ERRORS LEAD TO ACCIDENTS
Fortunately, most errors do not lead to accidents. Accidents often 
have numerous contributing causes, no single one of which is the 
root cause of the incident.
James Reason likes to explain this by invoking the metaphor of 
multiple slices of Swiss cheese, the cheese famous for being riddled 
with holes (Figure 5.3). If each slice of cheese represents a condi-
tion in the task being done, an accident can happen only if holes 
in all four slices of cheese are lined up just right. In well-designed 
systems, there can be many equipment failures, many errors, but 
they will not lead to an accident unless they all line up precisely. 
Any leakage—passageway through a hole—is most likely blocked 
at the next level. Well-designed systems are resilient against failure.
This is why the attempt to find 
“the” cause of an accident is usually 
doomed to fail. Accident investiga-
tors, the press, government officials, 
and the everyday citizen like to find 
simple explanations for the cause of 
an accident. “See, if the hole in slice A 
FIGURE 5.3. Reason’s Swiss Cheese Model of Accidents. Accidents usually have 
multiple causes, whereby had any single one of those causes not happened, the acci-
dent would not have occurred. The British accident researcher James Reason describes 
this through the metaphor of slices of Swiss cheese: unless the holes all line up per-
fectly, there will be no accident. This metaphor provides two lessons: First, do not try 
to find “the” cause of an accident; Second, we can decrease accidents and make sys-
tems more resilient by designing them to have extra precautions against error (more 
slices of cheese), less opportunities for slips, mistakes, or equipment failure (less holes), 
and very different mechanisms in the different subparts of the system (trying to en-
sure that the holes do not line up). (Drawing based upon one by Reason, 1990.)

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 209
had been slightly higher, we would not have had the accident. So 
throw away slice A and replace it.” Of course, the same can be said 
for slices B, C, and D (and in real accidents, the number of cheese 
slices would sometimes measure in the tens or hundreds). It is rel-
atively easy to find some action or decision that, had it been dif-
ferent, would have prevented the accident. But that does not mean 
that this was the cause of the accident. It is only one of the many 
causes: all the items have to line up.
You can see this in most accidents by the “if only” statements. 
“If only I hadn’t decided to take a shortcut, I wouldn’t have had 
the accident.” “If only it hadn’t been raining, my brakes would 
have worked.” “If only I had looked to the left, I would have seen 
the car sooner.” Yes, all those statements are true, but none of them 
is “the” cause of the accident. Usually, there is no single cause. 
Yes, journalists and lawyers, as well as the public, like to know 
the cause so someone can be blamed and punished. But reputable 
investigating agencies know that there is not a single cause, which 
is why their investigations take so long. Their responsibility is to 
understand the system and make changes that would reduce the 
chance of the same sequence of events leading to a future accident.
The Swiss cheese metaphor suggests several ways to reduce 
accidents:
•  Add more slices of cheese.
•  Reduce the number of holes (or make the existing holes smaller).
•  Alert the human operators when several holes have lined up.
Each of these has operational implications. More slices of cheese 
means mores lines of defense, such as the requirement in aviation and 
other industries for checklists, where one person reads the items, 
another does the operation, and the first person checks the opera-
tion to confirm it was done appropriately.
Reducing the number of critical safety points where error can 
occur is like reducing the number or size of the holes in the Swiss 
cheese. Properly designed equipment will reduce the opportunity 
for slips and mistakes, which is like reducing the number of holes 

210 The Design of Everyday Things
and making the ones that remain smaller. This is precisely how the 
safety level of commercial aviation has been dramatically improved. 
Deborah Hersman, chair of the National Transportation Safety 
Board, described the design philosophy as:
U.S. airlines carry about two million people through the skies safely 
every day, which has been achieved in large part through design redun-
dancy and layers of defense.
Design redundancy and layers of defense: that’s Swiss cheese. 
The metaphor illustrates the futility of trying to find the one un-
derlying cause of an accident (usually some person) and punishing 
the culprit. Instead, we need to think about systems, about all the 
interacting factors that lead to human error and then to accidents, 
and devise ways to make the systems, as a whole, more reliable.
When Good Design Isn’t Enough 
WHEN PEOPLE REALLY ARE AT FAULT
I am sometimes asked whether it is really right to say that people 
are never at fault, that it is always bad design. That’s a sensible 
question. And yes, of course, sometimes it is the person who is 
at fault.
Even competent people can lose competency if sleep deprived, fa-
tigued, or under the influence of drugs. This is why we have laws 
banning pilots from flying if they have been drinking within some 
specified period and why we limit the number of hours they can 
fly without rest. Most professions that involve the risk of death or 
injury have similar regulations about drinking, sleep, and drugs. 
But everyday jobs do not have these restrictions. Hospitals often re-
quire their staff to go without sleep for durations that far exceed the 
safety requirements of airlines. Why? Would you be happy having a 
sleep-deprived physician operating on you? Why is sleep depriva-
tion considered dangerous in one situation and ignored in another?
Some activities have height, age, or strength requirements. 
Others require considerable skills or technical knowledge: people 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
211
not trained or not competent should not be doing them. That is 
why many activities require government-approved training and li-
censing. Some examples are automobile driving, airplane piloting, 
and medical practice. All require instructional courses and tests. 
In aviation, it isn’t sufficient to be trained: pilots must also keep 
in practice by flying some minimum number of hours per month.
Drunk driving is still a major cause of automobile accidents: this 
is clearly the fault of the drinker. Lack of sleep is another major 
culprit in vehicle accidents. But because people occasionally are 
at fault does not justify the attitude that assumes they are always 
at fault. The far greater percentage of accidents is the result of poor 
design, either of equipment or, as is often the case in industrial 
accidents, of the procedures to be followed.
As noted in the discussion of deliberate violations earlier in this 
chapter (page 169), people will sometimes deliberately violate 
procedures and rules, perhaps because they cannot get their jobs 
done otherwise, perhaps because they believe there are extenu-
ating circumstances, and sometimes because they are taking the 
gamble that the relatively low probability of failure does not apply 
to them. Unfortunately, if someone does a dangerous activity that 
only results in injury or death one time in a million, that can lead 
to hundreds of deaths annually across the world, with its 7 billion 
people. One of my favorite examples in aviation is of a pilot who, 
after experiencing low oil-pressure readings in all three of his en-
gines, stated that it must be an instrument failure because it was a 
one-in-a-million chance that the readings were true. He was right 
in his assessment, but unfortunately, he was the one. In the United 
States alone there were roughly 9 million flights in 2012. So, a one-
in-a-million chance could translate into nine incidents. 
Sometimes, people really are at fault.
Resilience Engineering
In industrial applications, accidents in large, complex systems 
such as oil wells, oil refineries, chemical processing plants, electri-
cal power systems, transportation, and medical services can have 
major impacts on the company and the surrounding community. 

212 The Design of Everyday Things
Sometimes the problems do not arise in the organization but out-
side it, such as when fierce storms, earthquakes, or tidal waves 
demolish large parts of the existing infrastructure. In either case, 
the question is how to design and manage these systems so that 
they can restore services with a minimum of disruption and dam-
age. An important approach is resilience engineering, with the goal 
of designing systems, procedures, management, and the training 
of people so they are able to respond to problems as they arise. It 
strives to ensure that the design of all these things—the equipment, 
procedures, and communication both among workers and also ex-
ternally to management and the public—are continually being as-
sessed, tested, and improved.
Thus, major computer providers can deliberately cause errors in 
their systems to test how well the company can respond. This is done 
by deliberately shutting down critical facilities to ensure that the 
backup systems and redundancies actually work. Although it might 
seem dangerous to do this while the systems are online, serving real 
customers, the only way to test these large, complex systems is by do-
ing so. Small tests and simulations do not carry the complexity, stress 
levels, and unexpected events that characterize real system failures.
As Erik Hollnagel, David Woods, and Nancy Leveson, the au-
thors of an early influential series of books on the topic, have skill-
fully summarized:
Resilience engineering is a paradigm for safety management that fo-
cuses on how to help people cope with complexity under pressure to 
achieve success. It strongly contrasts with what is typical today—a 
paradigm of tabulating error as if it were a thing, followed by interven-
tions to reduce this count. A resilient organisation treats safety as a core 
value, not a commodity that can be counted. Indeed, safety shows itself 
only by the events that do not happen! Rather than view past success 
as a reason to ramp down investments, such organisations continue to 
invest in anticipating the changing potential for failure because they 
appreciate that their knowledge of the gaps is imperfect and that their 
environment constantly changes. One measure of resilience is therefore 
the ability to create foresight—to anticipate the changing shape of risk, 

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
213
before failure and harm occurs. (Reprinted by permission of the publishers. 
Hollnagel, Woods, & Leveson, 2006, p. 6.)
The Paradox of Automation
Machines are getting smarter. More and more tasks are becoming 
fully automated. As this happens, there is a tendency to believe 
that many of the difficulties involved with human control will go 
away. Across the world, automobile accidents kill and injure tens 
of millions of people every year. When we finally have widespread 
adoption of self-driving cars, the accident and casualty rate will 
probably be dramatically reduced, just as automation in factories 
and aviation have increased efficiency while lowering both error 
and the rate of injury.
When automation works, it is wonderful, but when it fails, the 
resulting impact is usually unexpected and, as a result, danger-
ous. Today, automation and networked electrical generation sys-
tems have dramatically reduced the amount of time that electrical 
power is not available to homes and businesses. But when the elec-
trical power grid goes down, it can affect huge sections of a coun-
try and take many days to recover. With self-driving cars, I predict 
that we will have fewer accidents and injuries, but that when there 
is an accident, it will be huge.
Automation keeps getting more and more capable. Automatic 
systems can take over tasks that used to be done by people, 
whether it is maintaining the proper temperature, automatically 
keeping an automobile within its assigned lane at the correct 
distance from the car in front, enabling airplanes to fly by them-
selves from takeoff to landing, or allowing ships to navigate by 
themselves. When the automation works, the tasks are usually 
done as well as or better than by people. Moreover, it saves peo-
ple from the dull, dreary routine tasks, allowing more useful, 
productive use of time, reducing fatigue and error. But when 
the task gets too complex, automation tends to give up. This, of 
course, is precisely when it is needed the most. The paradox is 
that automation can take over the dull, dreary tasks, but fail with 
the complex ones.

214 The Design of Everyday Things
When automation fails, it often does so without warning. This is 
a situation I have documented very thoroughly in my other books 
and many of my papers, as have many other people in the field of 
safety and automation. When the failure occurs, the human is “out 
of the loop.” This means that the person has not been paying much 
attention to the operation, and it takes time for the failure to be 
noticed and evaluated, and then to decide how to respond.
In an airplane, when the automation fails, there is usually con-
siderable time for the pilots to understand the situation and re-
spond. Airplanes fly quite high: over 10 km (6 miles) above the 
earth, so even if the plane were to start falling, the pilots might 
have several minutes to respond. Moreover, pilots are extremely 
well trained. When automation fails in an automobile, the person 
might have only a fraction of a second to avoid an accident. This 
would be extremely difficult even for the most expert driver, and 
most drivers are not well trained.
In other circumstances, such as ships, there may be more time 
to respond, but only if the failure of the automation is noticed. In 
one dramatic case, the grounding of the cruise ship Royal Majesty in 
1997, the failure lasted for several days and was only detected in the 
postaccident investigation, after the ship had run aground, causing 
several million dollars in damage. What happened? The ship’s lo-
cation was normally determined by the Global Positioning System 
(GPS), but the cable that connected the satellite antenna to the nav-
igation system somehow had become disconnected (nobody ever 
discovered how). As a result, the navigation system had switched 
from using GPS signals to “dead reckoning,” approximating the 
ship’s location by estimating speed and direction of travel, but the 
design of the navigation system didn’t make this apparent. As a re-
sult, as the ship traveled from Bermuda to its destination of Boston, 
it went too far south and went aground on Cape Cod, a peninsula 
jutting out of the water south of Boston. The automation had per-
formed flawlessly for years, which increased people’s trust and re-
liance upon it, so the normal manual checking of location or careful 
perusal of the display (to see the tiny letters “dr” indicating “dead 
reckoning” mode) were not done. This was a huge mode error failure.

 
five: Human Error? No, Bad Design 
215
Design Principles for Dealing with Error
People are flexible, versatile, and creative. Machines are rigid, pre-
cise, and relatively fixed in their operations. There is a mismatch 
between the two, one that can lead to enhanced capability if used 
properly. Think of an electronic calculator. It doesn’t do mathemat-
ics like a person, but can solve problems people can’t. Moreover, 
calculators do not make errors. So the human plus calculator is a 
perfect collaboration: we humans figure out what the important 
problems are and how to state them. Then we use calculators to 
compute the solutions. 
Difficulties arise when we do not think of people and machines 
as collaborative systems, but assign whatever tasks can be auto-
mated to the machines and leave the rest to people. This ends up 
requiring people to behave in machine like fashion, in ways that 
differ from human capabilities. We expect people to monitor ma-
chines, which means keeping alert for long periods, something we 
are bad at. We require people to do repeated operations with the 
extreme precision and accuracy required by machines, again some-
thing we are not good at. When we divide up the machine and 
human components of a task in this way, we fail to take advantage 
of human strengths and capabilities but instead rely upon areas 
where we are genetically, biologically unsuited. Yet, when people 
fail, they are blamed.
What we call “human error” is often simply a human action that 
is inappropriate for the needs of technology. As a result, it flags a 
deficit in our technology. It should not be thought of as error. We 
should eliminate the concept of error: instead, we should realize 
that people can use assistance in translating their goals and plans 
into the appropriate form for technology.
Given the mismatch between human competencies and tech-
nological requirements, errors are inevitable. Therefore, the best 
designs take that fact as given and seek to minimize the opportu-
nities for errors while also mitigating the consequences. Assume 
that every possible mishap will happen, so protect against them. 
Make actions reversible; make errors less costly. Here are key de-
sign principles:

216 The Design of Everyday Things
•  Put the knowledge required to operate the technology in the world. 
Don’t require that all the knowledge must be in the head. Allow for 
efficient operation when people have learned all the requirements, 
when they are experts who can perform without the knowledge in 
the world, but make it possible for non-experts to use the knowledge 
in the world. This will also help experts who need to perform a rare, 
infrequently performed operation or return to the technology after a 
prolonged absence.
•  Use the power of natural and artificial constraints: physical, logical, 
semantic, and cultural. Exploit the power of forcing functions and 
natural mappings.
•  Bridge the two gulfs, the Gulf of Execution and the Gulf of Evalua-
tion. Make things visible, both for execution and evaluation. On the 
execution side, provide feedforward information: make the options 
readily available. On the evaluation side, provide feedback: make the 
results of each action apparent. Make it possible to determine the sys-
tem’s status readily, easily, accurately, and in a form consistent with 
the person’s goals, plans, and expectations. 
We should deal with error by embracing it, by seeking to under-
stand the causes and ensuring they do not happen again. We need 
to assist rather than punish or scold.

C H A P T E R  N U M B E R
 
 217
C H A P T E R  S I X
DESIGN
THINKING
One of my rules in consulting is simple: never solve the 
problem I am asked to solve. Why such a counterintu-
itive rule? Because, invariably, the problem I am asked 
to solve is not the real, fundamental, root problem. It 
is usually a symptom. Just as in Chapter 5, where the solution to 
accidents and errors was to determine the real, underlying cause 
of the events, in design, the secret to success is to understand what 
the real problem is.
It is amazing how often people solve the problem before them 
without bothering to question it. In my classes of graduate students 
in both engineering and business, I like to give them a problem to 
solve on the first day of class and then listen the next week to their 
wonderful solutions. They have masterful analyses, drawings, and 
illustrations. The MBA students show spreadsheets in which they 
have analyzed the demographics of the potential customer base. 
They show lots of numbers: costs, sales, margins, and profits. The 
engineers show detailed drawings and specifications. It is all well 
done, brilliantly presented.
When all the presentations are over, I congratulate them, but 
ask: “How do you know you solved the correct problem?” They 
are puzzled. Engineers and business people are trained to solve 

218 The Design of Everyday Things
problems. Why would anyone ever give them the wrong problem? 
“Where do you think the problems come from?” I ask. The real 
world is not like the university. In the university, professors make 
up artificial problems. In the real world, the problems do not come 
in nice, neat packages. They have to be discovered. It is all too easy 
to see only the surface problems and never dig deeper to address 
the real issues.
Solving the Correct Problem
Engineers and businesspeople are trained to solve problems. De-
signers are trained to discover the real problems. A brilliant solu-
tion to the wrong problem can be worse than no solution at all: 
solve the correct problem.
Good designers never start by trying to solve the problem given 
to them: they start by trying to understand what the real issues are. 
As a result, rather than converge upon a solution, they diverge, 
studying people and what they are trying to accomplish, generat-
ing idea after idea after idea. It drives managers crazy. Managers 
want to see progress: designers seem to be going backward when 
they  are given a precise problem and instead of getting to work,  they 
ignore it and generate new issues to consider, new directions to 
explore. And not just one, but many. What is going on?
The key emphasis of this book is the importance of developing 
products that fit the needs and capabilities of people. Design can 
be driven by many different concerns. Sometimes it is driven by 
technology, sometimes by competitive pressures or by aesthetics. 
Some designs explore the limits of technological possibilities; some 
explore the range of imagination, of society, of art or fashion. Engi-
neering design tends to emphasize reliability, cost, and efficiency. 
The focus of this book, and of the discipline called human-centered 
design, is to ensure that the result fits human desires, needs, and 
capabilities. After all, why do we make products? We make them 
for people to use.
Designers have developed a number of techniques to avoid being 
captured by too facile a solution. They take the original problem 

 
six: Design Thinking 
219
as a suggestion, not as a final statement, then think broadly about 
what the issues underlying this problem statement might really be 
(as was done through the “Five Whys” approach to getting at the 
root cause, described in Chapter 5). Most important of all is that 
the process be iterative and expansive. Designers resist the temp-
tation to jump immediately to a solution for the stated problem. 
Instead, they first spend time determining what basic, fundamen-
tal (root) issue needs to be addressed. They don’t try to search for 
a solution until they have determined the real problem, and even 
then, instead of solving that problem, they stop to consider a wide 
range of potential solutions. Only then will they finally converge 
upon their proposal. This process is called design thinking.
Design thinking is not an exclusive property of designers—all 
great innovators have practiced this, even if unknowingly, re-
gardless of whether they were artists or poets, writers or scien-
tists, engineers or businesspeople. But because designers pride 
themselves on their ability to innovate, to find creative solutions to 
fundamental problems, design thinking has become the hallmark 
of the modern design firm. Two of the powerful tools of design 
  thinking are human-centered design and the double-diamond 
diverge-converge model of design.
Human-centered design (HCD) is the process of ensuring that 
people’s needs are met, that the resulting product is understand-
able and usable, that it accomplishes the desired tasks, and that the 
experience of use is positive and enjoyable. Effective design needs 
to satisfy a large number of constraints and concerns, including 
shape and form, cost and efficiency, reliability and effectiveness, 
understandability and usability, the pleasure of the appearance, 
the pride of ownership, and the joy of actual use. HCD is a proce-
dure for addressing these requirements, but with an emphasis on 
two things: solving the right problem, and doing so in a way that 
meets human needs and capabilities.
Over time, the many different people and industries that have 
been involved in design have settled upon a common set of meth-
ods for doing HCD. Everyone has his or her own favorite method, 

220 The Design of Everyday Things
but all are variants on the common theme: iterate through the four 
stages of observation, generation, prototyping, and testing. But 
even before this, there is one overriding principle: solve the right 
problem.
These two components of design—finding the right problem and 
meeting human needs and capabilities—give rise to two phases of 
the design process. The first phase is to find the right problem, the 
second is to find the right solution. Both phases use the HCD pro-
cess. This double-phase approach to design led the British Design 
Council to describe it as a “double diamond.” So that is where we 
start the story.
The Double-Diamond Model of Design
Designers often start by questioning the problem given to them: 
they expand the scope of the problem, diverging to examine all 
the fundamental issues that underlie it. Then they converge upon 
a single problem statement. During the solution phase of their 
studies, they first expand the space of possible solutions, the di-
vergence phase. Finally, they converge upon a proposed solution 
(Figure 6.1). This double diverge-converge pattern was first intro-
duced in 2005 by the British Design Council, which called it the double-
diamond design process model. The Design Council divided the 
design process into four stages: “discover” and “define”—for 
the divergence and convergence phases of finding the right problem, 
TIME
ALTERNATIVES
FINDING THE RIGHT
SOLUTION
FINDING THE RIGHT
PROBLEM
Convergence
Divergence
Convergence
Divergence
F IGU RE 6 .1. 
The Double-
Diamond Model of Design. 
Start with an idea, and through 
the initial design research, ex-
pand the thinking to explore the 
fundamental issues. Only then is 
it time to converge upon the real, 
underlying problem. Similarly, 
use design research tools to ex-
plore a wide variety of solutions 
before converging upon one. 
(Slightly modified from the work of 
the British Design Council, 2005.)

 
six: Design Thinking 221
and “develop” and “deliver”—for the divergence and convergence 
phases of finding the right solution. 
The double diverge-converge process is quite effective at free-
ing designers from unnecessary restrictions to the problem and 
solution spaces. But you can sympathize with a product manager 
who, having given the designers a problem to solve, finds them 
questioning the assignment and insisting on traveling all over 
the world to seek deeper understanding. Even when the design-
ers start focusing upon the problem, they do not seem to make 
progress, but instead develop a wide variety of ideas and thoughts, 
many only half-formed, many clearly impractical. All this can be 
rather unsettling to the product manager who, concerned about 
meeting the schedule, wants to see immediate convergence. To add 
to the frustration of the product manager, as the designers start to 
converge upon a solution, they may realize that they have inap-
propriately formulated the problem, so the entire process must be 
repeated (although it can go more quickly this time).
This repeated divergence and convergence is important in prop-
erly determining the right problem to be solved and then the best 
way to solve it. It looks chaotic and ill-structured, but it actually 
follows well-established principles and procedures. How does 
the product manager keep the entire team on schedule despite the 
apparent random and divergent methods of designers? Encourage 
their free exploration, but hold them to the schedule (and budget) 
constraints. There is nothing like a firm deadline to get creative 
minds to reach convergence.
The Human-Centered Design Process
The double-diamond describes the two phases of design: finding 
the right problem and fulfilling human needs. But how are these 
actually done? This is where the human-centered design pro-
cess comes into play: it takes place within the double-diamond 
diverge-converge process.
There are four different activities in the human-centered design 
process (Figure 6.2):

222 The Design of Everyday Things
1. Observation
2. Idea generation (ideation)
3. Prototyping
4. Testing
These four activities are iterated; 
that is, they are repeated over and 
over, with each cycle yielding more 
insights and getting closer to the de-
sired solution. Now let us examine 
each activity separately.
OBSERVATION
The initial research to understand 
the nature of the problem itself is 
part of the discipline of design re-
search. Note that this is research 
about the customer and the people 
who will use the products under consideration. It is not the kind 
of research that scientists do in their laboratories, trying to find 
new laws of nature. The design researcher will go to the potential 
customers, observing their activities, attempting to understand 
their interests, motives, and true needs. The problem definition 
for the product design will come from this deep understanding of 
the goals the people are trying to accomplish and the impediments 
they experience. One of its most critical techniques is to observe the 
would-be customers in their natural environment, in their normal 
lives, wherever the product or service being designed will actually 
be used. Watch them in their homes, schools, and offices. Watch 
them commute, at parties, at mealtime, and with friends at the local 
bar. Follow them into the shower if necessary, because it is essential 
to understand the real situations that they encounter, not some pure 
isolated experience. This technique is called applied ethnography, a 
method adapted from the field of anthropology. Applied ethnog-
raphy differs from the slower, more methodical, research-oriented 
practice of academic anthropologists because the goals are different. 
FIGURE 6.2. The Iterative Cycle 
of Human-Centered Design. Make 
observations on the intended tar-
get population, generate ideas, 
produce prototypes and test them. 
Repeat until satisfied. This is often 
called the spiral method (rather than 
the circle depicted here), to empha-
size that each iteration through the 
stages makes progress.

 
six: Design Thinking 223
For one, design researchers have the goal of determining human 
needs that can be addressed through new products. For another, 
product cycles are driven by schedule and budget, both of which 
require more rapid assessment than is typical in academic studies 
that might go on for years.
It’s important that the people being observed match those of the 
intended audience. Note that traditional measures of people, such 
as age, education, and income, are not always important: what 
matters most are the activities to be performed. Even when we 
look at widely different cultures, the activities are often surpris-
ingly similar. As a result, the studies can focus upon the activi-
ties and how they get done, while being sensitive to how the local 
environment and culture might modify those activities. In some 
cases, such as the products widely used in business, the activity 
dominates. Thus, automobiles, computers, and phones are pretty 
standardized across the world because their designs reflect the ac-
tivities being supported.
In some cases, detailed analyses of the intended group are nec-
essary. Japanese teenage girls are quite different from Japanese 
women, and in turn, very different from German teenage girls. If 
a product is intended for subcultures like these, the exact popu-
lation must be studied. Another way of putting it is that different 
products serve different needs. Some products are also symbols of 
status or group membership. Here, although they perform useful 
functions, they are also fashion statements. This is where teenagers 
in one culture differ from those of another, and even from younger 
children and older adults of the same culture. Design researchers 
must carefully adjust the focus of their observations to the intended 
market and people for whom the product is intended.
Will the product be used in some country other than where it is 
being designed? There is only one way to find out: go there (and 
always include natives in the team). Don’t take a shortcut and 
stay home, talking to students or visitors from that country while 
remaining in your own: what you will learn is seldom an accu-
rate reflection of the target population or of the ways in which the 
proposed product will actually be used. There is no substitute for 

224 The Design of Everyday Things
direct observation of and interaction with the people who will be 
using the product.
Design research supports both diamonds of the design process. 
The first diamond, finding the right problem, requires a deep un-
derstanding of the true needs of people. Once the problem has 
been defined, finding an appropriate solution again requires deep 
understanding of the intended population, how those people per-
form their activities, their capabilities and prior experience, and 
what cultural issues might be impacted.
DESIGN RESE A RC H V ERSUS M A R KE T RESE A RC H
Design and marketing are two important parts of the product 
development group. The two fields are complementary, but 
each has a different focus. Design wants to know what people re-
ally need and how they actually will use the product or service 
under consideration. Marketing wants to know what people will 
buy, which includes learning how they make their purchasing de-
cisions. These different aims lead the two groups to develop dif-
ferent methods of inquiry. Designers tend to use qualitative ob-
servational methods by which they can study people in depth, 
understanding how they do their activities and the environmental 
factors that come into play. These methods are very time consum-
ing, so designers typically only examine small numbers of people, 
often numbering in the tens.
Marketing is concerned with customers. Who might possibly 
purchase the item? What factors might entice them to consider 
and purchase a product? Marketing traditionally uses large-scale, 
quantitative studies, with heavy reliance on focus groups, surveys, 
and questionnaires. In marketing, it is not uncommon to converse 
with hundreds of people in focus groups, and to question tens of 
thousands of people by means of questionnaires and surveys.
The advent of the Internet and the ability to assess huge 
amounts of data have given rise to new methods of formal, quan-
titative market analysis. “Big data,” it is called, or sometimes 
“market analytics.” For popular websites, A/B testing is possible 
in which two potential variants of an offering are tested by giving 

 
six: Design Thinking 225
some randomly selected fraction of visitors (perhaps 10 percent) 
one set of web pages (the A set); and another randomly selected 
set of visitors, the other alternative (the B set). In a few hours, hun-
dreds of thousands of visitors may have been exposed to each test 
set, making it easy to see which yields better results. Moreover, 
the website can capture a wealth of information about people and 
their behavior: age, income, home and work addresses, previous 
purchases, and other websites visited. The virtues of the use of big 
data for market research are frequently touted. The deficiencies 
are seldom noted, except for concerns about invasions of personal 
privacy. In addition to privacy issues, the real problem is that nu-
merical correlations say nothing of people’s real needs, of their 
desires, and of the reasons for their activities. As a result, these 
numerical data can give a false impression of people. But the use of 
big data and market analytics is seductive: no travel, little expense, 
and huge numbers, sexy charts, and impressive statistics, all very 
persuasive to the executive team trying to decide which new prod-
ucts to develop. After all, what would you trust—neatly presented, 
colorful charts, statistics, and significance levels based on millions 
of observations, or the subjective impressions of a motley crew of 
design researchers who worked, slept, and ate in remote villages, 
with minimal sanitary facilities and poor infrastructure? 
The different methods have different goals and produce very 
different results. Designers complain that the methods used by 
marketing don’t get at real behavior: what people say they do and 
want does not correspond with their actual behavior or desires. 
People in marketing complain that although design research meth-
ods yield deep insights, the small number of people observed is a 
concern. Designers counter with the observation that traditional 
marketing methods provide shallow insight into a large number 
of people.
The debate is not useful. All groups are necessary. Customer 
research is a tradeoff: deep insights on real needs from a tiny set 
of people, versus broad, reliable purchasing data from a wide 
range and large number of people. We need both. Designers un-
derstand what people really need. Marketing understands what 

226 The Design of Everyday Things
people actually buy. These are not the same things, which is why 
both approaches are required: marketing and design researchers 
should work together in complementary teams.
What are the requirements for a successful product? First, if no-
body buys the product, then all else is irrelevant. The product de-
sign has to provide support for all the factors people use in making 
purchase decisions. Second, once the product has been purchased 
and is put into use, it must support real needs so that people can 
use, understand, and take pleasure from it. The design specifications 
must include both factors: marketing and design, buying and using.
IDEA GENERATION
Once the design requirements are determined, the next step for 
a design team is to generate potential solutions. This process is 
called idea generation, or ideation. This exercise might be done for 
both of the double diamonds: during the phase of finding the cor-
rect problem, then during the problem solution phase.
This is the fun part of design: it is where creativity is critical. 
There are many ways of generating ideas: many of these methods 
fall under the heading of “brainstorming.” Whatever the method 
used, two major rules are usually followed:
•  Generate numerous ideas. It is dangerous to become fixated upon 
one or two ideas too early in the process.
•  Be creative without regard for constraints. Avoid criticizing ideas, 
whether your own or those of others. Even crazy ideas, often obvi-
ously wrong, can contain creative insights that can later be extracted 
and put to good use in the final idea selection. Avoid premature dis-
missal of ideas.
I like to add a third rule:
• Question everything. I am particularly fond of “stupid” questions. 
A stupid question asks about things so fundamental that everyone 
assumes the answer is obvious. But when the question is taken seri-
ously, it often turns out to be profound: the obvious often is not ob-

 
six: Design Thinking 227
vious at all. What we assume to be obvious is simply the way things 
have always been done, but now that it is questioned, we don’t actu-
ally know the reasons. Quite often the solution to problems is discov-
ered through stupid questions, through questioning the obvious.
PROTOTYPING
The only way to really know whether an idea is reasonable is to 
test it. Build a quick prototype or mock-up of each potential solu-
tion. In the early stages of this process, the mock-ups can be pen-
cil sketches, foam and cardboard models, or simple images made 
with simple drawing tools. I have made mock-ups with spread-
sheets, PowerPoint slides, and with sketches on index cards or 
sticky notes. Sometimes ideas are best conveyed by skits, espe-
cially if you’re developing services or automated systems that are 
difficult to prototype.
One popular prototype technique is called “Wizard of Oz,” after 
the wizard in L. Frank Baum’s classic book (and the classic movie) 
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. The wizard was actually just an ordi-
nary person but, through the use of smoke and mirrors, he man-
aged to appear mysterious and omnipotent. In other words, it was 
all a fake: the wizard had no special powers.
The Wizard of Oz method can be used to mimic a huge, powerful 
system long before it can be built. It can be remarkably effective in 
the early stages of product development. I once used this method 
to test a system for making airline reservations that had been de-
signed by a research group at the Xerox Corporation’s Palo Alto 
Research Center (today it is simply the Palo Alto Research Center, 
or PARC). We brought people into my laboratory in San Diego one at 
a time, seated them in a small, isolated room, and had them type 
their travel requirements into a computer. They thought they were 
interacting with an automated travel assistance program, but in 
fact, one of my graduate students was sitting in an adjacent room, 
reading the typed queries and typing back responses (looking up 
real travel schedules where appropriate). This simulation taught 
us a lot about the requirements for such a system. We learned, for 
example, that people’s sentences were very different from the ones 

228 The Design of Everyday Things
we had designed the system to handle. Example: One of the people 
we tested requested a round-trip ticket between San Diego and 
San Francisco. After the system had determined the desired flight 
to San Francisco, it asked, “When would you like to return?” The 
person responded, “I would like to leave on the following Tues-
day, but I have to be back before my first class at 9 am.” We soon 
learned that it wasn’t sufficient to understand the sentences: we 
also had to do problem-solving, using considerable knowledge 
about such things as airport and meeting locations, traffic patterns, 
delays for getting baggage and rental cars, and of course, parking—
more than our system was capable of doing. Our initial goal was to 
understand language. The studies demonstrated that the goal was 
too limited: we needed to understand human activities.
Prototyping during the problem specification phase is done mainly 
to ensure that the problem is well understood. If the target popu-
lation is already using something related to the new product, that 
can be considered a prototype. During the problem solution phase 
of design, then real prototypes of the proposed solution are invoked.
TESTING
Gather a small group of people who correspond as closely as pos-
sible to the target population—those for whom the product is in-
tended. Have them use the prototypes as nearly as possible to the 
way they would actually use them. If the device is normally used 
by one person, test one person at a time. If it is normally used by a 
group, test a group. The only exception is that even if the normal 
usage is by a single person, it is useful to ask a pair of people to use 
it together, one person operating the prototype, the other guiding 
the actions and interpreting the results (aloud). Using pairs in this 
way causes them to discuss their ideas, hypotheses, and frustra-
tions openly and naturally. The research team should be observing, 
either by sitting behind those being tested (so as not to distract 
them) or by watching through video in another room (but having 
the video camera visible and after describing the procedure). Video 
recordings of the tests are often quite valuable, both for later show-
ings to team members who could not be present and for review.

 
six: Design Thinking 229
When the study is over, get more detailed information about 
the people’s thought processes by retracing their steps, reminding 
them of their actions, and questioning them. Sometimes it helps to 
show them video recordings of their activities as reminders.
How many people should be studied? Opinions vary, but my as-
sociate, Jakob Nielsen, has long championed the number five: five 
people studied individually. Then, study the results, refine them, 
and do another iteration, testing five different people. Five is usu-
ally enough to give major findings. And if you really want to test 
many more people, it is far more effective to do one test of five, 
use the results to improve the system, and then keep iterating the 
test-design cycle until you have tested the desired number of 
people. This gives multiple iterations of improvement, rather 
than just one.
Like prototyping, testing is done in the problem specification 
phase to ensure that the problem is well understood, then done 
again in the problem solution phase to ensure that the new design 
meets the needs and abilities of those who will use it.
ITERATION
The role of iteration in human-centered design is to enable contin-
ual refinement and enhancement. The goal is rapid prototyping 
and testing, or in the words of David Kelly, Stanford professor and 
cofounder of the design firm IDEO, “Fail frequently, fail fast.”
Many rational executives (and government officials) never quite 
understand this aspect of the design process. Why would you want 
to fail? They seem to think that all that is necessary is to determine 
the requirements, then build to those requirements. Tests, they be-
lieve, are only necessary to ensure that the requirements are met. It 
is this philosophy that leads to so many unusable systems. Delib-
erate tests and modifications make things better. Failures are to be 
encouraged—actually, they shouldn’t be called failures: they should 
be thought of as learning experiences. If everything works perfectly, 
little is learned. Learning occurs when there are difficulties.
The hardest part of design is getting the requirements right, 
which means ensuring that the right problem is being solved, as 

230 The Design of Everyday Things
well as that the solution is appropriate. Requirements made in the 
abstract are invariably wrong. Requirements produced by asking 
people what they need are invariably wrong. Requirements are de-
veloped by watching people in their natural environment.
When people are asked what they need, they primarily think of 
the everyday problems they face, seldom noticing larger failures, 
larger needs. They don’t question the major methods they use. 
Moreover, even if they carefully explain how they do their tasks 
and then agree that you got it right when you present it back to 
them, when you watch them, they will often deviate from their 
own description. “Why?” you ask. “Oh, I had to do this one dif-
ferently,” they might reply; “this was a special case.” It turns out 
that most cases are “special.” Any system that does not allow for 
special cases will fail.
Getting the requirements right involves repeated study and test-
ing: iteration. Observe and study: decide what the problem might 
be, and use the results of tests to determine which parts of the de-
sign work, which don’t. Then iterate through all four processes 
once again. Collect more design research if necessary, create more 
ideas, develop the prototypes, and test them.
With each cycle, the tests and observations can be more targeted 
and more efficient. With each cycle of the iteration, the ideas be-
come clearer, the specifications better defined, and the prototypes 
closer approximations to the target, the actual product. After the 
first few iterations, it is time to start converging upon a solution. 
The several different prototype ideas can be collapsed into one.
When does the process end? That is up to the product manager, 
who needs to deliver the highest-possible quality while meeting 
the schedule. In product development, schedule and cost provide 
very strong constraints, so it is up to the design team to meet these 
requirements while getting to an acceptable, high-quality design. 
No matter how much time the design team has been allocated, the 
final results only seem to appear in the last twenty-four hours be-
fore the deadline. (It’s like writing: no matter how much time you 
are given, it’s finished only hours before the deadline.)

 
six: Design Thinking 
231
ACTIVITY-CENTERED VERSUS HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
The intense focus on individuals is one of the hallmarks of human-
centered design, ensuring that products do fit real needs, that they 
are usable and understandable. But what if the product is intended 
for people all across the world? Many manufacturers make essen-
tially the same product for everyone. Although automobiles are 
slightly modified for the requirements of a country, they are all 
basically the same the world round. The same is true for cameras, 
computers, telephones, tablets, television sets, and refrigerators. 
Yes, there are some regional differences, but remarkably little. Even 
products specifically designed for one culture—rice cookers, for 
example—get adopted by other cultures elsewhere.
How can we pretend to accommodate all of these very different, 
very disparate people? The answer is to focus on activities, not the 
individual person. I call this activity-centered design. Let the activity 
define the product and its structure. Let the conceptual model of 
the product be built around the conceptual model of the activity.
Why does this work? Because people’s activities across the 
world tend to be similar. Moreover, although people are unwilling 
to learn systems that appear to have arbitrary, incomprehensible 
requirements, they are quite willing to learn things that appear 
to be essential to the activity. Does this violate the principles of 
human-centered design? Not at all: consider it an enhancement of 
HCD. After all, the activities are done by and for people. Activity-
centered approaches are human-centered approaches, far better 
suited for large, nonhomogeneous populations.
Take another look at the automobile, basically identical all across 
the world. It requires numerous actions, many of which make lit-
tle sense outside of the activity and that add to the complexity of 
driving and to the rather long period it takes to become an accom-
plished, skilled driver. There is the need to master foot pedals, to 
steer, use turn signals, control the lights, and watch the road, all 
while being aware of events on either side of and behind the vehi-
cle, and perhaps while maintaining conversations with the other 
people in the auto. In addition, instruments on the panel need to 

232 The Design of Everyday Things
be watched, especially the speed indicator, as well as the water 
temperature, oil pressure, and fuel level. The locations of the rear- 
and side-view mirrors require the eyes to be off the road ahead for 
considerable time.
People learn to drive cars quite successfully despite the need 
to master so many subcomponent tasks. Given the design of the 
car and the activity of driving, each task seems appropriate. Yes, 
we can make things better. Automatic transmissions eliminate the 
need for the third pedal, the clutch. Heads-up displays mean that 
critical instrument panel and navigation information can be dis-
played in the space in front of the driver, so no eye movements are 
required to monitor them (although it requires an attentional shift, 
which does take attention off the road). Someday we will replace 
the three different mirrors with one video display that shows ob-
jects on all sides of the car in one image, simplifying yet another 
action. How do we make things better? By careful study of the 
activities that go on during driving.
Support the activities while being sensitive to human capabilities, 
and people will accept the design and learn whatever is necessary.
ON T HE DIF F ERENC ES BE T W EEN TASKS A ND AC T I V I T IES
One comment: there is a difference between task and activity. I 
emphasize the need to design for activities: designing for tasks is 
usually too restrictive. An activity is a high-level structure, perhaps 
“go shopping.” A task is a lower-level component of an activity, 
such as “drive to the market,” “find a shopping basket,” “use a 
shopping list to guide the purchases,” and so forth.
An activity is a collected set of tasks, but all performed together 
toward a common high-level goal. A task is an organized, cohesive 
set of operations directed toward a single, low-level goal. Products 
have to provide support for both activities and the various tasks 
that are involved. Well-designed devices will package together the 
various tasks that are required to support an activity, making them 
work seamlessly with one another, making sure the work done for 
one does not interfere with the requirements for another.

 
six: Design Thinking 233
Activities are hierarchical, so a high-level activity (going to work) 
will have under it numerous lower-level ones. In turn, low-level 
activities spawn “tasks,” and tasks are eventually executed by ba-
sic “operations.” The American psychologists Charles Carver and 
Michael Scheier suggest that goals have three fundamental levels 
that control activities. Be-goals are at the highest, most abstract 
level and govern a person’s being: they determine why people act, 
are fundamental and long lasting, and determine one’s self-image. 
Of far more practical concern for everyday activity is the next level 
down, the do-goal, which is more akin to the goal I discuss in the 
seven stages of activity. Do-goals determine the plans and actions 
to be performed for an activity. The lowest level of this hierar-
chy is the motor-goal, which specifies just how the actions are per-
formed: this is more at the level of tasks and operations rather than 
activities. The German psychologist Marc Hassenzahl has shown 
how this three-level analysis can be used to guide in the develop-
ment and analysis of a person’s experience (the user experience, 
usually abbreviated UX) in interacting with products. 
Focusing upon tasks is too limiting. Apple’s success with its 
music player, the iPod, was because Apple supported the entire 
activity involved in listening to music: discovering it, purchasing 
it, getting it into the music player, developing playlists (that could 
be shared), and listening to the music. Apple also allowed other 
companies to add to the capabilities of the system with external 
speakers, microphones, all sorts of accessories. Apple made it pos-
sible to send the music throughout the home, to be listened to on 
those other companies’ sound systems. Apple’s success was due to 
its combination of two factors: brilliant design plus support for the 
entire activity of music enjoyment.
Design for individuals and the results may be wonderful for the 
particular people they were designed for, but a mismatch for oth-
ers. Design for activities and the result will be usable by everyone. 
A major benefit is that if the design requirements are consistent 
with their activities, people will tolerate complexity and the re-
quirements to learn something new: as long as the complexity and 

234 The Design of Everyday Things
the new things to be learned feel appropriate to the task, they will 
feel natural and be viewed as reasonable.
ITERATIVE DESIGN VERSUS LINEAR STAGES
The traditional design process is linear, sometimes called the water-
fall method because progress goes in a single direction, and once de-
cisions have been made, it is difficult or impossible to go back. This 
is in contrast to the iterative method of human-centered design, 
where the process is circular, with continual refinement, contin-
ual change, and encouragement of backtracking, rethinking early 
decisions. Many software developers experiment with variations 
on the theme, variously called by such names as Scrum and Agile.
Linear, waterfall methods make logical sense. It makes sense that 
design research should precede design, design precede engineer-
ing development, engineering precede manufacturing, and so on. 
Iteration makes sense in helping to clarify the problem statement 
and requirements; but when projects are large, involving consid-
erable people, time, and budget, it would be horribly expensive to 
allow iteration to last too long. On the other hand, proponents of 
iterative development have seen far too many project teams rush 
to develop requirements that later prove to be faulty, sometimes 
wasting huge amounts of money as a result. Numerous large 
projects have failed at a cost of multiple billions of dollars.
The most traditional waterfall methods are called gated meth-
ods because they have a linear set of phases or stages, with a gate 
blocking transition from one stage to the next. The gate is a man-
agement review during which progress is evaluated and the deci-
sion to proceed to the next stage is made.
Which method is superior? As is invariably the case where fierce 
debate is involved, both have virtues and both have deficits. In de-
sign, one of the most difficult activities is to get the specifications 
right: in other words, to determine that the correct problem is be-
ing solved. Iterative methods are designed to defer the formation of 
rigid specifications, to start off by diverging across a large set of pos-
sible requirements or problem statements before convergence, then 
again diverging across a large number of potential solutions before 

 
six: Design Thinking 235
converging. Early prototypes have to be tested through real interac-
tion with the target population in order to refine the requirements.
The iterative method, however, is best suited for the early design 
phases of a product, not for the later stages. It also has difficulty 
scaling its procedures to handle large projects. It is extremely dif-
ficult to deploy successfully on projects that involve hundreds or 
even thousands of developers, take years to complete, and cost 
in the millions or billions of dollars. These large projects include 
complex consumer goods and large programming jobs, such as au-
tomobiles; operating systems for computers, tablets, and phones; 
and word processors and spreadsheets.
Decision gates give management much better control over the 
process than they have in the iterative methods. However, they are 
cumbersome. The management reviews at each of the gates can 
take considerable time, both in preparation for them and then in 
the decision time after the presentations. Weeks can be wasted be-
cause of the difficulty of scheduling all the senior executives from 
the different divisions of the company who wish to have a say. 
Many groups are experimenting with different ways of manag-
ing the product development process. The best methods combine 
the benefits of both iteration and stage reviews. Iteration occurs 
inside the stages, between the gates. The goal is to have the best of 
both worlds: iterative experimentation to refine the problem and 
the solution, coupled with management reviews at the gates.
The trick is to delay precise specification of the product require-
ments until some iterative testing with rapidly deployed prototypes 
has been done, while still keeping tight control over schedule, bud-
get, and quality. It may appear impossible to prototype some large 
projects (for example, large transportation systems), but even there a 
lot can be done. The prototypes might be scaled objects, constructed 
by model makers or 3-D printing methods. Even well-rendered 
drawings and videos of cartoons or simple animation sketches can 
be useful. Virtual reality computer aids allow people to envision 
themselves using the final product, and in the case of a building, to 
envision living or working within it. All of these methods can pro-
vide rapid feedback before much time or money has been expended.

236 The Design of Everyday Things
The hardest part of the development of complex products is 
management: organizing and communicating and synchronizing 
the many different people, groups, and departmental divisions 
that are required to make it happen. Large projects are especially 
difficult, not only because of the problem of managing so many 
different people and groups, but also because the projects’ long 
time horizon introduces new difficulties. In the many years it takes 
to go from project formulation to completion, the requirements and 
technologies will probably change, making some of the proposed 
work irrelevant and obsolete; the people who will make use of the 
results might very well change; and the people involved in execut-
ing the project definitely will change.
Some people will leave the project, perhaps because of illness or 
injury, retirement or promotion. Some will change companies and 
others will move on to other jobs in the same company. Whatever 
the reason, considerable time is lost finding replacements and then 
bringing them up to the full knowledge and skill level required. 
Sometimes this is not even possible because critical knowledge 
about project decisions and methods are in the form we call implicit 
knowledge; that is, within the heads of the workers. When workers 
leave, their implicit knowledge goes with them. The management 
of large projects is a difficult challenge.
What I Just Told You? 
It Doesn’t Really Work That Way
The preceding sections describe the human-centered design pro-
cess for product development. But there is an old joke about the 
difference between theory and practice:
In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. 
In practice, there is.
The HCD process describes the ideal. But the reality of life within 
a business often forces people to behave quite differently from that 
ideal. One disenchanted member of the design team for a con-
sumer products company told me that although his company pro-

 
six: Design Thinking 237
fesses to believe in user experience and to follow human-centered 
design, in practice there are only two drivers of new products:
1. Adding features to match the competition
2. Adding some feature driven by a new technology
“Do we look for human needs?” he asked, rhetorically. “No,” he 
answered himself.
This is typical: market-driven pressures plus an engineering-
driven company yield ever-increasing features, complexity, and 
confusion. But even companies that do intend to search for human 
needs are thwarted by the severe challenges of the product devel-
opment process, in particular, the challenges of insufficient time and 
insufficient money. In fact, having watched many products succumb 
to these challenges, I propose a “Law of Product Development”:
DON NORMAN’S LAW OF PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
The day a product development process starts, it is behind schedule and 
above budget.
Product launches are always accompanied by schedules and bud-
gets. Usually the schedule is driven by outside considerations, in-
cluding holidays, special product announcement opportunities, 
and even factory schedules. One product I worked on was given 
the unrealistic timeline of four weeks because the factory in Spain 
would then go on vacation, and when the workers returned, it 
would be too late to get the product out in time for the Christmas 
buying season.
Moreover, product development takes time even to get started. 
People are never sitting around with nothing to do, waiting to be 
called for the product. No, they must be recruited, vetted, and then 
transitioned off their current jobs. This all takes time, time that is 
seldom scheduled.
So imagine a design team being told that it is about to work on 
a new product. “Wonderful,” cries the team; “we’ll immediately 
send out our design researchers to study target customers.” “How 

238 The Design of Everyday Things
long will that take?” asks the product manager. “Oh, we can do it 
quickly: a week or two to make the arrangements, and then two 
weeks in the field. Perhaps a week to distill the findings. Four or 
five weeks.” “Sorry,” says the product manager, “we don’t have 
time. For that matter, we don’t have the budget to send a team into 
the field for two weeks.” “But it’s essential if we really want to 
understand the customer,” argues the design team. “You’re abso-
lutely right,” says the product manager, “but we’re behind sched-
ule: we can’t afford either the time or the money. Next time. Next 
time we will do it right.” Except there is never a next time, because 
when the next time comes around, the same arguments get re-
peated: that product also starts behind schedule and over budget.
Product development involves an incredible mix of disciplines, 
from designers to engineers and programmers, manufacturing, 
packaging, sales, marketing, and service. And more. The product 
has to appeal to the current customer base as well as to expand 
beyond to new customers. Patents create a minefield for designers 
and engineers, for today it is almost impossible to design or build 
anything that doesn’t conflict with patents, which means redesign 
to work one’s way through the mines.
Each of the separate disciplines has a different view of the prod-
uct, each has different but specific requirements to be met. Often 
the requirements posed by each discipline are contradictory or 
incompatible with those of the other disciplines. But all of them 
are correct when viewed from their respective perspective. In most 
companies, however, the disciplines work separately, design pass-
ing its results to engineering and programming, which modify 
the requirements to fit their needs. They then pass their results to 
manufacturing, which does further modification, then marketing 
requests changes. It’s a mess.
What is the solution?
The way to handle the time crunch that eliminates the ability to 
do good up-front design research is to separate that process from 
the product team: have design researchers always out in the field, 
always studying potential products and customers. Then, when 
the product team is launched, the designers can say, “We already 

 
six: Design Thinking 239
examined this case, so here are our recommendations.” The same 
argument applies to market researchers.
The clash of disciplines can be resolved by multidisciplinary 
teams whose participants learn to understand and respect the 
requirements of one another. Good product development teams 
work as harmonious groups, with representatives from all the 
relevant disciplines present at all times. If all the viewpoints and 
requirements can be understood by all participants, it is often pos-
sible to think of creative solutions that satisfy most of the issues. 
Note that working with these teams is also a challenge. Everyone 
speaks a different technical language. Each discipline thinks it is 
the most important part of the process. Quite often, each discipline 
thinks the others are stupid, that they are making inane requests. 
It takes a skilled product manager to create mutual understanding 
and respect. But it can be done.
The design practices described by the double-diamond and the 
human-centered design process are the ideal. Even though the ideal 
can seldom be met in practice, it is always good to aim for the ideal, 
but to be realistic about the time and budgetary challenges. These 
can be overcome, but only if they are recognized and designed into 
the process. Multidisciplinary teams allow for enhanced communi-
cation and collaboration, often saving both time and money.
The Design Challenge
It is difficult to do good design. That is why it is such a rich, en-
gaging profession with results that can be powerful and effective. 
Designers are asked to figure out how to manage complex things, 
to manage the interaction of technology and people. Good design-
ers are quick learners, for today they might be asked to design a 
camera; tomorrow, to design a transportation system or a compa-
ny’s organizational structure. How can one person work across so 
many different domains? Because the fundamental principles of 
designing for people are the same across all domains. People are 
the same, and so the design principles are the same.
Designers are only one part of the complex chain of processes 
and different professions involved in producing a product. Although 

240 The Design of Everyday Things
the theme of this book is the importance of satisfying the needs 
of the people who will ultimately use the product, other aspects of 
the product are important; for example, its engineering effective-
ness, which includes its capabilities, reliability, and serviceability; 
its cost; and its financial viability, which usually means profitabil-
ity. Will people buy it? Each of these aspects poses its own set of 
requirements, sometimes ones that appear to be in opposition to 
those of the other aspects. Schedule and budget are often the two 
most severe constraints.
Designers try hard to determine people’s real needs and to ful-
fill them, whereas marketing is concerned with determining what 
people will actually buy. What people need and what they buy are 
two different things, but both are important. It doesn’t matter how 
great the product is if nobody buys it. Similarly, if a company’s 
products are not profitable, the company might very well go out 
of business. In dysfunctional companies, each division of the com-
pany is skeptical of the value added to the product by the other 
divisions.
In a properly run organization, team members coming from all 
the various aspects of the product cycle get together to share their 
requirements and to work harmoniously to design and produce 
a product that satisfies them, or at least that does so with accept-
able compromises. In dysfunctional companies, each team works 
in isolation, often arguing with the other teams, often watching its 
designs or specifications get changed by others in what each team 
considers an unreasonable way. Producing a good product requires 
a lot more than good technical skills: it requires a harmonious, 
smoothly functioning, cooperative and respectful organization.
The design process must address numerous constraints. In the 
sections that follow, I examine these other factors.
PRODUCTS HAVE MULTIPLE, CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS
Designers must please their clients, who are not always the end 
users. Consider major household appliances, such as stoves, refrig-
erators, dishwashers, and clothes washers and dryers; and even 
faucets and thermostats for heating and air-conditioning systems. 

 
six: Design Thinking 
241
They are often purchased by housing developers or landlords. 
In businesses, purchasing departments make decisions for large 
companies; and owners or managers, for small companies. In all 
these cases, the purchaser is probably interested primarily in price, 
perhaps in size or appearance, almost certainly not in usability. 
And once devices are purchased and installed, the purchaser has 
no further interest in them. The manufacturer has to attend to the 
requirements of these decision makers, because these are the peo-
ple who actually buy the product. Yes, the needs of the eventual 
users are important, but to the business, they seem of secondary 
importance.
In some situations, cost dominates. Suppose, for example, you 
are part of a design team for office copiers. In large companies, 
copying machines are purchased by the Printing and Duplicating 
Center, then dispersed to the various departments. The copiers are 
purchased after a formal “request for proposals” has gone out to 
manufacturers and dealers of machines. The selection is almost 
always based on price plus a list of required features. Usability? 
Not considered. Training costs? Not considered. Maintenance? Not 
considered. There are no requirements regarding understandabil-
ity or usability of the product, even though in the end those aspects 
of the product can end up costing the company a lot of money 
in wasted time, increased need for service calls and training, and 
even lowered staff morale and lower productivity.
The focus on sales price is one reason we get unusable copying 
machines and telephone systems in our places of employment. If 
people complained strongly enough, usability could become a re-
quirement in the purchasing specifications, and that requirement 
could trickle back to the designers. But without this feedback, de-
signers must often design the cheapest possible products because 
those are what sell. Designers need to understand their customers, 
and in many cases, the customer is the person who purchases the 
product, not the person who actually uses it. It is just as important to 
study those who do the purchasing as it is to study those who use it.
To make matters even more difficult, yet another set of people 
needs to be considered: the engineers, developers, manufacturing, 

242 The Design of Everyday Things
services, sales, and marketing people who have to translate the 
ideas from the design team into reality, and then sell and support 
the product after it is shipped. These groups are users, too, not of 
the product itself, but of the output of the design team. Designers 
are used to accommodating the needs of the product users, but 
they seldom consider the needs of the other groups involved in 
the product process. But if their needs are not considered, then 
as the product development moves through the process from de-
sign to engineering, to marketing, to manufacturing, and so on, 
each new group will discover that it doesn’t meet their needs, so 
they will change it. But piecemeal, after-the-fact changes invariably 
weaken the cohesion of the product. If all these requirements were 
known at the start of the design process, a much more satisfactory 
resolution could have been devised.
Usually the different company divisions have intelligent peo-
ple trying to do what is best for the company. When they make 
changes to a design, it is because their requirements were not suit-
ably served. Their concerns and needs are legitimate, but changes 
introduced in this way are almost always detrimental. The best 
way to counteract this is to ensure that representatives from all 
the divisions are present during the entire design process, starting 
with the decision to launch the product, continuing all the way 
through shipment to customers, service requirements, and repairs 
and returns. This way, all the concerns can be heard as soon as 
they are discovered. There must be a multidisciplinary team over-
seeing the entire design, engineering, and manufacturing process 
that shares all departmental issues and concerns from day one, so 
that everyone can design to satisfy them, and when conflicts arise, 
the group together can determine the most satisfactory solution. 
Sadly, it is the rare company that is organized this way.
Design is a complex activity. But the only way this complex pro-
cess comes together is if all the relevant parties work together as 
a team. It isn’t design against engineering, against marketing, 
against manufacturing: it is design together with all these other 
players. Design must take into account sales and marketing, ser-
vicing and help desks, engineering and manufacturing, costs and 

 
six: Design Thinking 243
schedules. That’s why it’s so challenging. That’s why it’s so much 
fun and rewarding when it all comes together to create a success-
ful product.
DESIGNING FOR SPECIAL PEOPLE
There is no such thing as the average person. This poses a particular 
problem for the designer, who usually must come up with a single 
design for everyone. The designer can consult handbooks with ta-
bles that show average arm reach and seated height, how far the 
average person can stretch backward while seated, and how much 
room is needed for average hips, knees, and elbows. Physical anthro-
pometry is what the field is called. With data, the designer can try 
to meet the size requirements for almost everyone, say for the 90th, 
95th, or even the 99th percentile. Suppose the product is designed 
to accommodate the 95th percentile, that is, for everyone except the 
5 percent of people who are smaller or larger. That leaves out a lot 
of people. The United States has approximately 300 million people, 
so 5 percent is 15 million. Even if the design aims at the 99th per-
centile it would still leave out 3 million people. And this is just for 
the United States: the world has 7 billion people. Design for the 99th 
percentile of the world and 70 million people are left out.
Some problems are not solved by adjustments or averages: Average 
a left-hander with a right-hander and what do you get? Sometimes it 
is simply impossible to build one product that accommodates ev-
eryone, so the answer is to build different versions of the product. 
After all, we would not be happy with a store that sells only one 
size and type of clothing: we expect clothing that fits our bodies, 
and people come in a very wide range of sizes. We don’t expect 
the large variety of goods found in a clothing store to apply to 
all people or activities; we expect a wide variety of cooking appli-
ances, automobiles, and tools so we can select the ones that pre-
cisely match our requirements. One device simply cannot work for 
everyone. Even such simple tools as pencils need to be designed 
differently for different activities and types of people.
Consider the special problems of the aged and infirm, the hand-
icapped, the blind or near blind, the deaf or hard of hearing, the 

244 The Design of Everyday Things
very short or very tall, or people who speak other languages. 
Design for interests and skill levels. Don’t be trapped by overly 
general, inaccurate stereotypes. I return to these groups in the 
next section.
THE STIGMA PROBLEM
“I don’t want to go into a care facility. I’d have to be around all those old 
people.” (Comment by a 95-year-old man.)
Many devices designed to aid people with particular difficul-
ties fail. They may be well designed, they may solve the problem, 
but they are rejected by their intended users. Why? Most peo-
ple do not wish to advertise their infirmities. Actually, many people 
do not wish to admit having infirmities, even to themselves.
When Sam Farber wanted to develop a set of household tools 
that his arthritic wife could use, he worked hard to find a solution 
that was good for everyone. The result was a series of tools that 
revolutionized this field. For example, vegetable peelers used to be 
an inexpensive, simple metal tool, often of the form shown on the 
left in Figure 6.3. These were awkward to use, painful to hold, and 
not even that effective at 
peeling, but everyone as-
sumed that this was how 
they had to be.
After considerable re-
search, Farber settled 
upon the peeler shown on 
the right in Figure 6.3 and 
built a company, OXO, to 
manufacture and distrib-
ute it. Even though the 
peeler was designed for 
someone with arthritis, it 
was advertised as a bet-
ter peeler for everyone. It 
was. Even though the de-
FIGURE 6.3. Three Vegetable Peelers. The 
traditional metal vegetable peeler is shown on 
the left: inexpensive, but uncomfortable. The 
OXO peeler that revolutionized the industry 
is shown on the right. The result of this rev-
olution is shown in the middle, a peeler from 
the Swiss company Kuhn Rikon: colorful and 
comfortable.

 
six: Design Thinking 245
sign was more expensive than the regular peeler, it was so success-
ful that today, many companies make variations on this theme. You 
may have trouble seeing the OXO peeler as revolutionary because 
today, many have followed in these footsteps. Design has become 
a major theme for even simple tools such as peelers, as demon-
strated by the center peeler of Figure 6.3.
Consider the two things special about the OXO peeler: cost and 
design for someone with an infirmity. Cost? The original peeler 
was very inexpensive, so a peeler that is many times the cost of 
the inexpensive one is still inexpensive. What about the special 
design for people with arthritis? The virtues for them were never 
mentioned, so how did they find it? OXO did the right thing and 
let the world know that this was a better product. And the world 
took note and made it successful. As for people who needed the 
better handle? It didn’t take long for the word to spread. Today, 
many companies have followed the OXO route, producing peelers 
that work extremely well, are comfortable, and are colorful. See 
Figure 6.3.
Would you use a walker, wheelchair, crutches, or a cane? Many 
people avoid these, even though they need them, because of the 
negative image they cast: the stigma. Why? Years ago, a cane was 
fashionable: people who didn’t need them would use them any-
way, twirling them, pointing with them, hiding brandy or whisky, 
knives or guns inside their handles. Just look at any movie depict-
ing nineteenth-century London. Why can’t devices for those who 
need them be as sophisticated and fashionable today?
Of all the devices intended to aid the elderly, perhaps the most 
shunned is the walker. Most of these devices are ugly. They cry out, 
“Disability here.” Why not transform them into products to be proud 
of? Fashion statements, perhaps. This thinking has already begun 
with some medical appliances. Some companies are making hearing 
aids and glasses for children and adolescents with special colors and 
styles that appeal to these age groups. Fashion accessories. Why not?
Those of you who are young, do not smirk. Physical disabilities 
may begin early, starting in the midtwenties. By their midforties, 
most people’s eyes can no longer adjust sufficiently to focus over 

246 The Design of Everyday Things
the entire range of distances, so something is necessary to compen-
sate, whether reading glasses, bifocals, special contact lenses, or 
even surgical correction.
Many people in their eighties and nineties are still in good men-
tal and physical shape, and the accumulated wisdom of their years 
leads to superior performance in many tasks. But physical strength 
and agility do decrease, reaction time slows, and vision and hear-
ing show impairments, along with decreased ability to divide at-
tention or switch rapidly among competing tasks.
For anyone who is considering growing old, I remind you that 
although physical abilities diminish with age, many mental ca-
pacities continue to improve, especially those dependent upon an 
expert accumulation of experience, deep reflection, and enhanced 
knowledge. Younger people are more agile, more willing to ex-
periment and take risks. Older people have more knowledge and 
wisdom. The world benefits from having a mix and so do design 
teams.
Designing for people with special needs is often called inclusive 
or universal design. Those names are fitting, for it is often the case that 
everyone benefits. Make the lettering larger, with high-contrast type, 
and everyone can read it better. In dim light, even the people with 
the world’s best eyesight will benefit from such lettering. Make 
things adjustable, and you will find that more people can use it, 
and even people who liked it before may now like it better. Just 
as I invoke the so-called error message of Figure 4.6 as my normal 
way of exiting a program because it is easier than the so-called cor-
rect way, special features made for people with special needs often 
turn out to be useful for a wide variety of people.
The best solution to the problem of designing for everyone is 
flexibility: flexibility in the size of the images on computer screens, 
in the sizes, heights, and angles of tables and chairs. Allow people 
to adjust their own seats, tables, and working devices. Allow them 
to adjust lighting, font size, and contrast. Flexibility on our high-
ways might mean ensuring that there are alternative routes with 
different speed limits. Fixed solutions will invariably fail with some 

 
six: Design Thinking 247
people; flexible solutions at least offer a chance for those with dif-
ferent needs.
Complexity Is Good; 
It Is Confusion That Is Bad
The everyday kitchen is complex. We have multiple instruments 
just for serving and eating food. The typical kitchen contains all 
sorts of cutting utensils, heating units, and cooking apparatus. The 
easiest way to understand the complexity is to try to cook in an 
unfamiliar kitchen. Even excellent cooks have trouble working in 
a new environment.
Someone else’s kitchen looks complicated and confusing, but 
your own kitchen does not. The same can probably be said for ev-
ery room in the home. Notice that this feeling of confusion is really 
one of knowledge. My kitchen looks confusing to you, but not to 
me. In turn, your kitchen looks confusing to me, but not to you. 
So the confusion is not in the kitchen: it is in the mind. “Why can’t 
things be made simple?” goes the cry. Well, one reason is that life 
is complex, as are the tasks we encounter. Our tools must match 
the tasks.
I feel so strongly about this that I wrote an entire book on the 
topic, Living with Complexity, in which I argued that complexity 
is essential: it is confusion that is undesirable. I distinguished be-
tween “complexity,” which we need to match the activities we take 
part in, and “complicated,” which I defined to mean “confusing.” 
How do we avoid confusion? Ah, here is where the designer’s 
skills come into play.
The most important principle for taming complexity is to pro-
vide a good conceptual model, which has already been well cov-
ered in this book. Remember the kitchen’s apparent complexity? 
The people who use it understand why each item is stored where 
it is: there is usually structure to the apparent randomness. Even 
exceptions fit: even if the reason is something like, “It was too big 
to fit in the proper drawer and I didn’t know where else to put it,” 
that is reason enough to give structure and understanding to the 

248 The Design of Everyday Things
person who stored the item there. Complex things are no longer 
complicated once they are understood.
Standardization and Technology 
If we examine the history of advances in all technological fields, 
we see that some improvements come naturally through the tech-
nology itself, others come through standardization. The early his-
tory of the automobile is a good example. The first cars were very 
difficult to operate. They required strength and skill beyond the 
abilities of many. Some problems were solved through automation: 
the choke, the spark advance, and the starter engine. Other aspects 
of cars and driving were standardized through the long process of 
international standards committees:
•  On which side of the road to drive (constant within a country, but 
variable across countries)
•  On which side of the car the driver sits (depends upon which side of 
the road the car is driven)
•  The location of essential components: steering wheel, brake, clutch, 
and accelerator (the same, whether on the left- or right-hand side of 
the car)
Standardization is one type of cultural constraint. With standard-
ization, once you have learned to drive one car, you feel justifiably 
confident that you can drive any car, anyplace in the world. Stan-
dardization provides a major breakthrough in usability.
ESTABLISHING STANDARDS
I have enough friends on national and international standards 
committees to realize that the process of determining an inter-
nationally accepted standard is laborious. Even when all parties 
agree on the merits of standardization, the task of selecting stan-
dards becomes a lengthy, politicized issue. A small company can 
standardize its products without too much difficulty, but it is much 
more difficult for an industrial, national, or international body to 

 
six: Design Thinking 249
agree to standards. There even 
exists a standardized procedure 
for establishing national and 
international standards. A set 
of national and international 
organizations works on stan-
dards; when a new standard is 
proposed, it must work its way 
through the organizational hi-
erarchy. Each step is complex, 
for if there are three ways of do-
ing something, then there are 
sure to be strong proponents 
of each of the three ways, plus 
people who will argue that it is 
too early to standardize.
Each proposal is debated at the 
standards committee meeting where it is presented, then taken back 
to the sponsoring organization—which is sometimes a company, 
sometimes a professional society—where objections and counter-
objections are collected. Then the standards committee meets again 
to discuss the objections. And again and again and again. Any com-
pany that is already marketing a product that meets the proposed 
standard will have a huge economic advantage, and the debates are 
therefore often affected as much by the economics and politics of 
the issues as by real technological substance. The process is almost 
guaranteed to take five years, and quite often longer.
The resulting standard is usually a compromise among the var-
ious competing positions, oftentimes an inferior compromise. 
Sometimes the answer is to agree on several incompatible stan-
dards. Witness the existence of both metric and English units; of 
left-hand- and right-hand-drive automobiles. There are several in-
ternational standards for the voltages and frequencies of electricity, 
and several different kinds of electrical plugs and sockets—which 
cannot be interchanged.
4
10
12
6
2
8
3
9
11
5
1
7
FIGURE 6.4. The Nonstandard Clock. 
What time is it? This clock is just as log-
ical as the standard one, except the hands 
move in the opposite direction and “12” is 
not in its usual place. Same logic, though. 
So why is it so difficult to read? What time 
is being displayed? 7:11, of course.

250 The Design of Everyday Things
WHY STANDARDS ARE NECESSARY: 
A SIMPLE ILLUSTRATION
With all these difficulties and with the continual advances in tech-
nology, are standards really necessary? Yes, they are. Take the ev-
eryday clock. It’s standardized. Consider how much trouble you 
would have telling time with a backward clock, where the hands 
revolved “counterclockwise.” A few such clocks exist, primarily as 
humorous conversation pieces. When a clock truly violates stan-
dards, such as the one in Figure 6.4 on the previous page, it is dif-
ficult to determine what time is being displayed. Why? The logic 
behind the time display is identical to that of conventional clocks: 
there are only two differences—the hands rotate in the opposite 
direction (counterclockwise) and the location of “12,” usually at 
the top, has been moved. This clock is just as logical as the stan-
dard one. It bothers us because we have standardized on a differ-
ent scheme, on the very definition of the term clockwise. Without 
such standardization, clock reading would be more difficult: you’d 
always have to figure out the mapping.
A STANDARD THAT TOOK SO LONG, 
TECHNOLOGY OVERRAN IT
I myself participated at the very end of the incredibly long, 
complex political process of establishing the US standards for 
high-definition television. In the 1970s, the Japanese developed a 
national television system that had much higher resolution than the 
standards then in use: they called it “high-definition television.”
In 1995, two decades later, the television industry in the United 
States proposed its own high-definition TV standard (HDTV) to the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). But the computer in-
dustry pointed out that the proposals were not compatible with the 
way that computers displayed images, so the FCC objected to the 
proposed standards. Apple mobilized other members of the indus-
try and, as vice president of advanced technology, I was selected 
to be the spokesperson for Apple. (In the following description, 
ignore the jargon—it doesn’t matter.) The TV industry proposed a 

 
six: Design Thinking 
251
wide variety of permissible formats, including ones with rectangu-
lar pixels and interlaced scan. Because of the technical limitations 
in the 1990s, it was suggested that the highest-quality picture have 
1,080 interlaced lines (1080i). We wanted only progressive scan, so 
we insisted upon 720 lines, progressively displayed (720p), argu-
ing that the progressive nature of the scan made up for the lesser 
number of lines.
The battle was heated. The FCC told all the competing parties 
to lock themselves into a room and not to come out until they had 
reached agreement. As a result, I spent many hours in lawyers’ 
offices. We ended up with a crazy agreement that recognized mul-
tiple variations of the standard, with resolutions of 480i and 480p 
(called standard definition), 720p and 1080i (called high-definition), 
and two different aspect ratios for the screens (the ratio of width to 
height), 4:3 (= 1.3)—the old standard—and 16:9 (= 1.8)—the new 
standard. In addition, a large number of frame rates were sup-
ported (basically, how many times per second the image was trans-
mitted). Yes, it was a standard, or more accurately a large number 
of standards. In fact, one of the allowed methods of transmission 
was to use any method (as long as it carried its own specifications 
along with the signal). It was a mess, but we did reach agreement. 
After the standard was made official in 1996, it took roughly ten 
more years for HDTV to become accepted, helped, finally, by a 
new generation of television displays that were large, thin, and in-
expensive. The whole process took roughly thirty-five years from 
the first broadcasts by the Japanese.
Was it worth the fight? Yes and no. In the thirty-five years that it 
took to reach the standard, the technology continued to evolve, so 
the resulting standard was far superior to the first one proposed 
so many years before. Moreover, the HDTV of today is a huge im-
provement over what we had before (now called “standard defini-
tion”). But the minutiae of details that were the focus of the fight 
between the computer and TV companies was silly. My technical 
experts continually tried to demonstrate to me the superiority of 
720p images over 1080i, but it took me hours of viewing special 

252 The Design of Everyday Things
scenes under expert guidance to see the deficiencies of the inter-
laced images (the differences only show up with complex moving 
images). So why did we care?
Television displays and compression techniques have improved 
so much that interlacing is no longer needed. Images at 1080p, 
once thought to be impossible, are now commonplace. Sophisti-
cated algorithms and high-speed processors make it possible to 
transform one standard into another; even rectangular pixels are 
no longer a problem.
As I write these words, the main problem is the discrepancy in 
aspect ratios. Movies come in many different aspect ratios (none 
of them the new standard) so when TV screens show movies, they 
either have to cut off part of the image or leave parts of the screen 
black. Why was the HDTV aspect ratio set at 16:9 (or 1.8) if no 
movies used that ratio? Because engineers liked it: square the old 
aspect ratio of 4:3 and you get the new one, 16:9.
Today we are about to embark on yet another standards fight 
over TV. First, there is three-dimensional TV: 3-D. Then there are 
proposals for ultra-high definition: 2,160 lines (and a doubling of 
the horizontal resolution as well): four times the resolution of our 
best TV today (1080p). One company wants eight times the resolu-
tion, and one is proposing an aspect ratio of 21:9 (= 2.3). I have seen 
these images and they are marvelous, although they only matter 
with large screens (at least 60 inches, or 1.5 meters, in diagonal 
length), and when the viewer is close to the display.
Standards can take so long to be established that by the time they 
do come into wide practice, they can be irrelevant. Nonetheless, 
standards are necessary. They simplify our lives and make it possi-
ble for different brands of equipment to work together in harmony. 
A STANDARD THAT NEVER 
CAUGHT ON: DIGITAL TIME
Standardize and you simplify lives: everyone learns the system 
only once. But don’t standardize too soon; you may be locked into 
a primitive technology, or you may have introduced rules that turn 
out to be grossly inefficient, even error-inducing. Standardize too 

 
six: Design Thinking 253
late, and there may already be so many ways of doing things that 
no international standard can be agreed on. If there is agreement 
on an old-fashioned technology, it may be too expensive for every-
one to change to the new standard. The metric system is a good ex-
ample: it is a far simpler and more usable scheme for representing 
distance, weight, volume, and temperature than the older English 
system of feet, pounds, seconds, and degrees on the Fahrenheit 
scale. But industrial nations with a heavy commitment to the old 
measurement standard claim they cannot afford the massive costs 
and confusion of conversion. So we are stuck with two standards, 
at least for a few more decades.
Would you consider changing how we specify time? The cur-
rent system is arbitrary. The day is divided into twenty-four rather 
arbitrary but standard units—hours. But we tell time in units of 
twelve, not twenty-four, so there have to be two cycles of twelve 
hours each, plus the special convention of a.m. and p.m. so we 
know which cycle we are talking about. Then we divide each hour 
into sixty minutes and each minute into sixty seconds.
What if we switched to metric divisions: seconds divided into 
tenths, milliseconds, and microseconds? We would have days, mil-
lidays, and microdays. There would have to be a new hour, min-
ute, and second: call them the digital hour, the digital minute, and 
the digital second. It would be easy: ten digital hours to the day, 
one hundred digital minutes to the digital hour, one hundred dig-
ital seconds to the digital minute.
Each digital hour would last exactly 2.4 times an old hour: 144 
old minutes. So the old one-hour period of the schoolroom or 
television program would be replaced with a half-digital hour 
period, or 50 digital minutes—only 20 percent longer than the 
current hour. We could adapt to the differences in durations with 
relative ease.
What do I think of it? I much prefer it. After all, the decimal sys-
tem, the basis of most of the world’s use of numbers and arithme-
tic, uses base 10 arithmetic and, as a result, arithmetic operations 
are much simpler in the metric system. Many societies have used 
other systems, 12 and 60 being common. Hence twelve for the 

254 The Design of Everyday Things
number of items in a dozen, inches in a foot, hours in a day, and 
months in a year; sixty for the number of seconds in a minute, sec-
onds in a degree, and minutes in an hour.
The French proposed that time be made into a decimal system 
in 1792, during the French Revolution, when the major shift to the 
metric system took place. The metric system for weights and lengths 
took hold, but not for time. Decimal time was used long enough for 
decimal clocks to be manufactured, but it eventually was discarded. 
Too bad. It is very difficult to change well-established habits. We 
still use the QWERTY keyboard, and the United States still measures 
things in inches and feet, yards and miles, Fahrenheit, ounces, and 
pounds. The world still measures time in units of 12 and 60, and 
divides the circle into 360 degrees.
In 1998, Swatch, the Swiss watch company, made its own attempt 
to introduce decimal time through what it called “Swatch Inter-
national Time.” Swatch divided the day into 1,000 “.beats,” each 
.beat being slightly less than 90 seconds (each .beat corresponds to 
one digital minute). This system did not use time zones, so people 
the world over would be in synchrony with their watches. This 
does not simplify the problem of synchronizing scheduled con-
versations, however, because it would be difficult to get the sun 
to behave properly. People would still wish to wake up around 
sunrise, and this would occur at different Swatch times around the 
world. As a result, even though people would have their watches 
synchronized, it would still be necessary to know when they woke 
up, ate, went to and from work, and went to sleep, and these times 
would vary around the world. It isn’t clear whether Swatch was 
serious with its proposal or whether it was one huge advertising 
stunt. After a few years of publicity, during which the company 
manufactured digital watches that told the time in .beats, it all fiz-
zled away.
Speaking of standardization, Swatch called its basic time unit a 
“.beat” with the first character being a period. This nonstandard 
spelling wreaks havoc on spelling correction systems that aren’t set 
up to handle words that begin with punctuation marks.

 
six: Design Thinking 255
Deliberately Making Things Difficult
How can good design (design that is usable and understandable) be 
balanced with the need for “secrecy” or privacy, or protection? That 
is, some applications of design involve areas that are sensitive and ne-
cessitate strict control over who uses and understands them. Perhaps 
we don’t want any user-in-the-street to understand enough of a sys-
tem to compromise its security. Couldn’t it be argued that some things 
shouldn’t be designed well? Can’t things be left cryptic, so that only 
those who have clearance, extended education, or whatever, can make 
use of the system? Sure, we have passwords, keys, and other types of 
security checks, but this can become wearisome for the privileged user. It 
appears that if good design is not ignored in some contexts, the purpose 
for the existence of the system will be nullified. (A computer mail question 
sent to me by a student, Dina Kurktchi. It is just the right question.)
In Stapleford, England, I came across a school door that was very 
difficult to open, requiring simultaneous operation of two latches, 
one at the very top of the door, the other down low. The latches 
were difficult to find, to reach, and to use. But the difficulties were 
deliberate. This was good design. The door was at a school for 
handicapped children, and the school didn’t want the children to 
be able to get out to the street without an adult. Only adults were 
large enough to operate the two latches. Violating the rules of 
ease of use is just what was needed.
Most things are intended to be easy to use, but aren’t. But some 
things are deliberately difficult to use—and ought to be. The 
number of things that should be difficult to use is surprisingly 
large:
• Any door designed to keep people in or out.
•  Security systems, designed so that only authorized people will be 
able to use them.
• Dangerous equipment, which should be restricted.
•  Dangerous operations that might lead to death or injury if done ac-
cidentally or in error. 

256 The Design of Everyday Things
•  Secret doors, cabinets, and safes: you don’t want the average person 
even to know that they are there, let alone to be able to work them.
•  Cases deliberately intended to disrupt the normal routine action (as 
discussed in Chapter 5). Examples include the acknowledgment re-
quired before permanently deleting a file from a computer, safeties 
on pistols and rifles, and pins in fire extinguishers.
•  Controls that require two simultaneous actions before the system will 
operate, with the controls separated so that it takes two people to 
work them, preventing a single person from doing an unauthorized 
action (used in security systems or safety-critical operations). 
•  Cabinets and bottles for medications and dangerous substances de-
liberately made difficult to open to keep them secure from children.
•  Games, a category in which designers deliberately flout the laws of 
understandability and usability. Games are meant to be difficult; in 
some games, part of the challenge is to figure out what is to be done, 
and how.
Even where a lack of usability or understandability is deliberate, 
it is still important to know the rules of understandable and usable 
design, for two reasons. First, even deliberately difficult designs 
aren’t entirely difficult. Usually there is one difficult part, designed 
to keep unauthorized people from using the device; the rest of it 
should follow the normal principles of good design. Second, even 
if your job is to make something difficult to do, you need to know 
how to go about doing it. In this case, the rules are useful, for they 
state in reverse just how to go about the task. You could systemat-
ically violate the rules like this:
•  Hide critical components: make things invisible.
•  Use unnatural mappings for the execution side of the action cycle, so 
that the relationship of the controls to the things being controlled is 
inappropriate or haphazard.
•  Make the actions physically difficult to do.
•  Require precise timing and physical manipulation.
•  Do not give any feedback.

 
six: Design Thinking 257
•  Use unnatural mappings for the evaluation side of the action cycle, 
so that system state is difficult to interpret.
Safety systems pose a special problem in design. Oftentimes, the 
design feature added to ensure safety eliminates one danger, only 
to create a secondary one. When workers dig a hole in a street, 
they must put up barriers to prevent cars and people from falling 
into the hole. The barriers solve one problem, but they themselves 
pose another danger, often mitigated by adding signs and flashing 
lights to warn of the barriers. Emergency doors, lights, and alarms 
must often be accompanied by warning signs or barriers that con-
trol when and how they can be used.
Design: Developing Technology for People
Design is a marvelous discipline, bringing together technology and 
people, business and politics, culture and commerce. The different 
pressures on design are severe, presenting huge challenges to the 
designer. At the same time, the designers must always keep fore-
most in mind that the products are to be used by people. This is 
what makes design such a rewarding discipline: On the one hand, 
woefully complex constraints to overcome; on the other hand, the 
opportunity to develop things that assist and enrich the lives of 
people, that bring benefits and enjoyment.

258 
DESIGN 
IN THE 
WORLD OF 
BUSINESS
The realities of the world impose severe constraints 
upon the design of products. Up to now I have de-
scribed the ideal case, assuming that human-centered 
design principles could be followed in a vacuum; that 
is, without attention to the real world of competition, costs, and 
schedules. Conflicting requirements will come from different 
sources, all of which are legitimate, all of which need to be resolved. 
Compromises must be made by all involved.
Now it is time to examine the concerns outside of human-
centered design that affect the development of products. I start 
with the impact of competitive forces that drive the introduction 
of extra features, often to excess: the cause of the disease dubbed 
“featuritis,” whose major symptom is “creeping featurism.” From 
there, I examine the drivers of change, starting with technological 
drivers. When new technologies emerge, there is a temptation to 
develop new products immediately. But the time for radically new 
products to become successful is measured in years, decades, or 
in some instances centuries. This causes me to examine the two 
forms of product innovation relevant to design: incremental (less 
glamorous, but most common) and radical (most glamorous, but 
rarely successful). 
C H A P T E R  S E V E N

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 259
I conclude with reflections about the history and future prospects 
of this book. The first edition of this book has had a long and fruit-
ful life. Twenty-five years is an amazingly long time for a book cen-
tered around technology to have remained relevant. If this revised 
and expanded edition lasts an equally long time, that means fifty 
years of The Design of Everyday Things. In these next twenty-five 
years, what new developments will take place? What will be the 
role of technology in our lives, for the future of books, and what 
are the moral obligations of the design profession? And finally, for 
how long will the principles in this book remain relevant? It should 
be no surprise that I believe they will always be just as relevant as 
they were twenty-five years ago, just as relevant as they are today. 
Why? The reason is simple. The design of technology to fit human 
needs and capabilities is determined by the psychology of people. 
Yes, technologies may change, but people stay the same.
Competitive Forces
Today, manufacturers around the world compete with one another. 
The competitive pressures are severe. After all, there are only a 
few basic ways by which a manufacturer can compete: three of the 
most important being price, features, and quality—unfortunately 
often in that order of importance. Speed is important, lest some 
other company get ahead in the rush for market presence. These 
pressures make it difficult to follow the full, iterative process of 
continual product improvement. Even relatively stable home prod-
ucts, such as automobiles, kitchen appliances, television sets, and 
computers, face the multiple forces of a competitive market that 
encourage the introduction of changes without sufficient testing 
and refinement.
Here is a simple, real example. I am working with a new startup 
company, developing an innovative line of cooking equipment. 
The founders had some unique ideas, pushing the technology of 
cooking far ahead of anything available for homes. We did numer-
ous field tests, built numerous prototypes, and engaged a world-
class industrial designer. We modified the original product concept 
several times, based on early feedback from potential users and 

260 The Design of Everyday Things
advice from industry experts. But just as we were about to com-
mission the first production of a few hand-tooled working proto-
types that could be shown to potential investors and customers (an 
expensive proposition for the small self-funded company), other 
companies started displaying similar concepts in the trade shows. 
What? Did they steal the ideas? No, it’s what is called the Zeit-
geist, a German word meaning “spirit of the time.” In other words, 
the time was ripe, the ideas were “in the air.” The competition 
emerged even before we had delivered our first product. What is 
a small, startup company to do? It doesn’t have money to compete 
with the large companies. It has to modify its ideas to keep ahead 
of the competition and come up with a demonstration that excites 
potential customers and wows potential investors and, more im-
portantly, potential distributors of the product. It is the distributors 
who are the real customers, not the people who eventually buy the 
product in stores and use it in their homes. The example illustrates 
the real business pressures on companies: the need for speed, the 
concern about costs, the competition that may force the company 
to change its offerings, and the need to satisfy several classes of 
customers—investors, distributors, and, of course, the people who 
will actually use the product. Where should the company focus its 
limited resources? More user studies? Faster development? New, 
unique features?
The same pressures that the startup faced also impact established 
companies. But they have other pressures as well. Most products 
have a development cycle of one to two years. In order to bring out 
a new model every year, the design process for the new model has 
to have started even before the previous model has been released 
to customers. Moreover, mechanisms for collecting and feeding 
back the experiences of customers seldom exist. In an earlier era, 
there was close coupling between designers and users. Today, they 
are separated by barriers. Some companies prohibit designers from 
working with customers, a bizarre and senseless restriction. Why 
would they do this? In part to prevent leaks of the new develop-
ments to the competition, but also in part because customers may 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 261
stop purchasing the current offerings if they are led to believe that 
a new, more advanced item is soon to come. But even where there 
are no such restrictions, the complexity of large organizations cou-
pled with the relentless pressure to finish the product makes this 
interaction difficult. Remember Norman’s Law of Chapter 6: The 
day a product development process starts, it is behind schedule 
and above budget.
FEATURITIS: A DEADLY TEMPTATION
In every successful product there lurks the carrier of an insidious 
disease called “featuritis,” with its main symptom being “creep-
ing featurism.” The disease seems to have been first identified and 
named in 1976, but its origins probably go back to the earliest tech-
nologies, buried far back in the eons prior to the dawn of history. 
It seems unavoidable, with no known prevention. Let me explain.
Suppose we follow all the principles in this book for a wonder-
ful, human-centered product. It obeys all design principles. It over-
comes people’s problems and fulfills some important needs. It is 
attractive and easy to use and understand. As a result, suppose the 
product is successful: many people buy it and tell their friends to 
buy it. What could be wrong with this?
The problem is that after the product has been available for a 
while, a number of factors inevitably appear, pushing the company 
toward the addition of new features—toward creeping featurism. 
These factors include:
•  Existing customers like the product, but express a wish for more fea-
tures, more functions, more capability.
•  A competing company adds new features to its products, producing 
competitive pressures to match that offering, but to do even more in 
order to get ahead of the competition.
•  Customers are satisfied, but sales are declining because the market 
is saturated: everyone who wants the product already has it. Time to 
add wonderful enhancements that will cause people to want the new 
model, to upgrade.

262 The Design of Everyday Things
Featuritis is highly infectious. New products are invariably more 
complex, more powerful, and different in size than the first release 
of a product. You can see that tension playing out in music players, 
mobile phones, and computers, especially on smart phones, tab-
lets, and pads. Portable devices get smaller and smaller with each 
release, despite the addition of more and more features (making 
them ever more difficult to operate). Some products, such as au-
tomobiles, home refrigerators, television sets, and kitchen stoves, 
also increase in complexity with each release, getting larger and 
more powerful.
But whether the products get larger or smaller, each new edition 
invariably has more features than the previous one. Featuritis is 
an insidious disease, difficult to eradicate, impossible to vaccinate 
against. It is easy for marketing pressures to insist upon the addition 
of new features, but there is no call—or for that matter, budget—to 
get rid of old, unneeded ones.
How do you know when you have encountered featuritis? By 
its major symptom: creeping featurism. Want an example? Look 
at Figure 7.1, which illustrates the changes that have overcome the 
simple Lego motorcycle since my first encounter with it for the first 
edition of this book. The original motorcycle (Figure 4.1 and Figure 
7.1A) had only fifteen components and could be put together with-
out any instructions: it had sufficient constraints that every piece 
had a unique location and orientation. But now, as Figure 7.1B 
shows, the same motorcycle has become bloated, with twenty-nine 
pieces. I needed instructions.
Creeping featurism is the tendency to add to the number of fea-
tures of a product, often extending the number beyond all reason. 
There is no way that a product can remain usable and understand-
able by the time it has all of those special-purpose features that 
have been added in over time.
In her book Different, Harvard professor Youngme Moon ar-
gues that it is this attempt to match the competition that causes all 
products to be the same. When companies try to increase sales by 
matching every feature of their competitors, they end up hurting 
themselves. After all, when products from two companies match 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 263
feature by feature, there is no longer any reason for a customer to 
prefer one over another. This is competition-driven design. Unfor-
tunately, the mind-set of matching the competitor’s list of features 
pervades many organizations. Even if the first versions of a prod-
uct are well done, human-centered, and focused upon real needs, 
it is the rare organization that is content to let a good product stay 
untouched.
Most companies compare features with their competition to de-
termine where they are weak, so they can strengthen those areas. 
Wrong, argues Moon. A better strategy is to concentrate on areas 
where they are stronger and to strengthen them even more. Then 
focus all marketing and advertisements to point out the strong 
points. This causes the product to stand out from the mindless 
herd. As for the weaknesses, ignore the irrelevant ones, says Moon. 
The lesson is simple: don’t follow blindly; focus on strengths, not 
weaknesses. If the product has real strengths, it can afford to just 
be “good enough” in the other areas.
Good design requires stepping back from competitive pressures 
and ensuring that the entire product be consistent, coherent, and 
FIGURE 7.1. Featuritis Strikes Lego. Figure A shows the original Lego Motorcycle 
available in 1988 when I used it in the first edition of this book (on the left), next to the 
2013 version (on the right). The old version had only fifteen pieces. No manual was 
needed to put it together. For the new version, the box proudly proclaims “29 pieces.” 
I could put the original version together without instructions. Figure B shows how far 
I got with the new version before I gave up and had to consult the instruction sheet. 
Why did Lego believe it had to change the motorcycle? Perhaps because featuritis 
struck real police motorcycles, causing them to increase in size and complexity and 
Lego felt that its toy needed to match the world. (Photographs by the author.)
A.
B.

264 The Design of Everyday Things
understandable. This stance requires the leadership of the com-
pany to withstand the marketing forces that keep begging to add 
this feature or that, each thought to be essential for some market 
segment. The best products come from ignoring these competing 
voices and instead focusing on the true needs of the people who 
use the product.
Jeff Bezos, the founder and CEO of Amazon.com, calls his ap-
proach “customer obsessed.” Everything is focused upon the re-
quirements of Amazon’s customers. The competition is ignored, 
the traditional marketing requirements are ignored. The focus is on 
simple, customer-driven questions: what do the customers want; 
how can their needs best be satisfied; what can be done better to 
enhance customer service and customer value? Focus on the cus-
tomer, Bezos argues, and the rest takes care of itself. Many compa-
nies claim to aspire to this philosophy, but few are able to follow 
it. Usually it is only possible where the head of the company, the 
CEO, is also the founder. Once the company passes control to oth-
ers, especially those who follow the traditional MBA dictum of 
putting profit above customer concerns, the story goes downhill. 
Profits may indeed increase in the short term, but eventually the 
product quality deteriorates to the point where customers desert. 
Quality only comes about by continual focus on, and attention to, 
the people who matter: customers.
New Technologies Force Change 
Today, we have new requirements. We now need to type on small, 
portable devices that don’t have room for a full keyboard. Touch- 
and gesture-sensitive screens allow a new form of typing. We can 
bypass typing altogether through handwriting recognition and 
speech understanding.
Consider the four products shown in Figure 7.2. Their appear-
ance and methods of operations changed radically in their century 
of existence. Early telephones, such as the one in Figure 7.2A, did 
not have keyboards: a human operator intervened to make the con-
nections. Even when operators were first replaced by automatic 
switching systems, the “keyboard” was a rotary dial with ten holes, 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 265
one for each digit. When the dial was replaced with pushbutton 
keys, it suffered a slight case of featuritis: the ten positions of the 
dial were replaced with twelve keys: the ten digits plus * and #.
But much more interesting is the merger of devices. The human 
computer gave rise to laptops, small portable computers. The tele-
phone moved to small, portable cellular phones (called mobiles 
in much of the world). Smart phones had large, touch-sensitive 
screens, operated by gesture. Soon computers merged into tab-
lets, as did cell phones. Cameras merged with cell phones. Today, 
talking, video conferences, writing, photography (both still and 
video), and collaborative interaction of all sorts are increasingly 
FIGURE 7.2. 100 Years of Telephones and Keyboards. Figures A and B show the 
change in the telephone from the Western Electric crank telephone of the 1910s, where 
rotating the crank on the right generated a signal alerting the operator, to the phone of 
the 2010s. They seem to have nothing in common. Figures C and D contrast a keyboard 
of the 1910s with one from the 2010s. The keyboards are still laid out in the same way, 
but the first requires physical depression of each key; the second, a quick tracing of a 
finger over the relevant letters (the image shows the word many being entered). Cred-
its: A, B, and C: photographs by the author; objects in A and C courtesy of the Museum 
of American Heritage, Palo Alto, California. D shows the “Swype” keyboard from 
Nuance. Image being used courtesy of Nuance Communications, Inc.
A.
B.
D.
C.

266 The Design of Everyday Things
being done by one single device, available with a large variety of 
screen sizes, computational power, and portability. It doesn’t make 
sense to call them computers, phones, or cameras: we need a new 
name. Let’s call them “smart screens.” In the twenty-second cen-
tury, will we still have phones? I predict that although we will still 
talk with one another over a distance, we will not have any device 
called a telephone.
As the pressures for larger screens forced the demise of physi-
cal keyboards (despite the attempt to make tiny keyboards, oper-
ated with single fingers or thumbs), the keyboards were displayed 
on the screen whenever needed, each letter tapped one at a time. 
This is slow, even when the system tries to predict the word being 
typed so that keying can stop as soon as the correct word shows 
up. Several systems were soon developed that allowed the finger or 
stylus to trace a path among the letters of the word: word-gesture 
systems. The gestures were sufficiently different from one another 
that it wasn’t even necessary to touch all the letters—it only mat-
tered that the pattern generated by the approximation to the cor-
rect path was close enough to the desired one. This turns out to be 
a fast and easy way to type (Figure 7.2D).
With gesture-based systems, a major rethinking is possible. Why 
keep the letters in the same QWERTY arrangement? The pattern 
generation would be even faster if letters were rearranged to max-
imize speed when using a single finger or stylus to trace out the 
letters. Good idea, but when one of the pioneers in developing this 
technique, Shumin Zhai, then at IBM, tried it, he ran into the legacy 
problem. People knew QWERTY and balked at having to learn a 
different organization. Today, the word-gesture method of typing 
is widely used, but with QWERTY keyboards (as in Figure 7.2D).
Technology changes the way we do things, but fundamental 
needs remain unchanged. The need for getting thoughts written 
down, for telling stories, doing critical reviews, or writing fiction 
and nonfiction will remain. Some will be written using traditional 
keyboards, even on new technological devices, because the key-
board still remains the fastest way to enter words into a system, 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 267
whether it be paper or electronic, physical or virtual. Some people 
will prefer to speak their ideas, dictating them. But spoken words 
are still likely to be turned into printed words (even if the print 
is simply on a display device), because reading is far faster and 
superior to listening. Reading can be done quickly: it is possible to 
read around three hundred words per minute and to skim, jump-
ing ahead and back, effectively acquiring information at rates in 
the thousands of words per minute. Listening is slow and serial, 
usually at around sixty words per minute, and although this rate 
can be doubled or tripled with speech compression technologies 
and training, it is still slower than reading and not easy to skim. 
But the new media and new technologies will supplement the old, 
so that writing will no longer dominate as much as it did in the 
past, when it was the only medium widely available. Now that 
anyone can type and dictate, take photographs and videos, draw 
animated scenes, and creatively produce experiences that in the 
twentieth century required huge amounts of technology and large 
crews of specialized workers, the types of devices that allow us to 
do these tasks and the ways they are controlled will proliferate.
The role of writing in civilization has changed over its five thou-
sand years of existence. Today, writing has become increasingly 
common, although increasingly as short, informal messages. We 
now communicate using a wide variety of media: voice, video, 
handwriting, and typing, sometimes with all ten fingers, some-
times just with the thumbs, and sometimes by gestures. Over time, 
the ways by which we interact and communicate change with tech-
nology. But because the fundamental psychology of human beings 
will remain unchanged, the design rules in this book will still apply.
Of course, it isn’t just communication and writing that has 
changed. Technological change has impacted every sphere of our 
lives, from the way education is conducted, to medicine, foods, 
clothing, and transportation. We now can manufacture things at 
home, using 3-D printers. We can play games with partners around 
the world. Cars are capable of driving themselves, and their en-
gines have changed from internal combustion to an assortment of 

268 The Design of Everyday Things
pure electric and hybrids. Name an industry or an activity and if 
it hasn’t already been transformed by new technologies, it will be.
Technology is a powerful driver for change. Sometimes for the 
better, sometimes for the worse. Sometimes to fulfill important 
needs, and sometimes simply because the technology makes the 
change possible.
How Long Does It Take 
to Introduce a New Product?
How long does it take for an idea to become a product? And after 
that, how long before the product becomes a long-lasting success? 
Inventors and founders of startup companies like to think the in-
terval from idea to success is a single process, with the total mea-
sured in months. In fact, it is multiple processes, where the total 
time is measured in decades, sometimes centuries.
Technology changes rapidly, but people and culture change 
slowly. Change is, therefore, simultaneously rapid and slow. It can 
take months to go from invention to product, but then decades—
sometimes many decades—for the product to get accepted. Older 
products linger on long after they should have become obsolete, 
long after they should have disappeared. Much of daily life is dic-
tated by conventions that are centuries old, that no longer make 
any sense, and whose origins have been forgotten by all except the 
historian.
Even our most modern technologies follow this time cycle: fast 
to be invented, slow to be accepted, even slower to fade away and 
die. In the early 2000s, the commercial introduction of gestural con-
trol for cell phones, tablets, and computers radically transformed 
the way we interacted with our devices. Whereas all previous elec-
tronic devices had numerous knobs and buttons on the outside, 
physical keyboards, and ways of calling up numerous menus of 
commands, scrolling through them, and selecting the desired 
command, the new devices eliminated almost all physical controls 
and menus.
Was the development of tablets controlled by gestures rev-
olutionary? To most people, yes, but not to technologists. 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 269
Touch-sensitive displays that could detect the positions of si-
multaneous finger presses (even if by multiple people) had been 
in the research laboratories for almost thirty years (these are called 
multi touch displays). The first devices were developed by the 
University of Toronto in the early 1980s. Mitsubishi developed a 
product that it sold to design schools and research laboratories, 
in which many of today’s gestures and techniques were being ex-
plored. Why did it take so long for these multitouch devices to be-
come successful products? Because it took decades to transform 
the research technology into components that were inexpensive 
and reliable enough for everyday products. Numerous small 
companies tried to manufacture screens, but the first devices 
that could handle multiple touches were either very expensive 
or unreliable.
There is another problem: the general conservatism of large com-
panies. Most radical ideas fail: large companies are not tolerant 
of failure. Small companies can jump in with new, exciting ideas 
because if they fail, well, the cost is relatively low. In the world of 
high technology, many people get new ideas, gather together a few 
friends and early risk-seeking employees, and start a new com-
pany to exploit their visions. Most of these companies fail. Only a 
few will be successful, either by growing into a larger company or 
by being purchased by a large company.
You may be surprised by the large percentage of failures, but 
that is only because they are not publicized: we only hear about 
the tiny few that become successful. Most startup companies fail, 
but failure in the high-tech world of California is not considered 
bad. In fact, it is considered a badge of honor, for it means that 
the company saw a future potential, took the risk, and tried. Even 
though the company failed, the employees learned lessons that 
make their next attempt more likely to succeed. Failure can occur 
for many reasons: perhaps the marketplace is not ready; perhaps 
the technology is not ready for commercialization; perhaps the 
company runs out of money before it can gain traction.
When one early startup company, Fingerworks, was struggling 
to develop an affordable, reliable touch surface that distinguished 

270 The Design of Everyday Things
among multiple fingers, it almost quit because it was about to run 
out of money. Apple however, anxious to get into this market, 
bought Fingerworks. When it became part of Apple, its financial 
needs were met and Fingerworks technology became the driving 
force behind Apple’s new products. Today, devices controlled by 
gestures are everywhere, so this type of interaction seems natural 
and obvious, but at the time, it was neither natural nor obvious. 
It took almost three decades from the invention of multitouch 
before companies were able to manufacture the technology with 
the required robustness, versatility, and very low cost necessary 
for the idea to be deployed in the home consumer market. Ideas 
take a long time to traverse the distance from conception to suc-
cessful product.
VIDEOPHONE: 
CONCEIVED IN 1879—STILL NOT HER E
The Wikipedia article on videophones, from which Figure 7.3 
was taken, said: “George du Maurier’s cartoon of ‘an electric cam-
era-obscura’ is often cited as an early prediction of television and 
also anticipated the videophone, in wide screen formats and flat 
screens.” Although the title of the drawing gives credit to Thomas 
Edison, he had nothing to do with this. This is sometimes called 
Stigler’s law: the names of famous people often get attached to 
ideas even though they had nothing to do with them.
The world of product design offers many examples of Stigler’s 
law. Products are thought to be the invention of the company that 
most successfully capitalized upon the idea, not the company that 
originated it. In the world of products, original ideas are the easy 
part. Actually producing the idea as a successful product is what 
is hard. Consider the idea of a video conversation. Thinking of the 
idea was so easy that, as we see in Figure 7.3, Punch magazine illus-
trator du Maurier could draw a picture of what it might look like 
only two years after the telephone was invented. The fact that he 
could do this probably meant that the idea was already circulating. 
By the late 1890s, Alexander Graham Bell had thought through a 
number of the design issues. But the wonderful scenario illustrated 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 
271
by du Maurier has still not become reality, one and one-half centu-
ries later. Today, the videophone is barely getting established as a 
means of everyday communication.
It is extremely difficult to develop all the details required to en-
sure that a new idea works, to say nothing of finding components 
that can be manufactured in sufficient quantity, reliability, and af-
fordability. With a brand-new concept, it can take decades before 
the public will endorse it. Inventors often believe their new ideas 
will revolutionize the world in months, but reality is harsher. Most 
new inventions fail, and even the few that succeed take decades 
to do so. Yes, even the ones we consider “fast.” Most of the time, 
the technology is unnoticed by the public as it circulates around 
the research laboratories of the world or is tried by a few unsuc-
cessful startup companies or adventurous early adopters.
FIGURE 7.3 Predicting the Future: The Videophone in 1879. The caption reads: 
“Edison’s Telephonoscope (transmits light as well as sound). (Every evening, before go-
ing to bed, Pater- and Materfamilias set up an electric camera-obscura over their bedroom 
mantel-piece, and gladden their eyes with the sight of their children at the Antipodes, and 
converse gaily with them through the wire.”) (Published in the December 9, 1878, issue of Punch 
magazine. From “Telephonoscope,” Wikipedia.) 

272 The Design of Everyday Things
Ideas that are too early often fail, even if eventually others in-
troduce them successfully. I’ve seen this happen several times. 
When I first joined Apple, I watched as it released one of the very 
first commercial digital cameras: the Apple QuickTake. It failed. 
Probably you are unaware that Apple ever made cameras. It failed 
because the technology was limited, the price high, and the world 
simply wasn’t ready to dismiss film and chemical processing of 
photographs. I was an adviser to a startup company that produced 
the world’s first digital picture frame. It failed. Once again, the 
technology didn’t quite support it and the product was relatively 
expensive. Obviously today, digital cameras and digital photo 
frames are extremely successful products, but neither Apple nor 
the startup I worked with are part of the story.
Even as digital cameras started to gain a foothold in photog-
raphy, it took several decades before they displaced film for still 
photographs. It is taking even longer to replace film-based mov-
ies with those produced on digital cameras. As I write this, only a 
small number of films are made digitally, and only a small number 
of theaters project digitally. How long has the effort been going on? 
It is difficult to determine when the effort stated, but it has been 
a very long time. It took decades for high-definition television to 
replace the standard, very poor resolution of the previous genera-
tion (NTSC in the United States and PAL and SECAM elsewhere). 
Why so long to get to a far better picture, along with far better 
sound? People are very conservative. Broadcasting stations would 
have to replace all their equipment. Homeowners would need new 
sets. Overall, the only people who push for changes of this sort are 
the technology enthusiasts and the equipment manufacturers. A 
bitter fight between the television broadcasters and the computer 
industry, each of which wanted different standards, also delayed 
adoption (described in Chapter 6).
In the case of the videophone shown in Figure 7.3, the illus-
tration is wonderful but the details are strangely lacking. Where 
would the video camera have to be located to display that won-
derful panorama of the children playing? Notice that “Pater- and 
Materfamilias” are sitting in the dark (because the video image is 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 273
projected by a “camera obscura,” which has a very weak output). 
Where is the video camera that films the parents, and if they sit 
in the dark, how can they be visible? It is also interesting that al-
though the video quality looks even better than we could achieve 
today, sound is still being picked up by trumpet-shaped telephones 
whose users need to hold the speaking tube to their face and talk 
(probably loudly). Thinking of the concept of a video connection 
was relatively easy. Thinking through the details has been very dif-
ficult, and then being able to build it and put it into practice—well, 
it is now considerably over a century since that picture was drawn 
and we are just barely able to fulfill that dream. Barely.
It took forty years for the first working videophones to be cre-
ated (in the 1920s), then another ten years before the first product 
(in the mid-1930s, in Germany), which failed. The United States 
didn’t try commercial videophone service until the 1960s, thirty 
years after Germany; that service also failed. All sorts of ideas have 
been tried including dedicated videophone instruments, devices 
using the home television set, video conferencing with home per-
sonal computers, special video-conferencing rooms in universities 
and companies, and small video telephones, some of which might 
be worn on the wrist. It took until the start of the twenty-first cen-
tury for usage to pick up.
Video conferencing finally started to become common in the 
early 2010s. Extremely expensive videoconferencing suites have 
been set up in businesses and universities. The best commercial 
systems make it seem as if you are in the same room with the 
distant participants, using high-quality transmission of images 
and multiple, large monitors to display life-size images of people 
sitting across the table (one company, Cisco, even sells the table). 
This is 140 years from the first published conception, 90 years 
since the first practical demonstration, and 80 years since the first 
commercial release. Moreover, the cost, both for the equipment 
at each location and for the data-transmission charges, are much 
higher than the average person or business can afford: right now 
they are mostly used in corporate offices. Many people today do 
engage in videoconferencing from their smart display devices, 

274 The Design of Everyday Things
but the experience is not nearly as good as provided by the best 
commercial facilities. Nobody would confuse these experiences 
with being in the same room as the participants, something that 
the highest-quality commercial facilities aspire to (with remark-
able success).
Every modern innovation, especially the ones that significantly 
change lives, takes multiple decades to move from concept to com-
pany success A rule of thumb is twenty years from first demon-
strations in research laboratories to commercial product, and 
then a decade or two from first commercial release to widespread 
adoption. Except that actually, most innovations fail completely 
and never reach the public. Even ideas that are excellent and will 
eventually succeed frequently fail when first introduced. I’ve been 
associated with a number of products that failed upon introduc-
tion, only to be very successful later when reintroduced (by other 
companies), the real difference being the timing. Products that 
failed at first commercial introduction include the first American 
automobile (Duryea), the first typewriters, the first digital cameras, 
and the first home computers (for example, the Altair 8800 com-
puter of 1975).
THE LONG PROCESS OF DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE TYPEWRITER KEYBOARD
The typewriter is an ancient mechanical device, now found mostly 
in museums, although still in use in newly developing nations. 
In addition to having a fascinating history, it illustrates the diffi-
culties of introducing new products into society, the influence of 
marketing upon design, and the long, difficult path leading to new 
product acceptance. The history affects all of us because the type-
writer provided the world with the arrangement of keys on today’s 
keyboards, despite the evidence that it is not the most efficient ar-
rangement. Tradition and custom coupled with the large number 
of people already used to an existing scheme makes change diffi-
cult or even impossible. This is the legacy problem once again: the 
heavy momentum of legacy inhibits change.

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 275
Developing the first successful typewriter was a lot more than 
simply figuring out a reliable mechanism for imprinting the let-
ters upon the paper, although that was a difficult task by itself. 
One question was the user interface: how should the letters be pre-
sented to the typist? In other words, the design of the keyboard.
Consider the typewriter keyboard, with its arbitrary, diagonally 
sloping arrangement of keys and its even more arbitrary arrange-
ment of their letters. Christopher Latham Sholes designed the cur-
rent standard keyboard in the 1870s. His typewriter design, with 
its weirdly organized keyboard, eventually became the Remington 
typewriter, the first successful typewriter: its keyboard layout was 
soon adopted by everyone.
The design of the keyboard has a long and peculiar history. Early 
typewriters experimented with a wide variety of layouts, using 
three basic themes. One was circular, with the letters laid out al-
phabetically; the operator would find the proper spot and depress 
a lever, lift a rod, or do whatever other mechanical operation the 
device required. Another popular layout was similar to a piano 
keyboard, with the letters laid out in a long row; some of the early 
keyboards, including an early version by Sholes, even had black 
and white keys. Both the circular layout and the piano keyboard 
proved awkward. In the end, the typewriter keyboards all ended 
up using multiple rows of keys in a rectangular configuration, with 
different companies using different arrangements of the letters. 
The levers manipulated by the keys were large and ungainly, and the 
size, spacing, and arrangement of the keys were dictated by these 
mechanical considerations, not by the characteristics of the human 
hand. Hence the keyboard sloped and the keys were laid out in 
a diagonal pattern to provide room for the mechanical linkages. 
Even though we no longer use mechanical linkages, the keyboard 
design is unchanged, even for the most modern electronic devices.
Alphabetical ordering of keys seems logical and sensible: Why 
did it change? The reason is rooted in the early technology of key-
boards. Early typewriters had long levers attached to the keys. 
The levers moved individual typebars to contact the typing paper, 

276 The Design of Everyday Things
usually from behind (the letters being typed could not be seen 
from the front of the typewriter). These long type arms would of-
ten collide and lock together, requiring the typist to separate them 
manually. To avoid the jamming, Sholes arranged the keys and the 
typebars so that letters that were frequently typed in sequence did 
not come from adjacent typebars. After a few iterations and ex-
periments, a standard emerged, one that today governs keyboards 
used throughout the world, although with regional variations. The 
top row of the American keyboard has the keys Q W E R T Y U I O P, 
which gives rise to the name of this layout: QWERTY. The world 
has adopted the basic layout, although in Europe, for example, one 
can find QZERTY, AZERTY, and QWERTZ. Different languages 
use different alphabets, so obviously a number of keyboards had 
to move keys around to make room for additional characters.
Note that popular legend has it that the keys were placed so as 
to slow down the typing. This is wrong: the goal was to have the 
mechanical typebars approach one another at large angles, thus 
minimizing the chance of collision. In fact, we now know that the 
FIGURE 7.4. The 1872 Sholes Typewriter. Remington, the manufacturer of the 
first successful typewriter, also made sewing machines. Figure A shows the in-
fluence of the sewing machine upon the design with the use of a foot pedal for 
what eventually became the “return” key. A heavy weight hung from the frame 
advanced the carriage after each letter was struck, or when the large, rectangular 
plate under the typist’s left hand was depressed (this is the “space bar”). Pressing 
the foot pedal raised the weight. Figure B shows a blowup of the keyboard. Note 
that the second row shows a period (.) instead of R. From Scientific American’s “The 
Type Writer” (Anonymous, 1872).
A.
B.

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 277
QWERTY arrangement guarantees a fast typing speed. By plac-
ing letters that form frequent pairs relatively far apart, typing is 
speeded because it tends to make letter pairs be typed with differ-
ent hands .
There is an unconfirmed story that a salesperson rearranged 
the keyboard to make it possible to type the word typewriter on 
the second row, a change that violated the design principle of sep-
arating letters that were typed sequentially. Figure 7.4B shows that 
the early Sholes keyboard was not QWERTY: the second row of 
keys had a period (.) where today we have R, and the P and R keys 
were on the bottom row (as well as other differences). Moving the 
R and P from the fourth row to the second makes it possible to type 
the word typewriter using only keys on the second row.
There is no way to confirm the validity of the story. Moreover, 
I have only heard it describe the interchange of the period and R 
keys, with no discussion of the P key. For the moment, suppose 
the story were true: I can imagine the engineering minds being 
outraged. This sounds like the traditional clash between the hard-
headed, logical engineers and the noncomprehending sales and 
marketing force. Was the salesperson wrong? (Note that today we 
would call this a marketing decision, but the profession of mar-
keting didn’t exist yet.) Well, before taking sides, realize that until 
then, every typewriter company had failed. Remington was going 
to come out with a typewriter with a weird arrangement of the 
keys. The sales staff were right to be worried. They were right to 
try anything that might enhance the sales efforts. And indeed, they 
succeeded: Remington became the leader in typewriters. Actually, 
its first model did not succeed. It took quite a while for the public 
to accept the typewriter.
Was the keyboard really changed to allow the word typewriter 
to be typed on one row? I cannot find any solid evidence. But it is 
clear that the positions of R and P were moved to the second row: 
compare Figure 7.4B with today’s keyboard.
The keyboard was designed through an evolutionary process, 
but the main driving forces were mechanical and marketing. Even 
though jamming isn’t a possibility with electronic keyboards and 

278 The Design of Everyday Things
computers and the style of typing has changed, we are committed 
to this keyboard, stuck with it forever. But don’t despair: it really 
is a good arrangement. One legitimate area of concern is the high 
incidence of a kind of injury that befalls typists: carpal tunnel syn-
drome. This ailment is a result of frequent and prolonged repetitive 
motions of the hand and wrist, so it is common among typists, 
musicians, and people who do a lot of handwriting, sewing, some 
sports, and assembly line work. Gestural keyboards, such as the 
one shown in Figure 7.2D, might reduce the incidence. The US Na-
tional Institute of Health advises, “Ergonomic aids, such as split 
keyboards, keyboard trays, typing pads, and wrist braces, may be 
used to improve wrist posture during typing. Take frequent breaks 
when typing and always stop if there is tingling or pain.”
August Dvorak, an educational psychologist, painstakingly 
developed a better keyboard in the 1930s. The Dvorak keyboard 
layout is indeed superior to that of QWERTY, but not to the extent 
claimed. Studies in my laboratory showed that the typing speed on 
a QWERTY was only slightly slower than on a Dvorak, not differ-
ent enough to make upsetting the legacy worthwhile. Millions of 
people would have to learn a new style of typing. Millions of type-
writers would have to be changed. Once a standard is in place, the 
vested interests of existing practices impede change, even where 
the change would be an improvement. Moreover, in the case of 
QWERTY versus Dvorak, the gain is simply not worth the pain. 
“Good enough” triumphs again.
What about keyboards in alphabetical order? Now that we 
no longer have mechanical constraints on keyboard ordering, 
wouldn’t they at least be easier to learn? Nope. Because the letters 
have to be laid out in several rows, just knowing the alphabet isn’t 
enough. You also have to know where the rows break, and today, 
every alphabetic keyboard breaks the rows at different points. One 
great advantage of QWERTY—that frequent letter pairs are typed 
with opposite hands—would no longer be true. In other words, 
forget it. In my studies, QWERTY and Dvorak typing speeds were 
considerably faster than those on alphabetic keyboards. And an 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 279
alphabetical arrangement of the keys was no faster than a random 
arrangement.
Could we do better if we could depress more than one finger at 
a time? Yes, court stenographers can out-type anyone else. They 
use chord keyboards, typing syllables, not individual letters, di-
rectly onto the page—each syllable represented by the simultane-
ous pressing of keys, each combination being called a “chord.” The 
most common keyboard for American law court recorders requires 
between two and six keys to be pressed simultaneously to code the 
digits, punctuation, and phonetic sounds of English.
Although chord keyboards can be very fast—more than three 
hundred words per minute is common—the chords are difficult 
to learn and to retain; all the knowledge has to be in the head. 
Walk up to any regular keyboard and you can use it right away. 
Just search for the letter you want and push that key. With a chord 
keyboard, you have to press several keys simultaneously. There is 
no way to label the keys properly and no way to know what to do 
just by looking. The casual typist is out of luck.
Two Forms of Innovation: 
Incremental and Radical
There are two major forms of product innovation: one follows a 
natural, slow evolutionary process; the other is achieved through 
radical new development. In general, people tend to think of inno-
vation as being radical, major changes, whereas the most common 
and powerful form of it is actually small and incremental.
Although each step of incremental evolution is modest, con-
tinual slow, steady improvements can result in rather significant 
changes over time. Consider the automobile. Steam-driven vehicles 
(the first automobiles) were developed in the late 1700s. The first 
commercial automobile was built in 1888 by the German Karl Benz 
(his company, Benz & Cie, later merged with Daimler and today is 
known as Mercedes-Benz).
Benz’s automobile was a radical innovation. And although his firm 
survived, most of its rivals did not. The first American automobile 

280 The Design of Everyday Things
company was Duryea, which only lasted a few years: being first 
does not guarantee success. Although the automobile itself was a 
radical innovation, since its introduction it has advanced through 
continual slow, steady improvement, year after year: over a century 
of incremental innovation (with a few radical changes in compo-
nents). Because of the century of incremental enhancement, today’s 
automobiles are much quieter, faster, more efficient, more comfort-
able, safer, and less expensive (adjusted for inflation) than those 
early vehicles.
Radical innovation changes paradigms. The typewriter was 
a radical innovation that had dramatic impact upon office and 
home writing. It helped provide a role for women in offices as 
typists and secretaries, which led to the redefinition of the job of 
secretary to be a dead end rather than the first step toward an 
executive position. Similarly, the automobile transformed home 
life, allowing people to live at a distance from their work and rad-
ically impacting the world of business. It also turned out to be a 
massive source of air pollution (although it did eliminate horse 
manure from city streets). It is a major cause of accidental death, 
with a worldwide fatality rate of over one million each year. The 
introduction of electric lighting, the airplane, radio, television, 
home computer, and social networks all had massive social im-
pacts. Mobile phones changed the phone industry, and the use of 
the technical communication system called packet switching led 
to the Internet. These are radical innovations. Radical innovation 
changes lives and industries. Incremental innovation makes things 
better. We need both.
INCREMENTAL INNOVATION
Most design evolves through incremental innovation by means of 
continual testing and refinement. In the ideal case, the design is 
tested, problem areas are discovered and modified, and then the 
product is continually retested and remodified. If a change makes 
matters worse, well, it just gets changed again on the next go-
round. Eventually the bad features are modified into good ones, 
while the good ones are kept. The technical term for this process is 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 
281
hill climbing, analogous to climbing a hill blindfolded. Move your 
foot in one direction. If it is downhill, try another direction. If the 
direction is uphill, take one step. Keep doing this until you have 
reached a point where all steps would be downhill; then you are at 
the top of the hill, or at least at a local peak.
Hill climbing. This method is the secret to incremental innova-
tion. This is at the heart of the human-centered design process dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. Does hill climbing always work? Although it 
guarantees that the design will reach the top of the hill, what if the 
design is not on the best possible hill? Hill climbing cannot find 
higher hills: it can only find the peak of the hill it started from. 
Want to try a different hill? Try radical innovation, although that is 
as likely to find a worse hill as a better one.
RADICAL INNOVATION
Incremental innovation starts with existing products and makes 
them better. Radical innovation starts fresh, often driven by new 
technologies that make possible new capabilities. Thus, the inven-
tion of vacuum tubes was a radical innovation, paving the way 
for rapid advances in radio and television. Similarly, the inven-
tion of the transistor allowed dramatic advances in electronic de-
vices, computational power, increased reliability, and lower costs. 
The development of GPS satellites unleashed a torrent of location-
based services.
A second factor is the reconsideration of the meaning of tech-
nology. Modern data networks serve as an example. Newspapers, 
magazines, and books were once thought of as part of the pub-
lishing industry, very different from radio and television broad-
casting. All of these were different from movies and music. But 
once the Internet took hold, along with enhanced and inexpensive 
computer power and displays, it became clear that all of these dis-
parate industries were really just different forms of information 
providers, so that all could be conveyed to customers by a single 
medium. This redefinition collapses together the publishing, tele-
phone, television and cable broadcasting, and music industries. We 
still have books, newspapers, and magazines, television shows and 

282 The Design of Everyday Things
movies, musicians and music, but the way by which they are dis-
tributed has changed, thereby requiring massive restructuring of 
their corresponding industries. Electronic games, another radical 
innovation, are combining with film and video on the one hand, 
and books on the other, to form new types of interactive engage-
ment. The collapsing of industries is still taking place, and what 
will replace them is not yet clear.
Radical innovation is what many people seek, for it is the big, 
spectacular form of change. But most radical ideas fail, and even 
those that succeed can take decades and, as this chapter has al-
ready illustrated, they may take centuries to succeed. Incremental 
product innovation is difficult, but these difficulties pale to insig-
nificance compared to the challenges faced by radical innovation. 
Incremental innovations occur by the millions each year; radical 
innovation is far less frequent.
What industries are ready for radical innovation? Try education, 
transportation, medicine, and housing, all of which are overdue for 
major transformation.
The Design of Everyday Things: 
1988–2038
Technology changes rapidly, people and culture change slowly. 
Or as the French put it:
Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose.
The more things change, the more they are the same.
Evolutionary change to people is always taking place, but the 
pace of human evolutionary change is measured in thousands of 
years. Human cultures change somewhat more rapidly over peri-
ods measured in decades or centuries. Microcultures, such as the 
way by which teenagers differ from adults, can change in a gener-
ation. What this means is that although technology is continually 
introducing new means of doing things, people are resistant to 
changes in the way they do things.

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 283
Consider three simple examples: social interaction, communica-
tion, and music. These represent three different human activities, 
but each is so fundamental to human life that all three have per-
sisted throughout recorded history and will persist, despite major 
changes in the technologies that support these activities. They are 
akin to eating: new technologies will change the types of food we 
eat and the way it is prepared, but will never eliminate the need 
to eat. People often ask me to predict “the next great change.” My 
answer is to tell them to examine some fundamentals, such as so-
cial interaction, communication, sports and play, music and enter-
tainment. The changes will take place within spheres of activity 
such as these. Are these the only fundamentals? Of course not: add 
education (and learning), business (and commerce), transporta-
tion, self-expression, the arts, and of course, sex. And don’t forget 
important sustaining activities, such as the need for good health, 
food and drink, clothing, and housing. Fundamental needs will also 
stay the same, even if they get satisfied in radically different ways.
The Design of Everyday Things was first published in 1988 (when it 
was called The Psychology of Everyday Things). Since the original pub-
lication, technology has changed so much that even though the prin-
ciples remained constant, many of the examples from 1988 are no 
longer relevant. The technology of interaction has changed. Oh yes, 
doors and switches, faucets and taps still provide the same difficul-
ties they did back then, but now we have new sources of difficulties 
and confusion. The same principles that worked before still apply, 
but this time they must also be applied to intelligent machines, to the 
continuous interaction with large data sources, to social networks 
and to communication systems and products that enable lifelong 
interaction with friends and acquaintances across the world.
We gesture and dance to interact with our devices, and in turn 
they interact with us via sound and touch, and through multiple 
displays of all sizes—some that we wear; some on the floor, walls, 
or ceilings; and some projected directly into our eyes. We speak to 
our devices and they speak back. And as they get more and more 
intelligent, they take over many of the activities we thought that 

284 The Design of Everyday Things
only people could do. Artificial intelligence pervades our lives and 
devices, from our thermostats to our automobiles. Technologies are 
always undergoing change.
AS TECHNOLOGIES CHANGE 
WILL PEOPLE STAY THE SAME?
As we develop new forms of interaction and communication, 
what new principles are required? What happens when we wear 
augmented reality glasses or embed more and more technology 
within our bodies? Gestures and body movements are fun, but 
not very precise.
For many millennia, even though technology has undergone 
radical change, people have remained the same. Will this hold true 
in the future? What happens as we add more and more enhance-
ments inside the human body? People with prosthetic limbs will 
be faster, stronger, and better runners or sports players than nor-
mal players. Implanted hearing devices and artificial lenses and 
corneas are already in use. Implanted memory and communica-
tion devices will mean that some people will have permanently 
enhanced reality, never lacking for information. Implanted com-
putational devices could enhance thinking, problem-solving, and 
decision-making. People might become cyborgs: part biology, 
part artificial technology. In turn, machines will become more like 
people, with neural-like computational abilities and humanlike 
behavior. Moreover, new developments in biology might add to 
the list of artificial supplements, with genetic modification of peo-
ple and biological processors and devices for machines. 
All of these changes raise considerable ethical issues. The long-
held view that even as technology changes, people remain the same 
may no longer hold. Moreover, a new species is arising, artificial 
devices that have many of the capabilities of animals and people, 
sometimes superior abilities. (That machines might be better than 
people at some things has long been true: they are clearly stron-
ger and faster. Even the simple desk calculator can do arithmetic 
better than we can, which is why we use them. Many computer 
programs can do advanced mathematics better than we can, which 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 285
makes them valuable assistants.) People are changing; machines 
are changing. This also means that cultures are changing.
There is no question that human culture has been vastly impacted 
by the advent of technology. Our lives, our family size and living 
arrangements, and the role played by business and education in 
our lives are all governed by the technologies of the era. Modern 
communication technology changes the nature of joint work. As 
some people get advanced cognitive skills due to implants, while 
some machines gain enhanced human-qualities through advanced 
technologies, artificial intelligence, and perhaps bionic technolo-
gies, we can expect even more changes. Technology, people, and 
cultures: all will change.
THINGS THAT MAKE US SMART
Couple the use of full-body motion and gestures with high-quality 
auditory and visual displays that can be superimposed over the 
sounds and sights of the world to amplify them, to explain and 
annotate them, and we give to people power that exceeds anything 
ever known before. What do the limits of human memory mean 
when a machine can remind us of all that has happened before, at 
precisely the exact time the information is needed? One argument 
is that technology makes us smart: we remember far more than 
ever before and our cognitive abilities are much enhanced. 
Another argument is that technology makes us stupid. Sure, we 
look smart with the technology, but take it away and we are worse 
off than before it existed. We have become dependent upon our 
technologies to navigate the world, to hold intelligent conversa-
tion, to write intelligently, and to remember.
Once technology can do our arithmetic, can remember for us, 
and can tell us how to behave, then we have no need to learn 
these things. But the instant the technology goes away, we are 
left helpless, unable to do any basic functions. We are now so 
dependent upon technology that when we are deprived, we suf-
fer. We are unable to make our own clothes from plants and an-
imal skins, unable to grow and harvest crops or catch animals. 
Without technology, we would starve or freeze to death. Without 

286 The Design of Everyday Things
cognitive technologies, will we fall into an equivalent state of 
ignorance?
These fears have long been with us. In ancient Greece, Plato tells 
us that Socrates complained about the impact of books, arguing 
that reliance on written material would diminish not only memory 
but the very need to think, to debate, to learn through discussion. 
After all, said Socrates, when a person tells you something, you 
can question the statement, discuss and debate it, thereby enhanc-
ing the material and the understanding. With a book, well, what 
can you do? You can’t argue back.
But over the years, the human brain has remained much the 
same. Human intelligence has certainly not diminished. True, 
we no longer learn how to memorize vast amounts of material. 
We no longer need to be completely proficient at arithmetic, for 
calculators—present as dedicated devices or on almost every 
computer or phone—take care of that task for us. But does that 
make us stupid? Does the fact that I can no longer remember my 
own phone number indicate my growing feebleness? No, on the 
contrary, it unleashes the mind from the petty tyranny of tending 
to the trivial and allows it to concentrate on the important and 
the critical.
Reliance on technology is a benefit to humanity. With technol-
ogy, the brain gets neither better nor worse. Instead, it is the task 
that changes. Human plus machine is more powerful than either 
human or machine alone.
The best chess-playing machine can beat the best human chess 
player. But guess what, the combination of human plus machine 
can beat the best human and the best machine. Moreover, this win-
ning combination need not have the best human or machine. As 
MIT professor Erik Brynjolfsson explained at a meeting of the Na-
tional Academy of Engineering:
The best chess player in the world today is not a computer or a human 
but a team of humans and computers working together. In freestyle 
chess competitions, where teams of humans and computers compete, 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 287
the winners tend not to be the teams with the most powerful computers 
or the best chess players. The winning teams are able to leverage the 
unique skills of humans and computers to work together. That is a met-
aphor for what we can do going forward: have people and technology 
work together in new ways to create value. (Brynjolfsson, 2012.)
Why is this? Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee quote the 
world-champion human chess player Gary Kasparov, explaining 
why “the overall winner in a recent freestyle tournament had nei-
ther the best human players nor the most powerful computers.” 
Kasparov described a team consisting of:
a pair of amateur American chess players using three computers at the 
same time. Their skill at manipulating and “coaching” their computers 
to look very deeply into positions effectively counteracted the superior 
chess understanding of their grandmaster opponents and the greater 
computational power of other participants.Weak human + machine + 
better process was superior to a strong computer alone and, more re-
markably, superior to a strong human + machine + inferior process. 
(Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2011.)
Moreover, Brynjolfsson and McAfee argue that the same pattern is 
found in many activities, including both business and science: “The 
key to winning the race is not to compete against machines but to com-
pete with machines. Fortunately, humans are strongest exactly where 
computers are weak, creating a potentially beautiful partnership.”
The cognitive scientist (and anthropologist) Edwin Hutchins of 
the University of California, San Diego, has championed the power 
of distributed cognition, whereby some components are done by 
people (who may be distributed across time and space); other com-
ponents, by our technologies. It was he who taught me how pow-
erful this combination makes us. This provides the answer to the 
question: Does the new technology make us stupid? No, on the 
contrary, it changes the tasks we do. Just as the best chess player 
is a combination of human and technology, we, in combination 

288 The Design of Everyday Things
with technology, are smarter than ever before. As I put it in my 
book Things That Make Us Smart, the power of the unaided mind is 
highly overrated. It is things that make us smart.
The power of the unaided mind is highly overrated. Without external 
aids, deep, sustained reasoning is difficult. Unaided memory, thought, 
and reasoning are all limited in power. Human intelligence is highly 
flexible and adaptive, superb at inventing procedures and objects that 
overcome its own limits. The real powers come from devising external 
aids that enhance cognitive abilities. How have we increased memory, 
thought and reasoning? By the invention of external aids: it is things 
that make us smart. Some assistance comes through cooperative, social 
behavior: some arises through exploitation of the information pres-
ent in the environment; and some comes through the development of 
tools of thought—cognitive artifacts—that complement abilities and 
strengthen mental powers. (The opening paragraph of Chapter 3, Things 
That Make Us Smart, 1993.)
The Future of Books
It is one thing to have tools that aid in writing conventional books, 
but quite another when we have tools that dramatically transform 
the book.
Why should a book comprise words and some illustrations 
meant to be read linearly from front to back? Why shouldn’t it be 
composed of small sections, readable in whatever order is desired? 
Why shouldn’t it be dynamic, with video and audio segments, 
perhaps changing according to who is reading it, including notes 
made by other readers or viewers, or incorporating the author’s 
latest thoughts, perhaps changing even as it is being read, where 
the word text could mean anything: voice, video, images, dia-
grams, and words?
Some authors, especially of fiction, might still prefer the linear 
telling of tales, for authors are storytellers, and in stories, the or-
der in which characters and events are introduced is important to 
build the suspense, keep the reader enthralled, and manage the 
emotional highs and lows that characterize great storytelling. But 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 289
for nonfiction, for books like this one, order is not as important. 
This book does not attempt to manipulate your emotions, to keep 
you in suspense, or to have dramatic peaks. You should be able to 
experience it in the order you prefer, reading items out of sequence 
and skipping whatever is not relevant to your needs.
Suppose this book were interactive? If you have trouble under-
standing something, suppose you could click on the page and I 
would pop up and explain something. I tried that many years ago 
with three of my books, all combined into one interactive electronic 
book. But the attempt fell prey to the demons of product design: 
good ideas that appear too early will fail.
It took a lot of effort to produce that book. I worked with a large 
team of people from Voyager Books, flying to Santa Monica, Cal-
ifornia, for roughly a year of visits to film the excerpts and record 
my part. Robert Stein, the head of Voyager, assembled a talented 
team of editors, producers, videographers, interactive designers, 
and illustrators. Alas, the result was produced in a computer sys-
tem called HyperCard, a clever tool developed by Apple but never 
really given full support. Eventually, Apple stopped supporting it 
and today, even though I still have copies of the original disks, they 
will not run on any existing machine. (And even if they could, the 
video resolution is very poor by today’s standards.)
FIGURE 7.5. The Voyager Interactive Electronic Book. Figure A, on the left, is 
me stepping on to a page of The Design of Everyday Things. Figure B, on the right, 
shows me explaining a point about graph design in my book Things That Make 
Us Smart.
B.
A.

290 The Design of Everyday Things
Notice the phrase “it took a lot of effort to produce that book.” 
I don’t even remember how many people were involved, but the 
credits include the following: editor-producer, art director–graphic 
designer, programmer, interface designers (four people, including 
me), the production team (twenty-seven people), and then special 
thanks to seventeen people.
Yes, today anybody can record a voice or video essay. Anyone 
can shoot a video and do simple editing. But to produce a pro-
fessional-level multimedia book of roughly three hundred pages 
or two hours of video (or some combination) that will be read 
and enjoyed by people across the world requires an immense 
amount of talent and a variety of skills. Amateurs can do a five- 
or ten-minute video, but anything beyond that requires superb 
editing skills. Moreover, there has to be a writer, a cameraperson, 
a recording person, and a lighting person. There has to be a direc-
tor to coordinate these activities and to select the best approach to 
each scene (chapter). A skilled editor is required to piece the seg-
ments together. An electronic book on the environment, Al Gore’s 
interactive media book Our Choice (2011), lists a large number of 
job titles for the people responsible for this one book: publishers 
(two people), editor, production director, production editor, and 
production supervisor, software architect, user interface engineer, 
engineer, interactive graphics, animations, graphics design, photo 
editor, video editors (two), videographer, music, and cover de-
signer. What is the future of the book? Very expensive.
The advent of new technologies is making books, interactive 
media, and all sorts of educational and recreational material more 
effective and pleasurable. Each of the many tools makes creation 
easier. As a result, we will see a proliferation of materials. Most will 
be amateurish, incomplete, and somewhat incoherent. But even 
amateur productions can serve valuable functions in our lives, as 
the immense proliferation of homemade videos available on the 
Internet demonstrate, teaching us everything from how to cook 
Korean pajeon, repair a faucet, or understand Maxwell’s equations 
of electromagnetic waves. But for high-quality professional mate-
rial that tells a coherent story in a way that is reliable, where the 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 291
facts have been checked and the message authoritative, where the 
material will flow, experts are needed. The mix of technologies 
and tools makes quick and rough creation easier, but polished and 
professional level material much more difficult. The society of the 
future: something to look forward to with pleasure, contemplation, 
and dread.
The Moral Obligations of Design
That design affects society is hardly news to designers. Many take 
the implications of their work seriously. But the conscious manip-
ulation of society has severe drawbacks, not the least of which is 
the fact that not everyone agrees on the appropriate goals. Design, 
therefore, takes on political significance; indeed, design philoso-
phies vary in important ways across political systems. In Western 
cultures, design has reflected the capitalistic importance of the mar-
ketplace, with an emphasis on exterior features deemed to be at-
tractive to the purchaser. In the consumer economy, taste is not the 
criterion in the marketing of expensive foods or drinks, usability is 
not the primary criterion in the marketing of home and office appli-
ances. We are surrounded with objects of desire, not objects of use.
NEEDLESS FEATURES, NEEDLESS MODELS: 
GOOD FOR BUSINESS, BAD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
In the world of consumable products, such as food and news, there 
is always a need for more food and news. When the product is con-
sumed, then the customers are consumers. A never-ending cycle. In 
the world of services, the same applies. Someone has to cook and 
serve the food in a restaurant, take care of us when we are sick, do 
the daily transactions we all need. Services can be self-sustaining 
because the need is always there.
But a business that makes and sells durable goods faces a prob-
lem: As soon as everyone who wants the product has it, then there 
is no need for more. Sales will cease. The company will go out of 
business.
In the 1920s, manufacturers deliberately planned ways of making 
their products become obsolete (although the practice had existed 

292 The Design of Everyday Things
long before then). Products were built with a limited life span. Au-
tomobiles were designed to fall apart. A story tells of Henry Ford’s 
buying scrapped Ford cars and having his engineers disassemble 
them to see which parts failed and which were still in good shape. 
Engineers assumed this was done to find the weak parts and make 
them stronger. Nope. Ford explained that he wanted to find the 
parts that were still in good shape. The company could save money 
if they redesigned these parts to fail at the same time as the others.
Making things fail is not the only way to sustain sales. The wom-
en’s clothing industry is an example: what is fashionable this year is 
not next year, so women are encouraged to replace their wardrobe 
every season, every year. The same philosophy was soon extended 
to the automobile industry, where dramatic style changes on a reg-
ular basis made it obvious which people were up to date; which 
people were laggards, driving old-fashioned vehicles. The same is 
true for our smart screens, cameras, and TV sets. Even the kitchen 
and laundry, where appliances used to last for decades, have seen 
the impact of fashion. Now, out-of-date features, out-of-date styling, 
and even out-of-date colors entice homeowners to change. There 
are some gender differences. Men are not as sensitive as women to 
fashion in clothes, but they more than make up for the difference 
by their interest in the latest fashions in automobiles and other 
technologies.
But why purchase a new computer when the old one is func-
tioning perfectly well? Why buy a new cooktop or refrigerator, a 
new phone or camera? Do we really need the ice cube dispenser 
in the door of the refrigerator, the display screen on the oven door, 
the navigation system that uses three-dimensional images? What 
is the cost to the environment for all the materials and energy used 
to manufacture the new products, to say nothing of the problems 
of disposing safely of the old?
Another model for sustainability is the subscription model. Do 
you have an electronic reading device, or music or video player? 
Subscribe to the service that provides articles and news, music and 
entertainment, video and movies. These are all consumables, so 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 293
even though the smart screen is a fixed, durable good, the sub-
scription guarantees a steady stream of money in return for ser-
vices. Of course this only works if the manufacturer of the durable 
good is also the provider of services. If not, what alternatives are 
there?
Ah, the model year: each year a new model can be introduced, 
just as good as the previous year’s model, only claiming to be bet-
ter. It always increases in power and features. Look at all the new 
features. How did you ever exist without them? Meanwhile, sci-
entists, engineers, and inventors are busy developing yet newer 
technologies. Do you like your television? What if it were in three 
dimensions? With multiple channels of surround sound? With vir-
tual goggles so you are surrounded by the images, 360 degrees’ 
worth? Turn your head or body and see what is happening behind 
you. When you watch sports, you can be inside the team, experi-
encing the game the way the team does. Cars not only will drive 
themselves to make you safer, but provide lots of entertainment 
along the way. Video games will keep adding layers and chapters, 
new story lines and characters, and of course, 3-D virtual envi-
ronments. Household appliances will talk to one another, telling 
remote households the secrets of our usage patterns.
The design of everyday things is in great danger of becoming the 
design of superfluous, overloaded, unnecessary things.
Design Thinking and 
Thinking About Design
Design is successful only if the final product is successful—if peo-
ple buy it, use it, and enjoy it, thus spreading the word. A design 
that people do not purchase is a failed design, no matter how great 
the design team might consider it.
Designers need to make things that satisfy people’s needs, in 
terms of function, in terms of being understandable and usable, 
and in terms of their ability to deliver emotional satisfaction, pride, 
and delight. In other words, the design must be thought of as a 
total experience.

294 The Design of Everyday Things
But successful products need more than a great design. They 
have to be able to be produced reliably, efficiently, and on sched-
ule. If the design complicates the engineering requirements so 
much that they cannot be realized within the cost and scheduling 
constraints, then the design is flawed. Similarly, if manufacturing 
cannot produce the product, then the design is flawed.
Marketing considerations are important. Designers want to sat-
isfy people’s needs. Marketing wants to ensure that people ac-
tually buy and use the product. These are two different sets of 
requirements: design must satisfy both. It doesn’t matter how 
great the design is if people don’t buy it. And it doesn’t matter 
how many people buy something if they are going to dislike it 
when they start using it. Designers will be more effective as they 
learn more about sales and marketing, and the financial parts of 
the business.
Finally, products have a complex life cycle. Many people will 
need assistance in using a device, either because the design or the 
manual is not clear, or because they are doing something novel that 
was not considered in the product development, or for numerous 
other reasons. If the service provided to these people is inadequate, 
the product will suffer. Similarly if the device must be maintained, 
repaired, or upgraded, how this is managed affects people’s appre-
ciation of the product.
In today’s environmentally sensitive world, the full life cycle of 
the product must be taken into consideration. What are the envi-
ronmental costs of the materials, of the manufacturing process, of 
distribution, servicing, and repairs? When it is time to replace the 
unit, what is the environmental impact of recycling or otherwise 
reusing the old?
The product development process is complex and difficult. But 
to me, that is why it can be so rewarding. Great products pass 
through a gauntlet of challenges. To satisfy the myriad needs re-
quires skill as well as patience. It requires a combination of high 
technical skills, great business skills, and a large amount of per-
sonal social skills for interacting with the many other groups that 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 295
are involved, all of whom have their own agendas, all of which 
believe their requirements to be critical.
Design consists of a series of wonderful, exciting challenges, 
with each challenge being an opportunity. Like all great drama, 
it has its emotional highs and lows, peaks and valleys. The great 
products overcome the lows and end up high.
Now you are on your own. If you are a designer, help fight the 
battle for usability. If you are a user, then join your voice with those 
who cry for usable products. Write to manufacturers. Boycott un-
usable designs. Support good designs by purchasing them, even 
if it means going out of your way, even if it means spending a bit 
more. And voice your concerns to the stores that carry the prod-
ucts; manufacturers listen to their customers.
When you visit museums of science and technology, ask ques-
tions if you have trouble understanding. Provide feedback about 
the exhibits and whether they work well or poorly. Encourage mu-
seums to move toward better usability and understandability.
And enjoy yourself. Walk around the world examining the de-
tails of design. Learn how to observe. Take pride in the little things 
that help: think kindly of the person who so thoughtfully put them 
in. Realize that even details matter, that the designer may have 
had to fight to include something helpful. If you have difficulties, 
remember, it’s not your fault: it’s bad design. Give prizes to those 
who practice good design: send flowers. Jeer those who don’t: 
send weeds.
Technology continually changes. Much is for the good. Much 
is not. All technology can be used in ways never intended by the 
inventors. One exciting development is what I call “the rise of 
the small.”
THE RISE OF THE SMALL
I dream of the power of individuals, whether alone or in small 
groups, to unleash their creative spirits, their imagination, and 
their talents to develop a wide range of innovation. New tech-
nologies promise to make this possible. Now, for the first time 

296 The Design of Everyday Things
in history, individuals can share their ideas, their thoughts and 
dreams. They can produce their own products, their own ser-
vices, and make these available to anyone in the world. All can 
be their own master, exercising whatever special talents and in-
terests they may have.
What drives this dream? The rise of small, efficient tools that 
empower individuals. The list is large and growing continuously. 
Consider the rise of musical explorations through conventional, elec-
tronic, and virtual instruments. Consider the rise of self-publishing, 
bypassing conventional publishers, printers and distributors, and 
replacing these with inexpensive electronic editions available to 
anyone in the world to download to e-book readers.
Witness the rise of billions of small videos, available to all. Some 
are simply self-serving, some are incredibly educational, and some 
are humorous, some serious. They cover everything from how to 
make spätzle to how to understand mathematics, or simply how 
to dance or play a musical instrument. Some films are purely for 
entertainment. Universities are getting into the act, sharing whole 
curricula, including videos of lectures. College students post their 
class assignments as videos and text, allowing the whole world to 
benefit from their efforts. Consider the same phenomenon in writ-
ing, reporting events, and the creation of music and art.
Add to these capabilities the ready availability of inexpensive 
motors, sensors, computation, and communication. Now consider 
the potential when 3-D printers increase in performance while 
decreasing in price, allowing individuals to manufacture custom 
items whenever they are required. Designers all over the world 
will publish their ideas and plans, enabling entire new industries 
of custom mass production. Small quantities can be made as inex-
pensively as large, and individuals might design their own items 
or rely on an ever-increasing number of freelance designers who 
will publish plans that can then be customized and printed at local 
3-D print shops or within their own homes.
Consider the rise of specialists to help plan meals and cook them, 
to modify designs to fit needs and circumstances, to tutor on a 

 
seven: Design in the World of Business 297
wide variety of topics. Experts share their knowledge on blogs and 
on Wikipedia, all out of altruism, being rewarded by the thanks of 
their readers.
I dream of a renaissance of talent, where people are empowered 
to create, to use their skills and talents. Some may wish for the 
safety and security of working for organizations. Some may wish 
to start new enterprises. Some may do this as hobbies. Some may 
band together into small groups and cooperatives, the better to as-
semble the variety of skills required by modern technology, to help 
share their knowledge, to teach one another, and to assemble the 
critical mass that will always be needed, even for small projects. 
Some may hire themselves out to provide the necessary skills re-
quired of large projects, while still keeping their own freedom and 
authority.
In the past, innovation happened in the industrialized nations 
and with time, each innovation became more powerful, more com-
plex, often bloated with features. Older technology was given to 
the developing nations. The cost to the environment was seldom 
considered. But with the rise of the small, with new, flexible, inex-
pensive technologies, the power is shifting. Today, anyone in the 
world can create, design, and manufacture. The newly developed 
nations are taking advantage, designing and building by them-
selves, for themselves. Moreover, out of necessity they develop 
advanced devices that require less power, that are simpler to make, 
maintain, and use. They develop medical procedures that don’t re-
quire refrigeration or continual access to electric power. Instead of 
using handed-down technology, their results add value for all of 
us—call it handed-up technology.
With the rise of global interconnection, global communication, 
powerful design, and manufacturing methods that can be used 
by all, the world is rapidly changing. Design is a powerful equal-
izing tool: all that is needed is observation, creativity, and hard 
work—anyone can do it. With open-source software, inexpensive 
open-source 3-D printers, and even open-source education, we can 
transform the world.

298 The Design of Everyday Things
AS THE WORLD CHANGES, 
WHAT STAYS THE SAME?
With massive change, a number of fundamental principles stay 
the same. Human beings have always been social beings. Social 
interaction and the ability to keep in touch with people across the 
world, across time, will stay with us. The design principles of this 
book will not change, for the principles of discoverability, of feed-
back, and of the power of affordances and signifiers, mapping, and 
conceptual models will always hold. Even fully autonomous, auto-
matic machines will follow these principles for their interactions. 
Our technologies may change, but the fundamental principles of 
interaction are permanent.

 
 
299
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The original edition of this book was entitled The Psychology of Ev-
eryday Things (POET). This title is a good example of the difference 
between academics and industry. POET was a clever, cute title, 
much loved by my academic friends. When Doubleday/Currency 
approached me about publishing the paperback version of this 
book, the editors also said, “But of course, the title will have to be 
changed.” Title changed? I was horrified. But I decided to follow 
my own advice and do some research on readers. I discovered that 
while the academic community liked the title and its cleverness, 
the business community did not. In fact, business often ignored the 
book because the title sent the wrong message. Bookstores placed 
the book in their psychology section (along with books on sex, 
love, and self-help). The final nail in the title’s coffin came when I 
was asked to talk to a group of senior executives of a leading man-
ufacturing company. The person who introduced me to the audi-
ence praised the book, damned the title, and asked his colleagues 
to read the book despite the title. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FOR POET: 
PSYCHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY THINGS
The book was conceived and the first few drafts written in the late 
1980s while I was at the Applied Psychology Unit (the APU) in 

300 Acknowledgments
Cambridge, England, a laboratory of the British Medical Research 
Council (the laboratory no longer exists). At the APU, I met an-
other visiting American professor, David Rubin of Duke Univer-
sity, who was analyzing the recall of epic poetry. Rubin showed 
me that it wasn’t all in memory: much of the information was in 
the world, or at least in the structure of the tale, the poetics, and the 
lifestyles of the people. 
After spending the fall and winter in Cambridge, England, at 
the APU, I went to Austin, Texas, for the spring and summer (yes, 
the opposite order from what would be predicted by thinking 
of the weather at these two places). In Austin, I was at the Micro-
electronics and Computer Consortium (MCC), where I completed 
the manuscript. Finally, when I returned to my home base at the 
University of California, San Diego (UCSD), I revised the book sev-
eral more times. I used it in classes and sent copies to a variety of 
colleagues for suggestions. I benefited greatly from my interactions 
at all these places: APU, MCC, and, of course, UCSD. The com-
ments of my students and readers were invaluable, causing radical 
revision from the original structure. 
My hosts at the APU in Britain were most gracious, especially 
Alan Baddeley, Phil Barnard, Thomas Green, Phil Johnson-Laird, 
Tony Marcel, Karalyn and Roy Patterson, Tim Shallice, and Richard 
Young. Peter Cook, Jonathan Grudin, and Dave Wroblewski were 
extremely helpful during my stay at the MCC in Texas (another in-
stitution that no longer exists). At UCSD, I especially wish to thank 
the students in Psychology 135 and 205: my undergraduate and 
graduate courses at UCSD entitled “Cognitive Engineering.” 
My understanding of how we interact with the world was de-
veloped and strengthened by years of debate and interaction with 
a very powerful team of people at UCSD from the departments of 
cognitive science, psychology, anthropology, and sociology, orga-
nized by Mike Cole, who met informally once a week for several 
years. The primary members were Roy d’Andrade, Aaron Cicourel, 
Mike Cole, Bud Mehan, George Mandler, Jean Mandler, Dave Ru-
melhart, and me. In later years, I benefited immensely from my 

 
Acknowledgments 301
interactions with Jim Hollan, Edwin Hutchins, and David Kirsh, all 
faculty members in the department of cognitive science at UCSD. 
The early manuscript for POET was dramatically enhanced by 
critical readings by my colleagues: In particular, I am indebted to 
my editor at Basic Books, Judy Greissman, who provided patient 
critique through several revisions of POET. 
My colleagues in the design community were most helpful with 
their comments: Mike King, Mihai Nadin, Dan Rosenberg, and Bill 
Verplank. Special thanks must be given to Phil Agre, Sherman De-
Forest, and Jef Raskin, all of whom read the manuscript with care 
and provided numerous and valuable suggestions. Collecting the 
illustrations became part of the fun as I traveled the world with 
camera in hand. Eileen Conway and Michael Norman helped col-
lect and organize the figures and illustrations. Julie Norman helped 
as she does on all my books, proofing, editing, commenting, and 
encouraging. Eric Norman provided valuable advice, support, and 
photogenic feet and hands. 
Finally, my colleagues at the Institute for Cognitive Science at 
UCSD helped throughout—in part through the wizardry of inter-
national computer mail, in part through their personal assistance 
to the details of the process. I single out Bill Gaver, Mike Mozer, 
and Dave Owen for their detailed comments, but many helped out 
at one time or another during the research that preceded the book 
and the several years of writing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS FOR 
DESIGN OF EVERYDAY THINGS, REVISED EDITION
Because this new edition follows the organization and principles 
of the first, all the help given to me for that earlier edition applies 
to this one as well. 
I have learned a lot in the years that have passed since the first 
edition of this book. For one thing, then I was an academic scholar. 
In the interim I have worked in several different companies. The 
most important experience was at Apple, where I began to appre-
ciate how issues—budget, schedule, competitive forces, and the 

302 Acknowledgments
established base of products—that seldom concern scientists can 
dominate decisions in the world of business. While I was at Apple 
it had lost its way, but nothing is a better learning experience than 
a company in trouble: you have to be a fast learner. 
I learned about schedules and budgets, about the competing 
demand of the different divisions, about the role of marketing, 
industrial design, and graphical, usability, and interactive design 
(today lumped together under the rubric of experience design). I 
visited numerous companies across the United States, Europe, and 
Asia and talked with numerous partners and customers. It was a 
great learning experience. I am indebted to Dave Nagel, who hired 
and then promoted me to vice president of advanced technology, 
and to John Scully, the first CEO I worked with at Apple: John had 
the correct vision of the future. I learned from many people, far 
too many to name (a quick review of the Apple people I worked 
closely with and who are still in my contact list reveals 240 names). 
I learned about industrial design first from Bob Brunner, then 
from Jonathan (Joni) Ive. (Joni and I had to fight together to con-
vince Apple management to produce his ideas. My, how Apple 
has changed!) Joy Mountford ran the design team in advanced 
technology and Paulien Strijland ran the usability testing group 
in the product division. Tom Erickson, Harry Saddler, and Aus-
tin Henderson worked for me in the User Experience Architect’s 
office. Of particular significance to my increased understanding 
were Larry Tesler, Ike Nassi, Doug Solomon, Michael Mace, Rick 
LaFaivre, Guerrino De Luca, and Hugh Dubberly. Of special im-
portance were the Apple Fellows Alan Kay, Guy Kawasaki, and 
Gary Starkweather. (I was originally hired as an Apple Fellow. 
All Fellows reported to the VP of advanced technology.) Steve 
Wozniak, by a peculiar quirk, was an Apple employee with me as 
his boss, which allowed me to spend a delightful afternoon with 
him. I apologize to those of you who were so helpful, but who I 
have not included here. 
I thank my wife and critical reader, Julie Norman, for her pa-
tience in repeated careful readings of the manuscripts, telling me 

 
Acknowledgments 303
when I was stupid, redundant, and overly wordy. Eric Norman 
showed up as a young child in two of the photos of the first edi-
tion, and now, twenty-five years later, read the entire manuscript 
and provided cogent, valuable critiques. My assistant, Mimi Gard-
ner, held off the e-mail onslaught, allowing me to concentrate upon 
writing, and of course my friends at the Nielsen Norman group 
provided inspiration. Thank you, Jakob. 
Danny Bobrow of the Palo Alto Research Center, a frequent col-
laborator and coauthor of science papers for four decades, has 
provided continual advice and cogent critiques of my ideas. Lera 
Boroditsky shared her research on space and time with me, and 
further delighted me by leaving Stanford to take a job at the de-
partment I had founded, Cognitive Science, at UCSD. 
I am of course indebted to Professor Yutaka Sayeki of the Univer-
sity of Tokyo for permission to use his story of how he managed 
the turn signals on his motorcycle. I used the story in the first edi-
tion, but disguised the name. A diligent Japanese reader figured 
out who it must have been, so for this edition, I asked Sayeki for 
permission to name him. 
Professor Kun-Pyo Lee invited me to spend two months a year 
for three years at the Korea Advanced Institute for Science and 
Technology (KAIST) in its Industrial Design department, which 
gave me a much deeper insight into the teaching of design, Korean 
technology, and the culture of Northeast Asia, plus many new 
friends and a permanent love for kimchi.
Alex Kotlov, watching over the entrance to the building on Mar-
ket Street in San Francisco where I photographed the destination 
control elevators, not only allowed me to photograph them, but 
then turned out to have read DOET! 
In the years since publication of POET/DOET, I have learned a 
considerable amount about the practice of design. At IDEO I am 
indebted to David Kelly and Tim Brown, as well as fellow IDEO 
Fellows Barry Katz and Kristian Simsarian. I’ve had many fruitful 
discussions with Ken Friedman, former dean of the faculty of de-
sign at Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, as well as 

304 Acknowledgments
with my colleagues at many of the major schools of design around 
the world, in the United States, London, Delft, Eindhoven, Ivrea, 
Milan, Copenhagen, and Hong Kong. 
And thanks to Sandra Dijkstra, my literary agent for almost 
thirty years, with POET being one of her first books, but who now 
has a large team of people and successful authors. Thanks, Sandy.
Andrew Haskin and Kelly Fadem, at the time students at CCA, 
the California College of the Arts in San Francisco, did all of the 
drawings in the book—a vast improvement over the ones in the 
first edition that I did myself. 
Janaki (Mythily) Kumar, a User Experience designer at SAP, pro-
vided valuable comments on real world practices. 
Thomas Kelleher (TJ), my editor at Basic Books for this revised 
edition, provided rapid, efficient advice and editing suggestions 
(which led me to yet another massive revision of the manuscript 
that vastly improved the book). Doug Sery served as my editor at 
MIT Press for the UK edition of this book (as well as for Living with 
Complexity). For this book, TJ did all the work and Doug provided 
encouragement.

 
 
305
GENERAL 
READINGS 
AND NOTES
In the notes below, I first provide general readings. Then, chapter 
by chapter, I give the specific sources used or cited in the book.
In this world of rapid access to information, you can find infor-
mation about the topics discussed here by yourself. Here is an ex-
ample: In Chapter 5, I discuss root cause analysis as well as the 
Japanese method called the Five Whys. Although my descriptions 
of these concepts in Chapter 5 are self-sufficient for most purposes, 
readers who wish to learn more can use their favorite search en-
gine with the critical phrases in quotes. 
Most of the relevant information can be found online. The prob-
lem is that the addresses (URLs) are ephemeral. Today’s locations 
of valuable information may no longer be at the same place to-
morrow. The creaky, untrustworthy Internet, which is all we have 
today, may finally, thank goodness, be replaced by a superior 
scheme. Whatever the reason, the Internet addresses I provide may 
no longer work. The good news is that over the years that will 
pass after the publication of this book, new and improved search 
methods will certainly arise. It should be even easier to find more 
information about any of the concepts discussed in this book.
These notes provide excellent starting points. I provide critical 
references for the concepts discussed in the book, organized by 

306 General Readings
the chapters where they were discussed. The citations serve two 
purposes. First, they provide credit to the originators of the ideas. 
Second, they serve as starting points to get a deeper understanding 
of the concepts. For more advanced information (as well as newer, 
further developments), go out and search. Enhanced search skills 
are important tools for success in the twenty-first century.
GENERAL READINGS
When the first edition of this book was published, the discipline 
of interaction design did not exist, the field of human-computer 
interaction was in its infancy, and most studies were done under 
the guise of “usability” or “user interface.” Several very different 
disciplines were struggling to bring clarity to this enterprise, but 
often with little or no interaction among the disciplines. The ac-
ademic disciplines of computer science, psychology, human fac-
tors, and ergonomics all knew of one another’s existence and often 
worked together, but design was not included. Why not design? 
Note that all the disciplines just listed are in the areas of science 
and engineering—in other words, technology. Design was then 
mostly taught in schools of art or architecture as a profession 
rather than as a research-based academic discipline. Designers had 
remarkably little contact with science and engineering. This meant 
that although many excellent practitioners were trained, there was 
essentially no theory: design was learned through apprenticeship, 
mentorship, and experience.
Few people in the academic disciplines were aware of the ex-
istence of design as a serious enterprise, and as a result, design, 
and in particular, graphical, communication, and industrial de-
sign worked completely independently of the newly emerging 
discipline of human-computer interaction and the existing disci-
plines of human factors and ergonomics. Some product design was 
taught in departments of mechanical engineering, but again, with 
little interaction with design. Design was simply not an academic 
discipline, so there was little or no mutual awareness or collabo-
ration. Traces of this distinction remain today, although design is 
more and more becoming a research-based discipline, where pro-

 
General Readings 307
fessors have experience in practice as well as PhDs. The boundar-
ies are disappearing.
This peculiar history of many independent, disparate groups all 
working on similar issues makes it difficult to provide references 
that cover both the academic side of interaction and experience 
design, and the applied side of design. The proliferation of books, 
texts, and journals in human-computer interaction, experience de-
sign, and usability is huge: too large to cite. In the materials that 
follow, I provide a very restricted number of examples. When I 
originally put together a list of works I considered important, it 
was far too long. It fell prey to the problem described by Barry 
Schwartz in his book The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less (2005). 
So I decided to simplify by providing less. It is easy to find other 
works, including important ones that will be published after this 
book. Meanwhile, my apologies to my many friends whose im-
portant and useful works had to be trimmed from my list.
Industrial designer Bill Moggridge was extremely influential in 
establishing interaction within the design community. He played a 
major role in the design of the first portable computer. He was one 
of the three founders of IDEO, one of the world’s most influential 
design firms. He wrote two books of interviews with key people 
in the early development of the discipline: Designing Interactions 
(2007) and Designing Media (2010). As is typical of discussions from 
the discipline of design, his works focus almost entirely upon the 
practice of design, with little attention to the science. Barry Katz, a 
design professor at San Francisco’s California College of the Arts, 
Stanford’s d.school, and an IDEO Fellow, provides an excellent 
history of design practice within the community of companies 
in Silicon Valley, California: Ecosystem of Innovation: The History of 
Silicon Valley Design (2014). An excellent, extremely comprehen-
sive history of the field of product design is provided by Bern-
hard Bürdek’s Design: History, Theory, and Practice of Product Design 
(2005). Bürdek’s book, originally published in German but with an 
excellent English translation, is the most comprehensive history of 
product design I have been able to find. I highly recommend it to 
those who want to understand the historical foundations.

308 General Readings
Modern designers like to characterize their work as providing 
deep insight into the fundamentals of problems, going far beyond 
the popular conception of design as making things pretty. Design-
ers emphasize this aspect of their profession by discussing the spe-
cial way in which they approach problems, a method they have 
characterized as “design thinking.” A good introduction to this 
comes from the book Change by Design (2009), by Tim Brown and 
Barry Katz. Brown is CEO of IDEO and Katz an IDEO Fellow (see 
the previous paragraph).
An excellent introduction to design research is provided in Jan 
Chipchase and Simon Steinhardt’s Hidden in Plain Sight (2013). 
The book chronicles the life of a design researcher who studies 
people by observing them in their homes, barber shops, and liv-
ing quarters around the world. Chipchase is executive creative 
director of global insights at Frog Design, working out of the 
Shanghai office. The work of Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt 
in Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems (1998) 
presents a powerful method of analyzing behavior; they have 
also produced a useful workbook (Holtzblatt, Wendell, & Wood, 
2004).
There are many excellent books. Here are a few more:
Buxton, W. (2007). Sketching user experience: Getting the design right and the right 
design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. (And see the companion 
workbook [Greenberg, Carpendale, Marquardt, & Buxton, 2012].)
Coates, D. (2003). Watches tell more than time: Product design, information, and the 
quest for elegance. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cooper, A., Reimann, R., & Cronin, D. (2007). About face 3: The essentials of 
interaction design. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Pub.
Hassenzahl, M. (2010). Experience design: Technology for all the right reasons. San 
Rafael, California: Morgan & Claypool.
Moggridge, B. (2007). Designing interactions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. http://
www.designinginteractions.com. Chapter 10 describes the methods of 
interaction design: http://www.designinginteractions.com/chapters/10
Two handbooks provide comprehensive, detailed treatments of the 
topics in this book:

 
Notes to Chapter 2 309
Jacko, J. A. (2012). The human-computer interaction handbook: Fundamentals, 
evolving technologies, and emerging applications (3rd edition). Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press. 
Lee, J. D., & Kirlik, A. (2013). The Oxford handbook of cognitive engineering. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Which book should you look at? Both are excellent, and although 
expensive, well worth the price for anyone who intends to work 
in these fields. The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook, as the ti-
tle suggests, focuses primarily on computer-enhanced interactions 
with technology, whereas the Handbook of Cognitive Engineering has 
a much broader coverage. Which book is better? That depends upon 
what problem you are working on. For my work, both are essential. 
Finally, let me recommend two websites: 
Interaction Design Foundation: Take special note of its Encyclopedia articles. 
www.interaction-design.org
SIGCHI: The Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group for ACM.
www.sigchi.org
CHAPTER ONE: THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY THINGS
2 
 Coffeepot for Masochists: This was created by the French artist Jacques 
Carelman (1984). The photograph shows a coffeepot inspired by 
Carelman, but owned by me. Photograph by Aymin Shamma for the 
author.
10 
 Affordances: The perceptual psychologist J. J. Gibson invented the word 
affordance to explain how people navigated the world (Gibson, 1979). 
I introduced the term into the world of interaction design in the first 
edition of this book (Norman, 1988). Since then, the number of writings 
on affordance has been enormous. Confusion over the appropriate way 
to use the term prompted me to introduce the concept of “signifier” in 
my book Living with Complexity (Norman, 2010), discussed throughout 
this book, but especially in Chapters 1 and 4.
CHAPTER TWO: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY ACTIONS
38  Gulfs of execution and evaluation: The story of the gulfs and bridges of 
execution and evaluation came from research performed with Ed 
Hutchins and Jim Hollan, then part of a joint research team between the 
Naval Personnel Research and Development Center and the University 
of California, San Diego (Hollan and Hutchins are now professors of 

310 Notes to Chapter 2
cognitive science at the University of California, San Diego). The work 
examined the development of computer systems that were easier to 
learn and easier to use, and in particular, of what has been called 
direct manipulation computer systems. The initial work is described 
in the chapter “Direct Manipulation Interfaces” in the book from our 
laboratories, User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human-
Computer Interaction (Hutchins, Hollan, & Norman, 1986). Also see the 
paper by Hollan, Hutchins, and David Kirsh, “Distributed Cognition: A 
New Foundation for Human-Computer Interaction Research” (Hollan, 
Hutchins, & Kirsh, 2000).
43  Levitt: “People don’t want to buy a quarter-inch drill. They want a quarter-
inch hole!” See Christensen, Cook, & Hal, 2006. The fact that Harvard 
Business School marketing professor Theodore Levitt is credited with 
the quote about the drill and the hole is a good example of Stigler’s law: 
“No scientific discovery is named after its original discoverer.” Thus, 
Levitt himself attributed the statement about drills and holes to Leo 
McGinneva (Levitt, 1983). Stigler’s law is, itself, an example of the law: 
Stigler, a professor of statistics, wrote that he learned the law from the 
sociologist Robert Merton. See more at Wikipedia, “Stigler’s Law of 
Eponymy” (Wikipedia contributors, 2013c).
46  Doorknob: The question “In the house you lived in three houses ago, as 
you entered the front door, was the doorknob on the left or right?” comes 
from my paper “Memory, Knowledge, and the Answering of Questions” 
(Norman, 1973).
53  Visceral, behavioral, and reflective: Daniel Kahneman’s book, Thinking Fast 
and Slow (Kahneman, 2011), gives an excellent introduction to modern 
conceptions of the role of conscious and subconscious processing. The 
distinctions between visceral, behavioral, and reflective processing 
form the basis of my book Emotional Design (Norman, 2002, 2004). This 
model of the human cognitive and emotional system is described in 
more technical detail in the scientific paper I wrote with Andrew Ortony 
and William Revelle: “The Role of Affect and Proto-affect in Effective 
Functioning” (Ortony, Norman, & Revelle, 2005). Also see “Designers 
and Users: Two Perspectives on Emotion and Design” (Norman & 
Ortony, 2006). Emotional Design contains numerous examples of the role 
of design at all three levels.
58  Thermostat: The valve theory of the thermostat is taken from Kempton, 
a study published in the journal Cognitive Science (1986). Intelligent 
thermostats try to predict when they will be required, turning on or 
off earlier than the simple control illustrated in Chapter 2 can specify, 
to ensure that the desired temperature is reached at the desired time, 
without over- or undershooting the target.
63  Positive psychology: Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s work on flow can be found 
in his several books on the topic (1990, 1997). Martin (Marty) Seligman 
developed the concept of learned helplessness, and then applied it to 
depression (Seligman, 1992). However, he decided that it was wrong for 

 
Notes to Chapter 3 311
psychology to continually focus upon difficulties and abnormalities, 
so he teamed up with Csikszentmihalyi to create a movement for 
positive psychology. An excellent introduction is provided in the article 
by the two of them in the journal American Psychologist (Seligman & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). Since then, positive psychology has expanded 
to include books, journals, and conferences.
66  Human error: People blame themselves: Unfortunately, blaming the user 
is imbedded in the legal system. When major accidents occur, official 
courts of inquiry are set up to assess the blame. More and more often, the 
blame is attributed to “human error.” But in my experience, human error 
usually is a result of poor design: why was the system ever designed so 
that a single act by a single person could cause calamity? An important 
book on this topic is Charles Perrow’s Normal Accidents (1999). Chapter 5 
of this book provides a detailed examination of human error.
72  Feedforward: Feedforward is an old concept from control theory, but I 
first encountered it applied to the seven stages of action in the paper 
by Jo Vermeulen, Kris Luyten, Elise van den Hoven, and Karin Coninx 
(2013).
CHAPTER THREE: KNOWLEDGE IN THE HEAD AND IN THE WORLD
74 
 American coins: Ray Nickerson and Marilyn Adams, as well as David 
Rubin and Theda Kontis, showed that people could neither recall 
nor recognize accurately the pictures and words on American coins 
(Nickerson & Adams, 1979; Rubin & Kontis, 1983).
80  French coins: The quotation about the French government release of the 
10-franc coin comes from an article by Stanley Meisler (1986), reprinted 
with permission of the Los Angeles Times.
80  Descriptions in memory: The suggestion that memory storage and retrieval 
is mediated through partial descriptions was put forth in a paper with 
Danny Bobrow (Norman & Bobrow, 1979). We argued that, in general, 
the required specificity of a description depends on the set of items 
among which a person is trying to distinguish. Memory retrieval can 
therefore involve a prolonged series of attempts during which the initial 
retrieval descriptions yield incomplete or erroneous results, so that the 
person must keep trying, each retrieval attempt coming closer to the 
answer and helping to make the description more precise.
83  Constraints of rhyming: Given just the cues for meaning (the first task), 
the people David C. Rubin and Wanda T. Wallace tested could guess the 
three target words used in these examples only 0 percent, 4 percent, and 
0 percent of the time, respectively. Similarly, when the same target words 
were cued only by rhymes, they still did quite poorly, guessing the targets 
correctly only 0 percent, 0 percent, and 4 percent of the time, respectively. 
Thus, each cue alone offered little assistance. Combining the meaning 
cue with the rhyming cue led to perfect performance: the people got the 
target words 100 percent of the time (Rubin & Wallace, 1989).

312 Notes to Chapter 3
86  ‘Ali Baba: Alfred Bates Lord’s work is summarized in his book The Singer 
of Tales (1960). The quotation from “‘Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves” 
comes from The Arabian Nights: Tales of Wonder and Magnificence, selected 
and edited by Padraic Colum, translated by Edward William Lane 
(Colum & Ward, 1953). The names here are in an unfamiliar form: most 
of us know the magic phrase as “Open Sesame,” but according to Colum, 
“Simsim” is the authentic transliteration.
87  Passwords: How do people cope with passwords? There are lots of studies: 
(Anderson, 2008; Florêncio, Herley, & Coskun, 2007; National Research 
Council Steering Committee on the Usability, Security, and Privacy of 
Computer Systems, 2010; Norman, 2009; Schneier, 2000).
To find the most common passwords, just search using some phrase 
such as “most common passwords.” My article on security, which led 
to numerous newspaper column references to it, is available on my 
website and was also published in the magazine for human-computer 
interaction, Interactions (Norman, 2009).
89  Hiding places: The quotation about professional thieves’ knowledge of 
how people hide things comes from Winograd and Soloway’s study “On 
Forgetting the Locations of Things Stored in Special Places” (1986).
93  Mnemonics: Mnemonic methods were covered in my book Memory and 
Attention, and although that book is old, the mnemonic techniques are 
even older, and are still unchanged (Norman, 1969, 1976). I discuss the 
effort of retrieval in Learning and Memory (Norman, 1982). Mnemonic 
techniques are easy to find: just search the web for “mnemonics.” 
Similarly, the properties of short- and long-term memory are readily 
found by an Internet search or in any text on experimental psychology, 
cognitive psychology, or neuropsychology (as opposed to clinical 
psychology) or a text on cognitive science. Alternatively, search online 
for “human memory,” “working memory,” “short-term memory” or 
“long-term memory.” Also see the book by Harvard psychologist Daniel 
Schacter, The Seven Sins of Memory (2001). What are Schacter’s seven sins? 
Transience, absent-mindedness, blocking, misattribution, suggestibility, 
persistence, and bias.
101  Whitehead: Alfred North Whitehead’s quotation about the power of 
automated behavior is from Chapter 5 of his book An Introduction to 
Mathematics (1911). 
107  Prospective memory: Considerable research on prospective memory and 
memory for the future is summarized in the articles by Dismukes on 
prospective memory and the review by Cristina Atance and Daniela 
O’Neill on memory for the future, or what they call “episodic future 
thinking” (Atance & O’Neill, 2001; Dismukes, 2012).
112  Transactive memory: The term transactive memory was coined by Harvard 
professor of psychology Daniel Wegner (Lewis & Herndon, 2011; Wegner, 
D. M., 1987; Wegner, T. G., & Wegner, D. M., 1995).
113  Stove controls: The difficulty in mapping stove controls to burners has 
been understood by human factors experts for over fifty years: Why are 

 
Notes to Chapter 4 313
stoves still designed so badly? This issue was addressed in 1959, the very 
first year of the Human Factors Journal (Chapanis & Lindenbaum, 1959).
118  Culture and design: My discussion of the impact of culture on mappings 
was heavily informed by my discussions with Lera Boroditsky, then 
at Stanford University, but now in the cognitive science department 
at the University of California, San Diego. See her book chapter “How 
Languages Construct Time” (2011). Studies of the Australian Aborigine 
were reported by Núñez & Sweetser (2006).
CHAPTER FOUR: KNOWING WHAT TO DO: 
CONSTRAINTS, DISCOVERABILITY, AND FEEDBACK
126  InstaLoad: A description of Microsoft’s InstaLoad technology for battery 
contacts is available on its website: www.microsoft.com/hardware
/en-us/support/licensing-instaload-overview.
129  Cultural frames: See Roger Schank and Robert B. Abelson’s Scripts, 
Plans, Goals, and Understanding (1977) or Erving Goffman’s classic and 
extremely influential books The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (1959) 
and Frame Analysis (1974). I recommend Presentation as the most relevant 
(and easiest to read) of his works.
129  Violating social conventions: “Try violating cultural norms and see how 
uncomfortable that makes you and the other people.” Jan Chipchase and 
Simon Steinhardt’s Hidden in Plain Sight provides many examples of how 
design researchers can deliberately violate social conventions so as to 
understand how a culture works. Chipchase reports an experiment in 
which able-bodied young people request that seated subway passengers 
give up their seat to them. The experimenters were surprised by two 
things. First, a large proportion of people obeyed. Second, the people 
most affected were the experimenters themselves: they had to force 
themselves to make the requests and then felt bad about it for a long 
time afterward. A deliberate violation of social constraints can be 
uncomfortable for both the violator and the violated (Chipchase & 
Steinhardt, 2013).
137  Light switch panel: For the construction of my home light switch panel, 
I relied heavily on the electrical and mechanical ingenuity of Dave 
Wargo, who actually did the design, construction, and installation of the 
switches.
156  Natural sounds: Bill Gaver, now a prominent design researcher at 
Goldsmiths College, University of London (UK), first alerted me to 
the importance of natural sounds in his PhD dissertation and later 
publications (Gaver, W., 1997; Gaver, W. W., 1989). There has been 
considerable research on sound since the early days: see, for example, 
Gygi & Shafiro (2010).
160  Electric vehicles: The quotation from the US government rule on sounds 
for electric vehicles can be found on the Department of Transportation’s 
website (2013). 

314 Notes to Chapter 5
CHAPTER FIVE: HUMAN ERROR? NO, BAD DESIGN
There has been a lot of work on the study of error, human reliabil-
ity, and resilience. A good source, besides the items cited below, is 
the Wiki of Science article on human error (Wiki of Science, 2013). 
Also see the book Behind Human Error (Woods, Decker, Cook, Jo-
hannesen, & Sarter, 2010). 
Two of the most important workers in human error are British 
psychologist James Reason and Danish engineer Jens Rasmussen. 
Also see the books by the Swedish investigator Sidney Dekker, and 
MIT professor Nancy Leveson (Dekker, 2011, 2012, 2013; Leveson, 
N., 2012; Leveson, N. G., 1995; Rasmussen, Duncan, & Leplat, 1987; 
Rasmussen, Pejtersen, & Goodstein, 1994; Reason, J. T., 1990, 2008).
Unless otherwise noted, all the examples of slips in this chapter 
were collected by me, primarily from the errors of myself, my re-
search associates, my colleagues, and my students. Everyone dili-
gently recorded his or her slips, with the requirement that only the 
ones that had been immediately recorded would be added to the 
collection. Many were first published in Norman (1981). 
165  F-22 crash: The analysis of the Air Force F-22 crash comes from a government 
report (Inspector General United States Department of Defense, 2013). 
(This report also contains the original Air Force report as Appendix C.) 
170  Slips and mistakes: The descriptions of skill-based, rule-based, and 
knowledge-based behavior is taken from Jens Rasmussen’s paper on 
the topic (1983), which still stands as one of the best introductions. The 
classification of errors into slips and mistakes was done jointly by me and 
Reason. The classification of mistakes into rule-based and knowledge-
based follows the work of Rasmussen (Rasmussen, Goodstein, Andersen, 
& Olsen, 1988; Rasmussen, Pejtersen, & Goodstein, 1994; Reason, J. T., 
1990, 1997, 2008). Memory lapse errors (both slips and mistakes) were not 
originally distinguished from other errors: they were put into separate 
categories later, but not quite the same way I have done here.
172  “Gimli Glider”: The so-called Gimli Glider accident was an Air Canada Boe-
ing 767 that ran out of fuel and had to glide to a landing at Gimli, a de-
commissioned Canadian Air Force base. There were numerous mistakes: 
search for “Gimli Glider accident.” (I recommend the Wikipedia treatment.)
174  Capture error: The category “capture error” was invented by James 
Reason (1979).
178  Airbus: The difficulties with the Airbus and its modes are described 
in (Aviation Safety Network, 1992; Wikipedia contributors, 2013a). For 
a disturbing description of another design problem with the Airbus—

 
Notes to Chapter 5 315
that the two pilots (the captain and the first officer) can both control the 
joysticks, but there is no feedback, so one pilot does not know what the other 
pilot is doing—see the article in the British newspaper The Telegraph 
(Ross & Tweedie, 2012).
181  The Kiss nightclub fire in Santa Maria, Brazil: It is described in numerous 
Brazilian and American newspapers (search the web for “Kiss nightclub 
fire”). I first learned about it from the New York Times (Romero, 2013).
186  Tenerife crash: My source for information about the Tenerife crash is from 
a report by Roitsch, Babcock, and Edmunds issued by the American 
Airline Pilots Association (Roitsch, Babcock, & Edmunds, undated). 
It is perhaps not too surprising that it differs in interpretation from 
the Spanish government’s report (Spanish Ministry of Transport and 
Communications, 1978), which in turn differs from the report by the 
Dutch Aircraft Accident Inquiry Board. A nice review of the 1977 Tenerife 
accident—written in 2007—that shows its long-lasting importance has 
been written by Patrick Smith for the website Salon.com (Smith, 2007, 
Friday, April 6, 04:00 AM PDT).
188  Air Florida crash: The information and quotations about the Air Florida 
crash are from the report of the National Transportation Safety Board 
(1982). See also the two books entitled Pilot Error (Hurst, 1976; Hurst, R. & 
Hurst, L. R., 1982). The two books are quite different. The second is better 
than the first, in part because at the time the first book was written, not 
much scientific evidence was available.
190  Checklists in medicine: Duke University’s examples of knowledge-based 
mistakes can be found at Duke University Medical Center (2013). An 
excellent summary of the use of checklists in medicine—and the many 
social pressures that have slowed up its adoption—is provided by Atul 
Gawande (2009).
192  Jidoka: The quotation from Toyota about Jidoka, and the Toyota 
Production System comes from the auto maker’s website (Toyota Motor 
Europe Corporate Site, 2013). Poka-yoke is described in many books and 
websites. I found the two books written by or with the assistance of the 
originator, Shigeo Shingo, to provide a valuable perspective (Nikkan 
Kogyo Shimbun, 1988; Shingo, 1986).
193  Aviation safety: The website for NASA’s Aviation Safety Reporting System 
provides details of the system, along with a history of its reports (NASA, 
2013).
197  Hindsight: Baruch Fischhoff’s study is called “Hindsight ≠ Foresight: 
The Effect of Outcome Knowledge on Judgment Under Uncertainty” 
(1975). And while you are at it, see his more recent work (Fischhoff, 2012; 
Fischhoff & Kadvany, 2011).
198  Designing for error: I discuss the idea of designing for error in a paper 
in Communications of the ACM, in which I analyze a number of the slips 
people make in using computer systems and suggest system design 
principles that might minimize those errors (Norman, 1983). This 
philosophy also pervades the book that our research team put together: 

316 Notes to Chapter 5
User Centered System Design (Norman & Draper, 1986); two chapters are 
especially relevant to the discussions here: my “Cognitive Engineering” 
and the one I wrote with Clayton Lewis, “Designing for Error.”
200  Multitasking: There are many studies of the dangers and inefficiencies of 
multitasking. A partial review is given by Spink, Cole, & Waller (2008). 
David L. Strayer and his colleagues at the University of Utah have done 
numerous studies demonstrating rather severe impairment in driving 
behavior while using cell phones (Strayer & Drews, 2007; Strayer, Drews, 
& Crouch, 2006). Even pedestrians are distracted by cell phone usage, 
as demonstrated by a team of researchers from West Washington 
University (Hyman, Boss, Wise, McKenzie, & Caggiano, 2010).
200  Unicycling clown: The clever study of the invisible clown, riding a 
unicycle, “Did you see the unicycling clown? Inattentional blindness 
while walking and talking on a cell phone” was done by Hyman, Boss, 
Wise, McKenzie, & Caggiano (2010).
208  Swiss cheese model: James Reason introduced his extremely influential 
Swiss cheese model in 1990 (Reason, J., 1990; Reason, J. T., 1997).
210  Hersman: Deborah Hersman’s description of the design philosophy for 
aircraft comes from her talk on February 7, 2013, discussing the NTSB’s 
attempts to understand the cause of the fires in the battery compartments 
of Boeing 787 aircraft. Although the fires caused airplanes to make 
emergency landings, no passengers or crew were injured: the multiple 
layers of redundant protection maintained safety. Nonetheless, the 
fires and resulting damage were unexpected and serious enough that 
all Boeing 787 airlines were grounded until all parties involved had 
completed a thorough investigation of the causes of the incident and 
then gone through a new certification process with the Federal Aviation 
Agency (for the United States, and through the corresponding agencies in 
other countries). Although this was expensive and greatly inconvenient, it 
is an example of good proactive practice: take measures before accidents 
lead to injury and death (National Transportation Safety Board, 2013).
212  Resilience engineering: The excerpt from “Prologue: Resilience Engineering 
Concepts,” in the book Resilience Engineering, is reprinted by permission 
of the publishers (Hollnagel, Woods, & Leveson, 2006).
213  Automation: Much of my research and writings have addressed issues of 
automation. An early paper, “Coffee Cups in the Cockpit,” addresses this 
problem as well as the fact that when talking about incidents in a large 
country—or that occur worldwide—a “one-in-a-million chance” is not 
good enough odds (Norman, 1992). My book The Design of Future Things 
deals extensively with this issue (Norman, 2007).
214  Royal Majesty accident: An excellent analysis of the mode error accident 
with the cruise ship Royal Majesty is contained in Asaf Degani’s book on 
automation, Taming HAL: Designing Interfaces Beyond 2001 (Degani, 2004), as 
well as in the analyses by Lützhöft and Dekker and the official NTSB report 
(Lützhöft & Dekker, 2002; National Transportation Safety Board, 1997). 

 
Notes to Chapter 6 317
CHAPTER SIX: DESIGN THINKING
As pointed out in the “General Readings” section, a good intro-
duction to design thinking is Change by Design by Tim Brown and 
Barry Katz (2009). Brown is CEO of IDEO and Katz a professor at 
the California College of the Arts, visiting professor at Stanford’s 
d.school, and an IDEO Fellow. There are multiple Internet sources; 
I like designthinkingforeducators.com.
220  Double diverge-converge pattern: The double diverge-converge pattern was 
first introduced by the British Design Council in 2005, which called it the 
“Double-Diamond Design Process Model” (Design Council, 2005).
221  HCD process: The human-centered design process has many variants, 
each similar in spirit but different in the details. A nice summary of the 
method I describe is provided by the HCD book and toolkit from the 
design firm IDEO (IDEO, 2013).
227  Prototyping: For prototyping, see Buxton’s book and handbook on 
sketching (Buxton, 2007; Greenberg, Carpendale, Marquardt, & Buxton, 
2012). There are multiple methods used by designers to understand the 
nature of the problem and come to a potential solution. Vijay Kumar’s 
101 Design Methods (2013) doesn’t even cover them all. Kumar’s book is 
an excellent treatment of design research methods, but its focus is on 
innovation, not the production of products, so it does not cover the actual 
development cycle. Physical prototyping, their tests, and iterations are 
outside the domain, as are the practical concerns of the marketplace, the 
topic of the last part of this chapter and all of chapter 7.
227  Wizard of Oz technique: The Wizard of Oz technique is named after 
L. Frank Baum’s book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (Baum & Denslow, 
1900). My use of the technique is described in the resulting paper from 
the group headed by artificial intelligence researcher Danny Bobrow at 
what was then called the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Bobrow 
et al., 1977). The “graduate student” sitting in the other room was Allen 
Munro, who then went on to a distinguished research career.
229  Nielsen: Jakob Nielsen’s argument that five users is the ideal number for 
most tests can be found on the Nielsen Norman group’s website (Nielsen, 
2013).
233  Three goals: Marc Hassenzahl’s use of the three levels of goals (be-goals, 
do-goals, and motor-goals) is described in many places, but I strongly 
recommend his book Experience Design (Hassenzahl, 2010). The three 
goals come from the work of Charles Carver and Michael Scheier in their 
landmark book on the use of feedback models, chaos, and dynamical 
theory to explain much of human behavior (Carver & Scheier, 1998).
246  Age and performance: A good review of the impact of age on human factors 
is provided by Frank Schieber (2003). The report by Igo Grossman and 

318 Notes to Chapter 7
colleagues is a typical example of research showing that careful studies 
reveal superior performance with age (Grossmann et al., 2010).
254  Swatch International Time: Swatch’s development of .beat time and the 
French decimal time are discussed in the Wikipedia article on decimal 
time (Wikipedia contributors, 2013b). 
CHAPTER SEVEN: DESIGN IN THE WORLD OF BUSINESS
261  Creeping featurism: A note for the technology historians. I’ve managed to 
trace the origin of this term to a talk by John Mashey in 1976 (Mashey, 
1976). At that time Mashey was a computer scientist at Bell Laboratories, 
where he was one of the early developers of UNIX, a well-known 
computer operating system (which is still active as Unix, Linux, and the 
kernel underlying Apple’s Mac OS).
262  Youngme Moon: Youngme Moon’s book Different: Escaping the Competitive 
Herd (Moon, 2010) argues that “If there is one strain of conventional 
wisdom pervading every company in every industry, it is the importance 
of competing hard to differentiate yourself from the competition. And 
yet going head-to-head with the competition—with respect to features, 
product augmentations, and so on—has the perverse effect of making 
you just like everyone else.” (From the jacket of her book: see http://
youngmemoon.com/Jacket.html.)
266  Word-gesture system: The word-gesture system that works by tracing the 
letters on the screen keyboard to type rapidly and efficiently (although 
not as fast as with a traditional ten-finger keyboard) is described in 
considerable detail by Shumin Zhai and Per Ola Kristensson, two of the 
developers of this method of typing (Zhai & Kristensson, 2012).
269  Multitouch screens: In the more than thirty years multitouch screens have 
been in the laboratories, numerous companies have launched products 
and failed. Nimish Mehta is credited with the invention of multitouch, 
discussed in his master’s thesis (1982) from the University of Toronto. 
Bill Buxton (2012), one of the pioneers in this field, provides a valuable 
review (he was working with multitouch displays in the early 1980s at 
the University of Toronto). Another excellent review of multitouch and 
gestural systems in general (as well as design principles) is provided 
by Dan Saffer in his book Designing Gestural Interfaces (2009). The story 
of Fingerworks and Apple is readily found by searching the web for 
“Fingerworks.”
270 Stigler’s law: See the comment about this in the notes for Chapter 2.
271  Telephonoscope: The illustration of the “Telephonoscope” was originally 
published in the December 9, 1878, issue of the British magazine Punch 
(for its 1879 Almanack). The picture comes from Wikipedia (Wikipedia 
contributors, 2013d), where it is in the public domain because of its age.
276  QWERTY keyboard: The history of the QWERTY keyboard is discussed 
in numerous articles. I thank Professor Neil Kay of University of 
Strathclyde for our e-mail correspondence and his article “Rerun the 

 
Notes to Chapter 7 319
Tape of History and QWERTY Always Wins” (2013). This article led me 
to the “QWERTY People Archive” website by the Japanese researchers 
Koichi and Motoko Yasuoka, an incredibly detailed, valuable resource 
for those interested in the history of the keyboard, and in particular, 
of the QWERTY configuration (Yasuoka & Yasuoka, 2013). The article 
on the typewriter in the 1872 Scientific American is fun to read: the style 
of Scientific American has changed drastically since then (Anonymous, 
1872).
278  Dvorak keyboard: Is Dvorak faster than QWERTY? Yes, but not by much: 
Diane Fisher and I studied a variety of keyboard layouts. We thought that 
alphabetically organized keys would be superior for beginners. No, they 
weren’t: we discovered that knowledge of the alphabet was not useful 
in finding the keys. Our studies of alphabetical and Dvorak keyboards 
were published in the journal Human Factors (Norman & Fisher, 1984).
Admirers of the Dvorak keyboard claim much more than a 10 percent 
improvement, as well as faster learning rates and less fatigue. But I 
will stick by my studies and my statements. If you want to read more, 
including a worthwhile treatment of the history of the typewriter, see 
the book Cognitive Aspects of Skilled Typewriting, edited by William E. 
Cooper, which includes several chapters of research from my laboratory 
(Cooper, W. E., 1963; Norman & Fisher, 1984; Norman & Rumelhart, 1963; 
Rumelhart & Norman, 1982).
278  Keyboard ergonomics: Health aspects of keyboards are reported in 
National Institute of Health (2013).
279  Incremental and radical innovation: The Italian business professor Roberto 
Verganti and I discuss the principles of incremental and radical 
innovation (Norman & Verganti, 2014; Verganti, 2009, 2010).
281  Hill climbing: There are very good descriptions of the hill-climbing 
process for design in Christopher Alexander’s book Notes on the Synthesis 
of Form (1964) and Chris Jones’s book Design Methods (1992; also see Jones, 
1984).
286  Humans versus machines: The remarks by MIT professor Erik Brynjolfsson 
were made in his talk at the June 2012 National Academy of Engineering 
symposium on manufacturing, design, and innovation (Brynjolfsson, 
2012). His book, coauthored with Andrew McAfee—Race Against the 
Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving 
Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy—
contains an excellent treatment of design and innovation (Brynjolfsson 
& McAfee, 2011).
290  Interactive media: Al Gore’s interactive media book is Our Choice (2011). 
Some of the videos from my early interactive book are still available: see 
Norman (1994 and 2011b).
295  Rise of the small: The section “The Rise of the Small” is taken from my 
essay written for the hundredth anniversary of the Steelcase company, 
reprinted here with Steelcase’s permission (Norman, 2011a).


 
 
321
REFERENCES
Alexander, C. (1964). Notes on the synthesis of form. Cambridge, England: 
Harvard University Press.
Anderson, R. J. (2008). Security engineering—A guide to building dependable 
distributed systems (2nd edition). New York, NY: Wiley. http://www.cl
.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/book.html
Anonymous. (1872). The type writer. Scientific American, 27(6, August 10), 1.
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2001). Episodic future thinking. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 5(12), 533–537. http://www.sciencessociales.uottawa
.ca/ccll/eng/documents/15Episodicfuturethinking_000.pdf
Aviation Safety Network. (1992). Accident description: Airbus A320-111. 
Retrieved February 13, 2013, from http://aviation-safety.net/database
/record.php?id=19920120–0
Baum, L. F., & Denslow, W. W. (1900). The wonderful wizard of Oz. Chicago, IL; 
New York, NY: G. M. Hill Co. http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.rbc/gen.32405
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual design: Defining customer-centered 
systems. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Bobrow, D., Kaplan, R., Kay, M., Norman, D., Thompson, H., & Winograd, 
T. (1977). GUS, a frame-driven dialog system. Artificial Intelligence, 8(2), 
155–173.
Boroditsky, L. (2011). How Languages Construct Time. In S. Dehaene & 
E. Brannon (Eds.), Space, time and number in the brain: Searching for the 
foundations of mathematical thought. Amsterdam, The Netherlands; New 
York, NY: Elsevier.
Brown, T., & Katz, B. (2009). Change by design: How design thinking transforms 
organizations and inspires innovation. New York, NY: Harper Business.
Brynjolfsson, E. (2012). Remarks at the June 2012 National Academy of 
Engineering symposium on Manufacturing, Design, and Innovation. In 

322 References
K. S. Whitefoot & S. Olson (Eds.), Making value: Integrating manufacturing, 
design, and innovation to thrive in the changing global economy. Wash ington, 
DC: The National Academies Press.
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2011). Race against the machine: How the digital 
revolution is accelerating innovation, driving productivity, and irreversibly 
transforming employment and the economy. Lexington, MA: Digital Frontier 
Press (Kindle Edition). http://raceagainstthemachine.com/
Bürdek, B. E. (2005). Design: History, theory, and practice of product design. 
Boston, MA: Birkhäuser–Publishers for Architecture.
Buxton, W. (2007). Sketching user experience: Getting the design right and the right 
design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Buxton, W. (2012). Multi-touch systems that I have known and loved. 
Retrieved February 13, 2013, from http://www.billbuxton.com/multi-
touchOverview.html
Carelman, J. (1984). Catalogue d’objets introuvables: Et cependant indispensables 
aux personnes telles que acrobates, ajusteurs, amateurs d’art. Paris, France: 
Éditions Balland.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior. Cambridge, 
UK; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Chapanis, A., & Lindenbaum, L. E. (1959). A reaction time study of four 
control-display linkages. Human Factors, 1(4), 1–7.
Chipchase, J., & Steinhardt, S. (2013). Hidden in plain sight: How to create 
extraordinary products for tomorrow’s customers. New York, NY: 
HarperCollins.
Christensen, C. M., Cook, S., & Hal, T. (2006). What customers want from 
your products. Harvard Business School Newsletter: Working Knowledge. 
Retrieved February 2, 2013, from http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/5170.html
Coates, D. (2003). Watches tell more than time: Product design, information, and the 
quest for elegance. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Colum, P., & Ward, L. (1953). The Arabian nights: Tales of wonder and magnificence. 
New York, NY: Macmillan. (Also see http://www.bartleby.com/16/905.
html for a similar rendition of ‘Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.)
Cooper, A., Reimann, R., & Cronin, D. (2007). About face 3: The essentials of 
interaction design. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley.
Cooper, W. E. (Ed.). (1963). Cognitive aspects of skilled typewriting. New York, 
NY: Springer-Verlag.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New 
York, NY: Harper & Row.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with 
everyday life. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Degani, A. (2004). Chapter 8: The grounding of the Royal Majesty. In A. Degani 
(Ed.), Taming HAL: Designing interfaces beyond 2001. New York, NY: 
Palgrave Macmillan. http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/m/profile/adegani/Ground
ing%20of%20the%20Royal%20Majesty.pdf 
Dekker, S. (2011). Patient safety:A human factors approach. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.

 
References 323
Dekker, S. (2012). Just culture: Balancing safety and accountability. Farnham, 
Surrey, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Dekker, S. (2013). Second victim: Error, guilt, trauma, and resilience. Boca Raton, 
FL: Taylor & Francis.
Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administra-
tion. (2013). Federal motor vehicle safety standards: Minimum sound re-
quirements for hybrid and electric vehicles. Retrieved from https://www
.federalregister.gov/articles/2013/01/14/2013-00359/federal-motor
-vehicle-safety-standards-minimum-sound-requirements-for-hybrid
-and-electric-vehicles-p-79
Design Council. (2005). The “double-diamond” design process model. Retrieved 
February 9, 2013, from http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/designprocess
Dismukes, R. K. (2012). Prospective memory in workplace and everyday 
situations. Current Directions in Psychological Science 21(4), 215–220.
Duke University Medical Center. (2013). Types of errors. Retrieved February 
13, 2013, from http://patientsafetyed.duhs.duke.edu/module_e/types
_errors.html
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight ≠ foresight: The effect of outcome knowledge 
on judgment under uncertainty. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance, 104, 288–299. http://www.garfield.library.
upenn.edu/classics1992/A1992HX83500001.pdf is a nice reflection on 
this paper by Baruch Fischhoff, in 1992. (The paper was declared a 
“citation classic.”)
Fischhoff, B. (2012). Judgment and decision making. Abingdon, England; New 
York, NY: Earthscan.
Fischhoff, B., & Kadvany, J. D. (2011). Risk: A very short introduction. Oxford, 
England; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Florêncio, D., Herley, C., & Coskun, B. (2007). Do strong web passwords 
accomplish anything? Paper presented at Proceedings of the 2nd 
USENIX workshop on hot topics in security, Boston, MA. http://www.
usenix.org/event/hotsec07/tech/full_papers/florencio/florencio.pdf 
and also http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/74162/hotsec07.pdf
Gaver, W. (1997). Auditory Interfaces. In M. Helander, T. K. Landauer, & P. V. 
Prabhu (Eds.), Handbook of human-computer interaction (2nd, completely rev. 
ed., pp. 1003–1041). Amsterdam, The Netherlands; New York, NY: Elsevier.
Gaver, W. W. (1989). The SonicFinder: An interface that uses auditory icons. 
Human-Computer Interaction, 4(1), 67–94. http://www.informaworld.com
/10.1207/s15327051hci0401_3
Gawande, A. (2009). The checklist manifesto: How to get things right. New York, 
NY: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt and Company.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. 
New York, NY: Harper & Row.

324 References
Gore, A. (2011). Our choice: A plan to solve the climate crisis (ebook edition). 
Emmaus, PA: Push Pop Press, Rodale, and Melcher Media. http://
pushpoppress.com/ourchoice/
Greenberg, S., Carpendale, S., Marquardt, N., & Buxton, B. (2012). Sketching 
user experiences: The workbook. Waltham, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Grossmann, I., Na, J., Varnum, M. E. W., Park, D. C., Kitayama, S., & Nisbett, 
R. E. (2010). Reasoning about social conflicts improves into old age. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. http://www.pnas.org
/content/early/2010/03/23/1001715107.abstract
Gygi, B., & Shafiro, V. (2010). From signal to substance and back: Insights from 
environmental sound research to auditory display design (Vol. 5954). Berlin 
& Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. http://link.springer.com/chapter/10
.1007%2F978–3–642–12439–6_16?LI=true
Hassenzahl, M. (2010). Experience design: Technology for all the right reasons. San 
Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool.
Hollan, J. D., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed cognition: A new 
foundation for human-computer interaction research. ACM Transactions 
on Human-Computer Interaction: Special Issue on Human-Computer 
Interaction in the New Millennium, 7(2), 174–196. http://hci.ucsd.edu/lab
/hci_papers/JH1999–2.pdf
Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. D., & Leveson, N. (Eds.). (2006). Resilience engineering: 
Concepts and precepts. Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 
http://www.loc.gov/catdir/toc/ecip0518/2005024896.html
Holtzblatt, K., Wendell, J., & Wood, S. (2004). Rapid contextual design: A how-to 
guide to key techniques for user-centered design. San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.
Hurst, R. (1976). Pilot error: A professional study of contributory factors. London, 
England: Crosby Lockwood Staples.
Hurst, R., & Hurst, L. R. (1982). Pilot error: The human factors (2nd edition). 
London, England; New York, NY: Granada.
Hutchins, E., J., Hollan, J., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Direct manipulation 
interfaces. In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system 
design; New perspectives on human-computer interaction (pp. 339–352). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hyman, I. E., Boss, S. M., Wise, B. M., McKenzie, K. E., & Caggiano, J. M. 
(2010). Did you see the unicycling clown? Inattentional blindness while 
walking and talking on a cell phone. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(5), 
597–607. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acp.1638
IDEO. (2013). Human-centered design toolkit. IDEO website. Retrieved 
February 9, 2013, from http://www.ideo.com/work/human-centered
-design-toolkit/
Inspector General United States Department of Defense. (2013). Assessment 
of the USAF aircraft accident investigation board (AIB) report on the F-22A 
mishap of November 16, 2010. Alexandria, VA: The Department of Defense 
Office of the Deputy Inspector General for Policy and Oversight. http://
www.dodig.mil/pubs/documents/DODIG-2013–041.pdf

 
References 325
Jacko, J. A. (2012). The human-computer interaction handbook: Fundamentals, 
evolving technologies, and emerging applications (3rd edition.). Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press.
Jones, J. C. (1984). Essays in design. Chichester, England; New York, NY: Wiley.
Jones, J. C. (1992). Design methods (2nd edition). New York, NY: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux.
Katz, B. (2014). Ecosystem of innovation: The history of Silicon Valley design. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kay, N. (2013). Rerun the tape of history and QWERTY always wins. Research 
Policy.
Kempton, W. (1986). Two theories of home heat control. Cognitive Science, 10, 
75–90.
Kumar, V. (2013). 101 design methods: A structured approach for driving innovation 
in your organization. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. http://www.101designmethods
.com/
Lee, J. D., & Kirlik, A. (2013). The Oxford handbook of cognitive engineering. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Leveson, N. (2012). Engineering a safer world. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/engineering-safer-world
Leveson, N. G. (1995). Safeware: System safety and computers. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Levitt, T. (1983). The marketing imagination. New York, NY; London, England: 
Free Press; Collier Macmillan.
Lewis, K., & Herndon, B. (2011). Transactive memory systems: Current issues 
and future research directions. Organization Science, 22(5), 1254–1265.
Lord, A. B. (1960). The singer of tales. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Lützhöft, M. H., & Dekker, S. W. A. (2002). On your watch: Automation on the 
bridge. Journal of Navigation, 55(1), 83–96.
Mashey, J. R. (1976). Using a command language as a high-level programming 
language. Paper presented at Proceedings of the 2nd international conference 
on Software engineering, San Francisco, California, USA.
Mehta, N. (1982). A flexible machine interface. M.S. Thesis, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, University of Toronto.
Meisler, S. (1986, December 31). Short-lived coin is a dealer’s delight. Los 
Angeles Times, 1–7.
Moggridge, B. (2007). Designing interactions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. http://
www.designinginteractions.com—Chapter 10 describes the methods of 
interaction design: http://www.designinginteractions.com/chapters/10
Moggridge, B. (2010). Designing media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moon, Y. (2010). Different: Escaping the competitive herd. New York, NY: Crown 
Publishers.
NASA, A. S. R. S. (2013). NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System. Retrieved 
February 19, 2013, from http://asrs.arc.nasa.gov

326 References
National Institute of Health. (2013). PubMed Health: Carpal tunnel syndrome. 
From http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0001469/
National Research Council Steering Committee on the Usability Security 
and Privacy of Computer Systems. (2010). Toward better usability, security, 
and privacy of information technology: Report of a workshop. The National 
Academies Press. http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12998
National Transportation Safety Board. (1982). Aircraft accident report: Air Flor-
ida, Inc., Boeing 737-222, N62AF, collision with 14th Street Bridge near Wash-
ington National Airport (Executive Summary). NTSB Report No. AAR-82-08. 
http://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/summary/AAR8208.html
National Transportation Safety Board. (1997). Marine accident report grounding 
of the Panamanian passenger ship ROYAL MAJESTY on Rose and Crown Shoal 
near Nantucket, Massachusetts June 10, 1995 (NTSB Report No. MAR-97-01, 
adopted on 4/2/1997): National Transportation Safety Board. Washington, 
DC. http://www.ntsb.gov/doclib/reports/1997/mar9701.pdf
National Transportation Safety Board. (2013). NTSB Press Release: NTSB 
identifies origin of JAL Boeing 787 battery fire; design, certification and 
manufacturing processes come under scrutiny. Retrieved February 16, 
2013, from http://www.ntsb.gov/news/2013/130207.html
Nickerson, R. S., & Adams, M. J. (1979). Long-term memory for a common 
object. Cognitive Psychology, 11(3), 287–307. http://www.sciencedirect
.com/science/article/pii/0010028579900136
Nielsen, J. (2013). Why you only need to test with 5 users. Nielsen Norman 
group website. Retrieved February 9, 2013, from http://www.nngroup
.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/
Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun, Ltd. (Ed.). (1988). Poka-yoke: Improving product quality 
by preventing defects. Cambridge, MA: Productivity Press.
Norman, D. A. (1969, 1976). Memory and attention: An introduction to human 
information processing (1st, 2nd editions). New York, NY: Wiley.
Norman, D. A. (1973). Memory, knowledge, and the answering of questions. 
In R. Solso (Ed.), Contemporary issues in cognitive psychology: The Loyola 
symposium. Washington, DC: Winston.
Norman, D. A. (1981). Categorization of action slips. Psychological Review, 
88(1), 1–15.
Norman, D. A. (1982). Learning and memory. New York, NY: Freeman.
Norman, D. A. (1983). Design rules based on analyses of human error. 
Communications of the ACM, 26(4), 254–258.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. New York, NY: Basic 
Books. (Reissued in 1990 [Garden City, NY: Doubleday] and in 2002 [New 
York, NY: Basic Books] as The design of everyday things.)
Norman, D. A. (1992). Coffee cups in the cockpit. In Turn signals are the 
facial expressions of automobiles (pp. 154–174). Cambridge, MA: Perseus 
Publishing. http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/chapter_16_coffee_c.html
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart. Cambridge, MA: Perseus 
Publishing.

 
References 327
Norman, D. A. (1994). Defending human attributes in the age of the machine. New 
York, NY: Voyager. http://vimeo.com/18687931
Norman, D. A. (2002). Emotion and design: Attractive things work better. 
Interactions Magazine, 9(4), 36–42. http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/Emotion
-and-design.html
Norman, D. A. (2004). Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) everyday things. 
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Norman, D. A. (2007). The design of future things. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Norman, D. A. (2009). When security gets in the way. Interactions, 16(6), 60–63. 
http://jnd.org/dn.mss/when_security_gets_in_the_way.html
Norman, D. A. (2010). Living with complexity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Norman, D. A. (2011a). The rise of the small. Essays in honor of the 100th anniversary 
of Steelcase. From http://100.steelcase.com/mind/don-norman/
Norman, D. A. (2011b). Video: Conceptual models. Retrieved July 19, 2012, 
from http://www.interaction-design.org/tv/conceptual_models.html
Norman, D. A., & Bobrow, D. G. (1979). Descriptions: An intermediate stage in 
memory retrieval. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 107–123.
Norman, D. A., & Draper, S. W. (1986). User centered system design: New perspectives 
on human-computer interaction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Norman, D. A., & Fisher, D. (1984). Why alphabetic keyboards are not easy to 
use: Keyboard layout doesn’t much matter. Human Factors, 24, 509–519.
Norman, D. A., & Ortony, A. (2006). Designers and users: Two perspectives on 
emotion and design. In S. Bagnara & G. Crampton-Smith (Eds.), Theories 
and practice in interaction design (pp. 91–103). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Norman, D. A., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1963). Studies of typing from the 
LNR Research Group. In W. E. Cooper (Ed.), Cognitive aspects of skilled 
typewriting. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Norman, D. A., & Verganti, R. (in press, 2014). Incremental and radical 
innovation: Design research versus technology and meaning change. 
Design Issues. http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/incremental_and_radi.html
Núñez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind them: Convergent 
evidence from Aymara language and gesture in the crosslinguistic 
comparison of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401–450.
Ortony, A., Norman, D. A., & Revelle, W. (2005). The role of affect and proto-
affect in effective functioning. In J.-M. Fellous & M. A. Arbib (Eds.), Who 
needs emotions? The brain meets the robot (pp. 173–202). New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Oudiette, D., Antony, J. W., Creery, J. D., & Paller, K. A. (2013). The role of 
memory reactivation during wakefulness and sleep in determining 
which memories endure. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(15), 6672.
Perrow, C. (1999). Normal accidents: Living with high-risk technologies. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Portigal, S., & Norvaisas, J. (2011). Elevator pitch. Interactions, 18(4, July), 14–16. 
http://interactions.acm.org/archive/view/july-august-2011/elevator-pitch1

328 References
Rasmussen, J. (1983). Skills, rules, and knowledge: Signals, signs, and symbols, 
and other distinctions in human performance models. IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC-13, 257–266.
Rasmussen, J., Duncan, K., & Leplat, J. (1987). New technology and human error. 
Chichester, England; New York, NY: Wiley.
Rasmussen, J., Goodstein, L. P., Andersen, H. B., & Olsen, S. E. (1988). Tasks, 
errors, and mental models: A festschrift to celebrate the 60th birthday of Professor 
Jens Rasmussen. London, England; New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Rasmussen, J., Pejtersen, A. M., & Goodstein, L. P. (1994). Cognitive systems 
engineering. New York, NY: Wiley.
Reason, J. T. (1979). Actions not as planned. In G. Underwood & R. Stevens 
(Eds.), Aspects of consciousness. London: Academic Press.
Reason, J. (1990). The contribution of latent human failures to the breakdown 
of complex systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological Sciences 327(1241), 475–484.
Reason, J. T. (1990). Human error. Cambridge, England; New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.
Reason, J. T. (1997). Managing the risks of organizational accidents. Aldershot, 
England; Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.
Reason, J. T. (2008). The human contribution: Unsafe acts, accidents and heroic 
recoveries. Farnham, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Roitsch, P. A., Babcock, G. L., & Edmunds, W. W. (undated). Human factors 
report on the Tenerife accident. Washington, DC: Air Line Pilots Association. 
http://www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/35.pdf
Romero, S. (2013, January 27). Frenzied scene as toll tops 200 in Brazil blaze. New 
York Times, from http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/28/world/americas
/brazil-nightclub-fire.html?_r=0 Also see: http://thelede.blogs.nytimes
.com/2013/01/27/fire-at-a-nightclub-in-southern-brazil/?ref=americas
Ross, N., & Tweedie, N. (2012, April 28). Air France Flight 447: “Damn it, 
we’re going to crash.” The Telegraph, from http://www.telegraph.co.uk
/technology/9231855/Air-France-Flight-447-Damn-it-were-going-to
-crash.html
Rubin, D. C., & Kontis, T. C. (1983). A schema for common cents. Memory & 
Cognition, 11(4), 335–341. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03202446
Rubin, D. C., & Wallace, W. T. (1989). Rhyme and reason: Analyses of dual 
retrieval cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 15(4), 698–709.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Norman, D. A. (1982). Simulating a skilled typist: A study 
of skilled cognitive-motor performance. Cognitive Science, 6, 1–36.
Saffer, D. (2009). Designing gestural interfaces. Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly.
Schacter, D. L. (2001). The seven sins of memory: How the mind forgets and 
remembers. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding: 
An inquiry into human knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum 
Associates; distributed by the Halsted Press Division of John Wiley and 
Sons.

 
References 329
Schieber, F. (2003). Human factors and aging: Identifying and compensating 
for age-related deficits in sensory and cognitive function. In N. Charness 
& K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Impact of technology on successful aging (pp. 42–84). 
New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company. http://sunburst.usd
.edu/~schieber/psyc423/pdf/human-factors.pdf
Schneier, B. (2000). Secrets and lies: Digital security in a networked world. New 
York, NY: Wiley.
Schwartz, B. (2005). The paradox of choice: Why more is less. New York, NY: 
HarperCollins.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1992). Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. 
New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An 
introduction. American Psychologist, 55(1), 5–14.
Sharp, H., Rogers, Y., & Preece, J. (2007). Interaction design: Beyond human-
computer interaction (2nd edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Shingo, S. (1986). Zero quality control: Source inspection and the poka-yoke system. 
Stamford, CT: Productivity Press.
Smith, P. (2007). Ask the pilot: A look back at the catastrophic chain of events 
that caused history’s deadliest plane crash 30 years ago. Retrieved from 
http://www.salon.com/2007/04/06/askthepilot227/ on February 7, 2013.
Spanish Ministry of Transport and Communications. (1978). Report of a collision 
between PAA B-747 and KLM B-747 at Tenerife, March 27, 1977. Translation 
published in Aviation Week and Space Technology, November 20 and 27, 1987.
Spink, A., Cole, C., & Waller, M. (2008). Multitasking behavior. Annual Review 
of Information Science and Technology, 42(1), 93–118.
Strayer, D. L., & Drews, F. A. (2007). Cell-phone–induced driver distraction. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16(3), 128–131.
Strayer, D. L., Drews, F. A., & Crouch, D. J. (2006). A Comparison of the cell 
phone driver and the drunk driver. Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 48(2), 381–391.
Toyota Motor Europe Corporate Site. (2013). Toyota production system. 
Retrieved February 19, 2013, from http://www.toyota.eu/about/Pages
/toyota_production_system.aspx
Verganti, R. (2009). Design-driven innovation: Changing the rules of competition 
by radically innovating what things mean. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
Press. http://www.designdriveninnovation.com/
Verganti, R. (2010). User-centered innovation is not sustainable. Harvard 
Business Review Blogs (March 19, 2010). http://blogs.hbr.org/cs/2010/03
/user-centered_innovation_is_no.html
Vermeulen, J., Luyten, K., Hoven, E. V. D., & Coninx, K. (2013). Crossing the 
bridge over Norman’s gulf of execution: Revealing feedforward’s true 
identity. Paper presented at CHI 2013, Paris, France.
Wegner, D. M. (1987). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of 
the group mind. In B. Mullen & G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group 
behavior (pp. 185–208). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. http://www.wjh.
harvard.edu/~wegner/pdfs/Wegner Transactive Memory.pdf

330 References
Wegner, T. G., & Wegner, D. M. (1995). Transactive memory. In A. S. R. 
Manstead & M. Hewstone (Eds.), The Blackwell encyclopedia of social 
psychology (pp. 654–656). Oxford, England; Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Whitehead, A. N. (1911). An introduction to mathematics. New York, NY: Henry 
Holt and Company
Wiki of Science (2013). Error (human error). Retrieved from http://wikiof
science.wikidot.com/quasiscience:error on February 6, 2013.
Wikipedia contributors. (2013a). Air Inter Flight 148. Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved February 13, 2103, from http://en.wikipedia.org
/w/index.php?title=Air_Inter_Flight_148&oldid=534971641
Wikipedia contributors. (2013b). Decimal time. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved February 13, 2013, from http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php
?title=Decimal_time&oldid=501199184
Wikipedia contributors. (2013c). Stigler’s law of eponymy. Wikipedia, The 
Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved February 2, 2013, from http://en.wikipedia
.org/w/index.php?title=Stigler%27s_law_of_eponymy&oldid=531524843
Wikipedia contributors. (2013d). Telephonoscope. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved February 8, 2013, from http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php
?title=Telephonoscope&oldid=535002147
Winograd, E., & Soloway, R. M. (1986). On forgetting the locations of things 
stored in special places. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115(4), 
366–372.
Woods, D. D., Dekker, S., Cook, R., Johannesen, L., & Sarter, N. (2010). Behind 
human error (2nd edition). Farnham, Surry, UK; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Yasuoka, K., & Yasuoka, M. (2013). QWERTY people archive. Retrieved February 
8, 2013, from http://kanji.zinbun.kyoto-u.ac.jp/db-machine/~yasuoka
/QWERTY/
Zhai, S., & Kristensson, P. O. (2012). The word-gesture keyboard: Reimagining 
keyboard interaction. Communications of the ACM, 55(9), 91–101. http://
www.shuminzhai.com/shapewriter-pubs.htm

 
 
331
INDEX
Abelson, Bob, 129
A/B testing, 224–225
Accidents
“Five Whys,” 165–169
investigation of, 163–169, 197–198
root cause analysis of, 164
social and institutional pressures 
and, 186–191
when human error really is to 
blame, 210–211
See also Error; Mistakes; Slips
Acoustical memory, 94
Action
Gulfs of Execution and 
Evaluation and, 38–40
opportunistic, 43
reversing, 199, 203, 205
stages of, 40–44, 55–56, 71–73, 
172–173
subconscious nature of many, 42
See also Psychology of everyday 
actions
Action slips, 171, 173, 174, 194
Activity
complete immersion into, 55–56
task vs., 232–234
Activity-centered controls, 
140–141
Activity-centered design, 231–234
Adams, Marilyn, 74
Affordances, xiv–xv, 10–13, 19–20, 
60, 72, 145, 298
applying to everyday objects, 
132–141
minimizing chance of 
inappropriate actions using, 
67
misuse of term, 13–14
perceived, 13, 18, 19, 145
signifiers vs., xiv–xv, 14, 18, 19
Agile process of product 
development, 234
Airbus accident, 178–179
Air Florida crash, 188–189
Airplane
attitude indicator design, 
121–122
failure of automation in, 214
landing gear switch design, 135
mode-error slips and control 
design, 178–179
See also Aviation

332 Index
Baby locks, 144
Battery design, 125–127
Baum, L. Frank, 227
Beeps, 156
Be-goals, 233
Behavior
constraints forcing desired, 
141–145
data-driven, 43
event-driven, 42, 43
goal-driven, 42–43, 44
knowledge-based, 179, 180
knowledge in the head and in 
the world and, 75–85
rule-based, 179, 180
skill-based, 179, 180, 206–207
technology accommodating, 
68–71
Behavioral level of processing, 
51–53
design and, 54, 55
emotional responses and, 56
relation to visceral and reflective 
stages, 54–55
stages of action and, 55–56
Bell, Alexander Graham, 270
Benz, Karl, 279
Benz & Cie, 279
Bezos, Jeff, 264
Big data, 224–225
Biometric devices, 128
Blame, for error, 162, 163
falsely blaming self, 61, 65–71, 
167
misplaced, 61–62
Boats, control of, 21–22
Bookmarks, 16
Books, see e-books
Brainstorming, 226
British Design Council, 220
British Psychological Society, 150
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 286–287
Budgets, product development, 
237, 240
Business strategy, lock-ins as, 
143–144
Airplane accidents, 164–166, 172, 
178–179, 186–187, 188–189, 
314
Air-traffic control instructions, 
pilots remembering, 105–107
Alarm clocks, mode-error slips 
and, 178
Alert, sound signifier as, 160
“’Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,” 
86
Altair 8800 computer, 274
Amazon.com, 264
Andon, 192
Annoyance of sounds, 156, 160
Anti-lock brakes, rule-based 
mistake in using, 182
Apple, 121, 233, 250, 270, 272, 289
Apple QuickTake camera, 272
Arithmetic, mental, 103–104
Automation, 185, 213–214, 248–316
Automobiles
activity-centered design of, 
231–232
application of constraints to, 202
auditory and haptic modalities 
for warning systems, 95
door handles, 133–134
failure of first American, 274, 
279–280
incremental innovation in, 
279–280
interlocks and, 142
limited life span of, 292
seat adjustment control, 22
standardization and, 248
starting, 141–142
technology and changes in, 
267–268
See also Driving
Aviation
deliberate violation example, 211
interruptions and errors in, 200
NASA’s safety reporting system, 
193–194
use of checklists in, 189–190, 191
See also Airplane

 
Index 333
subconscious, 44–49, 51–52, 173, 
206–207
technology and enhanced 
human, 285–288
visceral level, 50–51, 53–55
Coins
confusion created by new design 
of, 79–82
types of knowledge and use of, 
74–75, 77, 79–80
Communication
conceptual models and, 31–32
design and, 8–9, 73
technological change and, 283
Companies, conservatism of large, 
269
Competition-driven design, 
259–264
Complexity, 4–8
complicated vs., 247
using conceptual model to tame, 
247–248
Conceptual models, 10, 25–37, 40, 
72, 94, 96, 98, 121, 204, 298
communication and, 31–32
as story, 57–59
and Gulfs of Evaluation and 
Execution, 39, 40
mental models, 26, 31
providing meaning via, 99–100
to tame complexity, 247–248
for thermostat, 57–59, 68–69
Confirmation messages, 203–205
Conscious cognition, 48, 49, 51–52, 
53, 100–101
knowledge-based behavior and, 
184
mistakes and, 173
subconscious vs., 40, 42, 44–56, 
67, 310
Constraints, 10, 73
applied to everyday objects, 
132–141
to bridge Gulf of Execution, 40
cultural (see Cultural constraints)
on design process, 240–247
Cabinet doors, lack of signifiers 
on, 134
Calendar program, using variety of 
formats, 70–71
Cameras
digital, 272, 274
merger with cell phones, 265
Cane, design of, 245
Capture slips, 174, 208
Carelman, Jacques, 2
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 278
Carver, Charles, 233
Catalogue d’objets introuvables 
(Carelman), 2
Causal elements, reflective level of 
processing and, 53
Causes of events
causal relations, 59–65
need to form explanations and, 
57–59
Cell phones, 34, 200, 265, 280. See 
also Telephone
Celsius scale, conversion between 
Fahrenheit scale and, 
101–102
Change, technology as cause of, 
264–268, 282, 284–285
Checklists, 189–191
Chess-playing machine, 286–287
Child safety caps, 144
Chord keyboards, 279
Cisco, 273
Clocks, 249, 250
Clothing industry, yearly changes 
in fashion, 292
“Coffeepot for Masochists,” 2
Cognition and emotion, 49–55
conscious, 48, 49, 51–52, 53, 
100–101
distributed, 287–288
integration of, 47, 48–55
behavioral level, 50, 51–55
design and levels of, 53–55
reflective level, 50, 53–55
stages of action and levels of 
processing, 55–56

334 Index
destination-control elevators 
and change in, 146–149
faucet design and, 151–152
mapping and, 151–152
people’s responses to changes 
in, 149–150
perceived affordance and, 145
Cultural norms
confusion and lack of 
knowledge of, 134–135
conventions and standards, 
130–132
Culture
impact of technology on, 285
mappings and, 22–23, 118–122
pace of change of, 282
Customers
observing would-be, 222–223, 
225–226
quality and focus on, 264
See also Purchasers; Users
Cybermind, 112
Cyborgs, 284
Daily Mail (newspaper), 88
Daimler, 279
Data-driven behavior, 43
Data networks, 281–282
Dead man’s switch, 142–143
Decision gates, 234, 235
Declarative knowledge, 78
Declarative memory, 47, 97
Deliberate violations, 211
accidents and, 169–170
Dependence on technology, 
285–287
Description, discrimination among 
choices and, 80–82
Description-similarity slips, 174, 
175
Design
activity-centered, 231–234
areas of specialty in, 4–5, 9,110, 
302, 308
behavioral level and, 54, 55
challenge of, 34–36, 239–247
desired behavior and, 76, 
141–145
knowledge in the world and, 
123, 124–125
logical, 124–125, 130
memory and, 82–85
minimizing chance of 
inappropriate actions using, 
67, 202–203
physical (see Physical 
constraints)
semantic, 124–125, 129–130
signifiers and, 132–135
Consumer economy, 291–293
Controls
activity-centered, 140–141
device-centered, 140
incorporating safety or security 
in, 256
mapping and design of, 21
segregating, 203
See also Switches
Conventions, cultural. See Cultural 
conventions
Cooperative problem-solving, 185
Cost
as design constraint, 6, 219, 230, 
240, 241, 242, 245, 260, 294
feedback design and, 23–25, 68
Countersteering, 102–103
Creativity, 49, 64
Creeping featurism, 258, 261–264
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 55–56
Cultural constraints, 124–125, 
128–129
on assembly of mechanical 
device, 85
behavior and, 76
cultural conventions and, 
130–132, 146
standardization as, 248
Cultural conventions
behavior and, 76
as cultural constraints, 130–132, 
146
Constraints (Continued)

 
Index 335
universal (inclusive), 243–247
visceral responses and, 51
in the years 1988–2038, 282–288
See also Human-centered design 
(HCD)
Design error, operator error vs., 6–8
Designers
advice for, 64–65
bridging Gulfs of Evaluation 
and Execution, 40
clients/customers, 240–241
conceptual model and, 31–32
engineers as, 6–8, 10
The Design of Future Things 
(Norman), 185
Design redundancy, 210
Design research
market research vs., 224–226
observation, 222–224
separating from product team, 
238–239
Design team, 35
multidisciplinary, 34–36, 
238–239, 242–243
needs of other groups in product 
process, 241–242
Design thinking, 219, 293–298
double-diamond diverge-
converge model of design, 
219, 220–221
See also Human-centered design 
(HCD)
Destination-control elevators, 
146–149
Detection of error, 194–198
Development cycle, 260, 268–279
Device-centered controls, 140
Different (Moon), 262–263
Digital cameras, 272, 274
Digital picture frame, 272
Digital time, 252–254
Digital watch, 27–28, 33
Discoverability, 72, 298
affordances, 10–13, 19–20
conceptual models, 25–31
constraints, 10
checklist, 191
choice of metaphor and, 120–122
coins, of, 79–82
communication and, 8–9, 73
competition-driven, 259–264
constraints as tools for, 85
correct requirements/
specifications and, 229–230, 
234–235
double-diamond diverge-
converge model, 219, 220–221
as equalizing tool, 297
error and (see Error)
experience, 4–5, 9, 302, 307
faucet, 115–116, 150–155
flexibility in, 246–247
fundamental principles of, 
71–73, 298. See also individual 
principles
implications of short-term 
memory for, 94–95
inclusive design, 243–247
industrial, 4–5, 9, 302, 306
interaction, 4–5, 9, 306, 309
interplay of technology and 
psychology in, 6–8
knowledge in the world and the 
head and, 76–77
legacy problem, 127, 266, 274
management of process, 34–35
memory-lapse mistakes and, 
185–186
moral obligations of, 291–293
multidisciplinary approach to, 
34–36, 238–239, 242–243
problem identification and, 
217–220
providing meaningful structure 
in, 100
reflection and, 53–54
rule-based mistakes and, 
182–183, 184
security and, 90–91, 255–257
success of, 293–294
superfluous features in, 291–293
theory vs. practice in, 236–239

336 Index
Early adopters, 271
Edison, Thomas, 270
Electrical standards, 249
e-Books (Electronic books), 16, 143, 
286, 288–290, 319
Electronic games, 282
Electronic reminders, 109
Elevators, destination-control, 
146–149
Emotion, xiii, xv, 5, 47–56, 293–295, 
310
behavioral level, 50–56
cognition and, 47–50, 53–55
positive and negative, 10, 38, 49, 
63–64
reflective level, 50, 53–56
visceral level, 50–51, 53–56
Emotional Design (Norman), 49, 54
Engineers
as designers, 6–8, 10
as users of design team output, 
241–242
Environment, attributing failure/
error to, 61–62, 63, 168
Environmental cue, as reminder, 109
Epic poems, memory for, 82–85
Error, 66–68, 162–216
automation and, 213–214
checklist to reduce, 189–191
classification as slips or 
mistakes, 170
defined, 170–171
deliberate violations and, 
169–170
design and, 162–163, 198–211, 
215–216
design to prevent or lessen cost 
of, 67–68, 198–210, 202–205
detecting, 194–198
reasons for, 163–169
reporting, 191–194
resilience engineering and, 
211–213
social and institutional pressures 
and, 186–191
See also Mistakes; Slips
design and, 3–4
feedback, 23–25
gesture-controlled devices and, 
115–116
mappings, 20–23
signifiers, 13–20
Discrimination, rules for, 80–82
Displays, 68
description-similarity slips and, 
175
mapping and design, 21
metaphor and interaction with, 
120–122
smart, 121, 265–266
touch-sensitive, 21, 140, 268–269
Distributed cognition, 287–288
Do-goals, 233
Doors
affordances and, 3,13–16, 18, 69, 
132–135, 145
designing for security, 255
handles/hardware, 18, 133–134, 
145
panic bars, 60, 133
poor design of, 1–3
signifiers and, 14–16, 18, 132–135
sliding, 16
Double-diamond diverge-converge 
model of design, 219, 220–221
Drill, goal of buying, 43–44
Driver’s safety device, 142–143
Driving
cell phone use while, 200
conventions of, 131–132
left-side vs. right-side, 122
as rule-based behavior, 181
stages of action in, 40–41
sterile periods during, 200–201
while drunk, 211
See also Automobiles
du Maurier, George, 270–271
Durable goods, 291
Duryea, 274, 280
Dvorak, August, 278
Dvorak keyboard, 278
Discoverability (Continued)

 
Index 337
characteristics of effective, 23–24
communicating progress, 60
faucet design and, 153
prioritizing, 25
reducing error and, 216
Feedforward, 71–72, 216
Filing cabinet, Gulfs of Evaluation 
and Execution and, 37–39
Financial institutions, mistake 
outcomes, 198
Financial transactions, sensibility 
checks and, 206
Fingerworks, 269–270
Fire exit lockout, 144
Fire extinguisher pins, 144
Fischhoff, Baruch, 197
“Five Whys” analysis, 165–169, 219
Flexibility, designing to 
accommodate, 246–247
Flow state, 55–56
Forcing functions, 141–142, 143
deliberate disabling of, 145
interlocks, 142–143
lock-ins, 143–144
lockouts, 144–145
memory-lapse slips and, 
176–177
reducing error and, 216
Ford, Henry, 292
Foresight ≠ hindsight, 197, 315
Frames, 129
Freud, Sigmund, 173
F-22 airplane accidents, 164–166
Games, 256
Gated product development 
methods, 234, 235
General Electric, 30
Generalizations, forming, 57
Gestalt psychology, 12, 22
Gestural keyboards, 278
Gesture-controlled faucets, soap 
dispensers and hand dryers, 
115–116
Gibson, J. J., 12
Gibsonian psychology, 12
Error messages, 203–205
Ethnography, 222–224
Evaluation, 38–40, 216
action cycle and stages of, 40–44
Event-driven behavior, 42, 43
Everyday practice, scientific theory 
vs., 104–105
Execution, 38–40, 216
action cycle and stages of, 40–44
feedforward information and, 
71–72
Expectations
behavioral cognition and, 52
emotions and, 52–53
Experience design, 4–5, 9, 302, 307
Experts
design and, 6
Jidoka and, 192
slips and, 7, 173, 199
unconscious action and, 47, 
100–101, 173, 180, 216
Eyewitness testimony, 97
Fahrenheit scale, conversion 
between Celsius scale and, 
101–102
Failure
attributing reason for, 61–62
“fail frequently, fail fast,” 229
learned helplessness and, 62–63
learning from, 64, 229
positive psychology and, 63–65
self-blame and, 65–71, 113, 
162–169
Farber, Sam, 244–245
Faucet design, 115–116, 150–155
Featuritis, xvii, 258, 261–265
Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), 
193–194, 200
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), 250, 251
Feedback, 10, 23–25, 298
as aid in design, 71–72
behavioral states and, 52
to bridge Gulf of Evaluation, 
39, 40

338 Index
activity-centered design vs., 
231–234
design thinking and, 219
idea generation (ideation) in, 
222, 226–227
incremental innovation and, 281
iteration, 229–230, 234–236
iterative design vs. linear stages, 
234–236
observation/design research 
and, 222–226
in practice, 236–239
prototyping in, 222, 227–228
role of, 9–10
spiral method, 222. See also 
Iteration
testing in, 222, 228–229
Human error, See Error
Human-machine interaction, 6, 
185, 215
Hutchins, Edwin, 287
HyperCard, 289
Idea generation (ideation), 222, 
226–227
Identity theft, 90
IDEO, 64, 229, 303, 307
“fail frequently, fail fast,” 229
“if only” statements, accidents and, 
209
Iliad (Homer), 84
Implanted devices, 284
Implicit knowledge, 236
Inclusive design, 243–247
Incremental innovation, 279–281
Individual
as focus of design, 231, 233
technology and empowerment 
of, 295–297
Industrial design, 4–5, 9
Industrial Design Society of 
America (IDSA), 5
Industrial settings, natural 
mapping and, 117
Information pickup, 12
Gimli Glider Air Canada 767 
accident, 172, 314
Global Positioning System (GPS), 
214, 281
Goal
be-goal, do-goal, and motor-
goal, 233
comparing outcome with, 41
conscious vs. unconscious, 42
stages of execution, 41, 42–43
Goal-driven behavior, 42–43, 44
Goffman, Erving, 129
Google, 90
Gore, Al, 290
GPS. See Global Positioning System 
(GPS)
Graphical user interface, 100
Greetings, cultural conventions 
regarding, 130–131
Gulf of Evaluation, 38–40, 216
Gulf of Execution, 38–40, 216
Hand dryers, gesture-controlled, 
115–116
Handed-up technology, 297
Haptics, 95
Hassenzahl, Marc, 233
HCD. See Human-centered design 
(HCD)
Hersman, Deborah, 210
High-definition television (HDTV), 
250–252, 272
Highway signs, misinterpreting, 
196–197
Hill climbing, 281
Hindsight,
explanations given in, 183, 
197–198, 315
foresight ≠ to, 197, 315
Hollnagel, Erik, 212
Homer’s Odyssey and Iliad, 84
Household appliances, 240–241, 
292
Human-centered design (HCD), 
8–10, 137, 219–220, 221–236

 
Index 339
Knowledge-based behavior, 179, 
180
Knowledge-based mistakes, 
171–172, 184–185
Knowledge in the head, 74–75, 
105–109, 123
behavior and, 75–77, 79–85
memory as, 86–91
in multiple heads, multiple 
devices, 111–113
prospective memory and, 
107–109
remembering air-traffic control 
instructions and, 105–107
tradeoff with knowledge in the 
world, 109–111
Knowledge in the world, 74–75, 
77–79, 123
behavior and, 75–79
Lego motorcycle construction 
and, 123–125
operating technology and, 216
tradeoff with knowledge in the 
head, 109–111
See also Constraints
Kuhn Rikon, 244
Law, cultural convention codified 
into, 131
“Law of Product Development,” 
xvii, 237–239, 261
Learned helplessness, 62–63
Learned skills, 51–53
Learning
changes in convention and new, 
149–150
conscious thinking and, 45–46, 
100–101
failure and, 64
knowledge in the environment 
and, 78
rote, 98
Legacy problem, 127, 266, 274
Lego motorcycle, 123–125, 129, 130, 
262, 263
Innovation, xvii, 43, 374, 279–282, 
397, 317
radical and incremental, 
279–282, 319
Inside-out display, 121–122
InstaLoad battery contacts 
(Microsoft), 126, 127, 313
Institutional pressure, accidents 
and, 186–191
Instruction manuals, see manuals
Interaction, principles of, xii–319
Interlocks, 142–143
Interpret, in action cycle, 41
Interruptions, as source of error, 
163, 176, 199–200
iPod, 233
Iteration in design, 222, 229–230, 
234–236. See also Repetitive 
cycles
Jidoka, 192
Joysticks, 21
Junghans Mega 1000 digital watch, 
27–28
KAIST, wall at, 18
Kasparov, Gary, 287
Kelly, David, 229
Key
automobile, 141–142
physical constraints and design 
of, 127–128
Keyboard, evolution of, 264–267, 
274–279, 318–319. See also 
QWERTY
Key logger, 91
Kiss nightclub fire, 181
Kitchen organization, 247
KLM Boeing 747 crash, 186–187
Knobs, 13, 177
Knowledge
arbitrary, 98–100
declarative, 78
procedural, 78–79
retrieval of, 97–98

340 Index
Market research, design research 
vs., 224–226
McAfee, Andrew, 287
Meaning, semantic constraints and, 
129–130
Meaningful things, memory for, 
98–100
Medicine
 checklists in, 190–191
electronic records, 95
errors in, 198, 200, 206
interruptions in, 200
safety reporting system, 194
Memory
acoustical, 94
approximate methods and, 
100–105
for arbitrary things, 98–100
constraints and, 82–85
declarative, 47, 97
distortions/falsification in, 96
knowledge in the head and, 
86–91, 105–109
long-term, 47, 95–98
for meaningful things, 98–100
in multiple heads, multiple 
devices, 111–113
procedural, 47, 96–97
prospective, 107–109
reflective, 53–54
retrieval, 45–47
short-term (working), 92–95
structure of, 91–105
transactive, 111–112
use of mnemonics, 88, 93–94, 99
See also Knowledge in the head
Memory-lapse mistakes, 171, 172, 
185–186, 195, 199–200
Memory-lapse slips, 171, 173, 
176–177, 195, 199–200
Mental arithmetic, 103–104
Mental models, 26, 31. Conceptual 
models
Mercedes-Benz, 22, 279
Metaphor, design and choice of, 
120–122
Leveson, Nancy, 212
Levitt, Theodore, 43–44
Life cycle, product, 294
Light, stages of turning on, 40, 42
Light controls, activity-centered, 
140–141
Light, as feedback, 23–24
Light switches, mapping and, 
20–21, 135–140
Linear stages of design, 234–236
Living with Complexity (Norman), 
14, 247
Lizard brain, 50–51
Location-based reminders, 109
Lock-ins, 143–144
Lockouts, 144–145
Locks, physical constraints and 
design of, 127–128
Logical constraints, 124–125, 130
Long-term memory (LTM), 47, 95–98
Lord, Albert Bates, 83–84
Machine-people interaction, 68, 
185, 215
Machine-readable codes, 207
Machines, characteristics of, 5–6
Management, role in design, 34–35
Management review, 234, 235
Manuals, 3–4, 26, 27, 29, 180, 185, 
294
system image and, 31
Manufacturing, product success 
and, 294
Mapping, 10, 20–23, 72, 298
bridging Gulf of Execution and, 
40
culture and, 118–122
faucet design and, 151, 154
levels of, 115
minimizing chance of 
inappropriate actions using, 67
natural (see Natural mapping)
Market analytics, 224–225
Marketing
effect on design, 277–278
product success and, 294

 
Index 341
Multitouch displays, 269, 270
Music, technological change and, 283
Names
identifying people by, 89–90
memory for, 98
Narrative, conceptual models as 
form of, 57–59
National Academy of Engineering, 
286
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), 
193–194
National Highway and Traffic 
Safety Administration 
(NHTSA), 157, 159–160
National Institute of Health (NIH), 
278
National Transportation Safety 
Board (NTSB), 135, 188–189, 
198, 210
Natural mapping, 22, 113–118. See 
also Mapping
culture and, 118–122
gesture-controlled devices and, 
115–116
in industrial settings, 117
as knowledge in the world, 79
light switches and, 137–140
reducing error and, 216
spatial cues and, 115
stove controls and, 113–115, 
116–117, 118
tradeoffs, 117–118
Negative emotional state, 49
Nest thermostat, 68–69
Nickerson, Ray, 74
Nielsen, Jakob, 229
Nielsen Norman group, 303, 317
Nissan, 158
Nonstandard clock, 249, 250
Norman, Don 92
“Norman doors,” 1–3
Norman’s law of product 
development, xvii, 237–239, 
261, 309 310
Metric measurement, 149, 253, 
254
accidents resulting from 
conversion, 172, 314
Microsoft
flexible date and time formats, 
70–71
InstaLoad battery contacts, 126, 
127, 313
Microwave ovens, interlocks and, 
142
Mistakes, 170–173
classification of, 179–186
confirmation messages and, 
204–205
detecting, 194, 195
explaining away, 195–196
knowledge-based, 171–172, 
184–185
memory-lapse, 171, 172, 
185–186, 195
rule-based, 171, 180–184
See also Error; Slips
Mitsubishi, 269
Mnemonics, 88, 93–94, 99
Mode error slips, 174, 177–179, 
207
Models
approximate, 100–105
See also Conceptual models
Modes, 177–178
Moon, Youngme, 262–263
Moral obligations of design, 
291–293
Motorcycle
Lego, 123–125, 129, 130, 262, 
263
steering system, 102–103
turn signal switch, 99–100
Motor-goal, 233
Motor system, visceral response 
and, 50–51
Multidisciplinary approach to 
design, 34–36, 238–239, 
242–243
Multitasking, error and, 200

342 Index
Planned obsolescence, 291–292
Plato, 286
Poetry, constraints of, 82–85
Poka-yoke, 193
Porsche, 158
Positive psychology, 63–65
Precision, knowledge and, 76, 
79–82
Predictive typing, 266
Price, design and competition/
focus on, 241, 259, 260, 264
Problem identification in design, 
217–220
double-diamond diverge-
converge model of design 
and, 220–221
See also Human-centered design 
(HCD)
Problem solving, reflective, 46–47
Procedural knowledge, 78–79
Procedural memory, 47, 96–97
Product development
competitive forces in, 259–264
cycle of, 268–279
Don Norman’s law of, 237–239
managing, 235–236
multidisciplinary needs, 34–36, 
238–239, 241–243
process of, 221–230, 234–236
prototyping, 227–228
technology and, 258, 264–268
timing of innovation, 271–272
Product manager, 230
Products
development cycle, 260, 268–279
failure of new products, 272, 274
life cycle of, 294
stage gate methods, 234, 235
success of, 293–294
Prospective memory, 107–109
Prototyping, 222, 227–228, 235
Psychology, 27–73. See also 
Cognition
causal relations (blame), 59–65
cognition and emotion, 49–55. 
See also Cognition; Emotion
Norms, cultural, 130–132
Novices, mistakes and, 173, 199
NTSB. See National Transportation 
Safety Board (NTSB)
Nuclear power plant accident, 7, 
201
Observation, in human-centered 
design, 222–226
Odyssey (Homer), 84
Office copiers, design constraint 
for, 241
Our Choice (Gore), 290
Outside-in display, 121, 122
Overlearning, 45–46
OXO, 244–245
Paller, Ken, 96
Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 
227, 317
Panic bars, 60, 133
Paris Métro doors, 134–135
Passwords, remembering, 86–89, 
91, 312
Patents, 238
Pedestrians, and electric cars, 
157–161
Penny, knowledge in the head and 
in the world and, 74–75, 77
People with special needs, 
designing for, 243–247
Perceive, as stage of evaluation, 41
Perceived affordances, 13, 18, 19, 
145. See also Signifiers
Perform, as stage of execution, 41
Personality, attributing failure to, 
61–62
Physical anthropometry, 243
Physical constraints, 124–128
battery design and, 125–127
forcing functions, 141–142, 143
as knowledge in the world, 79
locks and keys and, 127–128
Pilots, remembering air-traffic 
control instructions, 105–107
Plan, as stage of execution, 41

 
Index 343
Rehearsal of material, 96, 100–101
Reminders, 108–109
Reminding, strategies for, 106, 
107–109, 110
Remington typewriter, 275, 276, 277
Remote controller, cultural effect 
on design of, 118, 119
Repetitive cycles of design, see 
spiral design
Resilience engineering, 211–213
Retention, memory and, 94
Retrieval, memory and, 97–98
Retrospective decision making, 183
Reversing action, see Undo
Rhyming, constraints of, 83
Root cause analysis, 42, 43–44, 
164–165
Rote learning, 98
Royal Majesty cruise ship, 214
Rubin, David, 83
Rule-based behavior, 179, 180
Rule-based mistakes, 171, 180–184
Rules, deliberate violation of, 
169–170
Safety. See also Accidents; Error
checklists, 189–191
electric vehicles, and 157–161
forcing functions, 142–145
interlocks, 142–143
lock-ins, 143–144
lockouts and, 144–145
management, 209–210, 212–213
NASA’s safety reporting system, 
193–194
resilience engineering, 211–213
social and institutional pressures 
and, 186–189
sterile periods and, 200
Swiss cheese metaphor, 208–210
warning signals, 201
Sayeki, Yutaka, 99–100, 102–103, 
105
Schank, Roger, 128–129
Schedules, product development, 
237, 240
falsely blaming self, 65–71
fundamental design principles 
and, 71–73
Gibsonian, 12
Gulfs of Evaluation and 
Execution, 38–40
human thought, 44–49
interplay with technology, 6–8
people as storytellers, 56–59
positive, 63–65
stages of action, 40–44, 55–56, 
71–73, 172–173
The Psychology of Everyday Things 
(POET), xi, 283, 299–304
Punch (magazine), 270
Purchasers
designing for, 241
users vs., 117–118
See also Customers
Purchasing process, usability and, 
117–118
Quality, focus on customer and, 
264
Questioning, 46, 117, 226–227, 229, 
230, 264, 286, 295, 310
QWERTY keyboard, 254, 266, 
275–278, 318, 319. See also 
Keyboard
Radiation doses, sensibility checks 
and, 206
Radical innovation, 279–280, 
281–282
Rasmussen, Jens, 179
Reading vs. listening, 267
Reason, James, 164, 170, 208
Recycling, 294
Reflection, 45
design and, 53–54
relation to visceral and 
behavioral response, 54–55
stages of action and, 55–56
Reflective problem solving, 46–47
Refrigerator temperature controls, 
conceptual model and, 28–31

344 Index
Sleep deprivation, error and, 210, 
211
Sliding doors, 16
Slips, 170–171, 172–173
action, 171, 173, 174, 194
capture, 174, 208
classification of, 173–179
confirmation messages and, 
204–205
description-similarity, 174, 175
memory-lapse, 171, 173, 
176–177, 195
minimizing, 206–208
mode error, 174, 177–179
See also Error; Mistakes
Smart displays/screens, 121, 
265–266. See also Touch–
sensitive displays/screens
Smart phones, 265
Soap dispensers, gesture-
controlled, 115–116
Social interaction, 283–284, 298
Social pressure, accidents and, 
186–191
Socrates, 286
Sound, as signifier, 155–161
for electric cars, 157–161
Sound generators, for feedback, 
23–24
Spatial cues, natural mapping and, 
115
Specifications, design and correct, 
234–235
Specify, as stage of execution, 41
Speech, presenting information 
via, 201–202
Spiral design, 222. See also Iteration 
in design
Stage gate method of product 
development, 234–235
Stages of action, 40–44
Stairways of public buildings, 
lockouts and, 144
Standardization
of faucet design, 153, 154, 155
individualization vs., 161
Scheier, Michael, 233
Schindler elevators, 147
Scripts, 129
Scrum method of product 
development, 234
Security
design and, 90–91, 255–257
identity theft and, 90
passwords as means of ensuring, 
86–89, 91
Semantic constraints, 124–125, 
129–130
Sensibility checks, 199, 205–206
Shingo, Shigeo, 193
Sholes, Christopher Latham
typewriter, 275–276. See also 
QWERTY
Short-term memory (STM), 92–95, 
102
Shower controls, design of, 73
Signifiers, xv, 10, 12, 13–20, 72, 298
affordances vs., xiv–xv, 14, 18, 19
applied to everyday objects, 
132–141
to bridge Gulf of Execution, 40
doors and, 15, 16, 132–135
external, 15
gesture-controlled devices and 
lack of, 115–116
as knowledge in the world, 79
misleading, 18–19
perceived affordances and, 145
poka-yoke technique and, 193
as reminders, 108–109
sound as, 155–161
on touch screen, 21
Signs, 15, 18, 19
Silence, problems with, 157–161
Simplified models, 100–105
Single-spout, single-control faucet, 
153–154
Sink drain, signifiers for, 17
Skeuomorphic, 159
Skill-based behavior, 179, 180, 
206–207
Sleep, memory and, 95–96

 
Index 345
Task analysis, 137
Tasks
activities vs., 232–234
technology and changes in, 286, 
287–288
Taught helplessness, 63
Technical manuals. See Manuals
Technological aids, for knowledge 
in the head, 112–113
Technology
accommodating human 
behavior, 68–71
adoption of, 268–269, 271, 272, 
274
dependence on, 112–113, 
285–287
design and, 257
as driver of change, 267–268, 
282, 283–285
empowerment of individuals 
and, 295–297
enhancing human cognition, 
112–113, 285–288
handed-up, 297
interaction design and, 5
interplay with psychology, 6–8
meaning of, 281–282
paradox of, 32–34
precision and use of, 104
product innovation and, 258, 
264–268
radical innovation and, 281
reminders and, 109
self-blame and trouble using, 63
skeuomorphic designs and, 159
standardization and, 248–254
substituting for memory, 87
Telephone numbers, remembering, 
45, 46
Telephones, 68, 70, 156, 264–266. 
See also Cell phones
Telephonoscope, 270–273
Temperature controls, refrigerator, 
28–31
Temperature conversions, 101–102
Tenerife disaster, 186–187
Standards
cultural, 130–132
digital time, 252–254
for electric automobile sounds, 
159–160, 161
establishing, 248–249
HDTV, 250–252
international, 131, 248–249
necessity of, 250
Startup companies, failure of, 
269–270
Stein, Robert, 289
“Sterile Cockpit Configuration,” 
200
Stigler’s law, 270
Stigma problem, 244–247
Story, conceptual models as form 
of, 57–59
Stove controls, natural mapping 
and, 113–115, 116–117, 118
Subconscious, 48, 49. See also 
Cognition; Conscious 
cognition
behavioral level of processing 
and, 51–52
human thought as, 44–49
skilled behavior as, 206–207
slips and, 173
Subway train doors, lack of 
signifiers on, 134–135
Susan B. Anthony coin, 79–80, 
81–82
Sustainability, model for, 292–293
Swatch International Time, 254
“Swiss cheese model of how 
errors lead to accidents,” 164, 
208–210
Switches. See also Controls
airplane landing gear, 135
dead man’s, 142–143
description-similarity slips and, 
175
light, 20–21, 135–140
wireless, 139
System error, 66
System image, 31–32

346 Index
touch and gesture-sensitive 
screens and, 264, 266
Ultra-high definition television, 
252
Understanding, design and, 3–4
Understanding action, feedback 
and, 71–72
Underwater (scuba) diving 
accidents, 187–188
Undo, 199, 203–205
Universal design, 243–247
University of Toronto, 269
Usability, 117–118, 241, 295
Use, determining how to use 
object, 38–40
User experience, 10, 233
Users
conceptual model and, 31–32
designing for, 240–241
difficulties using products and, 
59–65
purchaser vs., 117–118
See also Customers
Vacuum tubes, 281
Valance, emotional, 52
Vegetable peelers, design of, 
244–245
Vehicular control, mapping and, 
21–22
Video conferencing, 273–274
Videophone, 270–274
Video recording, of test groups, 
228–229
Visceral level of processing, 50–51, 
54–56
Voyager Books, 289
Walkers, design of, 245
Walking, cell phone usage while, 
200
Wallace, Wanda, 83
Warning signals, design of, 201–202
Washer-dryer combination 
controls, 4
Ten-franc coin, 79–80
Testing, 222, 228–229
Text direction/scrolling, culture 
and choice of, 120–121
Thermostat
conceptual model of, 57–59, 
68–69, 181–182
control of refrigerator, 28–31
Things That Make Us Smart 
(Norman), 112, 288
Three-dimensional television, 252
3-D printers, 267, 296, 297
Three Mile Island nuclear power 
plant accident, 7
Tillers, 21–22
Time
Australian Aborigines, 
conception of, 120
cultural differences in view of, 
118–120
digital, 252–254
product development and, 236, 
238–239
 Swatch International Time, 254
Time-based reminders, 109
Time stress, as cause of error, 168
Touch-sensitive displays/screens, 
21, 140, 268–269. See also 
Smart displays/screens
Toyoda, Sakichi, 165
Toyota Motor Company, 165
Toyota Production System, 192, 193
Traffic conventions, 131–132
Training and licensing, 211
Transactive memory, 111–112
Transistor, 281
Transportation accidents, 
investigation of, 186–187, 
188–189
Turn signal switches, 99–100
Typewriters, 280
development of keyboard, 
274–279
Typing
knowledge in the world and, 
77–78

 
Index 347
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (Baum), 
227
Woods, David, 212
Word-gesture typing systems, 
266
Working memory, 92–95, 102
Wristwatch, 32–34
Writing, 104, 106, 107, 267
Xerox Corporation, 227
Zeitgeist, 260
Zhai, Shumin, 266
 
Watches
digital, 27–28, 33–34
mode-error slips and, 178
technology and changes in 
design of wristwatch, 32–34
Waterfall method, 234–236
Wegner, Daniel, 112
Wheelchair, control of, 21
Whitehead, Alfred North, 101
Wikipedia, 112, 270, 297
Wireless switches, 139
“Wizard of Oz” prototype 
technique, 227–228




